<doc id="17251393" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17251393" title="Evan O'Neill Kane">
Evan O'Neill Kane

Evan O'Neill Kane (April 6, 1861 – April 1, 1932) was a surgeon working in Pennsylvania, United States during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and a member of a notable Pennsylvanian family. Several other members of his family were also surgeons or physicians, and their family home, Anoatok, is now on the National Registry of Historic places.

He is most well known for the remarkable feat of removing his own appendix under local anesthetic in 1921 at the age of 60. He operated on himself again at the age of 70 to repair a hernia. In many ways Kane was idiosyncratic in his practices, which included the tattooing of his patients. Kane was again in the public eye in 1931 when he testified at the sensational trial of his son, Elisha Kent Kane III, a college professor, who was accused and then acquitted of murder in Elizabeth City County, Virginia following the drowning death of his wife near the Back River Light during a trip to the beach with him.

Kane was one of the founding members of the Kane Summit Hospital and became chief surgeon there. A large part of Kane's work was in railway surgery. In this field he contributed a number of innovations in procedures and equipment. These included asbestos bandages, mica windows for brain surgery, and multiple site hypodermoclysis.

Kane's father was the American Civil War Major General Thomas L. Kane, who was also the founder of the town Kane, Pennsylvania and a prominent abolitionist. Thomas L. Kane also played a role in preventing war with the Mormons through his friendship with Brigham Young. Kane's mother, Elizabeth Denniston Wood Kane, M.D. also practiced medicine (until 1909) as did his brother, William (also called Thomas L. Kane Jr.) (b. 1863), and his sister, Harriet Amelia (1855–1896). Kane also had an elder brother, Elisha Kent Kane (b. 1856), an engineering graduate from Princeton.

Kane married his first wife Blanche Rupert on 18 May 1893, but she died less than a year later, two weeks after giving birth to their son Elisha Kent Kane (b. 18 March 1894). He then married Lila Rupert on 1 June 1897. With Lila he had a further six children: William Wood Kane (b. 7 May 1898), Blanche Rupert Kane (b. 9 August 1899), Bernard Evan Kane (b. 18 February 1902), Thomas Leiper Kane (b. 3 August 1903), Robert Livingston Kane (b. 29 August 1904), and his twin Schuyler Kane born on the same date.

Kane's son, Elisha Kent Kane, was head of the Romance language department at the University of Tennessee. Elisha was charged with the murder of his wife, Jenny G. Kane (1898–1931), by drowning her in Chesapeake Bay. The trial was such a sensation at the time that there were crowds of people outside the courthouse unable to find room inside. Evan Kane was instrumental in obtaining his son's acquittal by presenting medical evidence at his trial. He established that Jenny had a heart condition that contributed to her drowning. Elisha resigned his position with the university after his trial. A book by Ann Davis, a local historian, gives a fictionalized account of these events.

Kane's son Thomas Leiper Kane was the father of Evan O'Neill Kane (physicist), who was prominent in the development of the band theory of semiconductors, which are now the basic building blocks of modern electronics.

The arctic explorer Elisha Kent Kane is related (he is Evan Kane's uncle), but is a different person from both Evan Kane's son and his brother of the same name.

Kane lived in the family home Anoatok, which is now listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Anoatok was built by Kane's mother to house herself, Evan O'Neill Kane and another son, Thomas L. Kane, and their families after the original family home burned down in 1896. The architect was Walter Cope who had married into the Kane family – to a cousin of Major General Kane. The name "Anoatok", an Eskimo word, honours Elisha Kent Kane the arctic explorer. Elizabeth died in 1909 and Thomas moved his family out in 1910 into a new home also designed by Walter Cope, leaving Evan O'Neill Kane and his family as the sole occupants. Anoatok remained Kane's home and office until his death.

Kane died of pneumonia at the age of 70 in 1932, shortly after the trial of his son and just a few months after his major hernia operation.

In 1887, Elizabeth Kane together with two of her sons, Evan and William, founded the Woodside Cottage Hospital in Kane. The concept of a cottage hospital originated with Major General Kane, who thought that wounds healed better "in the Kane air", but he died in 1883, some years before Elizabeth founded the hospital. Around 1892 the hospital, together with its patients, was moved to a larger site, built on land donated by Elizabeth Kane, and was thereafter known as Kane Summit Hospital. Evan graduated from Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia in 1884. He practiced as a physician in Kane and later became chief surgeon of the Kane Summit Hospital, a position he held at the time of his own appendectomy operation. He died at his own hospital in 1932. The facility ceased work as a hospital in 1970, but the building is still used by Kane Community Hospital for administration.

Kane Summit Hospital, as a public hospital, received charitable grants from the State of Pennsylvania. The tight family control of the hospital led to complaints from local physicians, who claimed that they were not able to freely use the hospital. Patients were admitted on condition that Evan O'Neill Kane, as the chief surgeon, had the final say in their treatment. The complaining physicians felt that they alone should be the judge of the proper treatment of their own patients and found this condition unacceptable. In February 1908, formal complaints to the Pennsylvania Board of Charity Commissioners resulted in an investigation. The complainants were requesting that the Hospital grant should be withdrawn so this was a serious matter for the hospital, but both Evan and his assistant Thomas L. Kane were away in Florida at the time. Answering the charges fell to their brother Elisha Kent Kane, who was on the board of management of the hospital, but not the medical staff, and the hospital superintendent Dr. M. J. Hays. The hospital admission rules were changed as a result of the investigation. The commissioners found that the Kanes were not using their position to make unacceptable profits from the hospital; on the contrary, they had made large donations, but recommended that stock holding in the hospital should be more broadly extended outside the Kane family. The commissioners also requested that the private practice offices of Evan and Thomas Kane be moved outside the hospital. Although the furnishing of these offices were paid for by the occupants, the cost of fuel, water and lighting was borne by the hospital.

Kane was a railway surgeon for five different railroads. In Kane's time, railway surgery was markedly different from surgery in a hospital and was considered to be its own field. Surgeons frequently needed to operate at great distances from a proper hospital facility, often in dirty and unsanitary conditions, and operations were performed with only basic equipment and materials. Industrial accidents on the railways resulted in many crushing injuries. A large proportion of the estimated 1,000 operations Kane performed in the three years from 1898 to 1900 were treatment for accidents on the railways, many of which were laparotomies. Several of Kane's medical innovations were intended to be aids to the surgeon in the field, and clearly inspired by his work as a railway surgeon.

Kane is responsible for one of the first uses of music as a medical therapy. Starting in 1914, he played music with a phonograph in the operating theatre prior to anaesthetizing the patient. Kane believed this had a calming effect on his patients and was more effective than simply talking to them as the surgeon was often distracted and conversations with the assistants, in his experience, soon dried up. Modern studies have shown that music can help reduce pain following an operation, and consequently also reduces the need for pain-killing drugs.

Kane invented an improvement to the Murphy button, a device then commonly used for intestinal anastomosis, but now usually done with a surgical stapler. Kane was seeking a device with a larger aperture and less possibility of blockage after losing a patient to whom he had fitted a Murphy button.

Kane presented a paper to the American Academy of Railway Surgeons in 1900 addressing the difficulty of administering intravenous infusions in the field. Kane lists among the difficulties the unsterilized conditions and the tendency of veins to collapse following haemorrhage. Kane's solution was a device which could administer multiple instances of hypodermoclyses simultaneously. Kane's device could have up to ten needles, but Kane never used this many, as four were normally sufficient. Normal hypodermoclysis would be too slow in emergency conditions, but Kane's invention speeded up the rate of fluid replacement many times. Kane's device was subsequently criticised for its use of an unsealed rubber bulb by Edwin Hasbrouck, who proposed an alternative improved design. Administering hypodermoclysis at two sites for faster fluid uptake is a technique still in use today.

Kane had some novel ideas on materials for use in surgery. Influenced by his work in railway surgery, he was particularly concerned with materials that were good for use in the field and sometimes advocated the use of supplies that could be obtained locally from hardware stores and similar suppliers. He made his own bandages from woven asbestos, a material readily available at the time. Sterilising dressings, and keeping them sterilised, was a problem in the field. Unlike modern dressings—which are supplied in sealed, sterile packs—the dressings of the time had to be sterilised immediately before use. In an emergency situation there may be little time to do this. The use of fire-proof bandages allowed them to be sterilised quickly in an open fire. In 1924, Kane proposed the use of mica to repair head wounds that had exposed and damaged the brain. He cited among the advantages of this that it provided a window for the physician to observe the damage and that in an emergency in the field, mica could be obtained by removing it from a stove window, an application for which it was commonly used at the time.

Another of Kane's innovations for use in the field was an acetylene lamp worn on the head by the surgeon. This was intended for operations carried out in the field at night. Kane says it was particularly useful for illuminating the abdominal cavity.

Kane advocated, and practiced, tattooing newborn infants (in an inconspicuous place) with an identifying mark matching an identical tattoo on the mother. Kane was aware of cases where claims had been made of babies being mixed up and wished to avoid any possibility of this occurring in his hospital. In Kane's view, complex clerical systems designed to prevent errors that might be implemented in a large hospital were impracticable in a small hospital because the administrative staff to run it were simply not available. Kane also argued that it was impossible to positively prove that a mistake had not been made with a purely clerical system.

Kane had a history of operating on himself. In 1919 he self-amputated one of his own fingers that had become infected. But it was the operation of removing his own appendix under local anaesthetic, performed on 15 February 1921 at the age of 60, which brought him wider media attention. He is believed to have been the first to have undertaken this self-operation. Kane did this, in part, to experience the procedure from the patient's perspective. He had in mind using local anaesthesia in future on patients with medical conditions that prevented a general anaesthetic being administered, and wanted to ensure that the procedure could be tolerated by the patient. Kane believed ether (the usual general anaesthetic of the time) was used too often and was more dangerous than local anaesthetics. The anaesthetic used by Kane was novocaine, a fairly recent replacement for the more dangerous cocaine. Kane performed the operation, which he had carried out nearly 4,000 times on others, with the aid of mirrors that enabled him to see the work area. At this time the operation was rather more major than today, as the incision to remove an appendix was much larger than that needed for modern keyhole surgery techniques. Nevertheless, Kane was well enough to be taken home the following day.

This operation by Kane was not only a sensation at the time—it continued to be reported for many years afterwards. For instance, "Popular Science" discusses it in 1933 in an article on anaesthesia.

On another occasion, in 1932 at the age of 70, Kane repaired his own inguinal hernia under local anaesthetic. The hernia had been caused by a horse riding accident six years earlier. The operation was carried out at the Kane Summit Hospital with the press, including a photographer, in attendance. This operation is more dangerous than the earlier appendectomy because of the risk of puncturing the femoral artery. The operation lasted one hour and 55 minutes. Kane was back in the operating theatre working 36 hours later.

In the latter part of his career, Kane had started signing his handiwork by tattooing on his patients the letter "K" in morse code (— · —) using India ink. However, during his hernia operation he became too drowsy to finish the stitching up so this task and the tattooing fell to Howard Cleveland (who later became Chief Surgeon in 1938).

Kane was opposed to the consumption of alcohol. Alcohol had been previously widely used as a treatment in medicine, but Kane believed that this was neither necessary nor desirable. He also spoke out against a suggestion that the sale of spirits should be reintroduced in army bases. Alcohol had ceased to be available to soldiers on base when, in a prelude to prohibition, the army canteens were abolished in 1901. For many years Richard Bartholdt attempted to introduce a Bill reversing this decision and his efforts were supported by a petition of 279 physicians. In a letter to "JAMA" in 1912, Kane railed against this with "If our soldiers cannot find agreeable amusement without booze to make it attractive it is time that a determined effort to refine their depraved taste be made by the officers, who have plenty of spare time on their hands".




</doc>
<doc id="17298868" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17298868" title="Ip Man (film)">
Ip Man (film)

Ip Man is a 2008 biographical martial arts film based on the life of Ip Man, a grandmaster of the martial art Wing Chun and teacher of Bruce Lee. The film focuses on events in Ip's life that supposedly took place in the city of Foshan during the Sino-Japanese War. The film was directed by Wilson Yip, and stars Donnie Yen as Ip Man, with martial arts choreography by Sammo Hung. The supporting cast includes Simon Yam, Lynn Hung, Lam Ka-tung, Xing Yu, Hiroyuki Ikeuchi and Tenma Shibuya. It is a co-production between China and Hong Kong.

The idea of an Ip Man biopic originated in 1998 when Jeffrey Lau and Corey Yuen discussed the idea of making a film based on Bruce Lee's martial arts teacher. However, the studio producing that proposed film closed, and the project was abandoned. Producer Raymond Wong decided to develop his own Ip Man film with full consent from Ip's sons, and had filmmakers head to Foshan to research Ip's life. Ip Chun, Ip Man's eldest son, along with martial arts master Leo Au-yeung and several other Wing Chun practitioners served as technical consultants for the film. Principal photography for "Ip Man" began in March 2008 and ended in August; filming took place in Shanghai, which was used to architecturally recreate Foshan during the late 1930s and World War II.

During filming, conflicts arose between the producers of "Ip Man" and filmmaker Wong Kar-wai over the film's working title. Wong, who had been developing his own Ip Man biopic, clashed with the producers after learning that their film would be titled "Grandmaster Ip Man" (), which was too similar to the title of the other film. The producers of "Ip Man" agreed to change the film title, despite Wong's film being in development hell. Wong's film, titled "The Grandmaster", was released on 10 January 2013.

"Ip Man" is the first film in the "Ip Man" film series. It premiered in Beijing on 10 December 2008, and was released theatrically in Hong Kong on 19 December 2008, receiving widespread acclaim from critics and audiences. Before the film's release, Raymond Wong announced that there would be a sequel; a second installment titled "Ip Man 2", was released in April 2010, and a third installment titled "Ip Man 3" was released in 2015, with a fourth installment scheduled to be released in 2019. "Ip Man" grossed over US$21 million worldwide, despite not being released in North America and most of Europe. Following its success, the film was nominated for 12 Hong Kong Film Awards, winning awards for Best Film and Best Action Choreography.

In the 1930s, Foshan is a hub of Southern Chinese martial arts, where various schools actively recruit disciples and compete against each other. Although the Wing Chun master Ip Man is the most skilled martial artist in Foshan, he is unassuming and maintains an almost invisible profile. As an independent wealthy man, he feels no need to accept any disciples and instead spends his days training, meeting with friends, and spending time with his family. However, his wife is often resentful of the time he spends training and discussing martial arts with friends and colleagues. Though not a professional martial artist, Ip is respected in Foshan due to the abilities he displays in friendly, closed-door competitions with local masters. Ip's reputation is further enhanced when he defeats an aggressive, rude, highly skilled Northern Chinese martial arts master, Jin Shanzhao, thus upholding the regional pride of fellow Southern stylists and others in Foshan.

The Japanese invasion in 1937 adversely affects the life of everyone in Foshan. Ip's house is claimed by the Japanese army and used as their Foshan military headquarters. Ip and his family lose their wealth and are forced to move into a decrepit apartment. Desperate to support his family, Ip finds work at a coal mine. The Japanese General Miura, who is a Karate master, establishes an arena where Chinese martial artists compete with his military trainees. There, he observes the fighing styles of the Chinese fighters, and his fascination leads him to want to test his own abilities. Miura challenges three fighters at once, one of whom is Lam, a friend of Ip Man and disciple of Chinese master Liu. He effortlessly defeats them, however, Lam refuses to concede defeat, forcing the general to ultimately kill him. Zhao, a former police officer and Ip's acquaintance, is now working as a translator for the Japanese army. He offers the martial artists working at the coal mine the chance to earn a bag of rice for every match they win. Ip at first declines to participate in the matches. However, when his friend Lam takes part in a match and does not return, Ip agrees to fight so he can find his friend. Ip watches fellow Foshan martial arts master Liu defeat one karateka, but then insist on fighting three and lose. When Liu attempts to collect the winning bag of rice from the first match, Miura's aide, Colonel Sato, shoots and kills him. Miura grabs Sato by his neck and threatens to personally execute him if he shoots in the dojo again.

As a result of the shooting, Ip deduces that Lam was beaten and killed by the Japanese after an earlier fight. Barely able to contain his rage, Ip demands a match with ten karateka at once. Despite having not practiced Wing Chun since the Japanese occupied Foshan (to conserve energy and thus food for his family), he mercilessly defeats all of them with a brutal and effective barrage of blows, showing none of the restraint he exhibited in earlier matches. His skill arouses the interest of General Miura, who wants to learn more about Ip and watch him fight again.

Ip later visits his friend Chow Ching-chuen, who owns and runs a cotton mill in Foshan. Chow's son tells Ip that a bandit gang led by Jin Shanzhao is harassing the workers and trying to extort money from them. Ip finally consents to teach others and trains the workers in Wing Chun for self-defense.

When Ip refuses to return to the arena, Miura grows impatient and sends the sadistic Colonel Sato along with several soldiers to find him. Sato sees Ip's wife and moves towards her. Ip defends his wife and incapacitates the three soldiers. They flee their apartment and take a room with Li Zhao's family. When the bandits return to the cotton mill, the workers fight back using the techniques that Ip taught them. Ip himself arrives midway through the battle. He defeats many of the robbers and personally beats Jin Shanzhao, embarrassing him a second time. Ip warns him not to harass the workers again.

Jin Shanzhao and his men inform the Japanese soldiers of Ip's connection to the cotton mill. The Japanese charge into the cotton mill and takes Ip. Ip tells Chow to take his wife and son away for protection. Miura tells Ip that his life will be spared if he agrees to instruct the Japanese soldiers in martial arts. Ip refuses and challenges Miura to a match, which Miura accepts, both because of his love for martial arts and because refusing the challenge would be a humiliation to the Japanese. The match between Ip and Miura is held in public in Foshan's square. Sato tells Ip that his life will be spared if he lets the general win. At first, the two fighters seem equally matched, but Ip's impeccable defense, relentless and direct blows allow him to eventually overwhelm Miura, inflicting a severe beating on him.

Ip is cheered by the Chinese crowd and sees his wife and child returning with Chow. Enraged at the general's defeat, Sato shoots Ip in the chest, igniting the Chinese crowd who overwhelm the Japanese soldiers. During the scuffle, Li Zhao kills Sato with Sato's own gun. Ip is taken away amidst the chaos. The epilogue reveals that he survived and escaped with his family to Hong Kong with the help of Chow Ching-chuen. There, Ip establishes a Wing Chun school, where his students come to learn martial arts from him, including Bruce Lee.


The idea of an Ip Man biopic originated in 1998 when Jeffrey Lau and Corey Yuen discussed the idea of making a film based on Bruce Lee's martial arts master. However, Paragon Films Ltd, the studio producing the proposed film, closed and the project was abandoned. Producer Raymond Wong decided to develop his own Ip Man film with full consent from Ip's sons, and had filmmakers head to Foshan to research Ip's life. Ip Chun, Ip Man's eldest son, along with martial arts master Leo Au-yeung and several other Wing Chun practitioners served as technical consultants for the film. Principal photography for "Ip Man" began in March 2008 and ended in August; filming took place in Shanghai, which was used to architecturally recreate Foshan. During filming, conflicts arose between the producers of "Ip Man" and filmmaker Wong Kar-wai over the film's working title. Wong, who had been developing his own Ip Man biopic, clashed with the producers after learning that their film would be titled "Grandmaster Ip Man" (), which was too similar to the title of Wong's film, "The Grandmaster".

"Ip Man" is the first film based on the life of Ip Man. It also marks the fourth film collaboration between director Wilson Yip and actor Donnie Yen. The two also reunite with co-star Simon Yam after 2005's "". The screenplay for "Ip Man" was written by Edmond Wong, the son of film producer Raymond Wong. Wong was the screenwriter of Yip and Yen's second collaboration, 2006's "Dragon Tiger Gate". Ip Man's eldest son, Ip Chun, his student Leo Au-yeung, and Changquan gold medalist To Yu-hang served as technical consultants for the film, providing advice on the film's story and martial arts choreography. The music for the film was provided by veteran Japanese composer Kenji Kawai, who also served as a composer on the 2006 film, "Dragon Tiger Gate" which featured Wilson Yip and Donnie Yen as director and actor respectively.

The film was originally conceived in 1998 when Jeffrey Lau and Corey Yuen first thought of the idea of making a film based on Ip Man's life. Donnie Yen signed onto the project, hoping to star as Ip, with Stephen Chow co-starring as Bruce Lee. Yen had signed the contract and received part of the acting fee. However, the studio producing the film closed, and the project was abandoned.

In December 2007, plans to make a new Ip Man film were announced with the filmmakers researching Ip's life in Foshan. Producer Raymond Wong stated that the film would take on a similar look and feel to "". On 26 February 2008, a press conference for the film was held in Foshan, where it was announced that Wilson Yip would be directing the film, while Yen would appear in the leading role as Ip. Lynn Hung, Lam Ka-tung, Simon Yam were announced to be appearing in supporting roles, while Sammo Hung would serve as the film's martial arts choreographer. Casting director Zhang Yan Bin spent three months casting actors in various roles for the film. He had completed casting during principal photography in March 2008.

Principal photography for "Ip Man" began in March 2008, and was completed by the end of August. A majority of the film focuses on events surrounding Ip Man that took place in Foshan in the 1930s and 1940s during the Sino-Japanese War. Since the buildings in modern-day Foshan are architecturally different from the ones of the film's period, the filmmakers decided to shoot the film in Shanghai.

Filming first took place in a storeroom in the industrial district of Shanghai. Having difficulties scouting a cotton factory suitable for shooting, set designers decided to recreate one in the style of the 1930s. They spent weeks transforming an abandoned storeroom into the Zhen Hua Cotton Mill Factory, a 1930s cotton mill factory founded by Ip's friend Chow Ching-chuen (played in the film by Simon Yam) during the Sino-Japanese War. It was where Ip Man first taught Wing Chun openly to the public.

Production designer Kenneth Mak included Western elements in his design, since Foshan, in earlier years, was a unique place where Chinese and Western cultures converged. Pillars were made to resemble English lampposts, and Western lighting, chairs and tableware were also used. To convey the culture and feel of the time, the buildings were made to look obsolete and worn out. Apart from historical references, Mak also created a glass house which was used in a scene in the film.

The martial arts choreography was designed by Sammo Hung and veteran fight and stunt coordinator Tony Leung Siu-hung. Hung had previously collaborated with Wilson Yip and Donnie Yen as an actor in the 2005 film "". He was hired as the choreographer mainly because of his experience on the 1978 film "Warriors Two" and 1982's "The Prodigal Son", both of which involved Wing Chun. When asked how he would work with Yen to direct the action scenes, Hung replied matter-of-factly, "With my mouth."

Yen described the role as the most emotionally and mentally difficult in his career. He spent months preparing for the role by going on a strict diet which consisted of eating one meal a day, training in Wing Chun, and learning more about Ip Man through his two sons. This was all in the hopes of portraying an erudite and cultured Ip Man, as well as bringing out the special traits of Wing Chun. Yen even went as far as to stay in character after filming, wearing his costume and changing his voice and movement patterns. While rehearsing a fight scene, Yen was reportedly injured when an axe wielder accidentally slashed the side of his left eye. Yen also had a masseur on set as he could not raise his right shoulder due to an injury.

Japanese actor Hiroyuki Ikeuchi, who holds a black belt in Judo, found it "difficult" working under Hung's command. In one scene, he suffered a mild concussion after receiving four consecutive blows. Hung later praised Yen and Ikeuchi's performances in the film, even though Ikeuchi was not trained in Chinese martial arts and was not given a lot of complex moves.

"Ip Man"'s original title was controversial. It was disputed when film director Wong Kar-wai announced plans to make his own Ip Man film with Tony Leung Chiu-wai while filming "2046". Wong had planned his own Ip Man biopic titled "The Great Master" (一代宗师), with Leung playing the role of Ip. Wong's film, however, had been in development hell, having been announced several years earlier. Producer Raymond Wong wanted to name his film "Grandmaster Yip Man", which bore a resemblance to the title Wong Kar-wai wanted to use for his film.

To settle the dispute, Raymond Wong publicly retracted the film title, stating "Actually, all along, we have called our film "Ip Man", but our mainland investors said that Yip Man was a great master of his times, so we changed our title to "Grandmaster Yip Man" out of respect for him." In a more recent interview, Raymond Wong revealed that "The Great Master" is currently in development. Wong Kar-wai's Ip Man film, titled "The Grandmaster", was released on 8 January 2013 in China.

"Ip Man" premiered in Beijing, China on 10 December 2008, only two days prior to its release in China. The film was later released in Malaysia, Singapore and New Zealand on 18 December 2008, one day prior to its release date in Hong Kong. The film was released in the United Kingdom on 2 October 2009. In 2010, Mandarin Films sold North American distribution rights for the film to distributor Well Go USA.

Prior to its theatrical release in China, "Ip Man" held a test screening in Beijing on 4 December 2008. The film was highly praised, based on survey sheets returned by the audience. Donnie Yen's portrayal of Ip Man was repeatedly hailed as the year's best performance. High praise was also given to the film's co-stars, Fan Siu-wong, Lam Ka-tung, and Lynn Hung. "Ip Man" also received positive reactions from film critics. "Salon" Andrew O'Hehir deemed "Ip Man" a "well-paced and satisfying piece of Chinese-nationalist pulp," referring to the film's heavy anti-Japanese sentiment.

Derek Elley of "Variety Magazine" wrote in his review, "Yen, who's taking on real star charisma in middle age, is aces as Ip, with a simple dignity that exactly mirrors the movie's own and a gracefulness in combat that's very different from his trademark whiplash style." Malaysian film critic Lim Chang Moh of "The Malay Mail" awarded the film three stars out of four, writing that the film was "nicely balanced with great martial arts action and an engaging narrative." Lim later placed the film at number six in his list of "Top Ten Movies of 2008." Jen Ogilvie of "Fortean Times" wrote, "what carries "Ip Man" is its dramatic charge: it is the story's entanglement in the real horrors of Japanese occupation that pulls the viewer in and builds tension into the fight scenes."

The film was never meant to be a true biographical film to Ip Man's life, but to broadly touch on the elements from his life. Most of the central turns of the plot are there only for the purpose of making a movie more exciting, including the scenes depicting duels between Ip Man and the Japanese, including Consul General Miura Yoshiaki (三浦義秋), as well as Ip Man encountering hardship during the Second Sino-Japanese War.

Ip Man's eldest son, Ip Chun, would have preferred the film to be shot on location in Foshan and noted the mansion being more grand than the original.

"Ip Man" grossed ¥14,948,157 (US$2,188,982) on its opening weekend in China. The film's revenues increased largely by 86.1%, grossing ¥27,812,224 (US$4,073,201) to retain second place at the box office. The film experienced a small decrease in revenue in its third weekend, dropping 10.5% to ¥24,889,189 ($3,645,112), though remaining in second place. "Ip Man" continued to decrease in revenue, grossing ¥19,956,454 (US$2,922,695) in its fourth week while staying in second place. After six weeks of theatrical release, "Ip Man" grossed a total of ¥93,740,529 (US$13,728,640). The film currently remains as China's 13th highest-grossing film of 2008.

During its opening weekend in Hong Kong, "Ip Man" came in first place at the box office, grossing HK$4.5 million (US$579,715). In its second week, "Ip Man" moved to second place, while grossing HK$6,156,765 (US$789,303) with a 36.2% increase in revenue. The film continued to decrease in revenue in its third week, grossing HK$3,494,366 ($447,981), while staying in second place at the box office. "Ip Man" moved to third place in its fourth week, grossing HK$2,075,250 ($266,055). After seven weeks of theatrical release in Hong Kong, "Ip Man" had grossed HK$25,581,958.69 (US$3,300,847) domestically. The film ranks as the 8th highest-grossing film of 2008. In total, the film had grossed $21,888,598 worldwide, despite not being released in North America and most of Europe.

"Ip Man" was released on DVD and Blu-ray disc formats on 13 February 2009. Releases include single-disc and two-disc special-edition formats. Features for the special edition include deleted scenes, a making-of featurette, a theatrical trailer, interviews with director Wilson Yip and actor Donnie Yen and featurettes on both Ip Man and Wing Chun martial arts. "Ip Man" was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the United States on 27 July 2010. A 3-disc Deluxe Collector's Edition was released in China, but only contains Mandarin-dubbed soundtracks and no English subtitles.

"Ip Man" is the first film in a trilogy. Donnie Yen reprised the lead role in the sequel "Ip Man 2", the second feature film based on the life of Ip Man. The film focuses on Ip's movements in Hong Kong as he attempts to propagate his discipline of Wing Chun martial arts; at the end it also briefly introduces a young Bruce Lee prior to becoming one of Ip's most famed disciples. "Ip Man 2" was released theatrically in Hong Kong in late April 2010. Lynn Hung and Fan Siu-wong reprise their supporting roles, while martial arts choreographer Sammo Hung appears as a master of Hung Ga martial arts.

Yen expressed his lack of interest in making a third film, feeling that, ""Ip Man 2" will incontrovertibly become a classic, bettering the first." Yen later stated that after "Ip Man 2", he would no longer be involved in a film based on Ip's life. While both Donnie Yen and Raymond Wong were not keen on making a third Ip Man film, director Wilson Yip expressed interest in making one that would focus on the relationship between Ip and Bruce Lee. While "Ip Man 2" very briefly shows Lee as a child, Yip hoped to find a suitable actor to portray Lee as an adult for the third installment.

In January 2014, "Variety" reported that "Ip Man 3" would begin shooting in 2015 with Donnie Yen reprising his role as Ip Man and Wilson Yip returning to direct. The film was initially scheduled for a late 2015 release, but eventually it was released in early 2016.

Ip Man 4 is scheduled to be released in 2019. Yen will again play the lead role, with Yip as director and Kwok-Kwan Chan as Bruce Lee.




</doc>
<doc id="17303057" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17303057" title="Breakout (Miley Cyrus album)">
Breakout (Miley Cyrus album)

Breakout is the second studio album by American recording artist Miley Cyrus, released on July 22, 2008 by Hollywood Records. It is her first record that is not affiliated with the television series "Hannah Montana", in which Cyrus portrays the title character Hannah Montana. She co-wrote eight of its thirteen tracks, several of which with the assistance of Antonina Armato and Tim James. The majority of the record was composed as she traveled during her headlining Best of Both Worlds Tour (2007–08). Overall, "Breakout" is dominant on pop rock but explores a variety of other musical genres. Lyrical themes addressed in the album relate to breakups and coming of age.

"Breakout" was met with generally favorable reception from critics, though some believed the tracks were not a significant departure from the "Hannah Montana" franchise. The album encountered commercial success and introduced Cyrus in new countries. The album peaked at number one on the "Billboard" 200 for one week selling 370,000 copies. It is Cyrus' third album to do so, and was eventually certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Elsewhere, "Breakout" topped the Canadian Albums Chart for two consecutive weeks and the Australian Albums Chart for one week. The album also charted within the top ten in Italy, Japan, and New Zealand.

Three singles were released from "Breakout". "7 Things" was released on June 17, 2008 as the lead single from the album; it was commercially successful, reaching the top ten on charts in various countries. It was followed by the Rock Mafia remix of "See You Again", released on August 11, 2008 in countries which the original version was not, expanding the success of the song by appearing on charts in several countries. The third single, "Fly on the Wall" was released on November 4, 2008 as the final single, being unable to duplicate the success of the previous singles.

Cyrus is a singer-songwriter and actress who starred as Miley Stewart, a girl with a secret double life as the popstar Hannah Montana, on the Disney Channel television series "Hannah Montana". Through the television series, Cyrus developed fame as a teen idol and released music while being credited to Hannah Montana. Cyrus' debut studio album, titled "Meet Miley Cyrus", was released as the second disc of the "" (2007) double-disc album. "Breakout" is Cyrus' second studio album and her first not be affiliated with the "Hannah Montana" franchise, which was intended to be reflected by the title of the album. She believed it was her "breakout record", where she was going to "show everyone what Miley Cyrus is all about." Cyrus further explained the album was also appropriately titled because it portrayed her "stepping away from Hannah but just a little bit different." She also decided to title the album after the song "Breakout" because it was "one of [her] favorite songs".

Cyrus believed that compared to previous albums, "Breakout" was "grown-up" and "just a little more creative." Cyrus aimed to incorporate a sound influenced by rock music, saying "the writing is definitely different...the lyrics mean more than my last couple of records". According to Cyrus, the album documented, in depth, the events that occurred in her life in a year span. Most of the songs were written as Cyrus traveled on the Best of Both Worlds Tour from October 2007 to January 2008. Recording commenced immediately after the tour came to an end, and seized in March 2008, for Cyrus was to film "" (2009) in Tennessee soon after. She expressed that, through each song, a listener could discover something about her and about themselves. Of connecting with her fans through "Breakout", she claimed she wanted "girls to feel to be able to feel empowered and just feel like they can kind of rock out", going on to say that, "listening to this music, I hope they can feel like a reason to dance and just smile and to have fun. This CD is totally age appropriate, specially for me".

"Breakout" was written by Ted Bruner, in collaboration with Trey Vittetoe and Gina Schock of the Go-Go's. It was first recorded by American pop singer Katy Perry, for her second album "One of the Boys" (2008), though it was never included for the album and was passed on to Cyrus, on whose version Perry sings backing vocals. Like most songs on "Breakout", Cyrus wrote "7 Things" while traveling on the Best of Both Worlds Tour, reflecting on her numerous emotions about an ex-boyfriend. She claimed her use of the word "hate" demonstrated how furious she was, at the time. Originally, "7 Things" was more "soft and nice" but Cyrus says she "went nuts" during the recording process and gave the song a harder sound. She decided to record a cover version of Cyndi Lauper's "Girls Just Want to Have Fun" from the album "She's So Unusual" (1983), after speaking with Lauper at the 50th Grammy Awards. The two singers were conversing about music, when Lauper stated, "Well, don't be scared of anything. People waste their lives being scared. Lasso the moon. But don't do it because someone tells you it's the right idea." Cyrus believed Lauper's saying encompassed the direction she wanted to take "Breakout", ergo she covered "Girls Just Want to Have Fun". However, she desired for the cover to be completely different from other covers of "Girls Just Want to Have Fun" she heard. She described the process as "almost [having] to relearn the song." About the finished product, Cyrus said, "When you listen to the song, it's, like, you're not even sure what it is. It's something completely new." "Full Circle" was co-written by Cyrus, Scott Cutler, and Anne Preven about Cyrus' relationship with Nick Jonas of the Jonas Brothers. "It's about two people. They're always gonna come back together no matter what anyone says, the bad people that try to keep you apart", Cyrus said of the song's concept.

"Fly on the Wall" was written by Cyrus with the aid of Armato, James, and Devrim Karaoglu. "Fly on the Wall" was intended for the media, regarding "how they think they know everything about [her], when they don't. They want to be a fly on my wall and watch [her] 24/7." Cyrus explained it was about attempting to avoid paparazzi but they appeared, "not going away like little annoying flies." Cyrus was inspired to write "Bottom of the Ocean" by her deceased fish, Lyric and Melody, who died when Cyrus was eleven years of age. She said the topic drifted drastically once she began writing. "It's saying if there's someone you've loved but for some reason you can't love them anymore, you have to take your feelings, scoop them out, and put them at the bottom of the ocean." Cyrus, Armato, James, Aaron Dudley co-wrote "Wake Up America", a track about environmentalism. The song was directed towards "the people in the back seat", children of today's generation; she said that, in the future, they would be the ones "driving [the] Earth to what it's gonna be." "It's the only one you got, so you gotta take care of it. And if you don't, there's gonna be, maybe not for you, right then, and your generation but your kids and their kids ... Every generation has a cycle that'll carry on for the rest of eternity", she concluded. Cyrus recorded a cover of Cheyenne Kimball's "Four Walls" from the album "The Day Has Come" (2006) for "Breakout", titled "These Four Walls". The twelfth and final track is a remixed version of the hit "See You Again", referred to as the Rock Mafia Remix and the 2008 Remix; "See You Again" was originally released on the "Meet Miley Cyrus" disc of "Hannah Montana 2: Meet Miley Cyrus".

Overall, "Breakout" is dominant on pop rock but explores a variety of other musical genres. The opening track, "Breakout", is a dance-pop number that begins with a fast beat, composed of chiming electric guitar and drums and later progresses to "the snares skip and the keyboards shimmer"; "ecstatic beats" pummel throughout. The song's lyrics are "a girls-only call to fun" that anecdote on feelings about coming of age and the desire to be school-free. The uptempo refrains of "7 Things" are pop punk influenced. The song is "a three-tempo patchwork quilt", transitioning "from sensitive breakup song in the strummy verses to punky-pop kiss-off in the double-time choruses." "7 Things"' lyrics list seven traits Cyrus hates about an ex-boyfriend. "The Driveway" is a power ballad whose lyrics regard a breakup, insisting "nothing hurts like losing when you know it's really gone." The cover of Cyndi Lauper's "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun" replaces the subtle reggae undercurrent in the original version with a more rock music driven sound that includes pop punk beats and string stabs. The lyrics of "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun" primarily discuss the "desire to let loose with one's friends", touching upon details of the life of an overworked child star. The song "Full Circle" is composed of a several pop rock hooks; in one of the hooks, Cyrus finishes various words with "Oh, oh, oh!". The lyrics describe not quitting a relationship.

"Fly on the Wall" is prominently an electropop song that is also composed of a number of hooks, which yell the song's title, while the instrumentation relies on electric guitars. Unlike other songs on "Breakout", "Fly on the Wall" has Cyrus' voice processed to sound different. The song's lyrics taunt "the listener for being on the outside of her inner sanctum". The target of the message has been interpreted differently by contemporary critics – an ex-boyfriend and the media have most commonly been referred to. "Bottom of the Ocean" is a contemporary ballad that contains a sound reflecting influences from minimalist music. The backdrop for the "feel-bad" love song features ocean wave sounds. The track "Wake Up America" has a "cheeky riff-rock backdrop" as its, while its lyrical content concerns environmentalism, where Cyrus mainly pleads for audiences to give the Earth "just a little attention". In the first verse, she "admits that she doesn't know exactly what's up with this global warming but believes there's something we should all do about it". "These Four Walls" is a power ballad accented with country pop elements and twangy vocals and lyrics which speak of an interior narrative. "Simple Song" has "bile" sound and is lyrically about moments in coming of age where a person "can't tell which way is up, which way is down" and they feel the need to alienate themselves. In "Goodbye", Cyrus' vocal performance is more "roosty" with a more "natural-sounding accompaniment" while, in the lyrics, she finds her remembering the "simple things ... until [she cries]." "See You Again" (Rock Mafia Remix) is dance-pop number, fusing sultry vocals with techno beats. The track has Cyrus detailing previous scenes and plans to redeem herself.

"7 Things" was released on June 17, 2008 as the lead single from "Breakout", through digital distribution. Following the song's release, allegations sparked that it was about Nick Jonas of the Jonas Brothers, which Cyrus neither confirmed nor denied. It received mixed reviews from contemporary critics, several of which compared Cyrus to Avril Lavigne. "7 Things" enjoyed worldwide commercial success, becoming a top ten hit on charts in Australia, Japan, Norway, and the United States. The single was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA). The song's accompanying music video was directed by Brett Ratner and features Cyrus performing the song with a back-up band as many teenage girls lipsync along.

"See You Again" (Rock Mafia Remix) was released August 11, 2008 as the second single from "Breakout"; it was only released in countries where the original version was not. The remix was received well by critics for properly combining vocals and music. The remix expanded the success of "See You Again", appearing on charts in Austria, Belgium (Flanders), Germany, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. "See You Again" (Rock Mafia Remix) was given a promotional music video, taken from a performance at the 2008 Disney Channel Games.

"Fly on the Wall" was released on November 4, 2008 as the third and final single from the album. "Fly on the Wall" received critical praise; several critics claiming it defied teen pop expectations and was "Breakout"'s best track. However, the song failed to match success of "7 Things", reaching its highest peak at number sixteen on the UK Singles Chart. Its music video was directed by Philip Andelman. Inspired by "Michael Jackson's Thriller", the video depicts Cyrus attempting to escape the paparazzi, as they follow her in a parking garage.

The promotion plan was centered on massive performances and interviews to television, radio, and magazines. It was formulated to not be aggressive to give Cyrus a period of rest, after doing many consecutive projects. Cyrus explained, Cyrus first performed songs from "Breakout", the title track, "Fly on the Wall", and "See You Again" (Rock Mafia Remix), at the opening ceremony of the 2008 Disney Channel Games on May 3, 2008. Her first live performance of "7 Things" took place on May 17, 2008 at the 2008 Zootopia, an annual summer concert put on by radio station Z100. Later that summer, she promoted "Breakout" at outdoor concerts hosted by "Good Morning America" and "The Today Show", while hosting the 2008 Teen Choice Awards, and at "FNMTV". Cyrus began promotion for "Breakout" in Europe in fall 2008, performing the track on the United Kingdom channel GMTV, the French television show "Le Grand Journal", and the British singing competition "The X Factor" among other venues. Cyrus performed several songs from album on April 24, 2009 in a London Apple Store. These performances were recorded and sold exclusively by the United Kingdom iTunes Store as a live extended play (EP) titled "iTunes Live from London".

Well over a year after the "Breakout"'s release, Cyrus embarked on her second concert tour, the Wonder World Tour, to promote the album and "The Time of Our Lives" extended play (EP). The tour was Cyrus' first to not have her costumed as Hannah Montana and was announced in June 2009, with dates revealed for American venues. Dates for venues in the United Kingdom were later announced. In to order to avoid the extensive scalping that occurred during the Best of Both Worlds Tour, all tickets were sold exclusively through paperless ticket delivery, which would require audiences to bring identification to gain entry into the concert. The tour expanded from September to December 2009, with a total of fifty-six concerts in North America and Europe. The tour received positive to mixed reviews from critics. Some praised it and deemed it a spectacle, while others believed it lacked profundity and portrayal of Cyrus' personality. The Wonder World Tour managed to gross over $67.1 million, $15 million which were earned by the singer. The entire European leg sold out within ten minutes, and, at one stop, Cyrus broke the record for the largest attendance at The O Arena in London, England with an audience of 16,196. A concert film was released on the limited, deluxe edition of her third studio album "Can't Be Tamed" (2010).

"Breakout" received generally positive reviews, earning a collective score of 66 out of 100 on Metacritic. Heather Phares of Allmusic commented that "Breakout" title expresses its "purpose nicely" though the music was not drastically different from Hannah Montana's, adding, "only a handful of songs truly break out from the Montana mold". Though not being impressed by "nothing [being] left to chance", she concluded, "Even if these songs are derivative of much more established pop divas <nowiki>[</nowiki>Avril Lavigne and Britney Spears<nowiki>]</nowiki>, they provide clues to the kind of company Cyrus aims to keep. And while "Breakout" isn't as much of a breakthrough as it could be, it still moves Miley closer to an identity and career outside of Hannah." Kerri Mason of "Billboard" wrote, "While it's still age-appropriate for minors, "Breakout" is for the big kids too" and complimented Cyrus for being a "natural-born popstar." Sarah Rodman of "The Boston Globe" felt Cyrus mostly succeeded while "trying to please most of the people most of the time" on "Breakout". She summarized, "With "Breakout", Cyrus has clearly made a choice to break from the shiny, happy 'Hannah Montana' character, but she hasn't scuffed her sound up so much that her fans won't recognize that she's just being Miley." Chris William of "Entertainment Weekly" graded the album a B and noted that the first half of the album was "fun" but the second half became "overly ballad-heavy," assuming that was the more mature side of Cyrus she had promised. Miakel Wood of the "Los Angeles Times" stated, "In that respect, "Breakout" is unlikely fodder for the razzle-dazzle road shows and 3-D concert films to come. As a portrait of the artist as a young malcontent, though, it's rarely less than fascinating."

Ben Ratliff of "The New York Times" said Cyrus' attempt to leave Hannah Montana was weak, only being driven by "more gray thoughts". Ratliff continued, "She eases up on songs with total-affirmation chants about being the captain of her ship ... The lyrics are half-terrible — almost too realistic as teenage thoughts — but the best of them transmit the desired message ... It’s a lackluster album, floated by two or three strong singles." Josh Timmermann of PopMatters believed "Breakout" was "a just-okay teenpop record with audible suggestions of said singer-songwriter aspirations. To be sure, it’s a stronger collection of songs than Moms and Dads with upturned noses ... would probably expect." Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine rated the album two and half stars out of five, being disappointed and deeming the songs not to be a "worthy follow-up" to "See You Again". Cinquemani finished, "For teen-pop, your kid could do worse. You know, like Avril [Lavigne]". Mordechai Shinefield of "The Village Voice" wrote, "If her lyrical prowess hasn't caught up to her voice yet, that should only hold promise of things to come. She's a rare talent; now she only has to survive until adulthood." Ash Dosanjh of Yahoo! Music gave "Breakout" seven stars out of ten and referred to Cyrus, in "Breakout", as the ideal of the American Dream: "a combination of hard work, good Christian living and un-smutty pop".

On the week ending August 8, 2008, "Breakout" debuted at number-one on the "Billboard" 200, thus earning Cyrus a third number-one album on the chart – including albums fully credited to Hannah Montana; the album sold 371,000 copies in its debut week, becoming the fourth-highest sales week of 2008 for a female artist. The following week, "Breakout" descended to number two, selling 163,000 copies. The album spent a total of forty-eight weeks on the "Billboard" 200. It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for shipments exceeding one million copies. According to Nielsen SoundScan, the album has sold 1.5 million copies since its release. Due to sales of 27,000 copies, "Breakout" entered at number-one on the Canadian Albums Chart on the week ending August 8, 2008, maintaining the top spot for two consecutive weeks.

On the week ending September 14, 2008, the album entered the Australian Albums Chart at number two. In the succeeding week, it moved to number-one, where it only stayed for a week. "Breakout" was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for shipments exceeding 35,000 copies. "Breakout" debuted at number four on the New Zealand Albums Chart on the week ending September 8, 2008. On the week ending October 13, 2008, the album reached its peak at number two on the New Zealand Albums Chart, a position it maintained for two consecutive weeks. "Breakout" was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand (RIANZ) for the shipment of more than 15,000 copies. In Japan, it peaked at number ten.

On the week ending September 13, 2008, the album entered and peaked at number ten on the UK Albums Chart, becoming Cyrus' first top ten album in the country. It was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for the shipment of 300,000 copies. In Ireland, "Breakout" peaked at number eleven and was certified platinum by the Irish Recorded Music Association (IRMA) for shipments exceeding 15,000 copies. In mainland Europe, "Breakout" peaked at number twenty-eight on the European Top 100 Albums Chart, number twelve on the Austrian Albums Chart, number six on the Italian Albums Chart, and number sixteen on the German Albums Chart. On the week ending September 21, 2008, the album debuted at number twenty-six on the Spanish Albums Chart and, after twenty-six weeks of ascending and descending the chart, it reached its peak at number seven. The album was certified gold by the Productores de Música de España (PROMUSICAE) for the shipment of more than 30,000 copies. "Breakout" experienced similar commercial outcomes throughout the rest of Europe; it charted within the top twenty on charts in Finland, Norway, and Poland.

Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Breakout".


</doc>
<doc id="17307532" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17307532" title="Benjamin Church House (Bristol, Rhode Island)">
Benjamin Church House (Bristol, Rhode Island)

Benjamin Church House (also known as Benjamin Church Home for the Aged) is a Colonial Revival house at 1014 Hope Street in Bristol, Rhode Island, U.S.A. It opened in 1909 as the "Benjamin Church Home for Aged Men" as stipulated by Benjamin Church's will. Beginning in 1934, during the Great Depression, it admitted women. The house was closed in 1968 and became a National Register of Historic Places listing in 1971. The non-profit Benjamin Church Senior Center was incorporated in June 1972 and opened on September 1, 1972. It continues to operate as a senior center.

Benjamin Church was born on February 20, 1842, to Elizabeth Luther and Samuel Church, a wealthy grain and flour merchant. Benjamin was raised with his 12 siblings on Mount Hope Farm and the old family farm on Poppasquash. His two brothers built houses in the Poppasquash Farms Historic District. In 1900, Benjamin Church drafted a will to provide for the construction of a home for elderly men. It opened in 1909 as the "Benjamin Church Home for Aged Men".

The Benjamin Church House is a two-story clapboarded Colonial Revival topped with a hipped roof that has four pedimented dormers. Constructed between 1908 and 1909 from designs by Clarke, Howe & Homer, architects, the building cost $21,000. The front of the house faces west towards Hope Street and is and has an ell on the rear side that measures . The front facade has a symmetrical five bay facade with the main entrance in the center, the door has sidelights and a semi-elliptical fanlight. The front windows are typical 20th-century windows with six-over-one sash and have splayed wooden lintels and those on the first floor have raised center keystones. Projecting out from the hipped roof are two dormers with shingled sides. The front facade has a one-story porch that runs the length of the face with a half-hipped roof. The porch is supported by six Doric columns that frame the bays and has a wooden frieze with a triglyph above each column. The porch has a simple wooden rail that runs the length of the porch and down the front and side steps, the newel posts are capped by small wooden urns. The corners of the main part of the house have wooden quoins. In the southeast corner of the building is an internal porch covered by a quarter-hipped roof. The rear roof is are two pedimented dormers, one on each side of the ell's roof and the third chimney which rises through the roof of the main building. The house has a stone foundation, which extends to a full story due the sloping land and has a doorway in the rear. The porch is supported by brick piers.

The interior of the house is designed around a central hall with a narrow stairway with turned balusters and newel that goes to the third floor. On both sides of the hall are two large front reception rooms, each and having tall ceilings. The rear of the south front room is the former dining room that is connected by a pantry to the kitchen in the ell. Two small rooms are located beyond the northern reception room. The second floor maintains the central hall and extends into the ell, but is bisected by a lateral hallway. Each "quadrant" housed two rooms for the residents with additional rooms in the ell and the third floor has four additional bedrooms with the dormer windows. The third floor of the ell was used as attic storage space. At the time of nomination to the National Register of Historic Places, the alterations that had been made to the house were described as "minor and inconspicuous, consisting mainly of alterations to windows and dormers to provide egress to necessary fire-escapes." The porch is believed to be a part of the original design, but it was noted that if it was a later addition it would likely have been done before 1920. In 1969, the clapboarded outbuilding to the southeast was torn down to construct newer housing for the elderly.

The Benjamin Church House was ready to open on March 15, 1909 and served as elderly housing for only aged men. In 1934, during the Great Depression, the board of trustees decided to admit women to the house. Samuel P. Colt would bequeath $25,000 to the home upon his death in 1921. The house was closed from 1968 until 1973 and vandalized during the period, but was also submitted and approved to the National Register of Historic Places. Sometime in 1972, the National Park Service approved a grant of $5,000 to refurbish the house. In June 1972, "[t]he Benjamin Church Senior Center was incorporated as a non-profit organization that was housed in [t]he Benjamin Church Home" and opened for occupancy on September 1, 1972. According to the Benjamin Church Senior Center, the house is used as a senior center and is run by volunteers and board members.

The Benjamin Church House is historically significant as a "very pure example" of the Colonial Revival style by noted local architects Clarke, Howe & Homer. The house also serves as an important asset to the Bristol environment as an elderly home, noted during its vacancy at the time of its nomination. The nomination states "[i]t is because of the environmental and architectural importance of this house and its significance in the greater context of the Bristol-Warren historic districts that it is thought to be worthy of National Register status and protection." It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 22, 1971.




</doc>
<doc id="17396169" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17396169" title="Fire Station No. 4 (Pawtucket, Rhode Island)">
Fire Station No. 4 (Pawtucket, Rhode Island)

Fire Station Number 4 or Fire Station No. 4 is a historic fire station located at 474 Broadway in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. The building historically has also been called the Collyer Fire Station. The Queen Anne Style station was built in 1890. It is a -story, hip-roofed rectangular brick building with two brick wings and a bell tower. Constructed of red brick with sandstone trim and sandstone lintels and sills on the windows, the building has a foliate terracotta plaque bearing its name and date of construction. The fire station was closed as a firehouse in 1974, when the current Fire Station Number 4 on Cottage Street opened. The interior of the building was greatly modified to accommodate offices and meeting rooms by the time of its listing on the national register. In 2014, the building is being used by the Catholic Charities of Providence. Fire Station Number 4 was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.

Fire Station Number 4, also known as the Collyer Fire Station, (see building plaque) was constructed in 1887-1888 by H. L. Bassett & Co. and F. L. Mason on the southwest corner of Broadway and Carnation Street, in the center of Pleasant View neighborhood. The building was completed and named in 1890. The main block of the Queen Anne-styled red brick firehouse is a -story, hip-roofed rectangle with a cross-gable facing Broadway. A pair of matching single-story wings with gable-on-hipped roofs project from the long sides of the building. The building has small hip-roofed porches with arched openings on the main entrance and Broadway facing sides. Though constructed of red brick and pinkish mortar, sandstone was used for the window sills and lintels and the station's trim. The building has detailed terracotta work, with an ornate foliate name and date plaque on the front gable and a string course at the base of the corbeled main entrance. Above the plaque is a semi-circular window, and another round-headed window is on the northern side. The northwest corner has a square hose drying/bell tower that also has its own round headed window. Photos of the building are available here. The station has been modified; its two fire engine doors have been removed and replaced with modern garage doors. The pyramidal roof on the belfry which crowned the bell tower was "recently" removed at the time of its NRHP nomination in 1983. The interior of the firehouse has been greatly altered in the conversion to office and meeting room space by the time of its National Register of Historic Places nomination. The surviving details included the Queen Anne staircase and sunken panel doors. Though the interior has been greatly modified, it did not prevent its listing on the historic register.

In 1974, Fire Station Number 4 was replaced by a new Fire Station Number 4 located on 397 Cottage Street. This was not to be the only replacement of the firehouses which would be reused through the Community Development Block Grant program, which assisted in the adaptation in the late 1970s and into the 1980s. By the time of its nomination, the fire station had been re-purposed as office and meeting space for city agencies. In 2014, the property was used by the Catholic Charities of Providence for Project Hope as a "Diocesan community advocacy, parish outreach and social service assistance center". In 2017, a new tenant, Rhode Island bankruptcy lawyer John S. Simonian, became a tenant in the building. 

The Fire Station Number 4 is architecturally significant as an example of a late 19th-century Queen Anne-style firehouse. The firehouse's distinguishing feature is the corbeled cornice and terracotta trim, but also it is historically significant as an example of Pawtucket's maturation as a city. The boundary for the property is listed as Plat 7B, lot 164 and includes the surrounding area, totaling less than one acre. Fire Station Number 4 was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 18, 1983.



</doc>
<doc id="17396208" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17396208" title="Foster–Payne House">
Foster–Payne House

The Foster–Payne House is a historic house at 25 Belmont Street in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. Built in 1878, the two-story multi-gabled house is distinguished by its clapboarded and exterior woodwork and opulent parlors in the interior. The property also has a matching carriagehouse with gable roof and cupola. The house was originally constructed and owned by Theodore Waters Foster, but it was sold to George W. Payne in 1882. The Foster–Payne House is architecturally significant as a well-designed and well-preserved late 19th century suburban residence. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.

The house was built in 1878 for Theodore Waters Foster, born on May 19, 1847, to Chauncey Foster and Ophelia Remington. He was educated in Pawtucket and joined the Rhode Island Cavalry in 1863. He served in the American Civil War under Nathaniel P. Banks in the Red River Campaign. In 1873, he formed a jewelry-manufacturing partnership with Walter E. White and Samuel H. Baily, named White, Foster & Company. After White retired in 1878, the company was renamed Foster & Bailey. During this time, Foster constructed the house and lived in it for a period of four years, commuting to his place of business in Providence, Rhode Island. Foster would continue to be successful in his jewelry manufacturing business and his son, Theodore Clyde Foster, would succeed him upon his death in 1928. In 1882, Theodore Foster sold the home to George W. Payne, the owner of the G. W. Payne & Company.

Constructed in 1878, the Foster–Payne House is a two-story home with a low-pitched multi-gabled roof. The house has a single story open porch on the western side, a kitchen ell that projects from the rear and a single-story bay window that projects from the western bay of the front facade. The house is distinguished by its clapboard exterior and wooden trim under the gable peaks, the window trim and the porch brackets. There are three types of windows used on the house, single and paired one-over-one windows and two-over-two windows.

The small foyer on the western entry porch leads to the main stairhall that features a gently curving staircase with turned balusters and a curving rail. The first floor rooms are arranged in an "L" pattern on the southern and eastern sides with the kitchen placed on the northern ell. The interior of one room, not specified in the NRHP nomination, has been altered with a pressed tin ceiling. The second floor of the home was not described in the NRHP nomination. The interior of the rooms display late Victorian details, with the front parlor having a carved marble mantlepiece, a molded central ceiling medallion and a painted ceiling with scroll-work. The back parlor has a marbleized slate mantlepiece with an over-mounted mirror in a Renaissance Revival frame. On the back edge of the lot is a two-story clapboarded carriagehouse with a Victorian cupola. This structure was not described in the NRHP nomination, but a photo from 2013 shows the cupola has been damaged.

The house is architecturally significant as a well-designed and well-preserved late 19th century suburban residence, with excellent interior detail and a matching carriagehouse. The area in which it is located was situated in an upper-class suburban area, but since the late 19th-century commercial and industrial buildings have entered the area. The property was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.



</doc>
<doc id="17396222" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17396222" title="Fuller Houses">
Fuller Houses

The Fuller Houses are two historic homes at 339-341 and 343-345 Broadway in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. Constructed in 1896-1897, the two Queen Anne-styled homes were constructed as rental properties for the Fuller family and are believed to have originally been identical in construction. The -story houses are marked by an octagonal bay which contains the front staircase and a large two-story porch projecting almost completely from the house itself. For the National Register of Historic Places nomination only a single unit was examined, but the identical unit below is believed to have undergone minimal alterations. The other house, 343-345 Broadway, was not surveyed, but has been more seriously modified to allow for four apartment units. The Fuller Houses are architecturally significant as well-preserved and well-detailed Queen Anne-styled apartment flats. The Fuller Houses were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.

The Fuller Houses were constructed in 1896-1897 for Susan E. Fuller. Fuller's husband, Charles H. Fuller, operated a successful jewelry findings firm. The Fullers owned the houses until 1915, and intended to use them as rental properties. The only member of the Fuller family to reside in one of the houses, specifically 341 Broadway, was Alice G. Fuller beginning in either 1911 or 1912. The houses are positioned to be prominently viewed from their location on the east side of U.S Route 1 and from northbound traffic on Interstate 95. Though not originally placed in a location of such prominence, the construction through the heart of Pawtucket greatly increased the visibility of these "I-95 landmarks".

The Fuller Houses are originally believed to have been constructed as identical -story Queen Anne-styled homes with both having their gable-ends facing the street. The southern flank of the building is visually broken up by a two-story bay window with a gabled peak. A semi-octagonal bay on the northern corner of the houses indicates the position of the front staircase. A single-story porch with a shed-roof overhangs the front doorways. A striking feature of the Fuller Houses is the two-story circular porch on the southwest side. The porches are almost removed from the building and topped with a conical roof and ornamented with Queen Anne-style spindle. The exterior walls of the houses are clapboarded and the tops of the gables have simple metal finials.

For the National Register of Historic Places nomination, only the interior of one of the four units was surveyed, the second floor interior of 341 Broadway. This unit is accessed from a spiral staircase leading from the first floor to the attic. The second floor landing has a short foyer before opening to two parlors. The front parlor is said to have had a water fountain which was removed, but the plumbing is said to exist within the floor. The back parlor has a Queen Anne mantel and leads to the dining room with large floor-to-ceiling china closets. Located on the east side of the apartment is the kitchen, pantry and rear staircase. The north part of the apartment contains two bedrooms and a bath. The NRHP nomination states that the alterations to the unit were minimal and it is likely that the same would have been done for the first floor unit. The northern Fuller House, containing 343-345 Broadway, has been more seriously modified because it has been split into four units. In 2013, real estate information for 343 Broadway suggests the expanse of the modifications to the house by listing the property as having 20 rooms, with 8 bedrooms and 5 baths. According to Trulia the house was sold in 2010 for $140,000 and still in the four unit configuration. A three-bay stuccoed garage dating from the 1920s or 1930 is used by 339-341 Broadway.

The Fuller Houses are architecturally significant as a pair of two well-preserved and well-detailed two-family Queen Anne-style apartment "flat" houses. The Queen Anne-style spindle-work porches are descriptive in the NRHP nomination as the most impressive examples remaining in Pawtucket. The two houses represent an important step in the development of Pawtucket's architectural development and contribute to the city's visual character. The Fuller Houses were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.



</doc>
<doc id="17396542" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17396542" title="Charles Payne House">
Charles Payne House

The Charles Payne House is an historic site at 25 Brown Street in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. The house was built in 1855–56 by Charles Payne and later expanded with the addition of two ells and a porch. The -story Gothic-Italianate vernacular cottage is architecturally significant as a 19th-century vernacular cottage in a picturesque setting. Though the round-head picket fence and entry gates were later removed, the property retains a large shaded garden on with ample street frontage. The Charles Payne House was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.

The house was constructed by Charles Payne, an engraver who founded the firm of Payne & Taylor for calico printers in 1849. In 1849, Payne becan to purchase parcels of land that he would later construct the house on. The main block of the house was erected in 1855–1856 and later expanded with a north wing in the mid-1870s. The final major addition was an ell on the west side of the house, the date of construction occurred prior to 1902. Though the house has been the subject of some alterations, these changes are largely inconspicuous.

The Charles Payne House is a -story Gothic-Italianate vernacular cottage that has a spacious garden founded on the site of a long-removed house. The house's gable end faces the street with a rear ell and the other ell perpendicular to the main block on the west side. Centered on the east end of the roof is a cross gable which is visually offset by the dormer on the west. The house has a small gable-roofed vestibule on the east side, aligned underneath the cross-gable. The rear ell has an attached porch that spans its length. A single story bay hexagonal bay window protrudes from the facade. The distinguishing feature of the Payne house is the wood trim exterior, consisting of hood mould on the paired windows on the south, four kinds of bargeboards and bracketed cornices on the rear ell's east side. The interior of the Charles Payne House is not covered in detail by any survey, but has three mantelpieces on the first floor, two displaying Gothic Revival influence in their wooden designs and the third, located in the rear ell, made of grey marble with a round-head opening. Though not mentioned in the nomination, a photo shows one of the wooden mantlepieces filled with brick and rendered unusable at the time. The setting of the house was important to the National Register nomination, which specifically highlighted its shaded garden and fencing. At the time of the nomination, an ornamental round head picket fence surrounded the property and access was through a double-leaf lattice work gate. By 2013, the picket fence and entrance gate had been removed, but the property still retains the street frontage for its garden.

According to the National Register of Historic Places, the Charles Payne house is architecturally significance as an "unusually picturesque and well-preserved example of the small vernacular cottages erected during the middle years of the nineteenth-century in Pawtucket". The nominated property included the Charles Payne house, the surrounding yard, fence and garden, all of which contributed to the picturesque setting of the nomination. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.




</doc>
<doc id="17546556" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17546556" title="Jape (band)">
Jape (band)

Jape is an Irish electronic–rock band from Dublin. Formed as a side project by Richie Egan whilst part of The Redneck Manifesto, they have released five albums to date; "Cosmosphere" (2003), "The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me" (2004), "Ritual" (2008), "Ocean of Frequency" (2011), and "This Chemical Sea" (2015). Jape's wider discography includes the EP, "Jape is Grape" (2007), as well as a number of singles, including "Floating" and "Phil Lynott". The band have performed at festivals and events such as Glastonbury, Electric Picnic, Lovebox and Hard Working Class Heroes and provided support for The Flaming Lips at Belsonic in Belfast in August 2008.

The first and second albums received airplay on alternative national radio in Ireland. "The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me"'s opening track, "Floating", became a popular single on late night alternative music radio shows and attracted the attention of Brendan Benson during a visit to Dublin. Benson now covers the track whilst performing live with his band The Raconteurs, as do the Belgian bastard pop duo Soulwax during their DJ sets.

Jape's third album, "Ritual", was released in June 2008, later winning the Choice Music Prize for Irish Album of the Year 2008. The album features the singles "I Was a Man", "Strike Me Down" and "Phil Lynott", the latter of which was subject to an unsuccessful petition by fans to have it named Ireland's Christmas number one single in December 2008.

The album "Ocean of Frequency" was released in 2011 and won Jape their second Choice Music Prize in March 2012.

Richie Egan is the principal songwriter but refers to the overall band as Jape. This came about following his first few solo performances when he realised he did not wish people to consider him a singer-songwriter but as part of a band. Egan has been part of many bands from a young age, and spent his youth experimenting with four-track tape recorders and sounds. He was previously a member of the bands Black Belt Jones and Sir Killalot. After leaving Black Belt Jones he went on to become the bassist in the instrumental rock band The Redneck Manifesto of which he is still a member. He has occasionally toured as part of David Kitt’s live band, as well as in Conor J. O'Brien's band Villagers as a bass player and with his bandmates in The Redneck Manifesto. By 2003 Egan had developed Jape after spending a week at the family home of fellow Redneck, Niall Byrne, in Avoca, County Wicklow.

Egan has said that he started listening to music during puberty. He was initially influenced by 1960s melodic pop such as Simon & Garfunkel, later listened to American hardcore punk such as the Dead Kennedys, Minor Threat, Black Flag but listens to many styles of music overall. The single "Strike Me Down" has been compared to MSTRKRFT and the French synthpop quartet Phoenix. Memories of a childhood show by heavy metal band Mastodon led him to write the song "Phil Lynott". He also enjoys newer Irish acts such as Villagers.

Jape's debut album, "Cosmosphere", was released on the Volta Sounds label in 2003. National broadcaster RTÉ suggested in its review that Jape was not a "convincing electronic producer" and that Egan did not have the voice of a singer-songwriter, indicating its desire to see him remain with The Redneck Manifesto and refrain from any further activities under the pseudonym Jape. However, the album received airplay on national radio on shows such as Donal Dineen's "Here Comes the Night" on Today FM.

Jape's second album, "The Monkeys in the Zoo Have More Fun Than Me" was released by Trust Me I'm A Thief Records in 2004. It enjoyed much more success than its predecessor and contains the well-known single "Floating" which was given much airplay on late night alternative radio shows. The lead single "Floating" was famously overheard being played in Whelan's in Dublin by the musician Brendan Benson. Benson immediately requested a copy of the album and then praised Jape in "The Guardian" – however, the newspaper spelt it "Jabe". He also rang Egan personally to inform him he would be covering "Floating" with his band The Raconteurs. However, Egan has stated that he did not give Benson personal permission to cover the song. He did witness the cover live at the Olympia Theatre and was later to describe it as "a great moment". The single is also covered by Soulwax during their DJ sets. Jape participated in two nationwide tours with both David Kitt and The Redneck Manifesto to promote the album's release. Kitt was co-producer of "Floating". The band went on to perform at prominent Irish festivals such as Electric Picnic and Hard Working Class Heroes.

A collection of remixes of the "Floating" single were released in June 2007. A performance at the Lovebox festival in Dublin followed on 21 July that year. Jape recorded the EP "Jape is Grape", due for release by V2 Records on 19 November 2007. Despite V2 folding in October 2007, the EP release went ahead and a nationwide tour of Ireland followed to promote what was the band's major label debut. The band re-signed to The Co-Op.

"Ritual", Jape's first album in four years, was released under the Co-op label on 4 June 2008. It entered the Irish album charts at number fifteen, while the "Irish Independent"s John Meagher named it his twentieth best Irish album of the 2000s. "Ritual" featured ten tracks, including "Streetwise", "Graveyard" and "Strike Me Down", all of which had previously been performed live. The album was preceded by the single "I Was a Man", whilst a video for the song "Graveyard", which was filmed in an actual graveyard in Dublin, was also released. There was a host of Irish and European dates and festival appearances to promote the album in June 2008, including performances at the Róisín Dubh in Galway and Vicar Street and the Road Records music store in Dublin. Appearances alongside CSS, Battles and MGMT on the Park Stage and Dance Stage at Glastonbury in England on 28–29 June and an appearance at the Ola Festival in Spain followed. Jape then opened for The Flaming Lips at Belsonic in Belfast on 11 August 2008 and performed a free show as part of Heineken Green Spheres in Cork alongside Donal Dineen on 19 November 2008. Supporting Friendly Fires led to the English band remixing Jape's "Strike Me Down" single.<ref name="Jape – Strike Me Down (V2/Co-Op)"></ref> There was also an appearance at Electric Picnic 2008 to follow the appearance Electric Picnic 2006. Tony Clayton-Lea, writing in "The Irish Times" beforehand, said: "Suffice to say that if this whippet-thin geezer isn't one of the highlights of this year's Picnic then that's it—we give up". In December 2008, Jape fans were behind an unsuccessful petition to have the single "Phil Lynott" become the Christmas number one single in Ireland.

As of March 2009, Jape had six songs written for a fourth album. An appearance at Electric Picnic 2009 occurred, however, a performance at Pohoda in Slovakia did not occur, with Jape narrowly escaping a stage collapse which killed one person and injured more than 90 others. On 19 March 2010 Jape were announced as one of the first acts expected to perform at that year's Indie-pendence.

Jape released the album "Ocean of Frequency" in 2011. Jape performed at the Eurosonic Festival in 2012 when Ireland was the "Spotlight Country". Richie Egan has since left Ireland and moved to Sweden.

In January 2015 Jape returned with their fifth studio album "This Chemical Sea". The record was preceded by the single 'The Heart's Desire' and reached number 8 in Irish album charts. Following the album's release Jape toured Europe, playing live shows across the continent.

The nomination of Jape's third album, "Ritual", for Ireland's Choice Music Prize was announced on 14 January 2009.

"Ritual"'s victory was announced at a live ceremony held at Vicar Street, Dublin on 4 March 2009. The prize included a cheque for €10,000, jointly provided by the Irish Music Rights Organisation (IMRO) and the Irish Recorded Music Association (IRMA), and a specially commissioned award. Frontman Richie Egan joked about a rival nominee by saying: "They all deserve the award -- sure my mother even told me that Mick Flannery (nominated for his album "White Lies") was going to win, she said you're good, Richie, but he's gorgeous". The award was decided by a secret ballot after the twelve judges, who included Today FM presenter Ian Dempsey, decided that the decision was proving difficult due to a closeness in voting. Jape was amongst six of the nominees who performed at the event, with a three-song set featuring earlier in proceedings.

When Lisa Hannigan was nominated for the Mercury Prize, Ed Power, writing in the "Irish Independent", wondered how close Jape had come to receiving a Mercury nomination—"Or, for that matter, how many of the judges had even heard of him".

"Ocean of Frequency" was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in January 2012 and was announced as winner on 8 March 2012, making Jape the first act to have won the award more than once.

Richie Egan received one nomination at the 2009 Meteor Awards for his band Jape. He lost to Mick Flannery in the Best Irish Male category at the awards ceremony held on 17 March 2009.

"Floating" was nominated for Best Budget Video at the UK Music Video Awards in 2008. Autamata, another Irish band, were also nominated for their video "Need You Sunshine" as were Example’s video for "Me and Mandy", Lise Westzynthius's video for "Childlike Curves" and These New Puritans's video for "Elvis". The awards ceremony took place on 14 October 2008 in the Odeon West End in Leicester Square, London.


</doc>
<doc id="17554763" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17554763" title="Everyone Nose (All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom)">
Everyone Nose (All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom)

"Everyone Nose (All the Girls Standing in the Line for the Bathroom)" is a song by American band N.E.R.D. It is the lead single from their third studio album "Seeing Sounds" and was released on May 13, 2008. Lyrically, the song delves into the issue of woman socially snorting cocaine in bathrooms. The song was accompanied by music video, which was directed by Diane Martel. A video for the remix of the song featuring Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco, and Pusha T of Clipse was also filmed and directed by Hype Williams.

"Everyone Nose" received generally favorable reviews from music critics. N.E.R.D promoted the song through numerous tours and festivals. The song failed to chart in the United States, but peaked at number 17 on the Japan Hot 100 Singles and at number 41 on the UK Singles Chart.

"Everyone Nose" was written by Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo, who also produced the song as The Neptunes. The title of the song derives from the subject of women snorting cocaine socially in bathrooms. N.E.R.D attested that, "when the girls go in the bathroom, they're powdering their faces with that other white stuff." Andrew Coleman, the band's engineer, explained the song's bridge, saying it is the "breakdown" of the girl: "you can imagine a girl who is totally coked out of her mind dancing and sweating."

In midst of working with Missy Elliott, Williams was shown a video of people dancing to Baltimore house music. He "lost his mind, the way these people were dancing and these crazy beats," which inspired the beat for "Everyone Nose." The song begins with a Roland 5080 acoustic bass guitar and continues with drums provided by a Triton Extreme. He went on to say that, "Timbaland is scratching in there, too. The big Latin section is again, all Pharrell—all the same instruments; he just flipped the programming. That is the Latin club explosion part, mostly programmed beats with some buckets."

N.E.R.D produced a remix featuring Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco, and Pusha T, which was available as an iTunes and Zune Marketplace bonus track with the purchase of "Seeing Sounds". When asked why the song was remixed, Hugo replied with, "We wanted something with more of a straight-ahead, club-bumping beat, just a different take on it. We like to remix, dismantle, take apart shit and put it back together. It's just like a Rubik's Cube: When you can't solve it, you just break it and you put it back together." Williams added, "We think that 'Everyone Nose' in its current form already hits a certain demographic a certain way, so I just wanted to go and do something different."

Christian Hoard of "Rolling Stone" claimed that the song would be "destined to go down as [one] of 2008's most interesting hip-hop cuts." Addi Stewart of "Now" magazine said the song "is straight groovy, baby!" Many praised the beat; Nick Levine of Digital Spy said, "It's a triumph of beats over melody, but few would deny that those beats sound pretty good as they're dropping." The "Daily Mirror" described the beat as "nicely buffeted electropop", noting its "trickily timed beats, synthesised horns and playful vocal jousting". Scott Lowe of IGN said the song featured an "intriguing jazzy beat layered over pounding bass". Others panned the song's sound and lyrics, saying Williams "lampoons partygoing cokeheads by sounding like Baha Men after five too many rails" and that the lyrics were "about as shallow and trite as an inflatable kiddy swimming pool, but less fun".

The remix has also garnered positive reviews; Lowe noted that "Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco, and Pusha T make an appearance on a somewhat more enjoyable remixed version of [the song]", which added a "nice outside perspective to the otherwise tiresome track". Tom Breihan of "The Village Voice" called the remix "pretty great" compared to the "horrible hammering" of the original song. He criticized West's lyrics, saying he was "back to talking about girls on his verse again […] without any of the humane warmth he used to sometimes bring." The song was number 32 on "Rolling Stone"s list of the 100 Best Songs of 2008.

In response to the positive reception from listeners, Williams said, "We love the reaction that we get [from that song]. They know what we're talking about." Shay Haley, a member of the band, went on saying, "Me, personally, I'm shocked it's being embraced the way it is. I feel like it sticks out like a sore thumb in comparison to what you hear every day on the radio… It's just our personal observation of what we've seen over the past couple of years, so we felt like making a party record out of it."

N.E.R.D promoted the song by performing it in several tours and festivals, including the Austin City Limits Music Festival and the Diesel Bash. Toby Green of "The Guardian" attended a concert at The Roundhouse in London and gave the performance four out of five stars, saying "Pharrell's knack is connecting with the crowd. Many bands tell the audience they want to party with them, but N.E.R.D seem to mean it."

Williams contacted the T.A.G. ad agency to record an interactive video to create an "integrated campaign" in order to "hype" the single. The music video for "Everyone Nose" was directed by Diane Martel and co-directed by T.A.G, in collaboration with photo website Last Night's Party. It was filmed at a nightclub in Madison, New York, with 100 guests as an "orgiastic party" video, in addition to cameos by Kanye West, Lindsay Lohan, and Samantha Ronson. During the filming of the music video, a fight broke out on set and threatened to halt recording of the video. The outbreak resulted in one person being sent to a nearby hospital for medical treatment. N.E.R.D, West, and Lohan were not on set at the time of the altercation. Due to the lack of security and believing their safety was compromised, members of the trade union "threatened to walk off the set" before being persuaded to stay.

A large dancing nose and nude strippers were set to appear in the video, but were censored with "removed by request" slates. Because the lyrics dealt with cocaine, MTV initially did not air "Everyone Nose". MTV softened after their website was visited 5,000 times, and they played a censored version of the music video without the URL. Rebecca Skinner of HSI Productions criticized MTV, saying, "All artists want their videos to be seen on as many platforms as possible. However MTV is not what [it] used to be—yet another reason why the online component to this is important."

A music video for the remix of "Everyone Nose" featuring Kanye West, Lupe Fiasco, and Pusha T was filmed in July and was directed by Hype Williams. It features video game graphics from the 1980s. Williams explained that, "We just want to have fun with the project. In a day and age where the record industry is what it is, I'm lucky enough to be on a label that understands and they'll just let us have fun."





</doc>
<doc id="17573160" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17573160" title="Commercial Import Program">
Commercial Import Program

The Commercial Import Program, sometimes known as the Commodity Import Program (CIP), was an economic aid arrangement between South Vietnam and its main supporter, the United States. It lasted from January 1955 until the Fall of Saigon in 1975 and the dissolution of South Vietnam following the invasion by North Vietnam after US forces had withdrawn from the country due to the 1973 cease-fire agreement. The initiative was a trading plan that was designed to inject large amounts of American capital into the South Vietnamese economy to help fuel its industrialisation, growth and self-sufficiency, without incurring the high levels of inflation that would normally occur in such a drastic injection of money.

The CIP was a scheme whereby US dollars were given to the South Vietnamese government treasury. Selected businesspeople were given import licenses that allowed them to purchase US dollars with South Vietnamese currency at a rate far below the market value. The importers then used their American currency to buy US goods, while the Saigon government kept the South Vietnamese currency paid by the businessmen to fund the military and public service. The objective of the mechanism was to inject large amounts of money into the economy in an indirect way, through material goods, so that inflation would be avoided. However, the initiative failed to generate much economic development, as licenseholders spent most of their funds on consumer goods.

The main effect of the aid package was to fuel a rapid expansion in the urban middle and upper class, while life remained mostly unchanged for South Vietnam's rural majority. This served to increase anti-government resentment among peasants, while solidifying urban support for the Saigon government. US officials were aware of the failure of the program to propel economic development, but did not try and divert the spending to investment as they regarded the solidification of urban support for the government to be very important. They also used the dependence of the urban class on the CIP to achieve political changes in South Vietnam. In 1963, when the US sought to pressure the government of Ngo Dinh Diem after the alliance began to falter, they cut off funding as a gesture to the urban civil servant and military officer class that they disapproved of Diem. Following the South Vietnamese leader's overthrow and assassination in a US-backed coup, the CIP resumed.

During World War II, Imperial Japan attacked Indochina and wrested control from France, but when they were defeated by the Allies in 1945, a power vacuum resulted. The communist-dominated Vietminh of Ho Chi Minh fought for Vietnamese independence, while the French attempted to regain control of their colony by creating the French Union-allied State of Vietnam. Up until 1954, the First Indochina War raged. In 1954, the French lost the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the Geneva Conference was held to determine the future of French Indochina. The Vietminh were given control of North Vietnam, while the State of Vietnam controlled the territory south of the 17th parallel. The Geneva agreements, which the State of Vietnam did not sign, called for reunification elections to be held in 1956. The State of Vietnam received support from the US and other anti-communist countries in the midst of the Cold War, which saw it as a partner in a fight against the spread of communism.

The Commercial Import Program was created in January 1955, immediately upon the transfer of France's remaining direct influence over the State of Vietnam to the chief of state, former Emperor Bảo Đại and his Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem. The Americans and Diem feared a communist electoral victory and national polls never took place. In October, Diem proclaimed himself the president of the newly formed Republic of Vietnam after he won a fraudulent referendum, and the aid continued as the US wanted to build a strong and stable anti-communist state in Southeast Asia. When the program was first introduced, it generated turbulence for merchant importers in Vietnam. As a large proportion of the imports up to that point had been from France, traders who were dependent on selling French products found themselves in difficulties as their wares would now be more expensive than those of import licenseholders who now had access to cheaper American alternatives. The suppliers of French goods threatened to organize a strike, but this never materialized. At the time, South Vietnam was also suffering from a lack of foreign currency reserves and the CIP was seen as an urgent mechanism of remedying this. The introduction of the CIP brought an unprecedented new level of economic liberalism and capitalism, and at first, the entrepreneurial class struggled to meet the challenges of a deregulated market, leading to a series of significant shortages and surpluses of various goods due to their inexperience in judging market forces and resultant imbalances in the economy. Initially 25,000 applications for import licenses were received, many from speculators. In the early years of the initiative, a proportion of the US funding for the CIP came through the proceeds of the sale of surplus American agricultural products to France.

Upon the inception of the program in 1955, around 20,000 CIP licenses were granted, but it was determined that the progress was too unwieldy to manage, so the number of licenses was decreased and people were obliged to assemble into conglomerates to access the scheme. At first, inflation was regarded as such a pressing concern that there were very few limitations on what could be imported, the most notable restrictions being alcohol and jewellery. It was reasoned that more restrictions on imports would cause a lack of supply of goods, causing price increases. However, restrictions were increased in the next three years to an average of 75.

In 1955, Washington pumped USD322.4 million into South Vietnam, and the historian George McTurnan Kahin calculated that 87% of this came through the CIP. From the end of 1955, when Diem took full control of the country after ousting Bảo Đại and declaring himself president, until 1961, the US provided Saigon with USD1.447 billion in aid, mostly through the CIP. In addition, USD95.6 million of loans were given. In 1958 and 1959, the CIP accounted for around 80% of economic assistance. By 1960, Diem had accumulated USD216.4 million in reserves. The amount of CIP aid peaked at USD398 million in 1966 and began dropping thereafter, reaching USD233 million by 1973.

The program used import subsidies to pump US dollars into the South Vietnamese treasury. The regimes sold these dollars to business people who held licenses to import American goods. The businessmen bought the US dollars from the Saigon treasury with their South Vietnamese piasters at half the official exchange rate; they then used this cheaply acquired American currency to import US goods. This meant that American manufacturers would still get the same amount of US currency they would have received for selling their goods on the free market, while South Vietnamese importers could get twice as much goods for the same money. The piasters that the Saigon government collected from selling the US aid dollars were to be placed in a fund held by the National Bank of Vietnam, which was to be used to fund the expansion and training of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, national police and civil service.

During the rule of Diem, the majority of the cost of military, police and public service was paid by the US through the CIP. As the extra money was not actually circulating in the South Vietnamese economy and competing for the same supply of goods and services, inflation was not stimulated. A similar fiscal device was employed in the Marshall Plan aid package for the rebuilding of Western Europe following the destruction caused during World War II. One American economist described the CIP as the "greatest invention since the wheel".

Although the plan was theoretically sound, it was ineffective in stimulating economic growth. During Diem's time, there was little meaningful economic investment or development of infrastructure. The businessmen mostly used the import subsidies to purchase consumer goods such as boats, motorbikes, refrigerators, radios, music systems and other similar goods, which were luxuries at the time. The program was thus effective in expanding the size of the urban middle class, but it did not generate much economic investment. Only a minority of the purchases were of capital goods such as manufacturing equipment and supplies for factory production. As a result, not much of the subsidies created more economic production. The government funds generated from selling importing licenses also became a problem, with corruption and explicit theft dogging its effectiveness as a means of bankrolling the military and civil service. In addition, some government officials would not sell the coveted licenses to the businessmen until a bribe was paid. Another criticism of the CIP was that the funds collected by the government were not used for any significant amount of government-sector economic investment but mainly to fund the army. Diem defended this by stating that national security was paramount.

In time, the ineffectiveness of the CIP began to concern the Eisenhower administration, who were worried about the lack of industrialization. The corruption that permeated the initiative remained a problem. The rural peasants of Vietnam, who comprised more than 80% of the population, were unaffected by the aid package except for the resentment that it instilled in them when they observed the relative affluence of their city counterparts compared to their own impoverished state. However, the program was credited with transforming the textile industry, as 25,000 sewing machines were imported in the first year of its operation.

Phan Quang Dan, an anti-communist opposition politician who was Diem's most prominent opponent, and one of only two dissidents to win a seat at the 1959 legislative election but was imprisoned by Diem and barred from taking up his position, said that "The U.S. Commercial Import Program—which costs us nothing—brings in on a massive scale luxury goods of all kinds, which give us an artificial society—enhanced material conditions that don't amount to anything, and no sacrifice; it brings luxury to our ruling group and middle class, and luxury means corruption."

One of the political impacts of the massive infusion into the South Vietnamese economy was to expand the urban middle-class and ease the pressure on the government to collect taxes. This was because the government had set high import duties, which were effectively 50% of the cut-price exchange rate used under the CIP; these funds were also part of normal revenue, and were not subject to American oversight, unlike the proceeds of the counterpart fund. As a result of the proceeds of the import duty, income tax was very low, and without the progressive income tax rate in most countries, the upper-class were not affected by taxation as much as their peers in other nations, and thus supported Diem strongly. The effective income taxation rate was no more than 5%, and the South Vietnamese president privately told an adviser from the Michigan State University Group that he was happy that the CIP had allowed him to build a large support base among the newly created middle and upper class. American economic aid administrators were also aware of the effects of the CIP on urban political support for Diem and his successors. They were aware that the CIP had not been yielding substantial gains in economic development, and noted this in their reports, but said that the program should be continued regardless, as it was effective in enriching the urban middle class and ensuring their political support, thereby gaining loyalty from military officers, business leaders and public servants. A 1959 report concluded that if the CIP was absent or diluted to equilibrium economic levels, the resulting fall in living standards would create "serious political problems" due to erosion of the government's support among the urban minority.

As the CIP allowed licensees to import goods at half price, it was regarded as a virtual guarantee of business success, regardless of entrepreneurial skill. As a result, the licenses were highly prized. For those who were not confident in their sales ability, a healthy profit was usually made by selling their license to other willing businessmen, especially as demand far outstripped supply. A 1966 US Government report concluded that it was possible to guarantee a 100% domestic profit on piasters, and that a 50% profit could be safely achieved by using black market exchange rates and depositing one's money in an American bank.

Despite its shorter term political benefits, the South Vietnamese government also had complaints about the way the Americans set up the CIP. Diem and Nhu claimed that the paperwork involved in the applications for imports made the process was too slow and hindered the development of an emerging economy where the market situation changed rapidly. In particular, any investment in capital goods by importers that cost more than USD500,000 needed a formal American review before approval. Nhu also publicly criticized the review policy on several occasions, citing several private infrastructure investments that were blocked by American administrators. Nhu and Diem felt that the regulations that the Americans put on the use of the piaster fund obtained from Vietnamese importers were stifling their ability to accelerate development, especially as the planning and approval reviews took a long time.

Despite the fact the CIP had the effect of building an urban middle class base for his regime through the proliferation of consumer goods, Diem was unhappy with the situation, fearing the long-term detrimental effects that the lack of investment in capital goods would have on his country. He was particularly opposed to the clause in the importation regulations that restricted the purchase of capital goods to businesses that were entirely private. This proved to be a large hindrance in several areas, as the South Vietnamese government had a policy of having majority ownership of any industry deemed to be of vital national importance, as well as banning foreigners from having a stake in such ventures. South Vietnam's Ambassador to the US, Tran Van Chuong protested to the Americans about this clause, without success. Chuong wrote that the American restriction on the importation of capital goods "perpetuates dependence on this aid", and that "American aid would be most valuable if it were partly devoted to promoting [the] country's industrial capacities".

Over time, the economists in the Eisenhower administration became frustrated with Diem's refusal to devaluate the piaster once the Republic of Vietnam had become a stable nation. Diem refused to make the CIP exchange rate equivalent to the free market exchange rate for the two currencies. Although the fixed exchange rate meant that Americans were heavily funding the South Vietnamese economy and that the importing firms could obtain more goods for their money, the rate also meant that South Vietnam goods would not be economically competitive on the export market. Diem was reluctant to cut the currency rate, arguing that it would diminish the value of US aid to South Vietnam and undermine the urban middle class support for his regime as they would resent the loss of their cheap consumer and luxury goods. In 1963, the US Ambassador Frederick Nolting and his economic advisers exhorted Diem to spend more of the CIP funds on rural development in an attempt to shore up peasant support in the face of increasing communist pressure, but were rebuffed.

On October 5, 1963, the CIP was briefly suspended by the United States in the wake of the McNamara Taylor mission, a fact-finding expedition to South Vietnam conducted by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell D. Taylor to investigate the progress of the fight against the communist Vietcong insurgency. The report concluded that Diem was not concentrating on fighting the insurrection but was instead preoccupied with quelling Buddhist protests for religious equality, such as raiding pagodas and firing on Buddhist dissidents. One of the reasons for the CIP suspension was to give military officers a signal that Washington was unhappy with Diem and therefore increase the prospects of a coup, as well as to try and foster urban resentment towards Diem among those that had previously benefited from the CIP. Another was that Diem might change his policy direction in accordance with US wishes, although they considered this to be unlikely. Funding was restored in early November 1963, about a month later, after the deposal and assassination of Diem in a military coup.

The CIP continued until the dissolution of South Vietnam in April 1975 when the communists overran South Vietnam following the withdrawal of US forces following the 1973 cease-fire agreement. Kahin said that "together with other elements of U.S. economic support...substantially expanded South Vietnam's middle class and helped purchase its political loyalty to both the Saigon regime and its American sponsor" and that it "provided the means for a way of life that was as artificial as the economy upon which it rested". Kahin said that the initiative had the opposite effect of its stated aims, in that it promoted increasing economic dependency.




</doc>
<doc id="17642786" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17642786" title="Effects of Hurricane Charley in North Carolina">
Effects of Hurricane Charley in North Carolina

The effects of Hurricane Charley in North Carolina were minor to moderate and included $25 million (2004 USD) in damage. Hurricane Charley lasted from August 9 to August 15, 2004, and at peak intensity it attained 150 miles per hour (240 km/h) winds, making it a strong Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. The storm made landfall in southwestern Florida at maximum strength, and moved northward, parallel to the U.S. East Coast before moving ashore on northeastern South Carolina.

The storm caused flooding in seven counties within the state as a result of of rainfall. Winds peaked at which downed trees and power lines, and left 65,000 homes without power. A storm surge of to was reported, along with moderate waves that caused minor beach erosion. No deaths are attributed to the storm.

On August 13, 2004, a tropical storm watch was issued for Cape Fear, southward to South Carolina. The watch was extended northward to Oregon Inlet later that day; the watch further extended to Chincoteague, Virginia. The tropical storm watch from Cape Lookout to Oregon Inlet was changed to a hurricane warning. A hurricane watch was subsequently put into effect for coastal areas from Oregon Inlet to the North Carolina/Virginia border, although by August 15 all advisories were discontinued. Flood watches were also placed into effect for portions of the state.

Governor Mike Easley declared a state of emergency in advance of the storm, and 200 National Guard troops were dispatched to Charlotte, Raleigh, Kinston and Lumerton, while 800 more were on standby. On Ocracoke Island, authorities ordered mandatory evacuations, while on Bogue Banks voluntary evacuations were in place. Officials in Wrightsville Beach drove along the streets with loudspeakers mounted on trucks, warning tourists that a storm was approaching. The storm forced the University of North Carolina at Wilmington to suspend a planned opening for students moving into residence halls. Campgrounds at the Cape Hatteras National Seashore were closed by the National Park Service and three boat ramps were closed. Duke Power Co. prepared for Charley by lowering the level of hydroelectric lakes to make room for excessive rainfall. The state Department of Environment and Natural Resources advised hog farmers to pump out their waste lagoon. About 60 Red Cross shelters were opened during the storm and during the peak of Charley, and roughly 1,600 people sought protection.

Hurricane Charley produced moderate to heavy rainfall over the state, peaking at near Greenville; other rainfall amounts ranged from less than –more than . The outer rainbands began affecting the region in the early hours of August 14. Due to widespread debris, storm drains became clogged which left flooding in some areas. Freshwater flooding was reported in seven counties along the coastal plain. State highways 42 and 581, as well as numerous county and local roads, were covered with at least of water. Wilmington and surrounding towns were forced to close a total of 20 streets. The heavy precipitation also caused the Neuse River to swell to flood stage. A few businesses throughout the region were damaged; two in downtown Greenville and five others were flooded.

The storm produced estimated storm surge of to , along with waves of up to in height. However, there were isolated reports of surge, particularly along the beaches of Brunswick County. This produced minor beach erosion along the coastline. Winds gusted from 60–70 miles per hour (95–110 km/h), causing minor wind damage. The hurricane spawned five weak tornadoes across the state, including an F1 in Nags Head that damaged twenty structures. Charley destroyed 40 houses and damaged 2,231, 231 severely, including 221 damaged beach homes in Sunset Beach. Damage was the greatest in Brunswick County, where wind gusts peaked at 85 miles per hour (137 km/h). The winds blew down chimneys and damaged a roof on one building, and ripped the siding off another. Crop damage was also heavy in Brunswick County, with 50% of the tobacco crop lost and 30% of the corn and vegetable fields destroyed. Strong winds downed trees and power lines, leaving 65,000 homes without power. Damage in North Carolina totaled to $25 million (2004 USD).



</doc>
<doc id="17649882" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17649882" title="Bound for Glory IV">
Bound for Glory IV

Bound for Glory IV was a professional wrestling pay-per-view (PPV) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) promotion that took place on October 12, 2008 at the Sears Centre in Hoffman Estates, Illinois. It was the fourth event under the Bound for Glory name and the tenth event in the 2008 TNA PPV schedule. The show was promoted as TNA's premier PPV event and their equivalent to the rival World Wrestling Entertainment's (WWE) WrestleMania. Eight professional wrestling matches and one untelevised match were featured on the event's card, four of which were for championships.

The main event of Bound for Glory IV was a standard wrestling match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship, pitting the champion Samoa Joe against the challenger Sting. Sting won the match to become the new champion. Another highly promoted contest on the card was between Kurt Angle and Jeff Jarrett, with Mick Foley serving as the Special Ringside Enforcer. Jarrett was the victor of the encounter. TNA held a Three Way War between A.J. Styles, Booker T, and Christian Cage at the event, which Booker T won. The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended in a Four Way Tag Team Monster's Ball match with Steve McMichael as the Special Guest Referee, in which the champions Beer Money, Inc. (James Storm and Robert Roode) fought the team of Abyss and Matt Morgan, The Latin American Xchange (Hernandez and Homicide), and Team 3D (Brother Devon and Brother Ray). Beer Money, Inc. pinned Hernandez to retain the championship in the contest.

Bound for Glory IV is remembered for Sting winning the TNA World Heavyweight Championship and Team 3D forcing Abyss through a flaming table. There were 35,000 who purchased the event, as reported by "The Wrestling Observer Newsletter". Bound for Glory IV had an attendance of between 5,000 and 5,500 people. Chris and Bryan Sokol of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the show a 7 out of 10, the same as the 2009 edition but lower than the 2007 edition's rating of 7.5. It also received a lower rating by the Canadian Online Explorer than WWE's WrestleMania XXIV PPV event held on March 30, 2008, which had been given a 9 out of 10 by Dale Plummer.

In October 2017, with the launch of the Global Wrestling Network, the event became available to stream on demand.

The fourth installment under the Bound for Glory name was announced in January 2008 with an October 12 date attached. TNA issued a mobile alert in March 2008 that the top three candidate cities to host the event were New York City, Toronto, and Chicago. TNA President Dixie Carter was quoted as saying that Chicago had been chosen as the location. The main event was planned to be Samoa Joe versus Kevin Nash before TNA management chose to go in a different direction. TNA issued a press release on June 9 regarding Bound for Glory, announcing it would be held at the Sears Centre in Hoffman Estates, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago. It was also revealed that the event was officially stylized as "Bound for Glory IV," tickets went on sale August 1, and TNA had scheduled a "Total Nonstop InterAction" event on October 11. Early returns for ticket sales revealed that the first two tiers had been sold out. In previous installments, the purchasing price of the event was $29.99, but with Bound for Glory IV TNA increased the price to $34.99. TNA advertised recently signed wrestler Mick Foley for their Total Nonstop InterAction event held at the Hyatt Regency in Rosemont, Illinois, with it selling out shortly afterwards. "The Wrestling Observer Newsletter" reported that TNA had received the largest crowd for a Total Nonstop InterAction event up to that point. TNA originally planned to use former professional football player and professional wrestler Steve McMichael as a Special Ringside Enforcer before management changed their minds and decided to use Mick Foley in the role instead. TNA later issued a press release announcing that McMichael would take part in the Bound for Glory IV festivities as a Special Guest Referee due to his fame and connection to the Chicago Bears and Chicago in general.

Bound for Glory is considered by TNA to be their equivalent to the National Football League's Super Bowl or rival World Wrestling Entertainment's WrestleMania event. As such, TNA used an extensive marketing campaign that involved several wrestlers dressing up as gangsters from the 1920s and 1930s era of Chicago to promote the show since it is the biggest event the company holds annually. Samoa Joe and The Latin American Xchange (Hernandez and Homicide) participated in some of these promotional video shoots. This was the first Bound for Glory event to use roman numerals in the title. TNA created a section on their company website to promote Bound for Glory IV. TNA released a poster to promote the show featuring Karen Angle, Joe, Booker T, Kurt Angle, Christian Cage, and Gail Kim. The official theme for the show was Tarantula by The Smashing Pumpkins. A contest was held to win upgraded ringside seats, free merchandise, and meet several TNA performers at Bound for Glory IV by wearing a Halloween costume to the event, with a drawing being held prior to the start of the telecast.

Bound for Glory IV featured eight professional wrestling matches and one untelevised match that involved different wrestlers from pre-existing scripted feuds and storylines. Wrestlers portrayed villains, heroes, or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches.
Heading into Bound for Glory IV, TNA created a company-wide narrative that led to an on-screen rivalry between professional wrestling veterans, who played the villains, and the younger talent of the company, who played the heroic characters. Several matches and storylines that led to the event were connected to this narrative, such as the storyline surrounding the TNA World Heavyweight Championship and the bout pitting Kurt Angle against Jeff Jarrett. This narrative started at TNA's Victory Road PPV event on July 13, where Samoa Joe defended the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against Booker T. During the match, Joe relentlessly assaulted Booker T to the point that referees nor security could stop him. This led to Sting interfering in the contest trying to calm Joe down. Joe refused to listen and continued his assault, causing Sting to hit Joe in the stomach with a baseball in order for Joe to stop, resulting in a no contest. Sting did not state a reason as to why he hit Joe in the weeks after the event. At TNA's Hard Justice PPV event on August 10, A.J. Styles fought Angle in a Last Man Standing match, which he won after injuring Angle's neck in the contest. After the bout, Styles attacked Angle's injured neck, making the injury more severe in the storyline until Sting attacked Styles to prevent the assault from continuing. On the August 14 episode of TNA's television program "TNA Impact!," Sting explained that both Joe and Styles had been disrespectful and violent in their current rivalries and matches. He stated that his actions were to end that type of behavior between the younger wrestlers and the veteran wrestlers.

At TNA's previous No Surrender PPV event on September 14, Sting announced that TNA management had decided that he would challenge the TNA World Heavyweight Champion for the title at Bound for Glory. Later in the show, Joe defeated Christian Cage and Angle in a Three Ways to Glory match to retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship after Jarrett interfered in the bout by bashing a guitar over Angle's head. Following No Surrender on the September 18 episode of "Impact!", Sting discussed his actions further, stating that when he was younger he learned from the veterans in the industry and that Joe and Styles had been disrespectful in their rivalries with Booker T and Angle. Jarrett responded to Sting's comments later in the show, stating that the issue was not about disrespect, it was about the veterans in the company not wanting to retire and let the younger wrestlers be stars. Angle argued that he made TNA a success, not the efforts of Jarrett, Sting, Joe, or Styles. Angle then challenged Jarrett to a match at Bound for Glory IV, which Jarrett declined. On the September 25 episode of "Impact!", Angle challenged Jarrett to a match again, this time threatening and mocking him along with his daughters. Jarrett accepted Angle's challenge afterwards. Sting also expressed his reasons for having a desire to face Joe for the title on the same telecast, stating that he was taught respect by veterans in his youth so he was going to defeat Joe for the championship at Bound for Glory to teach Joe respect. Mick Foley was announced as the Special Ringside Enforcer for the Jarrett versus Angle bout on the October 2 "Impact!" episode. Sting and Joe signed the contract for their encounter on the October 9 episode of "Impact!", with the stipulation added that there would be no rematch between the two after the event regardless of the outcome.

TNA held a Three Way War between A.J. Styles, Booker T, and Christian Cage at the show. Leading into the event, Styles represented the younger wrestlers in the company, while Booker T represented the veterans. Cage was neutral in the storyline, due to not having revealed which side he had aligned with. This upset Styles in the storyline, who wanted Cage to join the younger wrestlers. On the September 25 episode of "Impact!", Styles fought Booker T in a standard match. Booker T won the bout after bashing Styles in the head with a steel briefcase. Styles blamed the loss on Cage, who had interfered in the bout and accidentally cost Styles the win due to a miscommunication. On the October 2 episode of "Impact!", the team of Cage, Styles, and Jay Lethal teamed to face the team of Booker T and Team 3D (Brother Devon and Brother Ray) in a Six Man Tag Team match. Another miscommunication between Styles and Cage occurred in the contest, allowing Booker T to pin Cage to win the bout. This led to the October 9 episode of "Impact!", when Management Director Jim Cornette announced that Booker T versus Styles with Cage as Special Guest Referee would be the main event of that telecast to settle the issue. Styles defeated Booker T during the show, with Cage assaulting both wrestlers after the contest. Cornette then promoted a Three Way War at Bound for Glory in order to end the overall conflict.
The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended in a Four Way Tag Team Monster's Ball match by Beer Money, Inc. (James Storm and Robert Roode) against the team of Abyss and Matt Morgan, The Latin American Xchange (Hernandez and Homicide; LAX), and Team 3D. On the September 18 episode of "Impact!", Matt Morgan announced that TNA were holding a Tag Team Invitational Tournament at Bound for Glory and that he had signed up himself and his partner Abyss for the contest. Team 3D interrupted Morgan and revealed that they were also involved in the tournament. Meanwhile, on the same telecast, Beer Money, Inc. and their manager Jacqueline assaulted LAX's manager Héctor Guerrero. On the September 25 episode of "Impact!", Team 3D announced that the match between them and the team of Morgan and Abyss was made a Monster's Ball match. On the same telecast, Beer Money, Inc. defeated LAX in a bout with the stipulation that the losing team lost their manager. This meant that Guerrero could no longer manage LAX in the storyline. On the October 2 episode of "Impact!", Management Director Jim Cornette announced that the originally scheduled tournament was cancelled. Instead, TNA was holding a Four Way Tag Team Monster's Ball match for the TNA World Tag Team Championship between the above teams at Bound for Glory IV. TNA issued a press release announcing that Steve McMichael would be the Special Guest Referee for this match after it was promoted for the event.

The TNA X Division Championship was defended by Sheik Abdul Bashir against Consequences Creed at the spectacle. At Hard Justice, Bashir attacked Creed with a steal chair during his bout with Petey Williams for the title, which allowed Williams to force Creed's head into the mat with his signature Canadian Destroyer maneuver to retain the X Division Championship. Creed was given a rematch on the August 21 episode of "Impact!", with Bashir once again interfering by attacking Creed, resulting in Creed winning by disqualification and Williams retaining the X Division Championship again. A Three Way match for the title with Williams defending against Bashir and Creed was scheduled for No Surrender. At the event, Bashir defeated Williams and Creed to become the new TNA X Division Champion. On the October 9 episode of "Impact!", Creed won a Four Way match to challenge Bashir for the title at Bound for Glory, defeating Sonjay Dutt, Williams, and Jay Lethal in the process.

Prior to the event broadcasting live, TNA held an untelevised match for the audience in attendance. It was an Intergender Tag Team match pitting the team of Eric Young and Sojournor Bolt against Lance Rock and Christy Hemme. The team of Young and Bolt won the contest.

Bound for Glory IV featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches. Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast. Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event. Andrew Thomas, Earl Hebner, Rudy Charles, Mark "Slick" Johnson, Traci Brooks, and Steve McMichael participated as referees for the encounters. Lauren Thompson and Borash were used as interviewers during the event. Besides employees who appeared in a wrestling role, SoCal Val, Christy Hemme, Jim Cornette, Raisha Saeed, Jacqueline, Sharmell, and Kevin Nash all appeared on camera, either in backstage or in ringside segments.

The opening televised contest of Bound for Glory was the Steel Asylum to determine the number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship. There were ten participants in this contest; those involved were Alex Shelley, Chris Sabin, Curry Man, Jay Lethal, Jimmy Rave, Johnny Devine, Petey Williams, Shark Boy, Sonjay Dutt, and Super Eric. Christy Hemme accompanied Rave to the ring, while SoCal Val accompanied Dutt. In this encounter, the ring was surrounded by a large red steel cage that domed with a hole in the center of the ceiling. The objective was for a competitor to fight up the walls of the cage and escape via the hole in the center. The first person to complete the task won the match and became number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship. The duration of the bout was 12 minutes and 7 seconds. After several minutes of fighting among one another, several wrestlers attempted to climb the cage but were stopped. At one point, Devine performed his signature Devine Intervention maneuver on Rave, with Rave landing awkwardly on his neck. The winner of the contest was Lethal, who climbed the cage and escaped through the hole while everyone was preoccupied.

A Six Person Intergender Tag Team Bimbo Brawl match with Traci Brooks as the Special Guest Referee was next, pitting the team of ODB, Rhaka Khan, and Rhino against The Beautiful People (Angelina Love, Cute Kip, and Velvet Sky). In this bout, both male and female wrestlers could fight each other and all weapons were legal to use. The only way to win was by pinfall or submission. Rhino won the match for his team after tackling Kip with his signature Gore maneuver at 6 minutes and 15 seconds.

The TNA X Division Championship match followed, with Sheik Abdul Bashir defending against Consequences Creed. The match lasted 9 minutes and 18 seconds. Prior to the contest, ring announcer David Penzer introduced Sgt. Daniel Casara, who in turn introduced Creed. During the bout, Bashir held Creed in a submission hold with the referee attempting to raise Creed's arm three times. If it fell all three times, Bashir would be named the winner. Creed held his arm up on the third try, continuing the match. Bashir won the contest later by pinning Creed with a roll-up pinning maneuver while holding onto the middle rope for leverage. As such, Bashir retained the TNA X Division Championship.

The TNA Women's Knockout Championship was defended by Taylor Wilde against Awesome Kong and Roxxi in a Three Way match next. Raisha Saeed accompanied Kong to the ring. She also interfered in the contest by pulling Roxxi out of the ring and kicking her at ringside. Roxxi later returned to the ring and attacked Kong before being pinned by Wilde with a bridging suplex pin at 5 minutes and 11 seconds. Wilde thus retained the TNA Women's Knockout Championship.

The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended in a Four Way Tag Team Monster's Ball match with Steve McMichael as Special Guest Referee in the fifth contest. Beer Money, Inc. (James Storm and Robert Roode) defended the title against the team of Abyss and Matt Morgan, The Latin American Xchange (Hernandez and Homicide), and Team 3D (Brother Devon and Brother Ray). Jacqueline accompanied Beer Money, Inc. to the ring. The duration of the bout was 20 minutes and 20 seconds. This bout was contested under no count-outs and no disqualification rules with weapons legal and the only way to win was for a competitor to either pin or make another wrestler submit. The match started off with Hernandez jumping over the top rope onto Roode and Storm. Several competitors bled during the contest, such as Devon and Abyss, who was cut open by a cheese grater by Ray. McMichael was directly involved in the match several times. The first being an altercation with Beer Money, Inc., resulting in McMichael attacking Roode. Another time was near the end of the contest when Jacqueline interrupted a pin attempt by Homicide on Storm, with McMichael spanking her in retaliation. The last time was when he aided Hernandez in opening a tied bag of thumbtacks. Johnny Devine interfered in the encounter when Team 3D were assaulting Abyss with various weapons, such as a staple gun. Devine hit Abyss with a kendo stick from behind and helped Devon set up a table on the floor next to the stage. Ray and Devon then sprayed the table with lighter fluid. Devine lit the table on fire before Ray and Devon slammed Abyss through the flaming table off of the stage. The match ended when Team 3D forced Hernandez through a table covered in thumbtacks with their signature 3D tag team maneuver, before Storm spat beer in Devon's eyes and Roode covered Hernandez for the pinfall to retain the TNA World Tag Team Championship.

The sixth match was a Three Way War between A.J. Styles, Booker T, and Christian Cage that lasted 13 minutes and 5 seconds. Sharmell accompanied Booker T to the ring. She interfered in the encounter by giving Booker T a steal briefcase which he used to knockout Styles at ringside. Later, Cage attempted his signature Unprettier maneuver on Styles, who countered the move into an Inverted DDT to force Cage's head into the mat. Styles followed by placing Booker T in an armbar submission hold, before Cage broke it up. Booker T gained a near-fall after slamming Styles back-first against the mat with his trademark Book End maneuver. Afterwards, Booker T performed his popular "Spinarooni" hallmark for the audience before he was attacked by Cage, who went on to mock the move. Cage and Styles fought on top of a turnbuckle before Styles threw Cage off the top and into the ring. Styles followed by performing his signature Spiral Tap maneuver, but Cage moved out of the way. Booker T hit both Styles and Cage with a double Axe Kick, gaining a near-fall on both. A short bit later, Cage performed the Unprettier on Styles from the top of a turnbuckle. As he went for the pin attempt, Booker T hit Cage with an Axe Kick off of a turnbuckle and followed with the pinfall to win the encounter.
The seventh match of the show pitted Jeff Jarrett against Kurt Angle, with Mick Foley serving as the Special Ringside Enforcer. Jarrett gained a near-fall in the contest when he suplexed Angle off the top of a turnbuckle. Jarrett then placed Angle in a Figure-Four Leglock submission hold, which was broken by the referee when Angle grabbed the bottom rope. Angle fought back with a series of consecutive German suplexes, forcing Jarrett against the mat back-first. He then placed Jarrett in his signature Ankle lock submission hold, which Jarrett fought Angle to get released. Angle gained a near-fall by slamming Jarrett back-first against the mat with his signature Olympic Slam maneuver. Afterwards, Angle missed an areial splash from the top of a turnbuckle, when Jarrett moved out of the way. Angle then accidentally hit the referee, knocking him out in the storyline. Jarrett followed by performing his signature Stroke maneuver on Angle, with Foley counting the pinfall attempt before Angle kicked out. Afterwards, Angle hit Jarrett in the groin and then attacked Foley with a steel chair at ringside, before returning to the ring to hit Jarrett with the chair as well. Angle then revived the referee who counted Angle's pinfall attempt before Foley stopped the count by pulling the referee from the ring. Foley then attacked Angle and applied his signature Mandible Claw submission hold. Jarrett followed up by bashing a guitar over Angle's head and covering for a pinfall that Foley counted to win the match at 20 minutes and 7 seconds.

The main event was for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship in which the champion Samoa Joe defended against the challenger Sting. The duration of the encounter was 16 minutes and 54 seconds. The beginning of the match had Joe on the offensive, with Joe performing a dive between the ropes to hit Sting in the face with his forearm. The competitors then fought throughout the crowd for an extended period. At one point while the two were fighting on the arena steps, Joe jumped from a luxury box and kicked Sting down the stairs. Afterwards, Sting and Joe fought back towards the ring with each trading the offensive advantage. Back in the ring, Sting earned a near-fall after an aerial splash from the top of a turnbuckle. Joe placed Sting in an STF submission hold after a powerbomb next. Sting reached the ropes, causing the hold to be broken by the referee. Sting threw Joe into a ring corner and performed his signature Stinger Splash before lifting Joe up and slamming Joe neck-first onto the mat with Joe's signature Muscle Buster maneuver. Joe got up off the mat immediately and attacked Sting. He then slammed Sting head and back-first into the mat with Sting's trademark Scorpion Death Drop maneuver. Sting also got up immediately after the move. Later, Kevin Nash entered the arena and walked to the ringside area. Nash had reportedly left the company but his attendance backstage was leaked to various media outlets. As Joe was arguing with the referee, Sting retrieved a baseball bat that he had left at ringside. Nash pulled the bat from Sting's hands, not allowing him to use it in the match. Afterwards, Joe and Sting fought in the ring when Sting dodged a running Joe, causing him to almost collide with referee Earl Hebner who dodged as well. At this time, Nash hit Joe across the back with the baseball bat when Joe came in contact with the ring ropes. Sting followed by performing the Scorpion Death Drop on Joe and pinned him to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. The event came to a close as Sting celebrated in-front of the crowd.

Following Bound for Glory IV, TNA continued the rivalry between the veteran wrestlers and the younger wrestlers. At Turning Point on November 9, TNA held several matches connected to this overall narrative. Since Samoa Joe and Sting agreed on the stipulation that there would be no rematch between the two, Sting went on to feud with A.J. Styles while Joe fought Kevin Nash. On the October 23 episode of "Impact!", the veterans in TNA formed the group The Main Event Mafia, consisting of Sting, Kurt Angle, Nash, Booker T, and Scott Steiner. Meanwhile, the younger wrestlers formed The TNA Front Line led by Joe and Styles.

Heading into Turning Point, Styles and Sting argued over Sting assaulting Styles at Hard Justice. On the October 30 episode of "Impact!", newly made co-owner of TNA Mick Foley advertised Sting defending the TNA World Heavyweight Championship against Styles at Turning Point. Sting retained the title at the event. Sting and Styles fought again at TNA's Final Resolution PPV event on December 7, this time in an Eight Man Tag Team Match pitting The Main Event Mafia (Sting, Nash, Steiner, and Booker T) against The TNA Front Line (Styles, Joe, Brother Devon, and Brother Ray) for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. The Main Event Mafia won the match, thus Sting retained the championship for a second time against Styles. Sting and Styles fought one last time for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship, but not for several months. They clashed one final time at the 2009 Bound for Glory event on October 18. At that event, Styles headed into the bout as the TNA World Heavyweight Champion. Styles defeated Sting to retain the championship at the show.

The storyline behind Nash's betrayal began in December 2007. At the 2007 Turning Point event, Joe was scheduled to take part in a Six Man Tag Team match, partnering with Nash and Nash's longtime real-life friend Scott Hall to face The Angle Alliance (Angle, Styles, and Tomko). Hall missed the event citing "food poisoning", leaving Joe legitimately angered by the excuse, causing him to make an on-camera statement insulting Hall. Following the incident, TNA began a storyline in which Joe was unhappy with his position in the company for various reasons and had continuous conflicts with Nash. After time, Nash became Joe's on-screen mentor, which led to Joe defeating Angle on April 13 at TNA's Lockdown PPV event to become the new TNA World Heavyweight Champion. On the October 30 episode of "Impact!", Foley announced that Joe would face Nash at Turning Point. Nash defeated Joe at the event. Joe and Nash fought again at Final Resolution when they competed on opposing teams in the Eight Man Tag Team match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship, which Nash's team won. Nash and Joe did not have another match until April 19, 2009 at TNA's Lockdown PPV event, when Joe was a part of Team Jarrett (Jarrett, Styles, Daniels, and Joe) and Nash was a part of Team Angle (Angle, Steiner, Booker T, and Nash) in a Lethal Lockdown match. Team Jarrett won the encounter; Joe went on to defeat Nash on May 24 at TNA's Sacrifice PPV event afterwards.

Another encounter connected to the narrative that was advertised for Turning Point was Kurt Angle versus Abyss in a Falls Count Anywhere match. After Angle lost to Jeff Jarrett at Bound for Glory IV, Angle challenged Jarrett to a rematch, which was refused on the October 16 episode of "Impact!". To get Jarrett to accept his challenge, Angle assaulted several wrestlers in TNA. On the October 23 episode of "Impact!", Angle challenged Jarrett to a rematch for the second time. Jarrett refused the offer for a second time, but recommended a casualty of Angle's attacks, Abyss, as Angle's opponent. On the October 30 episode of "Impact!", a contest between Angle and Abyss ended in a disqualification after Angle struck Abyss with a steel chair. Following their encounter, a match was promoted pitting Angle against Abyss in a Falls Count Anywhere match at Turning Point. Angle won the bout at the show.

On the October 23 episode of "Impact!", Booker T introduced a new championship named the TNA Legends Championship and declared himself the inaugural champion. Afterwards, Christian Cage challenged Booker T to defend the championship against him at Turning Point. Booker T accepted after he added the stipulation that if Cage lost the encounter Cage would have to join The Main Event Mafia. Later on the October 30 episode of "Impact!", the match was made official when it was promoted for the event. Booker T retained the championship at Turning Point, defeating Cage and causing him to join the veterans and The Main Event Mafia in the storyline.

A few wrestlers were injured at Bound for Glory IV. "The Wrestling Observer Newsletter" reported that Abyss suffered burns to his arms after going through a flaming table at the event. Jimmy Rave received a neck injury from being dropped on his head badly by Johnny Devine during the Steel Asylum.

"The Wrestling Observer Newsletter" reported that almost all of the participants involved in the Four Way Tag Team Monster's Ball match at the show were furious over how Steve McMichael performed as the Special Guest Referee. Some of the reported issues were slow counting and being out of position, which several felt "screwed up the match." McMichael was originally supposed to have served as a Special Ringside Enforcer, but TNA personnel did not want the role done twice in one night. The decision to change him to the Special Guest Referee was made the day of the show by Jeff Jarrett.

There were several reported attendance figures for Bound for Glory IV, with the initial attendance figure being 5,000 people before being retracted and updated to a total of 5,500 people by "The Wrestling Observer Newsletter". This was lower than the maximum seating capacity available at the Sears Centre of between 11,000 and 11,800 people for festival style events. However, the Bound for Glory IV setup caused the event to only hold a maximum capacity of 8,000 people. Of the 5,500 that attended the show, only 4,500 of them were paid tickets. Despite this, it was seen as one of the largest paid crowds in the company's history and one of the most responsive crowds the company has had as well. "The Wrestling Observer Newsletter" reported that 35,000 people bought the event.

Chris and Bryan Sokol of the Canadian Online Explorer reviewed and rated the show on a scale out of 10, giving it a 7. This was the same rating given to the 2009 edition by Nick Tylwalk, but lower than the 7.5 out of 10 given to the 2007 edition by Chris Sokol. Compared to TNA's previous PPV event No Surrender, Bound for Glory was received better as No Surrender was given a 3 out of 10 by Jason Clevett. Meanwhile, Chris and Bryan Sokol gave TNA's next PPV event Turning Point a 7 out of 10. Rival World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) produced two PPV events in October that competed against Bound for Glory IV. The first was the No Mercy PPV event on October 5, while the second was the Cyber Sunday PPV event on October 26. No Mercy was reviewed by Chris and Bryan Sokol and given a 6 out of 10, lower than the Bound for Glory IV rating. Cyber Sunday was rated an 8 out of 10 by Andy McNamara, higher than the Bound for Glory rating. Compared to WWE's WrestleMania XXIV PPV event on March 30, Bound for Glory IV was outperformed as WrestleMania XXIV was given a 9 out of 10 by Dale Plummer.

Chris and Bryan Sokol rated the matches on a scale out of 10, with the main event receiving a 7. The Jeff Jarrett versus Kurt Angle bout and the Four Way Tag Team Monster's Ball match were both given an 8 out of 10. The Three Way War between A.J. Styles, Booker T, and Christian Cage was given a 7, while the X Division Championship match got a 6 out of 10. In their review, they commented that the ending of the event was a "sloppy finish to a decent PPV". They felt the Jarrett versus Angle contest was a "great match with lots of close calls and near falls", while the Three Way War they considered was "pretty good". As for the Monster's Ball match, they said that it was "crazy", with "tons of brawling". The X Division Championship encounter was called a "good match" in their review.
Wade Keller of the "Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter" reviewed the show. Keller rated the matches on a scale out of 5 stars, with the main event given a 3 1/4 stars and called a "fine match that fit its slot on the PPV well" but had a finish that he described as "horrible". He gave Jarrett versus Angle 3 1/2 stars with Keller commenting that it was a "good old-school match ... but a bit slow". The Three Way War received a 3 star rating, stating that there was "enough good" but overall it was "above-average." The Monster's Ball match was given 3 1/4 stars in the review and called "an exciting match" with Keller explaining that there were "four stars worth of action, but it crossed into gratuitousness" and also criticized some awkward moments and the fire's danger. The X Division Championship contest got 2 1/4 stars with Keller commenting that it "started okay" with the middle being a "little too slow" and that the "build to the finish was solid" but the "actual pin was sloppy".

James Caldwell, also of the "Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter," posted a review of the show rating the matches on the same scale as Keller. The main event was given 3 1/2 stars with Caldwell commenting that it was a "really good main event match" but that the finishing sequence "killed the momentum". The Jarrett and Angle bout got a 4 star rating and called a "really nice match with a good story". Caldwell clarified that the "finish didn't hurt the drama". He also complimented Jarrett's "great physical condition in his first match back". The Three Way War received 3 stars with Caldwell saying it had "some really good moments". Caldwell called the Monster's Ball match a "heck of a stunt brawl" that "came off pretty well with tons of energy" before giving it 3 1/2 stars. He referred to the X Division Championship encounter as a "good singles match" and gave it 2 stars.

Daniel Wilkenfeld, also of the "Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter," posted a review of the telecast. Wilkenfeld gave some overall comments on the show, saying the "first half of the card dragged" but the "latter half picked up the pace a lot". Wilkenfeld compared the event against "normal TNA PPV standards" with Bound for Glory IV being a "pretty good outing", giving it either a "B+, or maybe even an A−" as an average show but since it was Bound for Glory the bar was raised higher so he only gave it a C. He called Samoa Joe the "Star of the Night" for getting a "largely pro-Sting crowd behind his destructive ways". Wilkenfeld called the Jarrett and Angle bout as the possible "match of the night" in his review. He referred to the flaming table portion of the Monster's Ball match as being "an insane flaming table spot" in which he could not understand how those are done "without bad things happening". He was disappointed by the X Division Championship match, and said that it never got past its "competent" beginning, with its conclusion "both arbitrary and blown".


Several images captured at the Bound for Glory IV PPV event on October 12, 2008.
Footnotes

Bibliography



</doc>
<doc id="17658836" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17658836" title="John McFall (athlete)">
John McFall (athlete)

John McFall (born 25 April 1981) is a Cardiff-based British Paralympic sprinter. In 2000, when he was 19 years old, his right leg was amputated above the knee following a serious motorcycle accident. He took up running again after being fitted with a prosthesis, and participated in his first race in 2004. The following year, he was selected to represent Great Britain at the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) European Championships, and took the bronze medal in the 200 metres (sport class T42).

In the 100-metre sprint, McFall subsequently won silver medals at the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) World Championships in 2006 and the Visa Paralympic World Cup in 2007. On 6 July 2007, he was placed third at the Meeting Gaz de France in Paris, part of the ÅF Golden League; and achieved his personal best time (as at 30 May 2008) in the 100 metres of 12.70 seconds by winning silver at the Bayer International Track and Field Competition in Leverkusen on 10 August of that year. In his other main event, the 200 metres, he achieved a bronze in the 2006 IPC World Championships, and a gold at the 2007 Visa Paralympic World Cup with a competition record time of 26.84 seconds. In September 2007, McFall was champion in both the 100 metres and 200 metres at the International Wheelchair and Amputee Sports Federation (IWAS) World Wheelchair and Amputee Games. He was ranked first in the world in 2007 for the 200 metres, and second for the 100 metres.

McFall, who has been called one of the fastest men in the world over 100 metres and 200 metres in the class of above-the-knee amputees, competed for Great Britain in the 100 metres (T42) at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing, winning the bronze in a time of 13.08 seconds.

John McFall was born on 25 April 1981 in Frimley, Surrey, in England. Between 1994 and 1997 he attended school at Millfield in Street, Somerset, where as a teenager he was a runner and hockey player. In August 2000 while on a gap-year trip to Ko Samui, Thailand, after his A-levels, he was involved in a serious motorcycle accident. While riding a moped, he went round a corner too quickly and skidded. He put out his leg to stop the motorcycle from falling over, and smashed his knee. The motorcycle then fell on him, resulting in the chain severing major blood vessels in his leg. He was flown to a hospital in Bangkok, but as he had damaged his lower right leg too severely, it had to be amputated above the knee after three days. Upon returning to the UK, he spent about seven weeks undergoing rehabilitation at Queen Mary's Hospital in Roehampton, London.

McFall spent the next year at home, during which he took up mountain biking and climbing and worked as a fitness instructor at his local leisure centre. He also started running in the summer of 2003 as soon as he had his prosthesis fitted: "I love that sound of air rushing past your ears and the freedom of it. I missed that and I wanted to get that back." After taking up his place at Swansea University to pursue a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) in sport and exercise science, he practised on the university's running track and also trained with a local running club, the Swansea Harriers Athletic Club. However, he found running difficult and uncomfortable as his prosthesis was not designed for the purpose, and frequently got damaged. Upon making inquiries at the Federation of Disability Sport Wales (FDSW), he was introduced to carbon-fibre running "blades". He graduated from university with an upper second-class honours degree in summer 2004, taking part in his first race at the Disability Sports Events (DSE) Championships in the UK the same year.

In September 2004 McFall embarked on postgraduate studies in sport and exercise science at the University of Wales Institute, Cardiff (UWIC), subsequently graduating with a Master of Science (M.Sc.). He took pre-medical examinations in 2008, and plans to retire from athletics after his 2009 season to train as a doctor.

With his sprinting prosthesis, McFall began training with an ex-Paralympian. In early 2005 former Welsh international athlete Darrell Maynard took over as his coach and he began training with an able-bodied squad. He was selected to represent Great Britain at the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) European Championships which took place in August 2005 in Espoo, Finland, a decision that greatly surprised him as he had not achieved the qualifying standard in races that summer. In the Championships, his first international competition, he took the bronze medal in the 200 metres and came fourth in the 100-metre race, having competed in sport class T42 (single amputation above the knee). McFall was subsequently placed on a funding programme, enabling him to become a full-time athlete.

At the end of January 2006, two weeks before the Sparkassen Cup in Stuttgart, Germany, McFall's car was stolen from the car park of the Welsh Institute of Sport where he worked part-time and trained. His customized running prosthesis worth £3,000 was in the boot. Following his appeal for the return of the prosthesis, he received a telephone call from two youths who said they "might be able to recover the lost leg" but asked "What is it worth?" Infuriated, McFall refused to pay anything and asked the youths whether they had considered what being an amputee was like. After McFall agreed to take no further action against them, the youths anonymously returned the prosthesis to the Institute a week later. McFall went on to achieve a personal best of 8.55 seconds in the 60 metres race, and 28.21 seconds in the 200 metres on 4 February.

His next major races were in September 2006 at the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) World Championships, where he was awarded a silver medal in the 100 metres and a bronze in the 200 metres. The following year, on 13 May 2007, McFall struck gold and achieved a competition record time of 26.84 seconds in the 200 metres in his "début" at the Visa Paralympic World Cup in Manchester, England; he also garnered a silver in the 100 metres. Subsequently, on 6 July 2007, he was placed third at the Meeting Gaz de France in Paris, part of the ÅF Golden League.

McFall achieved his personal best time (as at 30 May 2008) in the 100 metres of 12.70 seconds by winning silver at the Bayer International Track and Field Competition in Leverkusen, Germany, on 10 August 2007. Later that year he was champion in both the 100 metres and 200 metres at the International Wheelchair and Amputee Sports Federation (IWAS) World Wheelchair and Amputee Games in Chinese Taipei held from 9 to 19 September 2007. In 2007, he was ranked first in the world for the 200 metres, and second for the 100 metres.

McFall, who has been called "one of the fastest men in the world over 100m and 200m in the class of above-the-knee amputees", made his Paralympic "début" for Great Britain in the 100 metres (T42) at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing. After a false start, he took the bronze medal in 13.08 seconds behind Canada's Earle Connor (12.32 seconds) and Germany's Heinrich Popow (12.98 seconds). Despite McFall's plans to retire from athletics after his 2009 season to study medicine, he has not ruled out competing at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London. He has said, "It would be nice to do 2012. I'm interested in cycling and rowing, and I won't qualify as a doctor till 2013, so it wouldn't be impossible. We'll see. It's that constant striving for excellence, the hunger to do more."

Although McFall was born in England, he lives in Cardiff and competes professionally for Wales. He has said, "Wales has been very good to me and I want to put something back. So I'm very proud to run for Wales." According to him, his motorcycle accident "has been, in some ways, the best thing that ever happened to me. It's given me a focus, a drive, every day is a new challenge. ... I always had a list of goals and aspirations which didn't change after my accident – they just changed direction. Losing my leg has changed my life, but it hasn't changed who I am."

Following the 2008 Paralympic Games, McFall returned to the UK from Beijing overland via the Trans-Siberian Railway. He travelled from China to Mongolia and Russia, across Russia to the Ukraine, then to Hungary, Croatia and the Dalmatian coast. From there he took a ferry to Italy to meet his girlfriend in Rome. They then travelled by train across Italy and Austria, eventually returning to the UK around the middle of November 2008. McFall hopes one day to take up his childhood plans of studying medicine, running across the Sahara Desert, crossing the Atlantic Ocean by rowboat, and obtaining a free-fall parachute licence.

In his free time, McFall enjoys playing the guitar.





</doc>
<doc id="17674241" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17674241" title="Smoke Gets in Your Eyes (Mad Men)">
Smoke Gets in Your Eyes (Mad Men)

"Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" is the first episode of the first season of the American period drama television series "Mad Men". It first aired on July 19, 2007 in the United States on AMC and was written by creator Matthew Weiner and directed by Alan Taylor. "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" was budgeted at US$3 million. Production for the episode took place in New York City and Los Angeles.

Weiner conceived of the script in 2000 while working as a writer for the television sitcom "Becker". Before writing the pilot episode, he studied American literature and cinema of the 1950s and 1960s to get a perspective on American culture during that period. Weiner sent the script to "The Sopranos" creator David Chase, who recruited Weiner to work with him on "The Sopranos". Weiner shelved the project for seven years to focus on Chase's program; interest for "Mad Men" did not surface until the conclusion of "The Sopranos" final season.

According to the Nielsen Media Research, the episode attained a rating of 1.4 (1.2 million households) upon initial airing.

In 1960, in Manhattan, Don Draper (Jon Hamm), creative director for the advertising agency Sterling Cooper, is facing a professional dilemma: how to sell cigarettes despite increased public awareness of their health risks. He seeks input from customers and his girlfriend Midge Daniels (Rosemarie DeWitt), but is unable to find a solution. He rejects academic research results provided by the company's consulting psychologist that suggests some customers will be drawn to smoking despite the health risks because of a collective "death wish".

Meanwhile, Peggy Olson (Elisabeth Moss) starts work at Sterling Cooper as Don's secretary, where she experiences some sexual harassment. She seems excited to be working in Manhattan, but perhaps overwhelmed by her new surroundings. Office manager Joan Holloway (Christina Hendricks) advises Peggy on how to be appealing to the men of the office so as to achieve both success in her career and possibly an advantageous marriage. Junior account executive Pete Campbell (Vincent Kartheiser) makes boorish comments about Peggy's appearance and clothing, for which Don rebukes him. On her break, Peggy attends a doctor's appointment arranged by Joan, during which she undergoes a vaginal examination and is given a prescription for the recently introduced oral contraceptive, Enovid, which at the time was only supposed to be prescribed to married women with their husband's consent. Later in the day, Peggy makes a sexually inviting gesture to Don, which he rejects.

Don and Roger Sterling (John Slattery) meet with Rachel Menken (Maggie Siff), the Jewish owner of a large department store. In order to make Rachel more positively-inclined towards the agency, Roger enlists the only Jew in the company, a young man from the mailroom, to attend the meeting disguised as a member of the art department. Don initially thought the man was the owner, not Rachel. Rachel, looking to attract wealthier customers, is disappointed by the agency's suggestions of coupons to attract frugal housewives. The meeting becomes heated, with Don angry that a woman would talk to him in a commanding way, and Rachel angry that the men have not respected her plans for her business. A later meeting with executives from Lucky Strike tobacco company also appears to go badly, as Don still struggles to find a new approach to cigarette advertising. Pete raises the "death wish" idea put forth by the company's research, but the executives reject this. Just when it seems that the meeting is over, Don comes up with a new tagline—"It's toasted!"—and a strategy that highlights their method of preparation, which, although it's no different from that of other cigarettes, he proposes will make Lucky Strikes stand out in the minds of the public. The client is impressed, but after the meeting Don expresses his fury with Pete for having gone through his trash to steal the research data.

Don meets Rachel for dinner to make amends for the meeting. During the dinner, Don says he is living life to extract the maximum amount of pleasure as there is no tomorrow, while Rachel recognizes in Don the element of the disconnected outsider, for whom the world is laid out like a puzzle waiting to be solved. The two of them begin to bond, and she agrees to give Sterling Cooper another shot. Meanwhile, Pete and some of his co-workers go to a gentlemen's club to celebrate Pete's impending wedding. There, a woman rejects Pete's advances. Dejected from this rejection and Don's recent criticisms, Pete arrives drunk at Peggy's apartment, and she allows him in. Don takes a train to a large house in the suburbs, where he is greeted by his loving wife Betty (January Jones), whom he has made no mention of thus far in the episode. He checks on their two sleeping children as she watches admiringly from the doorway.

Creator Matthew Weiner conceived the script for "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" in 2000, while he was working as a writer for the sitcom "Becker". The first draft of the episode was written as a spec script and was titled "The Division". Two years later, Weiner sent the script to David Chase, the creator of "The Sopranos", although Weiner's agents insisted that he not proceed with his plans. Chase later recruited him upon first glance. "It was what you’re always hoping to see," he recalled. "It was lively and it had something new to say. Here was someone who had written a story about advertising in the 1960s, and was looking at recent American history through that prism." Weiner set the pilot script aside for the next seven years to focus on "The Sopranos". Neither HBO nor Showtime expressed interest in the project until the commencement of "The Sopranos" final season. During that time, AMC began looking into the television market for new programming. "The network was looking for distinction in launching its first original series," according to AMC Networks president Ed Carroll, "and we took a bet that quality would win out over formulaic mass appeal."

Prior to writing the pilot episode, Weiner studied American culture during the 1950s and 1960s, analyzing literary works such as "The Feminine Mystique" (1963) and "Sex and the Single Girl" (1962) while viewing such films as "The Apartment" (1960) and "A Guide for the Married Man" (1967). He continued his endeavors when the series' concept began to materialize, as he received a copy of Richard Yates' novel "Revolutionary Road" (1962) from the executives of AMC. Weiner discussed the look of "Mad Men" with production designer Bob Shaw and cinematographer Phil Abraham, whom Weiner had previously collaborated with in "The Sopranos". Abraham wanted to establish a more genuine approach to portraying society in the 1960s, rather than "simply referencing the period as seen in movies of that time. We wanted to be more genuine than that. Movies were an influence." In evoking historical accuracy of elements such as architecture and graphic design, Abraham sought inspiration from the buildings designed by the architecture firm Skidmore, Owings and Merrill. He said, "We noticed that in all the Skidmore, Owings & Merrill designs of contemporary buildings, the ceiling—the overhead grid of lights—was a strong graphic element in all the office spaces. In one design we loved, the whole ceiling was like a lightbox. It was a time of high modernism, and we embraced the notion of presenting the world in that way. These were new work spaces—sleek, not stuffy."

Jon Hamm was cast as Don Draper, the central character of the series. Hamm, who was relatively unknown at the time, competed with 80 other actors in the auditioning process. Weiner proclaimed that Hamm accurately portrayed the character, saying that he was "the only person who really had this great mix of empathy and masculinity and intelligence. Both Don and Jon have an inner life. So long as you have that kind of depth in a human being, people will root for him [...] Jon walked out of the room and I said, 'That guy has lived.'" Hamm admitted that he felt that he had a considerable disadvantage compared to his peers and initially believed Thomas Jane would acquire the role. "I started, literally, on the very, very bottom," he iterated. "I couldn't have had less heat on me. Nobody knew who I was. The casting directors didn't know who I was. I wasn't on anybody's lists. The funny thing was, I think they went to Thomas Jane for it, and they were told that Thomas Jane does not do television." Hamm went through seven auditions; his last one took place at the Hotel Gansevoort in the Meatpacking District of New York City. "When we were riding down on the elevator, the woman in charge of whatever the decision-making process was told me, 'You got the job.'"

John Slattery, who was later cast as Roger Sterling, originally auditioned to portray Don Draper. Slattery felt Don was the show's biggest draw and was disappointed upon hearing of his character's sparse screen time. He recalled, "I really did prepare the thing and went in and I worked hard on it and then read for Don and they actually gave me adjustments and I went and I did it again. And then they sort of said, 'Well, look, here’s the deal. We have a guy. The reason we asked you to come in and read for Draper is because we didn't think that you’d come in a read for Roger because there wasn’t that much Roger in the script.'" During production of "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes," Slattery admitted he was unsure of whether to continue working on "Mad Men". "I was on the fence a little bit, even while shooting it. And I think Matt finally was like, 'Look man, we’re not jerking you around here. We’re serious about this and I’ve really thought this out. I promise you this will be a great character and it will be a big part of the show.'" 

Producers of "Mad Men" approached January Jones to portray Betty Draper, Don's wife and the mother of their two children. Jones avouched that portraying the character would give the audience an opportunity to see a dark side of her nature. She initially auditioned for the role of Peggy Olson, which was later given to fellow cast member Elisabeth Moss. "It got down between Elisabeth Moss and myself, and it was obviously more suited to her, but Matthew had said, you know, there’s this other role, of the wife." Jones signed a seven-year contract with the show, although her character originally had two lines in "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes." Weiner eventually edited the script to accommodate her desires. "It’s such a testament to his ability," Jones stated. "He just took something out of thin air, which makes me think now that he had to have had an idea that the wife was going to be part of the show, because I kind of took the job with the promise that Betty would be a part of the show. When you sign a seven-year contract, you want to make sure you’re in the show." Christina Hendricks was brought in to play Joan Holloway, the office manager and head of Sterling Cooper's secretarial pool. While Hendricks had previously made recurring appearances on "ER" before being on "Mad Men", her acting career had been largely inactive, and Hendricks' agent urged her not to participate in the project. "They said to me, 'AMC [...] doesn't have any other big shows—why would you do this instead of taking something that's a better bet?' I said, 'Look, I've gone with the one that's the better bet in the past—let's go with the really good script this time.'"

"Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" features guest appearances from several actors and actresses, including Rosemarie DeWitt (as Midge) and Maggie Siff (as Rachel Menken). DeWitt was given a recurring role in the season as Don's mistress, which lasted for six episodes. She initially felt out of place while playing out her character. DeWitt stated, "They were at the end of casting, and hadn't found the right Midge yet. Originally they had a scene where she opens the door wearing a red kimono, and I remember thinking 'I'm not that', so I wasn’t sure I was right for the part. Maybe the fact that I wasn't this 'vamp' is what made Matt Weiner give me a shot." Prior to working on "Mad Men", Siff mainly worked in theatre and performing arts.

"Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" was budgeted at US$3 million, slightly more than the US$2–2.5 million budgeted in typical "Mad Men" episodes. The pilot episode was mostly shot at various locations in and around New York City including the Silvercup Studios, where principal photography lasted for two days. Most of the production crew were previously part of "The Sopranos". After filming concluded in New York, production moved to the Los Angeles Center Studios. Abraham collaborated with an entirely different production crew from the one in New York. According to Abraham, Los Angeles contained a continuity that was related to the show. "Once we moved to L.A., there was a continuity of style that came from Alan and me, and that was important to Matt [Weiner]."

In creating a practical effect, a grid consisting of fluorescent lights was installed onto the set that housed Sterling Cooper's main office. The show's art department bought several 2-by-2 four-tube fixtures, which was determined to be accurate relative to the time period. The shipments arrived on the first day of filming the pilot. However, examination by the set-lighting crew revealed the lightbulbs used were internally modernized, having been designed to hold T-8 bulbs measuring two feet each. "Getting more than 800 2-foot color-corrected T-8 tubes became a major issue, and none of the regular suppliers had enough in stock," recalled Mike Ambrose, the gaffer for the production team in Los Angeles. "Movietone stopped production of whatever bulbs it was making, retooled the plant and started manufacturing the T-8s we needed. The last shipment arrived the morning of our first day of shooting."

Abraham created a light-control system in an attempt to keep the overhead from being unflattering. However, after unsuccessfully attempting to implement the necessary wiring to control each light, the production team established controlling rows of light. Pat O'Mara, the key grip during production, installed several 2x1 and 2x2 blackout panels and frames that were retrofitted with small albeit strong magnets. During a scene when and actor or actresses stood under a fluorescent light, a panel or a frame was placed over the fixture, subsequently diffusing light onto their faces. "If somebody was walking through the office in a wide shot, I just turned the overhead lights on. But if Don was talking to someone at his desk and the office was the backdrop, I turned all the lights on and then selectively removed some; then, I brought the key around with Kino Flo Image 80s through 4-by-8 frames of 250 or 216, or sourced my key with a larger Fresnel through the window."

The set containing Sterling Cooper's corporate offices contained skypans fitted with 5K bulbs onto the centers, which measured 8 inches apart. Ambrose collaborated with the production team to institute twenty-five inch trusses on chain motors and to devise dollys with Arri Alexa cameras that were eventually installed on aluminum I-beams. Ambrose proclaimed that the flexibility of the trolleys and chain motors enabled production to move more efficiently in concentrating on the design of the window. He added: "We also had four 20Ks and a few more T-12s on stands that could be rolled around the office floor. For tungsten close-ups, we often used Barger-Baglite six- and three-light units with Chimeras, soft cloth, diaper baffles and 60- and 90-degree honeycomb grids for control." In comparison, Ambrose used traditional lighting when creating the housing for the character, as he favored the color spectrum of a household lightbulb. For example, Don's home required four to five rooms to be lit simultaneously. "We used a lot of batten strips with 100-watt household bulbs," noted Ambrose. "The bulbs are so close they're almost touching, so they create a single source that doesn't cast multiple shadows. Over time, we built housings for them with channels into which you can slide diffusion frames or egg crates. We call them 'Whiteys' because the guy who knocked these shells out of tin back in New York was named Whitey; I used them extensively on "The Sopranos" and felt they suited the homes in "Mad Men" as well."

In the days leading to the "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" premiere, the watchdog group Commercial Alert filed a complaint against producers to the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States. Commentators from the group criticized distillery brand Jack Daniel's for its decision to sponsor "Mad Men", citing that it violates industry codes that prohibit alcohol marketing, as well "depictions of irresponsible drinking, overt sexual activity or sexually lewd images". Robert Weissman, the director for Commercial Alert, stated that based on AMC's website, "it appears that the sponsorship arrangement will violate numerous provisions of the industry's self-regulatory marketing code." He continued: "There is no reason why a company should be able to escape normal enforcement and implementation of the Code simply because it chooses to violate the code in such brazen manner that curing the violation would cause non-trivial complications for a major television series." In association with the complaint, Weissman urged in his letter that the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States become more proactive in regulating the distilleries' initiatives in the entertainment industry. "Our complaint in this instance is not with the portrayal of heavy alcohol consumption, or even with the glorification of such heavy consumption; it is specific to industry sponsorship of and entwinement with such portrayals. Quite different issues are raised where artists choose to depict such activities in the absence of industry sponsorship."

"Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" was originally broadcast on July 19, 2007 in the United States on AMC. Upon airing, the episode acquired a 1.4 rating (1.2 million households) according to the Nielsen Media Research. Total viewership was 75 percent higher than all television programming airing on Thursdays on AMC.

Television commentators praised the pilot episode. Heather Havrilesky of "Salon" declared that "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" raised expectations for future competition at the time, and added that it emulated some of the best episodes of "The Sopranos". "Chicago Tribune" journalist Maureen Ryan said that it was an "intelligently made character drama". In his four star review, Adam Buckman of "New York Post" described it as "stunning" and suggested that "Mad Men" "just happens to be the finest new TV series of the summer and possibly the entire year". Tim Goodman of the "San Francisco Chronicle" and Brian Lowry of "Variety" lauded the episode for its historical accuracy; "Just because they're on the cusp of a new decade does not mean they can see what viewers already know is around the corner," stated Goodman. "That impending change gives an extra dimension of perspective to the series." Lowry addressed that despite the subtle approach of "Mad Men", it managed to provoke a profound meaning. "In that context, the show illustrates that period's own form of excess without wagging fingers, while reminding us that before sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll, there was sexual harassment, free-flowing cocktails and bluesy ballads, invariably sung by white guys." "USA Today" writer Robert Bianco echoed synonymous sentiment: ""Mad Men" is a joy to watch—the clothes, the clocks, the furniture, it's like a mid-century night's dream. But this is no mere period piece. It's a smart, complex drama that attempts to get through the facades that have always hidden the truth." 

Troy Patterson of "Slate" drew comparisons to the HBO comedy-drama "Sex and the City", and affirmed that it introduced a lewd and cynical perspective of the so-called "golden age" of advertisement. Nancy Franklin of "The New Yorker" concluded that "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" was "smart and tremendously attractive", while "Seattle Post-Intelligencer" journalist Melanie McFarland felt that it was a rarity compared to other television installments. Writing for the "Boston Globe", Matthew Gilbert remarked that the setting and design were immediately distinguishable. Gilbert wrote, "This is a gorgeously fashioned period piece, from its IBM typewriters and rotary phones to the constant fog of cigarette smoke hanging over every scene. The show has a subtle color palette, to match the ivory metal Venetian blinds at the Sterling Cooper ad agency offices, but it may sit in your memory as if it had been filmed in black and white." Citing its authenticity as an episode highlight, Randy Cordova from the "Arizona Republic" noted that "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" was well-constructed.

Some critics were less enthusiastic than the general consensus. Although "The New Republic" Sacha Zimmerman stated that the episode's aesthetic features were comparable to cinematic works, she affirmed that "Mad Men" lacked any substance, ultimately criticizing the cultural references and the character development presented in the episode. "Mad Men" seems to be attempting satire without a plan," Zimmerman said. "The mood is serious, not campy, and there aren't laugh-out-loud moments, just a lot of groaners—at which point, the show simply becomes a reflection of its characters: depressing. It turns out that watching moody, cruel men and unsatisfied, put-upon women for an hour just isn't that much fun." Similarly, Tim Shale of "The Washington Post" concluded that despite the evocative nature of the program, "Smokes Gets in Your Eyes" fell flat; "The people in and around them spoil the show, gum up the works and shatter veracity." To "New York" John Leonard, the installment felt like a "fifties leftover".

Commentators praised the performances of several cast members, specifically Hamm's portrayal of Don Draper. Goodman asserted that the acting from the cast members was one of the aspects that carried the show. Gilbert evaluated that Hamm played his character to "slick perfection".

At the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards, "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" won Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series (Matthew Weiner). The episode also won Creative Arts Emmys for Art Direction for a Single-Camera Series and Cinematography for a One Hour Series. "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" also received a nomination for Outstanding Directing in a Drama Series (Alan Taylor) as well as Outstanding Costumes for a Series (John A. Dunn, costume designer and Lisa Padovani, assistant costume designer). The episode also won a Casting Society of America Artios Award for Outstanding Casting in a Television Pilot, Drama. Alan Taylor won a 2007 Directors Guild of America Award for Drama Series directing the episode. The episode also earned a Motion Picture Sound Editors Golden Reel Award nomination in Best Sound Editing - Dialogue and ADR for Short Form Television for Jason George (supervising sound editor), Jed M. Dodge (supervising dialogue editor), Julie Altus (ADR editor), Dale Chaloukian (dialogue editor), and Charlie Kolander (dialogue editor).



</doc>
<doc id="17776151" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17776151" title="Effects of Hurricane Charley in South Carolina">
Effects of Hurricane Charley in South Carolina

The effects of Hurricane Charley in South Carolina included $20 million (2004 USD) in damage and 135,000 power outages. Hurricane Charley lasted from August 9 to August 15, 2004, and at its peak attained 150 mph (240 km/h) winds, making it a strong Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. The storm made landfall in southwestern Florida at maximum strength, making it the strongest hurricane to hit the United States since Hurricane Andrew struck Florida twelve years before, in 1992.

Before the storm, Governor Mark Sanford declared a state of emergency as Charley approached its final landfall and issued a mandatory evacuation for residents on barrier islands and in coastal locations. About 180,000 people evacuated the Grand Strand. Peak winds in the state were clocked at at the Isle of Palms. The storm spawned winds of at Folly Beach and in downtown Charleston. Numerous trees, tree limbs and electrical poles were knocked down in those regions. Flash flooding was also reported with rainfall peaking at over . There were no fatalities.

Prior to the storm, a tropical storm watch was issued for locations from the Altamaha sound, Georgia to the South Santee River on August 12. The next day, the watch was upgraded to a hurricane watch from the Altamaha sound to the South Carolina–Georgia border. As Charley approached the region, a hurricane warning was issued for the entire area. A tornado watch was issued eastward from a line extending from Aiken to Lancaster County.

Governor Mark Sanford declared a state of emergency as Charley approached landfall and issued a mandatory evacuation for residents on barrier islands and in coastal locations in Georgetown and Horry Counties. In Georgetown County, this order was focused on residents and tourists east of U.S. Route 17, likewise for Horry County. 180,000 people evacuated the Grand Strand. Drawbridges in Beaufort and Charleston Counties were shut down, and bridges in Georgetown and Horry Counties were locked down. Hampton County requested 2,000 sandbags, that were provided by the Department of Corrections. The Wateree Correctional Institution also filled 30,000 sandbags for potential floods. State troopers directed traffic inland from Myrtle Beach. U.S. Route 501 used a lane reversal to allow for evacuations.

The first storm to make landfall in the state at hurricane intensity since Hurricane Hugo in 1989, Hurricane Charley struck near Cape Romain, South Carolina as an 80 mph (130 km/h) hurricane, moved offshore briefly, and made its final landfall near North Myrtle Beach as a minimal hurricane with winds of 75 mph (120 km/h). With the landfalling system, five tornadoes were reported in the state. However, only two were confirmed; one moved through the Francis Marion National Forest, downing trees along its path. Storm surge ranged from –, although only minor beach erosion occurred. A buoy situated southeast of Charleston recorded seas and winds.

Peak winds in the state were clocked at at the Isle of Palms. The storm spawned winds of at Folly Beach and in downtown Charleston. Trees, limbs and electrical poles were knocked down in those regions. Trees were blown onto U.S. Route 17 in Mount Pleasant, and awnings were torn off of a few structures. A total of 2,231 houses were damaged; 2317 of these were severely damaged and 40 were destroyed. Two-hundred and twenty-one of those damaged were beach front structures on Sunset Beach. Businesses had broken windows, six hotels had roof and outer wall damage. This led to $30 million (2004 USD) in hotel profit loss in Myrtle Beach, primarily along U.S. Route 17.

As dry air from northern sections of the state wrapped into the circulation of the storm, a band of convection developed along a frontal boundary stretching from Newberry northward. Widespread rainfall peaking at over fell to the west of the storm's track. In downtown Charleston, of rainfall was reported, while in Hampton of rain fell. However, the bulk of the rainfall remained offshore. With the soil still saturated from Tropical Storm Bonnie, some flooding in low-lying areas of Charleston County occurred. Up to of water accumulated on South Carolina Route 17 and on local streets. Flash floods were also observed in Mount Pleasant. High winds spread vegetative debris, clogging storm drains and caused further flooding. A bridge in Union County washed out following rainfall from Charley and Tropical Storm Bonnie. 135,000 customers were without power, and storm damage totaled $20 million (2004 USD).

Following the storm, Progress Energy Carolinas assembled 1,200 tree and power line personnel to assist in damage recovery. Federal disaster funds were approved for the counties of Georgetown and Horry. The declaration covered damage to public property on August 14–15. The funding covered state and local government costs for debris removal and emergency services related to the hurricane.




</doc>
<doc id="17781489" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17781489" title="Tornado outbreak sequence of June 3–11, 2008">
Tornado outbreak sequence of June 3–11, 2008

The tornado outbreak sequence of June 3–11, 2008 was a series of tornado outbreaks affecting most of central and eastern North America from June 3–11, 2008. 192 tornadoes were confirmed, along with widespread straight–line wind wind damage. Seven people were killed from a direct result of tornadoes; four in Iowa, two in Kansas, and one in Indiana. Eleven additional people were killed across five states by other weather events including lightning, flash flooding, and straight-line winds. Severe flooding was also reported in much of Indiana, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Iowa as a result of the same thunderstorms, while high heat and humidity affected much of eastern North America; particularly along the eastern seaboard of the United States from New York City to the Carolinas.

Several clusters of thunderstorms developed during the morning from eastern Nebraska across Iowa into Illinois, taking place along a warm front. The front remained over the same areas during the day, as daytime heating and southwesterly surface winds brought warm and unstable air northward, resulting in severe weather development. The presence of strong winds aloft aided in development of multiple clusters and lines of thunderstorms that produced damaging wind, hail and tornadoes across Missouri, Illinois and Indiana.

A moderate risk of severe weather was issued by the Storm Prediction Center for parts of Indiana, Kentucky, Illinois, Ohio and West Virginia on June 3, Two particular tornadoes, rated EF2 and EF3 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale, caused extensive damage across portions of central Indiana. The EF3 tornado damaged 34 structures in Rush County, of which 27 of them were in Middletown. Eight people were injured in Rush County, including a 67-year-old woman who was impaled in the chest by a large tree limb and later died as a result of her injury on August 17. A 19th century landmark covered bridge in Moscow was destroyed, as well as severe damage to dozens of homes, including some that were swept completely off the foundation. The EF2 tornado damaged 20 to 30 homes in Brown County, 40 buildings at Camp Atterbury in Johnson County and 59 buildings in Edinburgh.

A moderate risk of severe weather was issued for northern Kansas into southern Nebraska and from eastern West Virginia through Virginia, Maryland and Delaware. An ongoing line of thunderstorms moved east across West Virginia as the atmosphere began to destabilize. The thunderstorms resulted in a threat for isolated tornadoes in eastern sections of West Virginia, Virginia, Delaware and Maryland. In the central Great Plains region, a warm front extended northeast in northeastern Kansas from a surface low in central sections of Kansas. Strong instability occurred in the vicinity of the area as a result of surface heating. An intensifying low-level jet stream broke the cap in the region and resulted in the development of thunderstorms. During the afternoon, numerous thunderstorms formed across the Mid-Atlantic States. An EF0 tornado was produced from one of the thunderstorms that impacted portions of Chesapeake Beach, tearing off sections of roof and siding from 10 to 20 single family homes. EF1 tornadoes were produced in Culpeper, Clarke and Stafford counties in Virginia. Several other EF0 and EF1 tornadoes formed throughout the Great Plains region.

A strong jet stream moved northeast across the Great Plains region and a strong surface low in western Kansas strengthened as it moved to the Nebraska-South Dakota border. Ahead of the low, very warm and moist air spread throughout the South Central United States into Nebraska, eastern sections of South Dakota and the upper Mississippi Valley. The combination of strong winds and warm and moist air created conditions favorable for strong thunderstorms. On June 5, a high risk of severe weather was issued for six different states in the Midwestern United States, with a moderate risk area surrounding the high risk area. Forecasters had warned of a potentially historic outbreak, as computer forecasting models for June 5 resembled those on June 8, 1974, when 39 tornadoes struck the southern Great Plains and killed 22 people. Wichita State University canceled evening classes because of the weather predictions. Severe weather began developing across eastern Colorado and northwestern Kansas during the morning and into the early afternoon, producing several weak tornadoes in the process. An EF1 tornado impacted a campground near Kellogg, Iowa and injured two people. Despite extremely favorable conditions, severe weather for the day was limited and the tornadoes generally caused minimal damage.

During the morning hours of June 6, two strong tornadoes caused damage throughout Wadena and Hubbard counties in Minnesota. The first tornado, rated EF2 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale, touched down south of Stocking Lake and downed several trees onto cabins, vehicles and storage sheds. It also toppled an irrigation system in a field north of the lake. The tornado moved to the north and expanded to its maximum width of and reached estimated peak winds of . Eight turkey barns were destroyed, killing an estimated 15 to 20 thousand turkeys. The tornado swept a home north of the area in Hubbard County off its foundation, as well as causing damage to several homes along with hundreds of acres of forest. One man working at a turkey barn was injured. The storm then produced an EF3 tornado, which eventually grew to a width of and reached wind speeds of . At Pickerel Lake, it nearly flattened every tree in the area, while destroying a trailer home, a camper, a garage and a house. At northern sections of Pickerel Lake, one home had its roof torn off and numerous trees were snapped onto other residences and farm buildings. The tornado began to lose its intensity but continued to topple trees, damage storage structures and toss debris before dissipating in Emmaville.

A series of impulses moved from the central Rocky Mountains into the central Great Plains. Opulent moisture formed over the Missouri and Mississippi Valleys with dew points reaching near . Strong low level winds over the area created favorable wind shear for supercells. During the afternoon, a supercell developed in western portions of Illinois and moved northeast reaching Lake Michigan around the Illinois-Indiana border, during which it produced eight tornadoes along its path. At 4:21 pm (2121 UTC), an EF0 tornado occurred east of Cornell in Livingston County. The tornado occurred in an open field with no damage observed. At 4:31 pm CDT (2131 UTC), an EF1 tornado touched down southwest of Dwight in Livingston County, snapping power poles and damaging trees and roofs; this tornado lifted at 4:45 pm CDT (2145 UTC). From 5:18 pm CDT (2218 UTC) to 5:46 pm CDT (2246 UTC), an EF2 tornado traveled across southwestern Will County and extreme northwestern Kankakee County, near Wilmington, uprooting trees, damaging homes and destroying sheds. At 5:51 pm CDT (2251 UTC), an EF2 tornado touched down for three minutes in central Will County near Wilton Center, destroying a garage and severely damaging a metal building. From 5:55 pm CDT (2255 UTC) to 6:08 pm CDT (2308 UTC), an EF2 tornado occurred west of Monee, leveling barns, garages, and outbuildings and damaging homes. An EF2 tornado re-formed at 6:13 pm CDT (2313 UTC), injuring six people as it crossed Interstate 57.

A storm system moved to the northern and central Great Plains region during the day, as strong winds helped push a moist air mass northward ahead of the system. Thunderstorms developed during the afternoon ahead of a cold front from southeast South Dakota into central Kansas. Strong winds along with instability in the atmosphere created favorable conditions for supercell development with the potential to produce strong tornadoes. At approximately 6:35 pm CDT (2335 UTC) a tornado hit the Little Sioux Scout Ranch in Little Sioux, Iowa, killing four Boy Scouts after a chimney collapsed on them and injuring 48 others. The camp received a tornado warning 12 minutes before it struck. There were 93 campers and 25 staff members at the camp. The campers were between 13 and 18 years old and were attending a leadership training camp. The tornado was rated EF3 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale.
Tornadoes also caused major damage in Kansas. In Chapman, one person was killed and three others were critically injured after an EF3 tornado struck the town. About 80 percent of Chapman suffered serious damage, with minor damage occurring to the downtown area. 70 homes in Chapman were destroyed with 215 receiving damage. Two churches were demolished and the town's elementary, middle and high schools were severely damaged. Manhattan was also heavily impacted by a tornado that was rated EF4 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale. Forty-five residences in Manhattan were destroyed, as well as two mobile homes and three businesses. An additional 67 residences, three multi-family homes, one mobile home and 10 businesses suffered significant damage. Also, 75 single-family residences, three multi-family structures and 20 businesses sustained minor damage, and 637 residences, 93 multi-family structures, 20 mobile homes and 10 businesses were partially affected. An elementary school was also heavily damaged in Manhattan. There was also damage to Kansas State University, where the Wind Erosion Lab was damaged. Also suffering severe damage was the engineering complex, the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity house, Waters, Call and Cardwell halls as well as Ward Hall, which houses the university's nuclear reactor. One person was also killed near the town of Soldier in Jackson County from an EF2 tornado. 32 homes were damaged in Jackson County. The southern outskirts of Salina near the junction of Interstate 135 was also hard hit by an EF3 tornado. Several homes, outbuildings, trees and power lines were damaged in the area.


On June 3, the communications tower at a courthouse in Shelbyville, Missouri was struck by lightning, damaging computers for the 911 system and the sheriff's office, radio consoles, and various other electronic equipment. In Oklahoma, high winds in excess of caused major damage to five to six barns in Cherokee and destroyed one barn in Ingersoll. Three people were injured in Frontenac, Kansas after a tree was blown down on a vehicle. The next day, the inclement weather moved into the Mid-Atlantic States. A 57-year-old man was killed in Annandale, Virginia after a large tree crushed his vehicle. More than 250,000 customers lost power in Virginia. Washington Monument State Park suffered extensive damage after thunderstorms knocked out phone, electricity, and water service. Fallen trees and branches blocked the main road and the hiking trail to the monument in several places. The museum and water treatment buildings were severely damaged, and as a result, the park was closed for two weeks. A total 70 severe thunderstorm, marine, and tornado warnings were issued in the Baltimore/Washington region. In Bloomington, Indiana, two people had lightning strikes near them and were taken to the hospital for lighting related injuries. The cell phone of another individual was stuck while the person was talking on the phone and was also taken to the hospital for treatment.

On June 5, a storm system caused damage throughout the Great Plains. The most substantial damage occurred in Altus, Oklahoma, where 179 homes sustained some form of damage, with two destroyed, five with major damage, 43 with minor damage and 129 affected. Seventeen businesses were damaged, with two destroyed, four with major damage and eight with minor damage. A school in Mulvane, Kansas had roof damage and there was significant roof damage to the terminal building at an airport near Winfield. In Lawrence, The Wakarusa Music and Camping Festival shut down while the storm passed through. On June 8, thunderstorms affected areas across the Great Lakes region. Two people were killed in Ottawa County, Michigan due to the straight-line winds that toppled trees; one onto a pedestrian and another onto a car. In Eaton County, a woman was killed by winds which blew a large trailer on to her. Over 300,000 people in Michigan were left without power due to the storm.
On June 10, a powerful squall line of thunderstorms with embedded supercells developed across New York and moved northeast through parts of northern New England and Quebec. Particularly hard hit was the Montreal region and its southern suburbs including Longueuil, Châteauguay, Brossard and Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu. Barns were reported damaged and other structures sustained roof and siding damage; particularly in the Saint-Blaise-sur-Richelieu area where one home was pushed from its foundation. In Sainte-Catherine, the roof of an office was blown into a nearby residence punching a large hole on the back wall. On Montreal's Champlain Bridge, eight tractor trailers were overturned forcing the closure of the entire bridge in both directions. In addition, a window washing platform tumbled from a high rise building in downtown Montreal. The workers were able to get inside.
Severe thunderstorms also affected the Saint-Hyacinthe, Sherbrooke, Trois-Rivières and Quebec City where winds as strong as were reported with locally higher gusts while hail from golf ball to baseball size were reported in Mont-Saint-Hilaire and Belœil breaking windows from homes and vehicles. The roof of a 65 unit apartment complex in Sainte-Foy was heavily damaged. The Quebec Bridge linking the city to the suburb of Levis was also temporarily shut down because of a collapsed scaffolding. About 300,000 Hydro-Québec customers across the province lost power, particularly in the Quebec City, Montérégie and Montreal regions with outages occurring in the Eastern Townships and Mauricie regions. Schools in some areas were closed on June 11 due to the power outages. The tractor trailer accidents resulted in two minor injuries during the storms. According to a report from the Insurance Bureau of Canada, insured damage amounts were estimated at $56 million (2008 CAD), and up to 16,000 insurance claims were filed for damage to homes and automobiles.

The severe weather extended south into the Eastern Seaboard of the United States where it ended a prolonged period of intense heat. Temperatures had reached the mid to upper 90s °F (mid 30s °C) for several days in a row, with some areas exceeding . About 150,000 customers in New Jersey, 140,000 in Pennsylvania and 50,000 in northern New York lost power. One person was killed in Lewis County, New York by fallen trees during the storm.

The same series of systems contributed to a significant flooding event in many parts of the Midwest. Several counties in this region in Iowa, Illinois and Wisconsin were declared disaster areas. Over fell in areas over the course of a week, and in Indiana some rivers approached levels similar to flooding in 1913 which killed 200 people. In Franklin, Indiana, water at one point reached the first level of the area hospital, and buildings at Franklin College were damaged. Flooding was reported also in Columbus, Helmsburg and Terre Haute, Indiana. US Coast Guard units were deployed in assistance for rescue efforts. Parts of Interstate 65 and U.S. Route 31 were temporarily shut down. Thirty thousand people in Indiana lost power during the storms, and several counties filed disaster declarations.

Flooding was also reported north of Mason City in southeastern Minnesota, where several inches of rain closed roads and forced evacuations. Gays Mills, Wisconsin was evacuated for the second time in ten months when the Kickapoo River flooded the town. These same areas were also affected by the 2007 Midwest flooding. From June 3 to June 11 eight people were killed due to flooding; three in Indiana, three in Michigan, and one in Illinois and Minnesota.




</doc>
<doc id="17877103" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17877103" title="Poor Jake's Demise">
Poor Jake's Demise

Poor Jake's Demise is a 1913 American silent short slapstick comedy film directed by Allen Curtis and featuring Max Asher and Lon Chaney. The slapstick film focuses on Jake who finds his wife in a compromising position with another man and later takes his revenge with a seltzer bottle. It is one of several slapstick comedy films Chaney made for Universal at the start of his career and is also his first credited screen role. The film was presumed lost, but a fragment of the film was discovered in England in May 2006 and restored.

Jake comes home and finds his wife and Willy Mollycoddle in a compromising position. Enraged, Jake throws Willy out of the house and scolds his wife and threatens to kill himself. Fearful that Jake will commit suicide, the wife calls the police and three officers are sent out to find Jake. Stopping at a bar before he commits suicide, Jake finds Willy who is drowning his sorrows. Jake takes his revenge on Willy with a seltzer bottle.


"Poor Jake's Demise" was directed by Allen Curtis and produced by Independent Moving Pictures Company (IMP) and distributed by Universal Film Manufacturing Company. The screenplay author was not credited. The film is notable for having been the first billed appearance of Lon Chaney and perhaps the debut of Louise Fazenda.

The film was released on August 16, 1913 and had viewings in Texas, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Illinois. A contemporary review of the film in "Moving Picture World" described it as "simply horse play without any special appeal, though it is harmless and lacks vulgarity."

The film was presumed lost, but a fragment of the film was discovered in England in May 2006. It has since been restored by the Haghefilm Laboratory of Amsterdam and Lobster Films, Paris. The restored fragment is 7 minutes and 52 seconds long. In 2006, the film was shown at the Pordenone Silent Film Festival. The film would also be shown at the 31st Cinéfest Sudbury International Film Festival on the evening of March 19, 2011.

In 1957, an article by Jim Neal of the "Denton Record-Chronicle" cited this as the first of Lon Chaney's films. Don G. Smith's book, "Lon Chaney, Jr.: Horror Film Star, 1906-1973", also claims this film as Chaney's first. Rosemary Guiley would also refer to this claim in "The Encyclopedia of Vampires, Werewolves, and Other Monsters". Chronologically, this is the first released film with a confirmed credit for Chaney and also the first billed release. According to Blake, Chaney did not appear in "The Honor of the Family" or "The Ways of Fate", two earlier films sometimes credited to him.



</doc>
<doc id="17883200" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17883200" title="Cultivated plant taxonomy">
Cultivated plant taxonomy

Cultivated plant taxonomy is the study of the theory and practice of the science that identifies, describes, classifies, and names cultigens—those plants whose origin or selection is primarily due to intentional human activity. Cultivated plant taxonomists do, however, work with all kinds of plants in cultivation.

Cultivated plant taxonomy is one part of the study of horticultural botany which is mostly carried out in botanical gardens, large nurseries, universities, or government departments. Areas of special interest for the cultivated plant taxonomist include: searching for and recording new plants suitable for cultivation (plant hunting); communicating with and advising the general public on matters concerning the classification and nomenclature of cultivated plants and carrying out original research on these topics; describing the cultivated plants of particular regions (horticultural floras); maintaining databases, herbaria and other information about cultivated plants.

Much of the work of the cultivated plant taxonomist is concerned with the naming of plants as prescribed by two plant nomenclatural Codes. The provisions of the "International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants" ("Botanical Code") serve primarily scientific ends and the objectives of the scientific community, while those of the "International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants" ("Cultivated Plant Code") are designed to serve both scientific and utilitarian ends by making provision for the names of plants used in commerce—the cultigens that have arisen in agriculture, forestry and horticulture. These names, sometimes called variety names, are not in Latin but are added onto the scientific Latin names, and they assist communication among the community of foresters, farmers and horticulturists.

The history of cultivated plant taxonomy can be traced from the first plant selections that occurred during the agrarian Neolithic Revolution to the first recorded naming of human plant selections by the Romans. The naming and classification of cultigens followed a similar path to that of all plants until the establishment of the first "Cultivated Plant Code" in 1953 which formally established the cultigen classification category of cultivar. Since that time the classification and naming of cultigens has followed its own path.

Cultivated plant taxonomy has been distinguished from the taxonomy of other plants in at least five ways. Firstly, there is a distinction made according to "where the plants are growing" — that is, whether they are wild or cultivated. This is alluded to by the "Cultivated Plant Code" which specifies in its title that it is dealing with "cultivated plants". Secondly, a distinction is made according to "how the plants originated". This is indicated in Principle 2 of the "Cultivated Plant Code" which defines the scope of the Code as "... "plants whose origin or selection is primarily due to the intentional actions of mankind"" — plants that have evolved under natural selection with human assistance.Thirdly, cultivated plant taxonomy is concerned with plant variation that requires the use of special classification categories that do not conform with the hierarchy of ranks implicit in the "Botanical Code", these categories being the cultivar, Group and grex (which are only loosely equivalent to ranks in the "Botanical Code"). This feature is also referred to in the Preamble to the "Cultivated Plant Code" which states that ""The purpose of giving a name to a taxon is not to indicate its characters or history, but to supply a means of referring to it and to indicate to which category it is assigned."" Fourthly, cultivated plant taxonomy serves a particular community of people: the "Botanical Code" focuses on the needs of plant taxonomists as they attempt to maintain order and stability for the scientific names of all plants, while the "Cultivated Plant Code" caters for the needs of people requiring names for plants used in the commercial world of agriculture, forestry and horticulture. Finally, the difference between cultivated plant taxonomy and the taxonomy of other plants has been attributed to the purpose for which the taxonomy has been devised, it being plant-centred in the "Botanical Code" and human-centred in the "Cultivated Plant Code".

The key activities of cultivated plant taxonomy relate to classification (taxonomy) and naming (nomenclature). The rules associated with naming plants are separate from the methods, principles or purposes of classification, except that the units of classification, the taxa, are placed in a nested hierarchy of ranks – like species within genera, and genera within families. There are three classification categories used in the "Cultivated Plant Code", the cultivar and the Group and the grex, but they are only loosely equivalent to ranks in the "Botanical Code".

From the time of the ancient world, at least, plants have been classified in two ways. On the one hand there is the detached academic, philosophical or scientific interest in plants themselves: this groups plants by their relationship to one another according to their similarities and differences in structure and function. Then there is the practical, utilitarian or anthropocentric interest which groups plants according to their human use. Cultivated plant taxonomy is concerned with the special classification categories needed for the plants of agriculture, horticulture and forestry as regulated by the "Cultivated Plant Code". This Code serves not only the scientific interests of formal nomenclature, it also caters for the special utilitarian needs of people dealing with the plants of commerce. Those cultigens given names governed by the "Cultivated Plant Code" fulfill three criteria: they have special features considered of sufficient importance to warrant a name; the special features are the result of deliberate human breeding or selection and are not found in wild populations (except in rare cases where the special features represent desirable part of natural variation found in wild populations that is not covered by a scientific name); it is possible to perpetuate the desirable features by propagation in cultivation.

The terms "cultigen" and "cultivar" may be confused with each other. "Cultigen" is a general-purpose term for plants that have been deliberately altered or specially selected by humans, while cultivar is a formal classification category. Cultigens include not only plants with cultivar names but also those with names in the classification categories of grex and Group. The "Cultivated Plant Code" points out that cultigens are: "deliberately selected plants that may have arisen by intentional or accidental hybridization in cultivation, by selection from existing cultivated stocks, or from variants within wild populations that are maintained as recognizable entities solely by continued propagation." Included within the group of plants known as cultigens are genetically modified plants, plants with binomial Latin names that are the result of ancient human selection, and any plants that have been altered by humans but which have not been given formal names. In practice most cultigens are cultivars.

The following account of the historical development of cultivated plant taxonomy traces the way cultigens have arisen and been incorporated into botanical science; it also demonstrates how two approaches to plant nomenclature and classification have led to the present-day "International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants" and "International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants".

The history of cultigen nomenclature has been discussed by William T. Stearn and Brandenberg, Hetterscheid and Berg. It has also been examined from a botanical perspective and from the origin of the "Cultivated Plant Code" in 1953 until 2004.

The early development of cultigen taxonomy follows that of plant taxonomy in general as the early listing and documentation of plants made little distinction between those that were anthropogenic and those that were natural wild kinds. Formal botanical nomenclature and classification evolved from the simple binomial system of folk taxonomy and it was not until the mid-19th century that the nomenclatural path of cultigens began to diverge from mainstream plant taxonomy.

William T. Stearn (1911–2001), taxonomic botanist, classical scholar and author of the book "Botanical Latin" has commented that "cultivated plants [cultigens] are mankind's most vital and precious heritage from remote antiquity".
Cultigens of our most common economic plants probably date back to the first settled communities of the Neolithic Revolution 10,000 to 12,000 years ago although their exact time and place of true origin will probably remain a mystery. In the Western world among the first cultigens would have been selections of the cereals wheat and barley that arose in the early settlements of the Fertile Crescent (the fertile river valleys of the Nile, Tigris and Euphrates) in the Western Mediterranean. Food plant selections would also have been made in the ten or so other centres of settlement that occurred around the world at this time. Confining crops to local areas gave rise to landraces (selections that are highly adapted to local conditions) although these are now largely replaced by modern cultivars. Cuttings are an extremely effective way of perpetuating desirable characters, especially of woody plants like grapes, figs and olives so it is not surprising that these are among the first known plant selections perpetuated in cultivation in the West. Migrating people would take their plant seeds and cuttings with them; there is evidence of early Fertile Crescent cereal cultigens being transferred from Western Asia to surrounding lands.

As early as the 5th century BCE the Greek philosopher Hippo expressed the opinion that cultigens (as we call them now) were produced from wild plants as the result of the care bestowed on them by man, a revolutionary view at a time when they were regarded as the special creation and gift of the gods. In devising ways of classifying organisms the philosopher Aristotle (384–322 BCE) established the important idea of a "fundamentum divisionis" — the principle that groups can be progressively subdivided. This has been assumed in biological classification ever since and is congruent with the relatively recent idea of evolution as descent with modification. All biological classification follows this principle of groups within groups, known as a nested hierarchy, but this form of classification does not necessarily presuppose evolution. The earliest scientific (rather than utilitarian) approach to plants is attributed to Aristotle's student Theophrastus (371–286 BCE), known as the "father of botany". In his "Enquiry into Plants" Theophrastus described 480 kinds of plant, dividing the plant kingdom into trees, shrubs, undershrubs and herbs with further subdivision into wild and cultivated, flowering and non-flowering, deciduous or evergreen.

The utilitarian approach, classifying plants according to their medicinal properties, is exemplified by the work of Roman nobleman, scientist and historian, Pliny the Elder (29–79 CE) author of "Naturalis historiae". "Cultivars" listed here are named after people, places or special plant characteristics. Most notable is the work of Dioscorides (ca.40–ca.90 CE) a Greek doctor who worked with the Roman army. His five-volume "Materia Medica" was a forerunner of the herbal which led to the modern pharmacopoeia. This work was endlessly plagiarised by later herbals including those printed between about 1470 and 1670 CE: it listed 600 to 1000 different kinds of plants including the cultigens Gallica, Centifolia, the rose of uncertain origin known as Alba and other rose cultivars grown by the Romans.

The first record of a named cultigen occurs in "De Agri Cultura". written about 160 BCE by Roman statesman Cato the Elder (234–149 BCE) in a list that includes 120 kinds (cultivars) of figs, grapes, apples and olives. The names are presented in a way that implies that they would have been familiar to fellow Romans. The "cultivar" names were mostly of one word and denoted the provenance of the cultivar (the geographical origin of the place where the plant selections were made). Writers up to the 15th century added little to this early work. In the Middle Ages the book of hours, early herbals, illuminated manuscripts and economic records indicate that plants grown by the Romans found their way into monastery gardens. For example, in 827 CE the following herbs were mentioned in the poem "Hortulus" by Walafrid Strabo as growing in the monastery garden of St Gallen in Switzerland: sage, rue, southernwood, wormwood, horehound, fennel, German iris, lovage, chervil, Madonna lily, opium poppy, clary, mint, betony, agrimony, catmint, radish, gallica rose, bottle gourd and melon. It seems likely that aromatic and culinary herbs were quite widespread and similar lists of plants occur in records of plants grown in Villa gardens at the time of Charlemagne (742–814 CE).

The revival of learning during the Renaissance reinvigorated the study of plants and their classification. From about 1400 CE European expansion established Latin as the common language of scholars and it was adopted for biological nomenclature. Then, from about 1500 CE, the publication of herbals (books often illustrated with woodcuts describing the appearance, medicinal properties, and other characteristics of plants used in herbal medicine) extended the formal documentation of plants and by the late 16th century the number of different plant kinds described in Europe had risen to about 4,000. In 1623 Gaspard Bauhin published his "Pinax theatre botanici" an attempt at a comprehensive compilation of all plants known at that time: it included about 6000 kinds. The combined works of a German physician and botanist Valerius Cordus (1515–1544 CE) which were published in 1562 included many named "cultivars" including 30 apples and 49 pears, presumably local German selections. English herbalist John Parkinson's "Paradisi in Sole ..." (1629) lists 57 apple "cultivars", 62 pears, 61 plums, 35 cherries and 22 peaches.

With increasing trade in economic and medicinal plants the need for a more comprehensive classification system increased. Up to about 1650 CE plants had been grouped either alphabetically or according to utilitarian folk taxonomy – by their medicinal uses or whether they were trees, shrubs or herbs. Between 1650 and 1700 CE there was a move from the utilitarian back to a scientific natural classification based on the characters of the plants themselves.

In 1700 French botanist J.P. de Tournefort although still using the broad groupings of "trees" and "herbs" for flowering plants, began to use flower characteristics as distinguishing features and, most importantly, provided a clear definition of the genus as a basic unit of classification. In "Institutiones Rei Herbariae" he listed about 10,000 different plants, which he called species, organised into 698 genera with illustrations. The establishment of this precursor of scientific classification vastly improved the organisation of plant variation into approximately equivalent groups or ranks and many of his genera were later taken up by Carl Linnaeus.
There was still at this time no common agreement on the way to present plant names so they ranged in length from one word to lengthy descriptive sentences. As the number of recorded plants increased this naming system became more unwieldy.

In England the tradition of documenting garden plants was established long before Linnaeus' "Species Plantarum" starting with the herbals, but the most prominent early chronicler was Philip Miller (1691–1771) who was a master gardener in charge of the Chelsea Physic Garden in London from 1722 to 1770. New plants were coming into Western Europe from southern Europe and the overseas colonies of the Dutch, British and French. These new plants came largely to the botanic gardens of Amsterdam, Leiden, Chelsea and Paris and they needed recording. In 1724 Miller produced a two-volume compendium of garden plants called "The Gardeners and Florists Dictionary or a complete System of Horticulture". The first edition was in 1724, subsequently revised and enlarged until the last and 8th edition in 1768 by which time he had adopted Linnaean binomials. For a while this publication was taken as the starting point for "horticultural" nomenclature equivalent to Linnaeus' "Species Plantarum" which is now taken as the starting point for botanical nomenclature in general. Miller's Dictionary was the first of many English horticultural compendia whose history has been traced by William Stearn.

 In the early 18th century colonial expansion and exploration created a demand for the description of thousands of new organisms. This highlighted difficulties in communication about plants, the replication of their descriptions, and the importance of an agreed way of presenting, publishing and applying their names.

It was the Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus who finally put order into this situation as he attempted to name all the known organisms of his day. In 1735 his "Systema Naturae", which included animals (the tenth edition became the starting point for zoological nomenclature) was followed by "Critica Botanica" in 1737, and "Philosophia Botanica" in 1751. But it was his most comprehensive work on plants, the 1753 publication "Species Plantarum" that formalised the name of a genus with a single epithet to form the name of a species as two words, the binomial thus making secure the biological system of binomial nomenclature. In these works Linnaeus used a third name as a variety within a species. These varieties included both wild and horticultural variants. The horticultural varieties were still written in Latin and some have persisted to this day.

Linnaeus had very definite and uncomplimentary views about cultigens, regarding them as inferior plants for the amusement of those people he disparagingly called anthophiles (flower-lovers); these were plants not deserving the attention of serious botanists. His views revealed both his prejudice, his stance on special creation, and his recognition of the difficulties entailed in cultivated plant taxonomy:

The natural distribution of plants across the world has determined when and where cultigens have been produced. The botanical and horticultural collection of economically important plants, including ornamentals, was based in Europe. Although economic herbs and spices had a long history in trade, and there are good records of cultivar distribution by the Romans, European botanical and horticultural exploration rapidly increased in the 19th century with the colonial expansion taking place at the time. New plants were brought back to Europe while, at the same time, valuable economic plants, including those from the tropics, were distributed among the colonies. This plant trade has provided the common global heritage of economic and ornamental cultigens that we use today and which formed the stock for modern plant selection, breeding, and genetic engineering.
The plant exchange that occurred as a result of European trade can be divided into several phases:

As the community of people dealing with the cultigens of commerce grew so, once again, the divergence between taxonomy serving scientific purposes and utilitarian taxonomy meeting human needs re-emerged. In 1865 German botanist Karl Koch, who became General Secretary of the Berlin Horticultural Society, expressed resentment at the continued use of Latin for cultigen names. Many proposals to deal with this were made, perhaps the most prominent being the "Lois de la nomenclature botanique" submitted in 1867 to the fourth Horticultural and Botanical Congress by Swiss botanist Alphonse de Candolle who, in Article 40 stated: 
""Seedlings, half-breeds (métis) of unknown origin or sports should receive from horticulturists fancy names (noms de fantaisie) in common language, as distinct as possible from the Latin names of species or varieties"." 

This Article, making provision for the cultigens of horticultural nomenclature was to remain in the "Botanical Code" (with a minor amendment in 1935 suggesting the use of the letter 'c' before the horticultural name and antedating formal recognition of the cultivar) through 1906, 1912 and 1935 until the separation, in 1953, of the "Horticultural Code", precursor to the "International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants" ("Cultivated Plant Code"). In 1900 there was the first International Botanical Congress and in 1905 at the second Congress in Vienna an agreed set of nomenclatural rules was established, the "Vienna Rules", which became known from then on as the "International Code of Botanical Nomenclature" (now the "International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants"). After World War II the responsibility for the "Botanical Code" was taken up by the International Association for Plant Taxonomy and meetings to discuss revisions are held at six-yearly intervals, the latest being in 2005

In horticulture at this time there existed all the problems that had confronted botanists in the 19th century – a plethora of names of various length, written and published in many languages with much duplication. The period between 1867 and 1953 was an uneasy time in which American horticulturists and other groups in Europe, such as the specialist orchid community, made attempts to put order into this chaos within their particular group of interest and devising their own rules for naming the plants of commerce. 
Friedrich Alefeld (1820–1872), who used Latin variety names, in a monographic study of beans, lentils and other legumes distinguished three infraspecific taxonomic categories: "Unterart" (subspecies), "Varietäten Gruppe" and "Kultur-Varietät", all with Latin names. In doing this he was probably laying the ground for the later establishment of the cultigen classification categories cultivar and Group. In conjunction with the Brussels International Botanical Congress of 1910 there was an International Horticultural Congress having a horticultural nomenclature component.

As a result of general dissatisfaction and a submission from the Royal Horticultural Society the "Règles de Nomenclature Horticole" was established. The use of simple descriptive Latin names (e.g. "compactus", "nanus", "prostratus") for horticultural variants was accepted and so too were names in the local language – which were not to be translated and should preferably consist of one word and a maximum of three. This first "Horticultural Code" consisted of 16 Articles. With the intercession of a World War I it was not until the "9th Horticultural Congress" in London in 1930 that the rules of a Horticulture Nomenclature Committee were agreed and added as an appendix to the 1935 "Botanical Code". The rules established in 1935 were accepted but needed to be extended to include the cultigens of agriculture and forestry, but it was only a result of discussions at the 1950 International Botanical Congress in Stockholm and the 18th International Horticultural Congress in London in 1952 the first "International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants" was published in 1953. The American horticultural botanist Liberty Hyde Bailey was responsible for coining the word cultigen in 1918
and cultivar in 1923, the word cultivar only coming into general circulation with the new Code of 1953. The use of these two terms belies the multitude of classification terms and categories that had been suggested as designations for cultigens.

The first "Cultivated Plant Code" (Wageningen), which was published in 1953, has been followed by eight subsequent editions – in 1958 (Utrecht), 1961 (update of 1958), 1969 (Edinburgh), 1980 (Seattle), 1995 (Edinburgh), 2004 (Toronto) and 2009 (Wageningen).

Following the structure of the "Botanical Code" the "Cultivated Plant Code" is set out in the form of an initial set of Principles followed by Rules and Recommendations that are subdivided into Articles. Amendments to the "Cultivated Plant Code" are prompted by international symposia for cultivated plant taxonomy which allow for rulings made by the "International Commission on the Nomenclature of Cultivated Plants". Each new "Cultivated Plant Code" includes a summary of the changes made to the previous version and these have also been summarised for the period 1953 to 1995.

Recent concerns have focused on international communication on cultivated plant taxonomy, organisation of international symposia, and general communication on topics of interest. In 1988 a "Horticultural Taxonomy Group" ("Hortax") was formed in the UK and a parallel organisation, the "Nomenclature and Registration Working Group" of the "Vaste Keurings Commissie" in the Netherlands. One development promoting discussion was the newsletter "Hortax News" which was superseded in February 2006 by the first issue of "Hanburyana", a journal produced by the Royal Horticultural Society in London and dedicated to horticultural taxonomy. This filled a gap left when the American journal "Baileya" ceased publication in the early 1990s. Another development was the launch, in 2007, at the Sixth Symposium on the Taxonomy of Cultivated Plants at Wageningen of the International Association for Cultivated Plant Taxonomy. "Hortax" also publishes "Plant Names: A Guide for Horticulturists, Nurserymen, Gardeners and Students".

Most cultigens have names consisting of a Latin name that is governed by the "International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants" e.g. "Malus domestica", to which is added a cultigen epithet, enclosed in single quotes e.g. "Malus domestica" 'Granny Smith'. The formation and use of the three classification categories (ranks) used for cultigens, the cultivar, Group and grex, is regulated by the ICNCP. Examples of acceptable ways to present cultigen names are given below:

Current challenges for cultivated plant taxonomists include: the use of large plant name databases; ways of dealing with the use of non-scientific names in commerce (known as trade designations), especially for plant labels in nurseries; intellectual property and plants; adapting modern technology, in particular molecular techniques, to the creation and identification of cultivars; maintaining germplasm collections of cultivars, including herbaria; the recording and registration of cultivars.

The ways in which the plant variation resulting from human activity is named and classified remains contentious. The replacement of the expression "cultivated plant" with the word "cultigen" is not universally accepted. The debate continues concerning the notions of ranks and taxa as applied to cultigens. Is it appropriate to call the highly modified transgenic products of human artificial selection "taxa" in the same way we do for the products of natural selection in the wild? To overcome this difficulty the term "culton" (pl. "culta") has been suggested to replace the word taxon when speaking about cultigens.

Then, most "wild" plants fit neatly into the nested hierarchy of ranks used in Linnaean classification (species into genera, genera into families etc.) which aligns with Darwinian descent with modification. Choosing classification categories for cultigens is not clear-cut. Included among cultigens are: simple selections taken from plants in the wild or in cultivation; artificial hybrids produced both by accident and intention; plants produced by genetic engineering; clonal material reproduced by cuttings, grafting, budding, layering etc.; graft-chimaeras; selections from the wild; ancient selections of crops that date back thousands of years; selections of aberrant growth such as witches brooms; the results of deliberate repeatable single crosses between two pure lines to produce plants of a particular general appearance that is desirable for horticulture, but which are not genetically identical. The question remains as to whether the classification categories of cultivar, Group and grex are the most appropriate and efficient way to deal with this broad range of plant variation.




</doc>
<doc id="17901805" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17901805" title="2008 Sichuan earthquake">
2008 Sichuan earthquake

The 2008 Sichuan earthquake (), also known as the Great Sichuan earthquake or Wenchuan earthquake, occurred at 14:28:01 China Standard Time on May 12, 2008. Measuring at 8.0 M (7.9 M), the earthquake's epicenter was located west-northwest of Chengdu, the provincial capital, with a focal depth of . The earthquake ruptured the fault for over , with surface displacements of several meters. The earthquake was also felt in nearby countries and as far away as both Beijing and Shanghai— away—where office buildings swayed with the tremor. Strong aftershocks, some exceeding 6 M, continued to hit the area up to several months after the main shock, causing further casualties and damage. The earthquake also caused the largest number of geohazards ever recorded, including about 200,000 landslides and more than 800 quake lakes distributed over an area of .

Over 69,000 people lost their lives in the quake, including 68,636 in Sichuan province. 374,176 were reported injured, with 18,222 listed as missing as of July 2008. The geohazards triggered by the earthquake are thought to be responsible for at least one third of the death toll. The earthquake left about 4.8 million people homeless, though the number could be as high as 11 million. Approximately 15 million people lived in the affected area. It was the deadliest earthquake to hit China since the 1976 Tangshan earthquake, which killed at least 240,000 people, and the strongest in the country since the 1950 Chayu earthquake, which registered at 8.5 on the Richter magnitude scale. It is the 18th deadliest earthquake of all time. On November 6, 2008, the central government announced that it would spend 1 trillion RMB (about US $146.5 billion) over the next three years to rebuild areas ravaged by the earthquake, as part of the Chinese economic stimulus program.

According to a study by the China Earthquake Administration (CEA), the earthquake occurred along the Longmenshan Fault, a thrust structure along the border of the Indo-Australian Plate and Eurasian Plate. Seismic activities concentrated on its mid-fracture (known as Yingxiu-Beichuan fracture). The rupture lasted close to 120 seconds, with the majority of energy released in the first 80 seconds. Starting from Wenchuan, the rupture propagated at an average speed of , 49° toward north east, rupturing a total of about . Maximum displacement amounted to . The focus was deeper than .

In a United States Geological Survey (USGS) study, preliminary rupture models of the earthquake indicated displacement of up to along a fault approximately long by deep. The earthquake generated deformations of the surface greater than and increased the stress (and probability of occurrence of future events) at the northeastern and southwestern ends of the fault. On May 20, USGS seismologist Tom Parsons warned that there is "high risk" of a major M>7 aftershock over the next weeks or months.

Japanese seismologist Yuji Yagi at the University of Tsukuba said that the earthquake occurred in two stages: "The 250-kilometre (155 mi) Longmenshan Fault tore in two sections, the first one ripping about 6.5 metres (7 yd) followed by a second one that sheared 3.5 metres (4 yd)." His data also showed that the earthquake lasted about two minutes and released 30 times the energy of the Great Hanshin earthquake of 1995 in Japan, which killed over 6,000 people. He pointed out that the shallowness of the epicenter and the density of population greatly increased the severity of the earthquake. Teruyuki Kato, a seismologist at the University of Tokyo, said that the seismic waves of the quake traveled a long distance without losing their power because of the firmness of the terrain in central China. According to reports from Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan province, the earthquake tremors lasted for "about two or three minutes".

The extent of the earthquake and after shock-affected areas lying north-east, along the Longmen Shan fault.

The Longmen Shan Fault System is situated in the eastern border of the Tibetan Plateau and contains several faults. This earthquake ruptured at least two imbricate structures in Longmen Shan Fault System, i.e. the Beichuan Fault and the Guanxian–Anxian Fault. In the epicentral area, the average slip in Beichuan Fault was about vertical, horizontal-parallel to the fault, and horizontal-perpendicular to the fault. In the area about northeast of the epicenter, the surface slip on Beichuan Fault was almost purely dextral strike-slip up to about , while the average slip in Guanxian–Anxian Fault was about vertical and horizontal.

According to CEA:

"The energy source of the Wenchuan earthquake and Longmenshan's southeast push came from the strike of the Indian Plate onto the Eurasian Plate and its northward push. The inter-plate relative motion caused large scale structural deformation inside the Asian continent, resulting in a thinning crust of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, the uplift of its landscape and an eastward extrude. Near the Sichuan Basin, Qinghai-Tibet Plateau's east-northward movement meets with strong resistance from the South China Block, causing a high degree of stress accumulation in the Longmenshan thrust formation. This finally caused a sudden dislocation in the Yingxiu-Beichuan fracture, leading to the violent earthquake of M 8.0."

According to the United States Geological Survey:

The earthquake occurred as the result of motion on a northeast striking reverse fault or thrust fault on the northwestern margin of the Sichuan Basin. The earthquake’s epicenter and focal-mechanism are consistent with it having occurred as the result of movement on the Longmenshan Fault or a tectonically related fault. The earthquake reflects tectonic stresses resulting from the convergence of crustal material slowly moving from the high Tibetan Plateau, to the west, against strong crust underlying the Sichuan Basin and southeastern China.

On a continental scale, the seismicity of central and eastern Asia is a result of northward convergence of the Indian Plate against the Eurasian Plate with a velocity of about . The convergence of the two plates is broadly accommodated by the uplift of the Asian highlands and by the motion of crustal material to the east away from the uplifted Tibetan Plateau. The northwestern margin of the Sichuan Basin has previously experienced destructive earthquakes. The magnitude 7.5 earthquake of August 25, 1933, killed more than 9,300 people.

According to the British Geological Survey:

The earthquake occurred northwest of the city of Chengdu in eastern Sichuan province and over from Beijing, where it was also strongly felt. Earthquakes of this size have the potential to cause extensive damage and loss of life.

The epicenter was in the mountains of the Eastern Margin of Qing-Tibet Plateau at the northwest margin of the Sichuan Basin. The earthquake occurred as a result of motion on a northeast striking thrust fault that runs along the margin of the basin.

The seismicity of central and eastern Asia is caused by the northward movement of the India plate at a rate of and its collision with Eurasia, resulting in the uplift of the Himalaya and Tibetan plateaux and associated earthquake activity. This deformation also results in the extrusion of crustal material from the high Tibetan Plateaux in the west towards the Sichuan Basin and southeastern China. China frequently suffers large and deadly earthquakes. In August 1933, the magnitude 7.5 Diexi earthquake, about northeast of today's earthquake, destroyed the town of Diexi and surrounding villages, and caused many landslides, some of which dammed the rivers.

The map of earthquake intensity published by CEA after surveying of the affected area shows a maximum "liedu" of XI on the China Seismic Intensity Scale (CSIS), described as "very destructive" on the European Macroseismic Scale (EMS) from which CSIS drew reference. (USGS, using the Modified Mercalli intensity scale (CC), also placed maximum intensity at XI, "extreme".) Two south-west-north-east stripes of liedu XI are centered around Yingxiu, Wenchuan (the town closest to the epicenter of the main quake) and Beichuan (the town repeatedly struck by strong aftershocks including one registering 6.1 on Aug 1, 2008), both in Sichuan Province, occupying a total of . The Yingxiu liedu-XI zone is about long and wide along Wenchuan–Dujiangyan–Pengzhou; the Beichuan liedu-XI zone is about long and wide along An County–Beichuan–Pingwu. The area with liedu X (comparable to X on EMS, "destructive" and X on MM, "disastrous") spans . The area affected by earthquakes exceeding liedu VI totals , occupying an oval long and wide, spanning three provinces and one autonomous region.

QLARM (Quake Loss Alarms for Response and Mitigation) issues near-real-time estimates of fatalities and number of injured for earthquakes worldwide. Recent alerts can be found on the web page of the International Institute for Earth Simulation Foundation. Such an alert was issued 21 minutes after the May 12 Wenchuan earthquake of 2008. It had at first been assigned M7.5, internationally. This initial underestimate of the magnitude is a known problem with earthquakes of M8 and larger. Based on the M7.5 information, QLARM distributed an email to about 300 recipients estimating that 1,000 to 4,000 fatalities had occurred. After learning that the earthquake may measure M8, QLARM distributed a revised estimate of 40,000 to 100,000 fatalities. This information was distributed within 100 minutes of the Wenchuan earthquake.

The news and official reports of fatalities are often strongly misleading. After the Wenchuan earthquake, officials led the public to believe for more than a week that the fatalities numbered only a fraction of what they really were (Figure 1). At the very beginning, everyone expects the news reports to be an initial count that will grow, not however, after one week. After such a long time, the false news reports take on a reality in their own right and the theoretical loss calculations by experts are discarded.

Once the extent of the rupture of the Wenchuan earthquake became known, QLARM calculated a more detail picture of the losses. Figure 2 shows a map of the expected mean damage of the settlements affected by the Wenchuan earthquake on a scale of 5. The resistance to shaking of buildings in large cities is assumed to be stronger than in villages, therefore the damage and percentage of fatalities in large cities is less than in villages.

Between 64 and 104 major aftershocks, ranging in magnitude from 4.0 to 6.1, were recorded within 72 hours of the main quake. According to Chinese official counts, "by 12:00 CST, November 6, 2008, there had been 42,719 total aftershocks, of which 246 ranged from 4.0 M to 4.9 M, 34 from 5.0 M to 5.9 M, and 8 from 6.0 M to 6.4 M; the strongest aftershock measured 6.4 M." The latest aftershock exceeding M6 occurred on August 5, 2008.

The earthquake had a magnitude of 8.0 M and 7.9 M. The epicenter was in Wenchuan County, Ngawa Tibetan and Qiang Autonomous Prefecture, west/northwest of the provincial capital of Chengdu, with its main tremor occurring at 14:28:01.42 China Standard Time (06:28:01.42 UTC), on May 12, 2008, lasting for around two minutes; in the quake almost 80% of buildings were destroyed.

Places ordered by distance from epicenter (or time of propagation) :

Office buildings in Shanghai's financial district, including the Jin Mao Tower and the Hong Kong New World Tower, were evacuated. A receptionist at the Tibet Hotel in Chengdu said things were "calm" after the hotel evacuated its guests. Meanwhile, workers at a Ford plant in Sichuan were evacuated for about 10 minutes. Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport was shut down, and the control tower and regional radar control evacuated. One SilkAir flight was diverted and landed in Kunming as a result. Cathay Pacific delayed both legs of its quadruple daily Hong Kong to London route due to this disruption in air traffic services. Chengdu Shuangliu Airport reopened later on the evening of May 12, offering limited service as the airport began to be used as a staging area for relief operations.

Reporters in Chengdu said they saw cracks on walls of some residential buildings in the downtown areas, but no buildings collapsed. Many Beijing office towers were evacuated, including the building housing the media offices for the organizers of the 2008 Summer Olympics. None of the Olympic venues were damaged. Meanwhile, a cargo train carrying 13 petrol tanks derailed in Hui County, Gansu, and caught on fire after the rail was distorted.

All of the highways into Wenchuan, and others throughout the province, were damaged, resulting in delayed arrival of the rescue troops. In Beichuan County, 80% of the buildings collapsed according to Xinhua News. In the city of Shifang, the collapse of two chemical plants led to leakage of some 80 tons of liquid ammonia, with hundreds of people reported buried. In the city of Dujiangyan, south-east of the epicenter, a whole school collapsed with 900 students buried and fewer than 60 survived. The Juyuan Middle School, where many teenagers were buried, was excavated by civilians and cranes. Dujiangyan is home of the Dujiangyan Irrigation System, an ancient water diversion project which is still in use and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The project's famous Fish Mouth was cracked but not severely damaged otherwise.

Both the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange suspended trading of companies based in southwestern China. Copper rose over speculations that production in southwestern China may be affected, and oil prices dropped over speculations that demand from China would fall.

Immediately after the earthquake event, mobile and terrestrial telecommunications were cut to the affected and surrounding area, with all internet capabilities cut to the Sichuan area too. Elements of telecommunications were restored by the government piece by piece over the next number of months as the situation in the Sichuan province gradually improved. Eventually, a handful of major news and media websites were made accessible online in the region, albeit with dramatically pared back webpages.

China Mobile had more than 2,300 base stations suspended due to power disruption or severe telecommunication traffic congestion. Half of the wireless communications were lost in the Sichuan province. China Unicom's service in Wenchuan and four nearby counties was cut off, with more than 700 towers suspended.

Initially, officials were unable to contact the Wolong National Nature Reserve, home to around 280 giant pandas. However, the Foreign Ministry later said that a group of 31 British tourists visiting the Wolong Panda Reserve in the quake-hit area returned safe and uninjured to Chengdu. Nonetheless, the well-being of an even greater number of pandas in the neighbouring panda reserves remained unknown. Five security guards at the reserve were killed by the earthquake. Six pandas escaped after their enclosures were damaged. By May 20, two pandas at the reserve were found to be injured, while the search continued for another two adult pandas that went missing after the quake. By May 28, 2008, one panda was still missing. The missing panda was later found dead under the rubble of an enclosure. Nine-year-old Mao Mao, a mother of five at the breeding center, was discovered on Monday, her body crushed by a wall in her enclosure. Panda keepers and other workers placed her remains in a small wooden crate and buried her outside the breeding centre.

The Zipingpu Hydropower Plant () located 20 km east of the epicenter was damaged. A recent inspection indicated that the damage was less severe than initially feared, and it remains structurally stable and safe. However, the Tulong reservoir upstream is in danger of collapse. About 2,000 troops have been allocated to Zipingpu, trying to release the pressure through spillway. In total, 391 dams, most of them small, were reported damaged by the quake.

According to Chinese state officials, the quake caused 69,180 known deaths including 68,636 in Sichuan province; 18,498 people are listed as missing, and 374,176 injured, but these figures may further increase as more reports come in. This estimate includes 158 earthquake relief workers who were killed in landslides as they tried to repair roads.

One rescue team reported only 2,300 survivors from the town of Yingxiu in Wenchuan County, out of a total population of about 9,000. 3,000 to 5,000 people were killed in Beichuan County, Sichuan alone; in the same location, 10,000 people were injured and 80% of the buildings were destroyed. The old county seat of Beichuan was abandoned and preserved as part of the Beichuan Earthquake Museum. Eight schools were toppled in Dujiangyan.
A 56-year-old was killed in Dujiangyan during a rescue attempt on the Lingyanshan Ropeway, where due to the earthquake 11 tourists from Taiwan had been trapped inside cable cars since May 13. A 4-year-old boy named Zhu Shaowei () was also killed in Mianzhu City when a house collapsed on him and another was reported missing.

Experts point out that the earthquake hit an area that has been largely neglected and untouched by China's economic rise. Health care is poor in inland areas such as Sichuan, highlighting the widening gap between prosperous urban dwellers and struggling rural people. Vice Minister of Health Gao Qiang told reporters in Beijing that the "public health care system in China is insufficient." The Vice Minister of Health also suggested that the government would pick up the costs of care to earthquake victims, many of whom have little or no insurance: "The government should be responsible for providing medical treatment to them," he said.

In terms of school casualties, thousands of school children died due to shoddy construction. In Mianyang City, seven schools collapsed, burying at least 1,700 people. At least 7,000 school buildings throughout the province collapsed. Another 700 students were buried in a school in Hanwang. At least 600 students and staff died at Juyuan Elementary School. Up to 1,300 children and teachers died at Beichuan Middle School. According to Tan Zuoren, 5,600 pupils were dead or missing from the 64 schools Tan investigated in the quake zone. Tan was detained after he published such a casualties number.

Details of school casualties had been under non-governmental investigation since December 2008 by volunteers including artist and architect Ai Weiwei, who had been constantly posting updates on his blog since March 2009. The official tally of students killed in the earthquake was not released until May 7, 2009, almost a year after the earthquake. According to the state-run Xinhua news agency, the earthquake killed 5,335 students and left another 546 children disabled. Some parents believe the real figure is twice that officially cited. The executive vice governor of Sichuan Wei Hong said the student death toll is 19,065. Mr. Wei noted the toll was incomplete as the officials were still tallying the final number. In the aftermath of the earthquake, the Chinese government declared that parents who had lost their only children would get free treatment from fertility clinics to reverse vasectomies and tubal ligations conducted by family planning authorities.

The earthquake left at least 5 million people without housing, although the number could be as high as 11 million. Millions of livestock and a significant amount of agriculture were also destroyed, including 12.5 million animals, mainly birds. In the Sichuan province a million pigs died out of 60 million total. Catastrophe modeling firm AIR Worldwide reported official estimates of insurers' losses at US$1 billion from the earthquake; estimated total damage exceeded US$20 billion. It values Chengdu, at the time having an urban population of 4.5 million people, at around US$115 billion, with only a small portion covered by insurance.

Reginald DesRoches, a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Georgia Tech, pointed out that the massive damage of properties and houses in the earthquake area was because China did not create an adequate seismic design code until after the devastating 1976 Tangshan earthquake. DesRoches said: "If the buildings were older and built prior to that 1976 earthquake, chances are they weren't built for adequate earthquake forces."

In the days following the disaster, an international reconnaissance team of engineers was dispatched to the region to make a detailed preliminary survey of damaged buildings. Their findings show a variety of reasons why many constructions failed to withstand the earthquake.

News reports indicate that the poorer, rural villages were hardest hit. Swaminathan Krishnan, assistant professor of civil engineering and geophysics at the California Institute of Technology said: "the earthquake occurred in the rural part of China. Presumably, many of the buildings were just "built;" they were not designed, so to speak." Swaminathan Krishnan further added: "There are very strong building codes in China, which take care of earthquake issues and seismic design issues. But many of these buildings presumably were quite old and probably were not built with any regulations overseeing them."

Even with the five largest cities in Sichuan suffering only minor damage from the quake, some estimates of the economic loss run higher than US$75 billion, making the earthquake one of the costliest natural disasters in Chinese history.

Strong aftershocks continued to strike even months after the main quake. On May 25, an aftershock of 6.0  (6.4  according to CEA) hit northeast of the original earthquake's epicenter, in Qingchuan County, Sichuan, causing eight deaths, 1,000 injuries, and destroying thousands of buildings. On May 27, two aftershocks, one 5.2 M in Qingchuan County and one 5.7 M in Ningqiang County, Shaanxi, led to the collapse of more than 420,000 homes and injured 63 people. The same area suffered two more aftershocks of 5.6 and 6.0  (5.8 and 5.5 , respectively, according to USGS) on July 23, resulting in 1 death, 6 serious injuries, the collapse of hundreds of homes and damaging kilometers of highways.
Pingwu County and Beichuan County, Sichuan, also northeast of Wenchuan and close to the epicenter of a 7.2 M earthquake in 1976, suffered a 6.1  aftershock (5.7  according to USGS) on August 1; it caused 2 deaths, 345 injuries, the collapse of 707 homes, damage to over 1,000 homes, and blocked of country roads. As late as August 5, yet another aftershock of 6.1  (6.2  according to USGS) hit Qingchuan, Sichuan, causing 1 death, 32 injuries, telecommunication interruptions, and widespread hill slides blocking roads in the area including a national highway.

Executive vice governor Wei Hong confirmed on November 21, 2008, that more than 90,000 people in total were dead or missing in the earthquake. He stated that 200,000 homes had been rebuilt, and 685,000 were under reconstruction, but 1.94 million households were still without permanent shelter. 1,300 schools had been reconstructed, with initial relocation of 25 townships, including Beichuan and Wenchuan, two of the most devastated areas. The government spent $441 billion on relief and reconstruction efforts.

General Secretary and President Hu Jintao announced that the disaster response would be rapid. Just 90 minutes after the earthquake, Premier Wen Jiabao, who has an academic background in geomechanics, flew to the earthquake area to oversee the rescue work. Soon afterward, the Ministry of Health stated that it had sent ten emergency medical teams to Wenchuan County. On the same day, the Chengdu Military Region Command dispatched 50,000 troops and armed police to help with disaster relief work in Wenchuan County. However, due to the rough terrain and close proximity of the quake's epicenter, the soldiers found it very difficult to get help to the rural regions of the province. Premier Wen ordered the People's Liberation Army by saying, “It is the people who have raised you. It's up to you to see what to do! Even with two legs, you must walk in there.(Chinese:是人民养育了你们, 你们自己看着办! 你们就是靠双腿走, 也要给我走进去)" However, due to PLA commander Guo Boxiong only listened Jiang Zeming's order, neither Wen Jiabo's or Hu Jintao's. The first 72 critical rescue hours were wasted. New York Times reported "the troops were unprepared to save lives in the first 72 hours, when thousands were buried under toppled masonry and every minute mattered." 
The National Disaster Relief Commission initiated a "Level II emergency contingency plan", which covers the most serious class of natural disasters. The plan rose to Level I at 22:15 CST, May 12.

An earthquake emergency relief team of 184 people (consisting of 12 people from the State Seismological Bureau, 150 from the Beijing Military Area Command, and 22 from the Armed Police General Hospital) left Beijing from Nanyuan Airport late May 12 in two military transport planes to travel to Wenchuan County.

Many rescue teams, including that of the Taipei Fire Department from Taiwan, were reported ready to join the rescue effort in Sichuan as early as Wednesday. However, the Red Cross Society of China said that (on May 13) "it was inconvenient currently due to the traffic problem to the hardest hit areas closest to the epicenter." The Red Cross Society of China also stated that the disaster areas need tents, medical supplies, drinking water and food; however it recommended donating cash instead of other items, as it had not been possible to reach roads that were completely damaged or places that were blocked off by landslides. Landslides continuously threatened the progress of a search and rescue group of 80 men, each carrying about 40 kg of relief supplies, from a motorized infantry brigade under commander Yang Wenyao, as they tried to reach the ethnically Tibetan village of Sier at a height of 4000 m above sea level in Pingwu county. The extreme terrain conditions precluded the use of helicopter evacuation, and over 300 of the Tibetan villagers were stranded in their demolished village for five days without food and water before the rescue group finally arrived to help the injured and stranded villagers down the mountain.

Persistent heavy rain and landslides in Wenchuan County and the nearby area badly affected rescue efforts. At the start of rescue operations on May 12, 20 helicopters were deployed for the delivery of food, water, and emergency aid, and also the evacuation of the injured and reconnaissance of quake-stricken areas. By 17:37 CST on May 13, a total of over 15,600 troops and militia reservists from the Chengdu Military Region had joined the rescue force in the heavily affected areas. A commander reported from Yingxiu Town, Wenchuan, that around 3,000 survivors were found, while the status of the other inhabitants (around 9,000) remained unclear. The 1,300 rescuers reached the epicenter, and 300 pioneer troops reached the seat of Wenchuan at about 23:30 CST. By 12:17 CST, May 14, 2008, communication in the seat of Wenchuan was partly revived. On the afternoon of May 14, 15 Special Operations Troops, along with relief supplies and communications gear, parachuted into inaccessible Mao County, northeast of Wenchuan.

By May 15, Premier Wen Jiabao ordered the deployment of an additional 90 helicopters, of which 60 were to be provided by the PLAAF, and 30 were to be provided by the civil aviation industry, bringing the total number of aircraft deployed in relief operations by the air force, army, and civil aviation to over 150, resulting in the largest non-combat airlifting operation in People's Liberation Army history.

Beijing accepted the aid of the Tzu Chi Foundation from Taiwan late on May 13. Tzu Chi was the first force from outside the People's Republic of China to join the rescue effort. China stated it would gratefully accept international help to cope with the quake.

A direct chartered cargo flight was made by China Airlines from Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport to Chengdu Shuangliu International Airport sending some 100 tons of relief supplies donated by the Tzu Chi Foundation and the Red Cross Society of Taiwan to the affected areas. Approval from mainland Chinese authorities was sought, and the chartered flight departed Taipei at 17:00 CST, May 15 and arrived in Chengdu by 20:30 CST. A rescue team from the Red Cross in Taiwan was also scheduled to depart Taipei on a Mandarin Airlines direct chartered flight to Chengdu at 15:00 CST on May 16.

Francis Marcus of the International Federation of the Red Cross praised the Chinese rescue effort as "swift and very efficient" in Beijing on Tuesday. But he added the scale of the disaster was such that "we can't expect that the government can do everything and handle every aspect of the needs". The "Economist" noted that China reacted to the disaster "rapidly and with uncharacteristic openness", contrasting it with Burma's secretive response to Cyclone Nargis, which devastated that country 10 days before the earthquake.

On May 16, rescue groups from South Korea, Japan, Singapore, Russia and Taiwan arrived to join the rescue effort. The United States shared some of its satellite images of the quake-stricken areas with Chinese authorities. During the weekend, the US sent into China two U.S. Air Force C-17's carrying supplies, which included tents and generators. Xinhua reported 135,000 Chinese troops and medics were involved in the rescue effort across 58 counties and cities.

The Internet was extensively used for passing information to aid rescue and recovery efforts. For example, the official news agency Xinhua set up an online rescue request center in order to find the blind spots of disaster recovery. After knowing that rescue helicopters had trouble landing into the epicenter area in Wenchuan, a student proposed a landing spot online and it was chosen as the first touchdown place for the helicopters. Volunteers also set up several websites to help store contact information for victims and evacuees. On May 31, a rescue helicopter carrying earthquake survivors and crew members crashed in fog and turbulence in Wenchuan county. No-one survived.

Rescue efforts performed by the Chinese government were praised by western media, especially in comparison with Myanmar's blockage of foreign aid during Cyclone Nargis, as well as China's previous performance during the 1976 Tangshan earthquake. China's openness during the media coverage of the Sichuan earthquake led a professor at the Peking University to say, “This is the first time [that] the Chinese media has lived up to international standards”. "Los Angeles Times" praised China's media coverage of the quake of being "democratic".

Rescue efforts also came from Jet Li's One Foundation which saw the martial arts actor Wu Jing assisting in the efforts.

As a result of the earthquake and the many strong aftershocks, many rivers became blocked by large landslides, which resulted in the formation of "quake lakes" behind the blockages; these massive amounts of water were pooling up at a very high rate behind the natural landslide dams and it was feared that the blockages would eventually crumble under the weight of the ever-increasing water mass, potentially endangering the lives of millions of people living downstream. As of May 27, 2008, 34 lakes had formed due to earthquake debris blocking and damming rivers, and it was estimated that 28 of them were still of potential danger to the local people. Entire villages had to be evacuated because of the resultant flooding.

The most precarious of these quake-lakes was the one located in the extremely difficult terrain at Mount Tangjia in Beichuan County, Sichuan, accessible only by foot or air; an Mi-26T heavy lift helicopter belonging to the China Flying Dragon Special Aviation Company was used to bring heavy earthmoving tractors to the affected location. This operation was coupled with the work done by PLAAF Mi-17 helicopters bringing in PLA engineering corps, explosive specialists and other personnel to join 1,200 soldiers who arrived on site by foot. Five tons of fuel to operate the machinery was airlifted to the site, where a sluice was constructed to allow the safe discharge of the bottle-necked water. Downstream, more than 200,000 people were evacuated from Mianyang by June 1 in anticipation of the dam bursting.

The State Council declared a three-day period of national mourning for the quake victims starting from May 19, 2008; the PRC's National Flag and Regional Flags of Hong Kong and Macau Special Administrative Regions flown at half mast. It was the first time that a national mourning period had been declared for something other than the death of a state leader, and many have called it the biggest display of mourning since the death of Mao Zedong. At 14:28 CST on May 19, 2008, a week after the earthquake, the Chinese public held a moment of silence. People stood silent for three minutes while air defense, police and fire sirens, and the horns of vehicles, vessels and trains sounded. Cars and trucks on Beijing's roads also came to a halt. People spontaneously burst into cheering "Zhongguo jiayou!" (Let's go, China!) and "Sichuan jiayou" (Let's go, Sichuan!) afterwards.

The Ningbo Organizing Committee of the Beijing Olympic torch relay announced that the relay, scheduled to take place in Ningbo during national mourning, would be suspended for the duration of the mourning period. The route of the torch through the country was scaled down, and there was a minute of silence when the next leg started in city of Ruijin, Jiangxi on the Wednesday after the quake.

Many websites converted their home page to black and white; Sina.com and Sohu, major internet portals, limited their homepages to news items and removed all advertisements. Chinese video sharing websites Youku and Tudou displayed a black background and placed multiple videos showing earthquake footage and news reports. The Chinese version of MSN, cn.msn.com, also displayed banner ads about the earthquake and the relief efforts. Other entertainment websites, including various gaming sites, such as the Chinese servers for "World of Warcraft", had shut down altogether, or had corresponding links to earthquake donations. After the moments of silence, in Tiananmen Square, crowds spontaneously burst out cheering various slogans, including "Long Live China". Casinos in Macau closed down.

All Mainland Chinese television stations (along with some stations in Hong Kong and expatriate communities) cancelled all regularly-scheduled programming, displayed their logo in grayscale, and replaced their cancelled programmes with live earthquake footage from CCTV-1 for multiple days after the quake. Even pay television channels (such as Channel V) had their programmes suspended.

On the evening of May 18, CCTV-1 hosted a special four-hour program called "The Giving of Love" (), hosted by regulars from the CCTV New Year's Gala and round-the-clock coverage anchor Bai Yansong. It was attended by a wide range of entertainment, literary, business and political figures from mainland China, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan. Donations of the evening totalled 1.5 billion Chinese Yuan (~US$208 million). Of the donations, CCTV gave the biggest corporate contribution at ¥50 million. Almost at the same time in Taiwan, a similarly themed programme was on air hosted by the sitting president Ma Ying-jeou.
In June, Hong Kong actor Jackie Chan, who donated $1.57 million to the victims, made a music video alongside other artists entitled "Promise"; the song was composed by Andy Lau. The Artistes 512 Fund Raising Campaign, an 8-hour fundraising marathon, was held on June 1 in Hong Kong; it was attended by some 200 Sinosphere musicians and celebrities. In Singapore, MediaCorp Channel 8 hosted a 'live' programme 让爱川流不息 to raise funds for the victims.

Although the Chinese government was initially praised for its response to the quake (especially in comparison to Myanmar's ruling military junta's blockade of aid during Cyclone Nargis), it then saw an erosion in confidence over the school construction scandal.

The central government estimates that over 7,000 inadequately engineered schoolrooms collapsed in the earthquake. Chinese citizens have since invented a catch phrase: "tofu-dregs schoolhouses" (), to mock both the quality and the quantity of these inferior constructions that killed so many school children. Due to the one-child policy, many families lost their only child when schools in the region collapsed during the earthquake. Consequently, Sichuan provincial and local officials have lifted the restriction for families whose only child was either killed or severely injured in the disaster. So-called "illegal children" under 18 years of age may be registered as legal replacements for their dead siblings; if the dead child was illegal, no further outstanding fines would apply. Reimbursement would not, however, be offered for fines that were already levied.

On May 29, 2008, government officials began inspecting the ruins of thousands of schools that collapsed, searching for clues about why they crumbled. Thousands of parents around the province have accused local officials and builders of cutting corners in school construction, citing that after the quake other nearby buildings were little damaged. In the aftermath of the quake, many local governments promised to formally investigate the school collapses, but as of July 17, 2008, across Sichuan, parents of children lost in collapsed schools complained they had yet to receive any reports. Local officials urged them not to protest but the parents demonstrated and demanded an investigation. Furthermore, censors discouraged stories of poorly built schools from being published in the media and there was an incident where police drove the protestors away.

In the China Digital Times an article reports a close analysis by an alleged Chinese construction engineer known online as “Book Blade” (), who stated:

"...because of our nation’s particular brand of education, our children are fed 20 years of Marxist philosophy with Chinese characteristics—a philosophy that has nothing to say about saving lives...School construction is the worst. First, there’s not enough capital. Schools in poor areas have small budgets and, unlike schools in the cities, they can’t collect huge fees, so they’re pressed for money. With construction, add in exploitation by government officials, education officials, school managers, etc. and you can imagine what’s left over for the actual building of schools. When earthquake prevention standards are raised, government departments, major businesses, etc. will all appraise and reinforce their buildings. But these schools with their 70s-era buildings, no-one pays attention to them. Because of this, the older school buildings suffer from inadequate protection while the new buildings have been shoddily constructed."

On Children's Day, June 1, 2008, many parents went to the rubble of schools to mourn for their children. The surviving children, who were mostly living in relief centres, performed ceremonies marking the special day, but also acknowledging the earthquake.

Ye Zhiping, the principal of Sangzao Middle School in Sangzao, one of the largest in An County, has been credited with proactive action that spared the lives of all 2,323 pupils in attendance when the earthquake happened. During a three-year period that ended in 2007, he oversaw a major overhaul of his school. During that time he obtained more than 400,000 yuan (US$60,000) from the county education department, money used to widen and strengthen concrete pillars and the balcony railing of all four storeys of his school, as well as secure its concrete floors.

The AP reported that "The state-controlled media has largely ignored the issue, apparently under the propaganda bureau's instructions. Parents and volunteers who have questioned authorities have been detained and threatened."

However, Reuters reported in June that, to date, Chinese prosecutors have joined an official inquiry into ten collapsed schools during May's devastating earthquake to gain first-hand material of construction quality at the collapsed schools, launch preliminary inquiries and prepare for possible investigations into professional crime. It was also reported that safety checks were to be carried out at schools across China after last month's earthquake.

"The New York Times" reported that "government officials in Beijing and Sichuan have said they are investigating the collapses. In an acknowledgment of the weakness of building codes in the countryside, the National Development and Reform Commission said on May 27 that it had drafted an amendment to improve construction standards for primary and middle schools in rural areas. Experts are reviewing the draft, the commission said." To limit protests, officials pushed parents to sign a document, which forbade them from holding protests, in exchange of money, but some who refused to sign were threatened. The payment amounts varied from school to school but were approximately the same. In Hanwang, parents were offered a package valued at 8,800 USD in cash and a per-parent pension of nearly 5,600 USD. Furthermore, officials used other methods of silencing: riot police officers broke up protests by parents; the authorities set up cordons around the schools; and officials ordered the Chinese news media to stop reporting on school collapses.

Besides parents, Liu Shaokun (), a Sichuan school teacher, was detained on June 25, 2008, for "disseminating rumors and destroying social order" about the Sichuan earthquake. Liu’s family was later told that he was being investigated on suspicion of the crime of inciting subversion. Liu had travelled to the Shifang, taken photos of collapsed school buildings, and put them online. He had also expressed his anger at “the shoddy tofu-dregs buildings” () in a media interview. He was ordered to serve one year of re-education through labor (RTL). According to the organization Human Rights in China, Liu has been released to serve his RTL sentence outside of the labor camp.

On May 15, 2008 Geoffery York of the Globeandmail.com reported that the shoddily constructed buildings are commonly called "tofu buildings" because builders cut corners by replacing steel rods with thin iron wires for concrete re-inforcement; using inferior grade cement, if any at all; and using fewer bricks than they should. One local was quoted in the article as saying that "the supervising agencies did not check to see if it met the national standards."

In January 2010, Hong Kong-based English newspaper "The Standard" reported that writer Tan Zuoren attempted to document shoddy construction that may have led to massive casualties in schools, was sentenced to in prison ostensibly for his writing an article in 2007 in support of the pro-democracy movement in 1989.

Because of the magnitude of the quake, and the media attention on China, foreign nations and organizations immediately responded to the disaster by offering condolences and assistance. On May 14, UNICEF reported that China formally requested the support of the international community to respond to the needs of affected families.

By May 14, the Ministry of Civil Affairs stated that 10.7 billion yuan (approximately US$1.5 billion) had been donated by the Chinese public. Houston Rockets center Yao Ming, one of the country's most popular sports icons, gave $214,000 and $71,000 to the Red Cross Society of China. The association has also collected a total of $26 million in donations. Other multinational firms located in China have also announced large amounts of donations.

The Red Cross Society of China flew 557 tents and 2,500 quilts valued at 788,000 yuan (US$113,000) to Wenchuan County. The Amity Foundation already began relief work in the region and has earmarked US$143,000 for disaster relief. The Sichuan Ministry of Civil Affairs said that they have provided 30,000 tents for those left homeless.

Central State-owned enterprises have accumulatively donated more than $48.6 million. China National Petroleum Corp and Sinopec donated 10 million yuan each to the disaster area.

Following the earthquake, donations were made by people from all over mainland China, with booths set up in schools, at banks, and around gas stations. People also donated blood, resulting in according to Xinhua long line-ups in most major Chinese cities. Many donated through text messaging on mobile phones to accounts set up by China Unicom and China Mobile By May 16, the Chinese government had allocated a total of $772 million for earthquake relief so far, up sharply from $159 million from May 14.

On May 16 China stated it had also received $457 million in donated money and goods for rescue efforts so far, including $83 million from 19 countries and four international organizations. Saudi Arabia was the largest aid donor to China, providing close to €40,000,000 in financial assistance, and an additional €8,000,000 worth of relief materials.

On May 12, 2009, China marked the first anniversary of the quake with a moment of silence as people across the nation remembered the dead. The government also opened access to the sealed ruins of the Beichuan county seat for three days, after which it will be frozen in time as a state earthquake relic museum, to remind people of the terrible disaster. There were also several concerts across the country to raise money for the survivors of the quake.

In 2008, State Council established a counterpart support plan (《汶川地震灾后恢复重建对口支援方案》). The plan is to arrange 19 eastern and central provinces and municipalities to help 18 counties, on "one province to one affected county" basis. The plan spanned 3 years, and cost no less than one percent of the province or municipality's budget.

In 2012, vice governor Wei Hong announced that the restoration and reconstruction are completed:

Wei said that 99.5 percent of the budget, or 865.8 billion yuan (137.5 billion U.S. dollars), has been invested in post-quake reconstruction efforts, and 99 percent of 29,692 related projects have been completed. . . . Local governments have successfully helped more than 12 million people in rural and urban areas repair their houses, and have relocated 200,000 farmers who lost their farmlands, the vice governor added.

The earthquake was the worst to strike the Sichuan area in over 30 years. Following the quake, experts and the general public sought information on whether or not the earthquake could have been predicted in advance, and whether or not studying statistics related to the quake could result in better prediction of earthquakes in the future. Earthquake prediction is not yet established science; there was no consensus within the scientific community that earthquake "prediction" is possible.

In 2002, Chinese geologist Chen Xuezhong published a "Seismic Risk Analysis" study in which he came to the conclusion that beginning with 2003, attention should be paid to the possibility of an earthquake with a magnitude of over 7.0 occurring in Sichuan region. He based his study on statistical correlation. That Sichuan is a seismically active area has been discussed for years prior to the quake, though few studies point to a specific date and time.

In a press conference held by the State Council Information Office the day after the earthquake, geologist Zhang Xiaodong, deputy director of CEA's Seismic Monitoring Network Center, restated that earthquake prediction was a global issue, in the sense that no proven methods exist, and that no prediction notification was received before the earthquake. Seismologist Gary Gibson of Monash University in Australia told Deutsche Presse-Agentur that he also did not see anything that could be regarded as having 'predicted' the earthquake's occurrence.

The earthquake also provided opportunities for researchers to retrofit data in order to model future earthquake predictions. Using data from the Intermagnet Lanzhou geomagnetic observatory, geologists Lazo Pekevski from the Ss. Cyril and Methodius University of Skopje in Macedonia and Strachimir Mavrodiev from the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences attempted to establish a "time prediction method" through collecting statistics on geomagnetism with tidal gravitational potential. Using this method, they were said to have predicted the time of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake with an accuracy of ±1 day. The same study, however, acknowledges the limitation of earthquake prediction models, and does not mention that the "location" of the quake could be accurately predicted.

An article in "Science" suggested that the construction and filling of the Zipingpu Dam may have triggered the earthquake. The chief engineer of the Sichuan Geology and Mineral Bureau said that the sudden shift of a huge quantity of water into the region could have relaxed the tension between the two sides of the fault, allowing them to move apart, and could have increased the direct pressure on it, causing a violent rupture. The effect was "25 times more" than a year's worth of natural stress from tectonic movement. The government had disregarded warnings about so many large-scale dam projects in a seismically active area. Researchers have been denied access to seismological and geological data to examine the cause of the quake further.

Malaysia-based "Yazhou Zhoukan" conducted an interview with former researcher at the China Seismological Bureau Geng Qingguo (耿庆国), in which Geng claimed that a confidential written report was sent to the State Seismological Bureau on April 30, 2008, warning about the possible occurrence of a significant earthquake in Ngawa Prefecture region of Sichuan around May 8, with a range of 10 days before or after the quake. Geng, while acknowledging that earthquake prediction was broadly considered problematic by the scientific community, believed that "the bigger the earthquake, the easier it is to predict." Geng had long attempted to establish a correlation between the occurrence of droughts and earthquakes; Premier Zhou Enlai reportedly took an interest in Geng's work. Geng's drought-earthquake correlation theory was first released in 1972, and said to have successfully predicted the 1975 Haicheng and 1976 Tangshan earthquakes. The same "Yazhou Zhoukan" article pointed out the inherent difficulties associated with predicting earthquakes. In response, an official with the Seismological Bureau stated that "earthquake prediction is widely acknowledged around the world to be difficult from a scientific standpoint." The official also denied that the Seismological Bureau had received reports predicting the earthquake.




</doc>
<doc id="17924964" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17924964" title="First Battle of Maryang-san">
First Battle of Maryang-san

The First Battle of Maryang San (3–8 October 1951), also known as the Defensive Battle of Maliangshan (), was fought during the Korean War between United Nations (UN) forces—primarily Australian and British—and the Chinese communist People's Volunteer Army. The fighting occurred during a limited UN offensive by US I Corps, codenamed Operation Commando. This offensive ultimately pushed the Chinese back from the Imjin River to the Jamestown Line and destroyed elements of four Chinese armies following heavy fighting. The much smaller battle at Maryang San took place over a five-day period, and saw the 3rd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment (3 RAR) dislodge a numerically superior Chinese force from the tactically important Kowang-San (Hill 355) and Maryang San (Hill 317) features, in conjunction with other units of the 1st Commonwealth Division.

Using tactics first developed against the Japanese in New Guinea during the Second World War, the Australians gained the advantage of the high ground and assaulted the Chinese positions from unexpected directions. They then repelled repeated Chinese counterattacks aimed at re-capturing Maryang San, with both sides suffering heavy casualties before the Australians were finally relieved by a British battalion. However, with the peace-talks ongoing, these operations proved to be the last actions in the war of manoeuvre, which had lasted the previous sixteen months. It was replaced by a static war characterised by fixed defences reminiscent of the Western Front in 1915–17. A month later, the Chinese re-captured Maryang San during fierce fighting, and it was never re-gained. Today, the battle is widely regarded as one of the Australian Army's greatest accomplishments during the war.

Following General of the Army Douglas MacArthur's dismissal as Commander-in-Chief of UN forces in Korea, he was replaced by General Matthew B. Ridgway. Consequently, on 14 April 1951, General James Van Fleet replaced Ridgway as commander of the US Eighth Army and the United Nations ground forces in Korea. The Chinese Spring Offensive during April and May 1951 ended in its defeat, while following two months of sporadic operations in mid-June and August, the war entered a new phase, with Van Fleet returning to the offensive. In July the Kansas and Wyoming Lines were strengthened, while a limited offensive in the east-central sector in mid-August seized the high ground around the Punchbowl and Bloody Ridge during the Battle of Bloody Ridge. In September the offensive in this sector continued, targeting the next hill complex north of Bloody Ridge, known as Heartbreak Ridge.

Meanwhile, the organisation of British Commonwealth ground forces fighting in Korea as part of the United Nations Command had undergone considerable change in the months following the battles of the Imjin River and Kapyong in late-April 1951. 3 RAR had been transferred from 27th British Infantry Brigade to the 28th British Commonwealth Brigade when that formation departed for Hong Kong. Meanwhile, after protracted negotiations between the governments of Australia, Britain, Canada, India, New Zealand and South Africa, agreement had been reached to establish an integrated formation with the aim of increasing the political significance of their contribution, as well as facilitating the solution of the logistic and operational problems faced by the various Commonwealth contingents.

The 1st Commonwealth Division was formed on 28 July 1951, with the division including the 25th Canadian, 28th British Commonwealth and 29th British infantry brigades under the command of Major General James Cassels, and was part of US I Corps. Since its formation, the division had occupied part of the west-central sector of the UN line, approximately north of the capital Seoul. The 28th Brigade included three infantry battalions—the 1st Battalion, King's Own Scottish Borderers (1 KOSB), 1st Battalion, King's Shropshire Light Infantry (1 KSLI) and the 3rd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment—under the command of Brigadier George Taylor. During this period 3 RAR was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Francis Hassett. Peace-talks at Kaesong during July and September led to a lull in the fighting and 3 RAR undertook mainly defensive duties, helping to construct the defences of the Kansas Line south of the Imjin River, as well as conducting extensive patrolling on the northern side. The battalion also used the reduced operational tempo as an opportunity to train reinforcements. The period culminated in a limited, and largely unopposed, divisional advance north of the Imjin to the Wyoming Line, codenamed Operation Minden, in September.

In late-September and early-October—even while continuing the attack against Heartbreak Ridge—Van Fleet developed a plan for a limited offensive in the western section, known as Operation Commando, to advance north of the 38th parallel, with the aim of pushing Chinese forces back and giving United Nations forces more leverage at the truce negotiations now occurring at Panmunjom. Operation Commando was scheduled for 3–5 October 1951 and the US I Corps commander, Lieutenant General John W. O'Daniel, envisioned a concept of operations in which three of the corps' four divisions would advance on a broad front in conjunction with US 25th Infantry Division on the left flank of the neighbouring US IX Corps, seizing a new defensive line known as the Jamestown Line. The divisions to be used in the advance included the 1st Commonwealth Division, US 1st Cavalry Division and the 9th South Korean Division. The 1st South Korean Division would remain in its existing position on the left flank.

In the sector occupied by 1st Commonwealth Division, Chinese communist forces were dug into a group of hills overlooking the Imjin River. The division faced 6,000 troops from the Chinese 191st Division, 64th Army under the overall command of Xie Zhengrong. The Chinese forces were divided into three regiments of about 2,000 men each, with two regiments dug-in in well prepared defensive positions with overhead protection, and a third regiment in support. The 28th Brigade faced one of the two forward regiments—the 571st Regiment—which was deployed with one battalion on Hill 355, a second battalion astride Hill 217 and Hill 317, and a third battalion in reserve to the west.

The task allocated to the British Commonwealth force was to take these positions with the intention of advancing the line from the southern bank of the Imjin to a line of hills to the north, in total an objective that stretched more than . The primary objectives of the advance would be the capture of Kowang-San (Hill 355) and Maryang San (Hill 317) and the task of taking these positions was allocated to the 28th British Commonwealth Brigade, with this formation bearing the brunt of the fighting. Cassels planned on capturing the Jamestown Line in three phases. In the first phase, scheduled for 3 October, the 28th Brigade would take Hill 355 in the east-central sector. During the second phase, on 4 October, the 25th Brigade would assault the two Hill 187 features and the south-western ridge running to the Samichon River. Lastly during the third phase, scheduled for 5 October, the 28th Brigade would capture Hills 217 and 317. As such, the bulk of the division's strength would be concentrated on the right flank, to be held by the 28th Brigade; meanwhile, the 25th Brigade would hold the left flank and the 29th Brigade would be held in reserve while providing a battalion to each of the other brigades as reinforcements.

Kowang-San would be assaulted during the first phase by 1 KOSB with 1 KSLI and 3 RAR in support, while Maryang San would be taken in the third phase of the operation by 3 RAR and the 1st Battalion, Royal Northumberland Fusiliers (1 RNF), who were under commander from 29th Brigade for the duration of Operation Commando. Careful reconnaissance and planning took place in the week prior to the commencement of the operation and Taylor emphasised the use of indirect fires, air support and infiltration tactics to limit casualties, as well as the exploitation of weak points in the Chinese defences. In direct support of the brigade was 16th Field Regiment, Royal New Zealand Artillery with its 25-pounder field guns, in addition to divisional and corps assets which included mortars, howitzers and heavy artillery; in total more than 120 guns and mortars. Also in support were two British Centurion tank squadrons from the 8th Royal Irish Hussars.

Given the primary task of capturing Hill 317, Hassett studied the approaches from the air and the ground. Two previous attempts to take Maryang San by American troops had been unsuccessful. Regardless, utilising tactics first developed against the Japanese in New Guinea during the Second World War of running along the tops of ridges, he intended to gain the advantage of the high ground, while utilising the cover afforded by the vegetation and the ease of movement along the crest-lines, in order to assault the Chinese positions from unexpected directions. Meanwhile, the Chinese defenders on Maryang San were also testing a newly developed tactic called the "mobile positional defense", in which only small units were stationed on the hills in order to exhaust the UN attackers, while the bulk of the Chinese defenders would later counterattack before the UN forces could consolidate into their newly gained positions.

However, during the first phase of the operation the Australians would be tasked with capturing a Chinese outpost on Hill 199 to allow tanks and medium machine-guns to provide direct fires onto the northern and eastern slopes of Hill 355 in support of an attack by the Borderers from the south-east. Likewise, the Shropshires would assault and capture Hill 208. Finally then, two days before the start of Operation Commando, the 28th Brigade crossed the Imjin river to assemble behind the 25th Brigade on 1 October. The following day the 3 RAR, less D Company, and the Borderers moved forward carefully into their assembly areas, ready to advance the following morning. C Company advanced to a position in front of the Canadian positions, north-east of Hill 355. B Company was to the rear. In the afternoon C Company was subjected to heavy shelling, losing one soldier wounded. D Company—under the command of Major Basil Hardiman—was detached to 25th Brigade to strengthen its extended front, and it would not be available until the afternoon of 3 October. 

At 03:00 on 3 October, B Company 3 RAR moved north toward Hill 199, crossing the open valley under the cover of darkness and heavy mist. A Company then moved up behind C Company. Artillery and mortar fire targeted known Chinese artillery positions with counter-battery fire prior to dawn, before switching to support the Borderers in their assault on Hill 355. Simultaneously, the Shropshires were assaulting Hill 208 and with the support of A Squadron, 8th Royal Irish Hussars they reached the positions without opposition by 06:00. By 08:00 B Company had gained the high ground to the north and then proceeded to patrol the short distance to west to the objective which was then taken with three wounded; five Chinese were killed and one captured. By mid-morning, both the Shropshires and the Australians had successfully captured their objectives.

Expecting a counter-attack, the Australians on Hill 199 began digging-in, however no such attack occurred. D Company subsequently returned and was allocated a position between C Company and the Borderers. C and B Companies both received shelling during the day, wounding two men. At 10:00 A Company—under Captain Jim Shelton—took over the defence of Hill 199, and B Company went into reserve behind A Company. According to plan a troop of Centurion tanks and a section of medium machine-guns were then moved up onto Hill 199 and began directing their fire onto the northern slopes of Hill 355 in support of the Borderers. Meanwhile, at 07:15, following preparation by artillery and mortar fire, the lead British assault companies had begun to advance on Hill 355. However, with the Chinese expecting an assault from that direction, the initial British moves met strong resistance and the Borderers were forced to withdraw and reorganise. At 14:15 a second assault reached the objectives on the lower slopes, and these gains were consolidated by nightfall.

The attack was now behind schedule. Indeed, the Borderers were still more than short of their final objective, and with stubborn resistance being encountered during the initial phase, Hill 355 would now not be secured until the afternoon of 4 October. The assault was being slowed by two positions on the northeast slopes of Hill 355—known as Hill 220—from which the Chinese held the British right flank in enfilade. C Company 3 RAR would be detached to assist the attack on Kowang-San the next morning, with the Australians tasked with outflanking the Chinese defences and capturing this position. Heavy Chinese artillery fire had also slowed progress with more than 2,500 rounds falling in the 28th Brigade area in the previous twenty-four hours, although this total was dwarfed many times over by the weight of allied artillery fired across the brigade front, which included 22,324 rounds. On the division's left flank, the delay also meant that the Canadian attack scheduled for 06:00 the next day in the 25th Brigade sector would have to be postponed until 11:00, due to the continuing requirement to use the divisional artillery in support of 28th Brigade.

On 4 October, C Company 3 RAR—under the command of Major Jack Gerke—attacked the long spur running east from the peak of Hill 355, known as Hill 220. Launching their assault at 09:00, the Australians quickly killed or drove off the defenders before pressing on up the spur and routing the remainder of a Chinese company. Reaching their objectives by 10:00, the Australians then took advantage of the initiative gained so far, pushing a platoon towards the summit of Hill 355. Amid heavy fighting, the Australians cleared the eastern slopes of Kowang-San by 12:00, despite having received no orders to do so. Thirteen Chinese were killed and three captured in the fighting, while Australian casualties included 11 wounded, one of whom subsequently died. Gerke was later awarded the Distinguished Service Order (DSO) for his leadership. C Company withdrew to the rear of the 3 RAR position and were replaced by D Company, who occupied the position held by A Company north of Hill 199. Meanwhile, led by a bagpiper, the Borderers made a simultaneous assault up the western face of Kowang-San, and fearing they may be caught between two attacks the Chinese defenders abandoned Hill 355, withdrawing northwest under heavy indirect fire.

Given the strong resistance exhibited by the Chinese, the Canadians expected a tough fight as 25th Brigade prepared to assault its objectives as part of the second phase of the divisional plan. Yet with the loss of Hill 355 and 210 the Chinese unexpectedly withdrew from their well-prepared defensive positions, with Hill 159 and 175 captured without opposition. Only the 2nd Battalion, Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry encountered any opposition before they captured the two Hill 187 features, losing one killed and six wounded during stiff fighting in which 28 Chinese were also killed. Indeed, the ease with which the Canadians had captured their initial objectives allowed them to press on, attaining their final objectives on the Jamestown Line by nightfall. No further resistance was encountered, although heavy Chinese artillery fire caused a number of casualties, including three killed. The Canadians subsequently occupied the positions they were destined to hold for the next twenty-two months of fighting.

Meanwhile, on the 28th Brigade's left flank the Shropshires met slight resistance, securing Hill 210 southwest of Kowang-San by 10:10. They were then relieved by the Canadians by nightfall in preparation for the third phase of the operation. The brigade plan was now a day behind schedule, although with the unexpected ease experienced by the Canadians, overall, the divisional attack was still running according to plan. However, determined to hold on following the loss of Hill 355, the Chinese moved in fresh troops, heavily reinforcing a number of positions, including Maryang San.

The final objective was Maryang San, a steep hill rising above the valley about north of Hill 355. However, following the delay in capturing Hill 355, Hassett would not be ready to implement his plan until early the next day. As such the third phase would begin on 5 October, with the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers scheduled to attack an intermediate objective—Hill 217, adjacent Kowang-San—before assisting the Australians assault Hill 317. The Australians moved into position northeast of Hill 199 on the afternoon of 4 October, while over the night of 4/5 October the divisional artillery hit Chinese positions, with two batteries of howitzers and another two batteries supplementing them. Air strikes by the Mustangs of No. 2 Squadron, South African Air Force were also planned, targeting Chinese concentrations north and west of the objectives to cut-off supplies and reinforcements. Both the Australians and Fusiliers were scheduled to begin their attacks at first light—at 05:45—following a heavy artillery preparation.

In the dark the Fusiliers moved off, but amid dense fog they found it difficult to maintain their bearings and were not in position in time to commence the attack as planned. By 10:00 they had struggled to within from their objective, and following further delays the assault was commenced at 11:00. After initially achieving surprise a number of the forward Chinese outposts fell to the Fusiliers. Occupying strong defensive positions on Hill 217, the Chinese regained the initiative however, and poured heavy machine-gun and rifle fire onto the attackers as they crossed the valley, forcing them to withdraw after suffering heavy casualties and running low on ammunition. Having expected the main axis of assault from the south, the Chinese positions were stronger than previously considered and the Fusiliers were unable to gain the summit, despite one company gaining a toehold on the summit by midday.

Earlier that morning, at 04:45, B and D Companies 3 RAR had moved north across the valley, while Anti-Tank Platoon crossed the Imjin, taking up positions further north in order to protect the right flank. The assaulting companies would then move west towards a series of objectives before assaulting Hill 317. Initially 3 RAR was to attack from the east, while 1 RNF would attack from the southwest through Hill 217, however with the Fusiliers facing stiff resistance on Hill 217 itself they were unable to get forward to assist. The previous attempts to capture Maryang San had failed due to the approach to steep eastern slopes of the feature being across a wide, open valley that was dominated by enfilade fire from mutually supporting Chinese positions. Consequently, the Australians planned to cross the valley under cover of darkness and position themselves on the Chinese flank in the foothills, before scaling the position at first light. A Company would create a diversion on the left flank, while B Company would clear the lower slopes before D Company passed through to assault the Chinese main defensive position, known as the 'Victor' feature, in a one-up, one-in-depth assault. However, following the casualties of previous nights on Hill 199, 220 and 355, and the effect of constant shelling, 3 RAR was now reduced to just 320 men. In contrast, the Australians faced two fresh Chinese battalions on Maryang San, in total about 1,200 men. 

B Company—commanded by Captain Henry Nicholls—led off shrouded in the heavy mist, and with visibility limited in the thick vegetation, it drifted to the right off the intended axis of advance having lost direction, suffering a similar fate as the Fusiliers. Disorientated, the assaulting companies became separated and the battalion attack turned into a series of independent company attacks. D Company slowly continued forward however, and when the mist lifted suddenly at 11:20 they were left dangerously exposed still only halfway up the slope to their objective. The Australian approach had surprised the Chinese however, who were apparently expecting the assault from the north, and D Company succeeded in closing to within grenade range of the Chinese on Victor. During a fierce twenty-minute fire-fight the Australians cleared their first objective with the assistance of direct fire from supporting tanks, and indirect fire support from artillery, losing three killed and 12 wounded. Included among the Australian wounded was the company commander and one of the platoon commanders, both of whom remained in command despite gunshot wounds. Chinese losses included 30 killed and 10 captured.

During the initial phase A Company had attacked southwest along a spur leading to Hill 317 and had met stiff opposition. The diversion was largely successful however, causing the Chinese to reinforce against the attack, which they believed to be the main effort. Meanwhile, D Company continued to press their attack along the high ground towards the 'Uniform' feature, assaulting the deeply entrenched Chinese positions, which included heavy automatic weapons. By 16:00 it had successfully captured the last of the intermediate objectives assigned to it and a platoon from B Company was pushed forward to assist in the clearance of the feature. Later, Lieutenant L.G. Clark was awarded the Military Cross while Sergeant W.J. Rowlinson was awarded a bar to his Distinguished Conduct Medal for their actions during the fighting. By this time total Chinese casualties included 98 killed and 40 captured, while the Australians believed that a large number of Chinese had also been wounded. Following the progress of B and D Companies, C Company was moved up behind them and with the capture of final objective they immediately commenced an assault on Hill 317, capturing 10 prisoners for no loss. Although the Chinese had been well dug-in, there were no barbed wire obstacles to hamper the attackers and the Australians had rapidly gained the position. By 17:00, Maryang San had fallen to the Australians, with the Chinese withdrawing under heavy artillery, mortar and machine-gun fire.

On Hill 217 the Fusiliers had maintained the pressure on the Chinese throughout the day, however they were still unable to capture the feature. Regardless, the efforts of the Fusiliers in conjunction with A Company's diversionary attack and the rapid advance of D Company with tank and artillery support had carried the day. A Company continued to attack against heavy opposition and indirect fire, slowly pushing the Chinese defenders back. Later, a platoon was detached to assist C Company consolidate the defence of Maryang San following its capture, while the remaining two platoons were withdrawn rearwards, again under heavy artillery fire. Indeed, although it had played a supporting role in the attack, the efforts of A Company had been vital, suffering 20 casualties while killing at least 25 Chinese and capturing two. Now with Maryang San captured the Australians began digging-in, modifying the south-facing linear Chinese trench system into an all-round defensive position with mutually supporting weapons pits. Fully expecting a Chinese counter-attack that evening, Hasset moved the Assault Pioneer Platoon to bolster the hasty defences. Meanwhile, the Chinese still occupied three key ridgeline positions—the 'Sierra' feature, the 'Hinge' and the summit of Hill 317 itself—which they continued to furiously defend. These would be the scene of considerable fighting in the days to come as the Australians attempted to clear them.

With both sides exhausted from the fighting the night of 5/6 October was less eventful than expected, and the Australians used the opportunity to develop their position. To add further depth to their defences and to probe the Chinese positions, Taylor ordered the Australians to capture the central remaining Chinese position, the Sierra feature—a wooded knoll halfway between the summit of Maryang San and the Hinge—the next day. Meanwhile, the Fusiliers would renew their attack on Hill 217. The southern approach to Hill 217 had proved to be too strongly defended by the Chinese and it became obvious that if it was to be overcome Taylor would need to split the fire of its defenders. To do this the high ground to the north-west of Maryang San, known as the Hinge, would be vital. Indeed, adjacent to Hill 217, the Hinge dominated it from the north. As such for the next assault, planned for the morning, the Fusiliers would detach their reserve company to attack the Hinge from the east, using the Australian positions on Maryang San as a firm base and thereby allowing them to outflank their opponents on Hill 217.

At 07:00 on 6 October, 9 Platoon C Company—under the command of Lieutenant Arthur Pembroke—moved forward to Sierra, using the heavy mist to conceal their movements. Under-strength and not expecting the feature to be occupied, instead the Australians found a large number of Chinese in well prepared defensive positions. Without fire support and outnumbered, the Australians immediately conducted a quick attack and, using grenades and bayonets, they inflicted heavy casualties on the Chinese before forcing the survivors to withdraw. Although subjected to constant shelling, 9 Platoon continued to hold the knoll, repelling several counterattacks over the next 13 hours, cutting down each assault through the tree-line and long grass with accurate rifle and machine-gun fire, forcing the Chinese to withdraw leaving their dead and wounded behind. One Australian was killed in the initial assault on Sierra, while a number were later wounded during the defence. Chinese casualties included 19 killed, 30 wounded and seven captured. Pembroke was later awarded the Military Cross.

During the day the Fusiliers again assaulted Hill 217 from the south, and attempted to work their way around the eastern and western flanks of the feature. Despite preparation by the divisional artillery and the 3 RAR Machine Gun Platoon firing their Vickers medium machine-guns in support from Maryang San, the Fusiliers were unable to make progress due to Chinese machine-guns located in bunkers at the top of their objective. Meanwhile, their flanking movements were also blocked by Chinese small arms and grenades. 1 RNF had now taken over 100 casualties during two days of fighting and by the afternoon they were a spent force. Sensing the Fusiliers' weakness, the Chinese then launched their own assault, forcing them to withdraw in contact. Previous plans for an assault on the Hinge had not occurred due to issues with resupply and the dangerous approach march that would have been required. Again, despite their efforts, the Fusiliers had failed to capture their objective. It seemed that the only way to finally secure Hill 217 was along the ridge from Hill 317, via the Hinge, and as such the Australians would be tasked with capturing the Hinge the following day. B Company was subsequently allocated the attack. In preparation, they ascended Hill 317 late in the afternoon of 6 October, finally securing the crest, and at last light joined 9 Platoon on the knoll northwest of the summit where they would form up the next day to conduct the assault.

In the early hours of 7 October the allied artillery and mortar bombardment began, targeting Chinese positions on the Hinge. Hassett moved the 3 RAR tactical headquarters on to Hill 317 just before the assaulting troops stepped off the line of departure, allowing him to direct the battle from a forward position and to co-ordinate fire support. Waiting for the fog to lift so that the artillery could fire until the last safe moment, the attack finally began at 08:00. B Company moved off down the ridgeline, with two-up and one-in-depth, using the trees and long grass for concealment. Initially it seemed that the Chinese had withdrawn during the night, when suddenly the lead Australian platoons were engulfed by small arms fire from their rear. A series of intense fire-fights ensued as the Australians fought back and by 09:20 the Hinge finally fell, with the Australians losing two killed and 20 wounded. Chinese casualties included more than 20 killed. As a result of the fighting Captain Henry Nicholls and Lieutenant Jim Hughes were awarded the Military Cross, while Corporal J. Park and Corporal E.F. Bosworth were awarded the Military Medal. Yet even as the surviving Chinese withdrew, artillery and mortar fire began to fall on the Hinge. B Company moved quickly to consolidate the position, but were hampered by the shelling, while they now faced a pressing shortage of ammunition and difficulties evacuating their casualties.

For the remainder of the day B Company was subjected to intense indirect fire on the Hinge, as was C Company on Hill 317. The Anti-Tank Platoon and Assault Pioneer Platoon reinforced C Company, with a platoon of C Company moved forward to the Hinge to support B Company. At 20:00 both the Hinge and Hill 317 were again heavily shelled for 45 minutes, heralding the beginning of the inevitable Chinese counterattack. Heavy mist concealed the Chinese advance, and this assisted many to penetrate the Australian perimeter. Throughout the night of 7/8 October the Hinge was attacked on three occasions from both the front and the flanks by a force of battalion strength, however the Australians beat back the Chinese in desperate hand-to-hand combat. The Chinese swept forward, but were stopped by intense small arms and artillery fire. During one such assault Sergeant P.J. O'Connell, on seeing one of his platoon's Bren gunners wounded, manned the light machine-gun himself, breaking up a Chinese assault, while controlling the fire of the men around him. Meanwhile, Sergeant R.W. Strong arranged the resupply of ammunition to the forward Australian sections. Both were awarded the Military Medal.

The intensity of the fighting had led to a severe shortage of ammunition among the defenders, and attempts to resupply the Australians were plagued by heavy shelling. The use of salvaged ammunition stabilised the situation momentarily after one of B Company's two Vickers medium machine-guns was destroyed by Chinese shelling, and its ammunition belts were subsequently broken up and dispersed among the riflemen. However, this soon resulted in a large number of mechanical failures and weapon stoppages, causing additional problems for the defenders. The evacuation of casualties was again an issue, and the Assault Pioneer Platoon—commanded by Lieutenant Jock McCormick—was used as stretcher bearers and to run ammunition forward, as were a number of the other specialist platoons. Their ammunition nearly exhausted, the Australians resorted to kicking and strangling many of the attacking Chinese during the brutal fighting. Fearing the Australians would be overwhelmed by the persistent Chinese attacks, Taylor ordered the Borderers and Shropshires to detach their Korean porters to resupply the Australians, while a full divisional concentration of artillery was fired in support of 3 RAR.

Ultimately, B Company succeeded in holding their hastily constructed defensive positions throughout the night and until 05:00 on 8 October when the Chinese finally gave up. In order to preserve its remaining strength, the Chinese 191st Division was forced to pull back by , surrendering the control of Hill 217 without a fight. At first light more than 120 Chinese dead and wounded lay around the Australian defences and in contrast to the savage fighting during the night, Chinese stretcher parties were allowed to come forward and collect their wounded under a flag of truce. The Australians had been victorious but were now exhausted after five days of heavy fighting.

Four hours later, at 09:00, 3 RAR was relieved on Maryang San and the Hinge by the Borderers, having lost 20 killed and 104 wounded. Chinese casualties on Hill 317 had been severe, with 283 killed (determined by body count) and another 50 captured. Later it was estimated that the Australians had destroyed at least two Chinese battalions during the five-day battle. 1 RNF once more advanced against Hill 217, this time without opposition, sending patrols to confirm that the Chinese had withdrawn. They were met by patrols from 1 KOSB on the Hinge, with the Borderers taking control of the area at 11:00. Hill 217 was latter occupied on 9 October by the Borderers. The 3 RAR Assault Pioneer Platoon, the Anti-Tank Platoon and a platoon from C Company remained on Maryang San however, and during the evening of 8/9 October the Pioneers killed four Chinese during a probe on their position. They were finally relieved on 9 October. For his leadership, Hassett was immediately awarded the DSO, while a number of awards were also made to others that had distinguished themselves during the fighting. The Royal Australian Regiment was subsequently granted the battle honours "Kowang-San" and "Maryang San". Today, the First Battle of Maryang San is widely regarded as one of the Australian Army's greatest accomplishments of the Korean War.

During the battle, the British Commonwealth logistic system proved robust enough to bear the strain of the fighting without serious disruption, although problems were experienced. Despite difficulties, an adequate flow of ammunition, equipment, food and water was maintained, although there were occasions when the Australians endured thirst and hunger for several hours. 3 RAR used 900,000 rounds of small arms, 5,000 grenades and 7,000 mortar rounds during the five-day battle, all of which was moved in man-packable loads by Korean Service Corps porters and Australian soldiers over long distances and extreme terrain, often while under fire. These resupply operations had required considerable effort and bravery to effect, and a number of Korean porters were killed and wounded at Maryang San.

Indeed, the evacuation of casualties and the resupply of ammunition at times proved problematic, and heavy shelling and sniper fire disrupted stretcher parties and porters on a number of occasions, resulting in the forward companies running short of ammunition. Meanwhile, the quality of support given to the British and Australian infantry by the artillery and tanks was of a high standard and proved a critical factor. Indeed, the tanks had often operated in terrain to which they were unsuited, while the New Zealand gunners had fired over 50,000 rounds in direct support of 3 RAR, blistering the paint off the barrels of their guns. Air support, including that provided by the South African Mustangs, had been important throughout.

The battle was also noted for the pioneering use of tunnel warfare by the Chinese in the Korean War. During the fighting, a company of Chinese soldiers had defended their positions from a U-shaped tunnel capable of housing 100 men, which had served as both a bomb shelter and a base for counterattacks. The company leader later claimed that the tunnel enabled the defenders to inflict 700 UN casualties while suffering only 21 casualties in return. Impressed by the report, the commander of the People's Volunteer Army, Peng Dehuai, later ordered the construction of deep tunnels along the entire front line, and it formed a formidable obstacle for UN forces to overcome during the stalemate period.

Operation Commando finally ended on 15 October with the US I Corps having successfully seized the Jamestown Line and destroying elements of the 42nd, 47th, 64th and 65th Chinese Armies. Chinese losses were estimated at 21,000 casualties, while UN losses were 4,000—the majority of them in the US 1st Cavalry Division which had borne the brunt of the fighting. Although a few hills south of the line remained in communist hands—requiring a follow-up operation known as Operation Polecharge which succeeded in capturing these positions by 19 October—UN supply lines near Seoul were now free from Chinese interdiction. With the peace-talks ongoing, these operations proved to be last actions in the war of manoeuvre, which had lasted the previous sixteen months. It was replaced by a static war characterised by fixed defences, trench lines, bunkers, patrols, wiring parties and minefields reminiscent of the Western Front in 1915–17. Construction of defensive localities began almost immediately, although such operations were confined to the reverse slopes during the day due to artillery and mortar fire which made such operations hazardous. Patrolling forward of the Jamestown Line also began in order to prevent the Chinese from gaining control of no mans land. Yet even as the war became a contest of positional warfare and attrition, growing western political sensitivities ensured that UN commanders were increasingly mindful of limiting casualties.

Total casualties among the 1st Commonwealth Division during Operation Commando amounted to 58 killed and 262 wounded, the bulk of which had occurred during the fighting for Hill 217 and Hill 317. Indeed, in addition to the heavy casualties suffered by 3 RAR, 1 RNF had lost 16 killed and 94 wounded. The Chinese 64th Army later received a commendation for keeping their casualties "light", despite some estimates placing its casualties at higher than 3,000. Throughout the operation 3 RAR had played a crucial role, and in a bold series of holding and flanking movements, coordinated with accurate and sustained artillery and direct tank fire, it had driven the Chinese from both Kowang-San and Maryang San. They had then held the key position against several unsuccessful counterattacks before forcing the Chinese to retire. A month later Maryang San was subsequently retaken by the Chinese from the Borderers amid fierce fighting at the Second Battle of Maryang San, for which Private Bill Speakman was later awarded the Victoria Cross. It was not re-gained, and remained in Chinese hands until the end of the war.

Footnotes
Citations



</doc>
<doc id="18024460" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18024460" title="1998 North Indian Ocean cyclone season">
1998 North Indian Ocean cyclone season

The 1998 North Indian Ocean cyclone season was an active season in annual cycle of tropical cyclone formation. The season has no official bounds but cyclones tend to form between April and December. These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northern Indian Ocean. There are two main seas in the North Indian Ocean—the Bay of Bengal to the east of the Indian subcontinent and the Arabian Sea to the west of India. The official Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre in this basin is the India Meteorological Department (IMD), while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center releases unofficial advisories. An average of four to six storms form in the North Indian Ocean every season with peaks in May and November. Cyclones occurring between the meridians 45°E and 100°E are included in the season by the IMD.

With eleven depressions and eight tropical cyclones, this was one of the most active seasons in the ocean along with 1987, 1996, and 2005. The season caused a large loss of life, most of which was from one storm. Over 10,000 people were killed in India when Tropical Cyclone 03A brought a 4.9-metre (16 ft) storm surge to the Kathiawar Peninsula, inundating numerous salt mines. Total damages from the storm amounted to Rs. 120 billion (US$3 billion). Tropical Cyclone 01B killed at least 26 people and left at least 4,000 fishermen missing in eastern Bangladesh on May 20. A short lived depression in mid-October killed 122 people after triggering severe flooding in Andhra Pradesh. In November, Tropical Cyclone 06B killed six people and caused property damage worth BTN 880 million (US$20.7 million) in eastern India. An additional 40 people were killed and 100 fishermen were listed as missing after Tropical Cyclone 07B affected Bangladesh.

The first storm of the season developed on May 18 out of an area of low pressure over the Bay of Bengal. It reached its peak intensity with winds of 130 km/h (70 mph) before making landfall near Chittagong, Bangladesh. The storm dissipated shortly after. Later that month, a short-lived storm developed over the Arabian Sea and dissipated the next day without impacting land. The most intense storm of the season formed in early June off the southwestern coast of India. It slowly traveled towards the west, remaining relatively weak before turning towards the north and intensifying. The storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 195 km/h (120 mph) shortly before making landfall near Porbandar in the Indian state of Gujarat. The cyclone rapidly dissipated on the same day.

After three months of inactivity, five storms developed in late September and October. Two of them strengthened into tropical storms, neither of which impacted land. In early November, the sixth tropical cyclone of the season developed in the Bay of Bengal. The storm quickly developed and reached its peak intensity upon landfall with winds of 155 km/h (100 mph). The storm rapidly dissipated the same day it made landfall. Shortly after 06B dissipated, the remnants of Tropical Storm Chip triggered the development of a new cyclone over the Bay of Bengal. The storm tracked along the edge of a subtropical ridge, reaching its peak intensity over open waters with winds of 140 km/h (80 mph). The cyclone entered an area of higher wind shear shortly after and rapidly weakened before making landfall. Then it dissipated in Bangladesh. The final cyclone of the season developed in the Arabian Sea during mid-December. It reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 km/h (75 mph) before weakening due to strong wind shear. It made landfall in Oman on December 17 as a minimal tropical storm shortly before dissipating.

The first cyclone in the region developed as a tropical disturbance on May 13 over the southern Bay of Bengal to the southeast of Sri Lanka. With little development, the disturbance initially traveled towards the north-northeast before turning west. On May 16, the system slowed down near the southeastern coast of India and began to turn towards the northeast once more. At 0700 UTC on May 17, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert (TCFA). Shortly after, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) declared that the disturbance developed into Depression BOB 01. A second TCFA was issued later that day as a new circulation associated with the system developed further towards the northeast. At 0600 UTC on May 18, the first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 01B was issued by the JTWC. At the time of the advisory, winds were estimated at 55 km/h (35 mph). The IMD also upgraded BOB 01 to a deep depression at this time.

Continuing on a northeasterly track, BOB 01 gradually intensified as it neared Bangladesh. About 12 hours after being designated a cyclone, it strengthened to the equivalent of a tropical storm. The winds had reached 65 km/h (40 mph). At that time, it was located 555 km (345 mi) south-southeast of Chittagong. Early on May 20, BOB 01 reached its peak intensity as a severe cyclonic storm with winds of 110 km/h (70 mph) and a barometric pressure of 972 mbar (hPa). The JTWC assessed the storm to have peaked with winds of 130 km/h (80 mph), equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir–Simpson Hurricane Scale. An eye developed and the system made landfall several hours later near Chittagong. After making landfall, the storm quickly weakened, dissipating later that day.

Ahead of the storm, officials in Bangladesh relocated an estimated 650,000 people, resulting in a lower loss of life. But BOB 01 adversely affected low-lying areas, destroying 6,000 homes and damaging another 9,945. It produced a storm surge of 1.8 to 3 m (6 to 10 ft), inundating coastal towns. A total of 1,876 hectares (4,635 acres) of salt fields and 25 hectares (61 acres) of shrimp farms were damaged. At least 35 people were killed by the storm and 504 others were injured. Five of the fatalities occurred in Chittagong and another five on an island in the Cox's Bazar District. Sixteen more of the fatalities occurred when three fishing vessels sank near Chittagong. Additionally, an estimated 4,000 fishermen were listed as missing at sea. A total of 108,440 people were affected in Bangladesh. An oil tanker anchored near Chittagong was tossed by rough seas into another vessel and sustained significant damage. Large quantities of crude oil spilled into the water due to a hole in the hull of the ship. Both of the ships involved in the incident were owned by the Bangladesh Shipping Corporation. Following the impacts of the storm, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization provided $40,000 in immediate funds for rehabilitation efforts. The Government of Germany also provided $270,166 to the affected population. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies donated about $1.2 million to Bangladesh.

On May 27, an area of low pressure developed over the central Arabian Sea. Early the next day, the JTWC issued their first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 02A while the system was located about 740 km (460 mi) south of Masirah Island. The IMD only briefly monitored the system as a weak depression, designating it as ARB 01. Upon being classified a tropical cyclone, 02A reached its peak intensity. The speed of its winds was 65 km/h (40 mph). Soon, it began to dissipate due to increasing vertical wind shear. The center of circulation quickly became devoid of convection. The storm weakened below tropical storm intensity later that day before dissipating on May 29 over open waters.
On June 1, an area of low pressure developed over the Laccadive Islands. Two days later, the JTWC issued a TCFA for the system as it became better organized. Early on June 4, the JTWC issued its first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 03A. Around the same time, the IMD began monitoring the system as Depression ARB 02. Shortly after, the depression was upgraded to a deep depression and further strengthened into a cyclonic storm the following day. The small storm moved slowly towards the west and weakened as wind shear began to increase. The storm weakened below tropical storm intensity later that day and the initial final advisory was issued. However, the system redeveloped and advisories resumed the next day. The storm gradually intensified as it moved towards the northwest. Dvorak satellite intensity estimates on June 6 reached T4.0, corresponding to an intensity of 120 km/h (75 mph). The IMD also marked the increase in intensity, upgrading ARB 02 to a severe cyclonic storm. Around this time, the storm began to turn towards the north and accelerate due to an approaching mid-level trough. As the storm neared the Indian coastline, an eye developed and the storm strengthened into the equivalent of a major hurricane with winds reaching 185 km/h (115 mph). The IMD assessed the storm to be a very severe cyclonic storm at this time, with winds up to 165 km/h (105 mph) and a barometric pressure of 958 mbar (hPa). After slightly weakening early on June 9, 03A re-strengthened, attaining its peak intensity with winds of 195 km/h (120 mph). Then it made landfall near Porbandar in the Indian state of Gujarat between 0100 and 0200 UTC. The storm weakened following landfall and the JTWC issued their final advisory later that day. The IMD continued to monitor ARB 02 until June 10, by which time it had weakened to a depression before dissipating.

Tropical Cyclone 03A brought a large storm surge of 4.9 m (16 ft) which devastated coastal communities and salt mines. An estimated 10,000 people were killed by the storm, many of whom were salt mine workers who did not own a radio and received little or no warning of the cyclone. The large loss of life was partially attributed to contractors who wanted to continue making profits and did not inform their workers of the approaching storm. Also, the region had witnessed only 17 cyclones since 1890, all of which were weaker than 03A. As a result, its vulnerability was miscalculated by the local population and the disaster management administration. Power supply to numerous residences was lost due to the storms high winds. A microwave tower in Porbandar collapsed, causing widespread disruption in telecommunication. Hundreds of other power transmission towers also fell, causing an estimated loss of Rs 10 billion for the Gujarat Electricity Board. At least 893 people were injured by the storm and over 11,000 animals were killed. Over 162,000 structures were damaged or destroyed throughout the affected area and damages amounted to Rs. 120 billion (US$3 billion). Over the next one month, insurance companies had lost approximately Rs. 13 billion (US$266.5 million). The remnants of the storm produced heavy rains over Pakistan which electrocuted 12 people. In the wake of the storm, the United States Government provided US$25,000 for rehabilitation of the affected population. The Government of Denmark also contributed $72,992 in funds for relief efforts. The Gujarat government deployed approximately 330 medical teams to the affected areas. Local aid, amounting to (US$20.5 million) was provided to assist victims.

On June 13, the IMD began monitoring a depression over the central Bay of Bengal. Tracking towards the west, the depression intensified into a deep depression, peaking with winds of 55 km/h (35 mph) and a minimum pressure of 992 mbar (hPa). Around 1500 UTC on June 14, the deep depression made landfall near Visakhapatnam. Shortly thereafter, it weakened to a depression and dissipated early the following day.

In late September, an area of low pressure developed over the Arabian Sea within an east-west oriented surface trough while located about 740 km (460 mi) west of Mumbai, India. The system gradually intensified as it moved slowly towards the west. Early on September 30, the JTWC issued its first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 04A. Its winds peaked at 65 km/h (40 mph). Located within an area of moderate wind shear, the storm quickly weakened and dissipated early on October 1.

On October 8, the IMD began monitoring a tropical depression located about 835 km (520 mi) southwest of Mumbai. The depression was briefly classified as a deep depression with winds of 55 km/h (35 mph) and a minimum pressure of 998 mbar (hPa) as it moved towards the west-northwest. Shortly after reaching its peak intensity, the depression weakened. The last advisory was issued the next day while the storm was over open waters.

On October 13, the IMD began monitoring a tropical depression off the eastern coast of India. The depression remained relatively weak, with winds peaking at 45 km/h (30 mph) before the storm made landfall near Narsapur in the Andhra Pradesh early on October 14. The depression dissipated shortly after landfall. Heavy rains produced by the depression damaged croplands and property. Twenty-four-hour rainfall totals reached in localized areas, triggering flash floods in areas severely impacted by another system a week earlier. In Hyderabad, schools and government offices were closed. During the morning of October 14, overflow from a dam inundated the Srisailam power house, forcing officials to shut down the plant. Numerous highways were also closed due to flowing water. The following day, the water level of the dam continued to rise, leading to the evacuation of nearly 53,000 residents in the area. Throughout Andhra Pradesh, flooding from the depression resulted in 122 fatalities.

The IMD began monitoring an area of low pressure over the Laccadive Islands on October 10. The low traveled towards the northwest with little development. On October 15, the JTWC issued a TCFA as the system became better organized. Although wind shear increased, the first advisory was issued the next day. With minimal convection, the storm never intensified past 65 km/h (40 mph). The system traveled towards the northeast and weakened due to strong wind shear. On October 17, the storm fell below tropical storm status and made landfall on the Kathiawar Peninsula, near the same area where 03A made landfall in early June. The storm dissipated shortly after landfall.

As the storm neared land, officials in Gujarat evacuated hundreds of residents from coastal areas. Due to the low-intensity of the storm, no damage was reported on land and only light rain fell. However, offshore, more than 250 people were reported as missing when contact was lost with numerous fishing vessels. One-hundred-twenty people on twelve ships from Satpathy village were among the missing. One of the ships capsized; however, the crew of 12 swam to shore. One boat from Vasai carrying 20 people was also missing. Ten fishermen from Colaba were reported as missing, three of which later swam to shore. The Indian Coast Guard immediately dispatched search and rescue ships and naval helicopters to find the missing people.

Early on October 28, the IMD began monitoring a tropical depression located about 555 km (345 mi) south-southeast of Visakhapatnam in the Andhra Pradesh. The depression strengthened to a deep depression later that day with winds peaking at 55 km/h (35 mph) before undergoing a weakening trend. The depression dissipated the next day near the Andhra Pradesh coastline. The outer bands of the depression produced light rainfall over the coast of Andhra Pradesh.

On November 10, an area of low pressure developed over the Bay of Bengal within a monsoonal trough. Moving towards the northwest, the low gradually developed and the JTWC issued a TCFA early on November 13. The next day, the first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 06B was issued. A brief period of rapid development took place as the storm strengthened just below Category 1 status. Shortly before making landfall near Visakhapatnam, 06B reached its peak intensity with winds of 155 km/h (100 mph). At this time, the IMD classified the cyclone as a Very Severe Cyclonic Storm and reported that it had a wide eye. Rapid weakening followed shortly after landfall and the storm dissipated early on November 16.

Major crop losses, property damage, and six fatalities were reported from the affected areas. Four of the fatalities were in Visakhapatnam and the other two were in east Godavari. Hundreds of trees and power lines had fallen. At least of cropland and more than 2,000 homes were damaged. Waves produced by the storm at Visakhapatnam were recorded up to 5.74 m (18.8 ft). The storm dropped rainfall in excess of throughout the region. Damages from the storm were estimated at BTN 880 million (US$20.7 million).

Tropical Storm Chip dissipated over Vietnam on November 15, 1998. The remnants of Chip crossed the Malay Peninsula on November 17 and entered the Bay of Bengal. The system moved along the edge of a subtropical ridge within an area of strong wind shear. After turning towards the northwest, the low entered an area of lower wind shear and began to become better organized. Between November 18 and 20, the JTWC issued three TCFAs before issuing first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 07B early on November 20. While recurving towards the northeast, 07B reached its peak intensity on November 22 with winds of 140 km/h (85 mph). Shortly after reaching peak intensity, the cyclone entered an area of strong wind shear which caused convection associated with the storm to become dislocated from the center. This caused 07B to rapidly weaken before making landfall to the west of Chittagong, Bangladesh. It dissipated on November 23.

Tropical Cyclone 07B produced a storm surge of 1.2 to 2.4 m (4 to 8 ft) which inundated coastal areas of Bangladesh, killing 40 people and leaving at least 103 others missing. Winds gusting up to 80 km/h (47 mph) and heavy rains impacted a large area of the country. A large area of rice paddies was lost due to flooding and numerous homes were buried in mud. A total of 5,780 families were left homeless. About 8,755 homes sustained severe damage and an estimated 300,000 people were affected by 07B.

On December 7, a broad area of low pressure developed near southern India within an area of moderate wind shear. On December 11, the JTWC issued a TCFA for the system as it drifted towards the northwest over the Arabian Sea. Two days later, the first advisory on Tropical Cyclone 08A was issued. The large cyclone slowly organized and intensified as it turned towards the north. By December 15, the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 km/h (75 mph). Then, it turned towards the west into an area of higher wind shear. The cyclone gradually weakened as it traveled towards Oman. It made landfall in the country on December 17 with winds of 65 km/h (40 mph) and dissipated later that day. Although it made landfall as a tropical storm, no known damage was reported. The remnants of the storm sank a ship, killing 18 fishermen.
This is a table of the storms in 1998 and their landfall(s), if any. Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect (an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident), but are still storm-related.




</doc>
<doc id="18057516" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18057516" title="Massey Poyntz">
Massey Poyntz

Edward Stephen Massey Poyntz (27 October 1883 – 26 December 1934) was an English first-class cricketer, who played for Somerset in the early twentieth century. An amateur, Poyntz was an aggressive right-handed batsman. He generally played as part of the middle order, and though his batting was not exceptional, he was highly praised for his fielding ability. He captained Somerset in the two years prior to the First World War.

The youngest son of the Chief Constable of Essex, Poyntz made his county cricket debut in 1905, hitting a half-century to help Somerset win their only match of that season. He achieved his best batting average in that year, while each of the following four were of little note. In 1910 he captained Somerset for the first time, and scored over 300 runs in a season for the second of five occasions. His only attempts at bowling occurred during 1911, when he claimed eight wickets at an average of almost forty. He was named as Somerset's official captain in 1913, and remained in charge for the following season. After serving in the Army during the First World War, Poyntz scored his only century in first-class cricket in a match for the Army against Cambridge University in 1919. He played two further matches for Somerset that year, after which he did not appear in first-class cricket again.

Poyntz was born on 27 October 1883 in Chelmsford, Essex. He was the youngest of seven children born to Major William Henry Poyntz and Henrietta Laycock. His father had achieved the rank of Major in the Royal Marines, and having served as the Chief Constable of Nottingham from 1872 until 1881, held the equivalent position in Essex at the time of his youngest son's birth. Poyntz senior was a cricket enthusiast, and during his time in Nottingham, he ran the police team, and wrote effusively in his reminiscences about watching Nottinghamshire face Yorkshire and Surrey. Educated at Haileybury College, Massey made the school's cricket team in 1901. The family had moved to Gotham House in Tiverton, north Devon, and after leaving school, Poyntz followed his older brother Hugh into the Somerset side.

On his debut for Somerset, Poyntz batted strongly in the lower order to help secure Somerset's only victory of the season. Poyntz's score of 32 in the first innings could not prevent the follow-on, but in the second innings, he hit 60 runs to widen Somerset's lead to almost 150 runs, a total Gloucestershire failed to chase down. His success against Gloucestershire continued in the return fixture later that season, in which he scored 89 of Somerset's total of 169 in the first innings, and 42 runs in the second innings, though their opponents won by an innings after amassing 521 runs in their only innings. In all, Poyntz played five matches in his debut season, totalling 307 runs. His season's batting average of 34.11 was the highest of his career.

In David Foot's history of Somerset cricket, after the 1903 season he wrote that "it's time discreetly to leap over undistinguished seasons." Between 1903 and the cessation of county cricket due to the First World War, Somerset never finished higher than tenth in the County Championship. Poyntz himself struggled for runs between 1906 and 1909: in thirty matches for the county, he failed to score a half-century. Statistically, his worst season came in 1907, when he averaged just 4.66 runs per innings. His most notable incident that season occurred during the match against Middlesex at Lord's. In his own benefit match, Albert Trott claimed two hat-tricks; Poyntz was one of the victims, falling for a second innings duck.

In 1910, Poyntz captained Somerset for the first time, standing-in during the absence of the regular captain, John Daniell. In that season, he struck his first half-century since 1905, scoring 50 runs in the second innings of a match against Middlesex at Bath. He followed that with another in his next innings, finishing on 52 not out against Lancashire, though Somerset lost both matches by an innings. He finished the 1910 season with 363 runs at an average of 16.50, and appeared in a representative match for the West of England against the East. In their summary of the 1911 season, "Wisden Cricketers' Almanack" claimed that "the outlook for Somerset is cheerless." The county finished bottom of the championship with only one victory, against Hampshire at Bath. Despite this, Poyntz had one of his most successful seasons: he scored 597 runs at an average of 22.96, and his five half-centuries were the most in any year of his career. He began the season with half-centuries in both innings of a drawn match with Hampshire in Southampton, and two matches later, he bowled for the first time in first-class cricket. Facing Lancashire, Poyntz was called upon as Somerset's ninth bowler in their opponent's second innings: only the captain Daniell and the wicket-keeper, Harry Chidgey, did not bowl. Poyntz bowled eight overs and three balls, and claimed five wickets; his best analysis in first-class cricket. He continued to bowl occasionally for the remainder of the season, but only claimed three further wickets, and finished his career with a bowling average of 39.62. Poyntz was unable to appear as often in 1912; he only played eight times for Somerset, six less than the season before. He scored 253 runs at an average 18.07 that year, and did not pass fifty run in an innings.

Somerset's difficulties were not confined to the pitch. In 1912, the club made a loss of £327, and they could not persuade Daniell to remain at the club rather than travel to India. Initially the county asked Arthur Newton, who was at that time 50 years old, to serve as captain, but after consideration he declined the role, and Poyntz was appointed instead. The team that he inherited remained a poor one: the "Wisden" summary in 1913 stated that they had, "no temptation to deal at any great length with the doings of Somerset". During a season in which his side had finished bottom of the championship with only two wins, Poyntz scored 363 runs at an average of 15.12, with a single half-century; 50 runs exactly scored against Derbyshire. The club once again recorded a loss during the season, and at the club's annual general meeting, the mood was negative. Despite this, Poyntz was reappointed as captain for 1914 after a proposal made by Bruce Hylton-Stewart and seconded by Newton. Rare optimism was shown by Newton and Poyntz, with the latter claiming that it was due to "a lot of bad luck that they [Somerset] did not finish half way up the table instead of at the bottom."

That optimism was not reflected in Somerset's results the following year. Further financial losses were made, and the county finished second-bottom of the championship. On a personal level, Poyntz scored more runs than in any other season, accruing 642 during his 19 matches at an average of 18.34, and scored three half-centuries. The start of the First World War during the summer of 1914 resulted in the cancellation of some matches, along with a number of players joining the armed forces, disrupting the end of the cricket season. Although Somerset fared poorly under his charge, David Foot claims that Poyntz received "more praise than criticism" for his captaincy.

In September 1914, Poyntz was appointed to the 3rd Battalion, Bedfordshire Regiment. He received promotion to Lieutenant, and then Captain in 1915, before being transferred to the 2nd Battalion in December of that year, serving in the Somme under the command of his brother, Major Hugh Stainton Poyntz. He was shortly thereafter assigned command of "B" Company. He continued to command B Company during the Battle of the Somme. Poyntz commanded the 2nd Battalion for a while in 1917 during his brother's leave, but spent most of the remainder of the war in reserve with the 3rd Battalion. He completed his military service as a Major.

Poyntz only played three further first-class cricket matches after the war. He made his highest total during a match for the Army against Cambridge University, at Fenner's. Batting at number eight, he struck 15 fours and 3 sixes to reach 114 runs in the second innings. The Army lost the match by 10 wickets. Later in the season, he his final appearances for Somerset, playing against Sussex and Hampshire under the captaincy of Daniell, averaging 10.00 from three innings. In all, Poyntz scored 3,127 runs during his first-class career at an average of 17.08. He died on 26 December 1934 in Minehead, Somerset.

Although not highly thought of as a batsman, Poyntz was known for being able to hit the ball hard. A right-handed batsman, he is described as lacking "technique and consistency" by David Foot, but obituaries suggest that his shortage of talent was offset by application of effort. "Wisden" declared him "an excellent fielder", but Foot is more reserved, describing him as a "passable slip fielder". Sammy Woods was Poyntz's godfather, while Poyntz in turn acted as a godfather to John Daniell's son Nigel. David Foot portrays an element of caricature about Poyntz, describing him as, "a tall man who slammed his hair back with a distinctive parting in the middle." He also related a story from a Somerset teammate in which Poyntz claimed that he could trace him family all the way back to William the Conqueror, and had a massive coat of arms in his Bristol flat.


</doc>
<doc id="18070831" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18070831" title="Bill of Middlesex">
Bill of Middlesex

The Bill of Middlesex was a legal fiction used by the Court of King's Bench to gain jurisdiction over cases traditionally in the remit of the Court of Common Pleas. Hinging on the King's Bench's remaining criminal jurisdiction over the county of Middlesex, the Bill allowed it to take cases traditionally in the remit of other common law courts by claiming that the defendant had committed trespass in Middlesex. Once the defendant was in custody, the trespass complaint would be quietly dropped and other complaints (such as debt or detinue) would be substituted.

The bill was part of a large reform movement to prevent equitable courts such as the Court of Chancery from undermining their business. It was far cheaper and faster than the older equivalents used by the Chancery and Common Pleas, leading to a drop in their business and an increase in that of the King's Bench. As such, the Chancery issued injunctions in an ineffective attempt to prevent its use. The Bill was finally abolished by the Uniformity of Process Act 1832.

As a result of reforming actions such as the Bill of Middlesex, the Common Pleas became increasingly conservative and resistant to King's Bench changes because of the impact they had on the business of the Common Pleas. This was best emphasised by Slade's Case, a struggle between the old and new forms of suing for breach of contract; although an equilibrium between the common law courts was finally reached, it eventually led to their dissolution with the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873, and merger into a single High Court of Justice.

The Court of Common Pleas and Court of King's Bench were two of the central common law courts in England and Wales from the 13th century until their dissolution in 1875. The Common Pleas' jurisdiction was over "common pleas," cases where the king had no interest. This in practice meant cases between subject and subject, including all actions taken under "praecipe" to recover debts or property, which made up the vast majority of civil cases. The Jurisdiction of the King's Bench, on the other hand, was over "pleas of the crown"; cases which involved the king in some way. With the exception of revenue matters, which were handled by the Exchequer of Pleas, the King's Bench held exclusive jurisdiction over these cases. Crucially, it retained some criminal jurisdiction over all cases in Middlesex, the county where it sat.

During the 15th century, the traditional superiority of the common law courts was challenged by ecclesiastical courts and the equitable jurisdiction of the Lord Chancellor, exercised through the Court of Chancery. These courts were more attractive to the common lawyers because of their informality and the simple method used to arrest defendants. The bills of complaint and subpoena used by the Chancery made court procedure far faster, and from 1460 to 1540 there was a steep decline in the number of cases in the common law courts, coinciding with a sharp increase in cases in the newer courts. This loss of business was quickly recognised by the King's Bench, which was urged by Fairfax J in 1501 to develop new remedies so that "subpoenas would not be used as often as they are at present". From 1500 the King's Bench began reforming to increase its business and jurisdiction, with the tide finally turning in their favour by 1550. The King's Bench significantly reformed its mode of practice in response, and one of the developments was the Bill of Middlesex.

The Bill of Middlesex exploited the King's Bench's remaining criminal jurisdiction over Middlesex. Prior to the introduction of bills, a writ would have to be issued, with different writs depending on the issue. If A wished to sue B for trespass, debt and detinue, the court would have to issue an individual writ for each action, with associated delays and costs for A, and then ensure that B appeared in court. Bills, on the other hand, were traditionally used against court officials and the court's prisoners; as such, the defendant was assumed to already be in the court's custody and presence in court was unnecessary. Thus a legal fiction arose; if A wished to sue B for trespass, debt and detinue, he would have a writ issued for trespass. B would be arrested as a result, and the detinue and debt actions undertaken by bill after he had been detained. Eventually it became even more fictitious; if A wished to sue B merely for debt and detinue, a trespass writ would be obtained and then quietly dismissed when B was detained in custody. This was originally undertaken through getting a writ of trespass from the Chancery, but eventually a shorter workaround was used; as the King's Bench retained criminal jurisdiction over Middlesex, the trespass (which was fictitious anyway) would be said to have occurred in that county, allowing the King's Bench to issue its own bill of arrest. This became known as the Bill of Middlesex, and undermined the jurisdiction of the Court of Common Pleas, which normally dealt with such civil cases.

As a result of the procedural changes, including the Bill of Middlesex, the King's Bench's business rose tenfold between 1560 and 1640. The simplicity and low cost of this procedure drove much business to the King's Bench, which had a negative impact on the Court of Common Pleas and Court of Chancery. Historically, cases now covered by the Bill of Middlesex had been handled by the Common Pleas, using a specialist writ drafted by the Chancery. This writ was very expensive, and as such brought large amounts of revenue to the Chancery and the Common Pleas. Costs varied depending on the amount of money being claimed from the defendant; it was 6 shillings and 8 pence to claim £40, 10 shillings for £100, and £5 for £1,000. In return, the Chancery began to bring injunctions against those who claimed Bills of Middlesex, "whereby [the judges] are hindered of their fine which should have been paid in [the Chancery] upon the original of the said case". These injunctions were only temporary; "once the fine had been paid there was nothing to prevent a continuation of proceedings in King’s Bench". Relatively few injunctions were issued, and thanks to technical loopholes "it was a weapon too infrequently used, and too easily parried" to have any long-term impact. The issuing of injunctions finally ended in 1590, after an ordinance passed by James I increased the costs of King's Bench proceedings. The Bill of Middlesex itself was finally abolished by the Uniformity of Process Act 1832.

As a longer term and more significant development, the Bill of Middlesex was one of several revolutionary developments by the King's Bench met with a conservative reaction from the Common Pleas, fearful of losing its own caseload. The troubles during this period are best illustrated by Slade's Case. Under the medieval common law, claims seeking the repayment of a debt or other matters could only be pursued through a writ of debt in the Common Pleas, a problematic and archaic process. By 1558 the lawyers had succeeded in creating another method, enforced by the Court of King's Bench, through the action of "assumpsit", which was technically for deceit. The legal fiction used was that by failing to pay after promising to do so, a defendant had committed deceit, and was liable to the plaintiff. The conservative Common Pleas, through the appellate court the Court of Exchequer Chamber, began to overrule decisions made by the King's Bench on "assumpsit", causing friction between the courts. In Slade's Case, the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, John Popham, deliberately provoked the Common Pleas into bringing an "assumpsit" action to a higher court where the Justices of the King's Bench could vote, allowing them to overrule the Common Pleas and establish "assumpsit" as the main contractual action. After the death of Edmund Anderson, the more activist Francis Gawdy became Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, which briefly led to a less reactionary and more revolutionary Common Pleas.

An equilibrium between the courts was eventually reached, but the result was three common law courts (the Exchequer of Pleas, Common Pleas and King's Bench) with near-identical jurisdictions. By the 18th century, it was customary to speak of the "twelve justices" of the three courts, not distinguishing them, and assize cases were shared equally between them. In 1828, Henry Brougham complained in Parliament that 
The result was the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873, which unified the Common Pleas, Exchequer, King's Bench and Court of Chancery into one body, the High Court of Justice, with the divisions between the courts to remain. Thus, while the reform epitomised by the Bill of Middlesex aided the King's Bench in the short term, it eventually led to its dissolution.



</doc>
<doc id="18151024" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18151024" title="Chris Davis (baseball)">
Chris Davis (baseball)

Christopher Lyn Davis (born March 17, 1986), nicknamed "Crush Davis", is an American professional baseball first baseman and outfielder for the Baltimore Orioles of Major League Baseball (MLB). He stands tall and weighs . Davis played in MLB for the Texas Rangers from 2008 until being traded to the Baltimore Orioles in 2011. He bats left-handed and throws right-handed. While primarily a first baseman and right fielder throughout his career, Davis has also played third base and has been a designated hitter.

Davis attended Navarro Junior College and was selected by the Rangers in the fifth round of the 2006 MLB draft. He ascended quickly through the Rangers' minor league system, getting named their Minor League Player of the Year in 2007. He was called up in the middle of 2008 and had a strong start to his major league career. He was the Rangers' starting first baseman for 92 games in 2009 and hit 21 home runs, but a low batting average and his tendency to strike out left the Rangers dissatisfied with him. Because of this, the Rangers sent Davis back and forth between the minors and the majors over the next two years and left him off their playoff roster in 2010. On July 30, 2011, they traded him to the Orioles with Tommy Hunter for Koji Uehara.

Davis appeared in 31 games for the Orioles in 2011. In the lineup full-time in 2012, he hit 33 home runs while batting .270 and helping the Orioles reach the playoffs for the first time since 1997. In 2013, his 53 home runs led all MLB players and set a new Orioles single-season franchise record. Davis also had 138 runs batted in (RBIs), was selected to the All-Star Game, and finished third in American League Most Valuable Player Award (MVP) voting. He led all major league players in strikeouts-per-at-bat each year in 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018.

Davis was born in Longview, Texas. He has an older sister, Jennifer. While he was in high school, his parents divorced. Davis attended Longview High School, playing shortstop on the school's varsity baseball team and pitching as well before graduating in 2004. He was originally chosen by the New York Yankees as the third-to-last pick of the 2004 Major League Baseball (MLB) Draft (1,496th overall in the 50th round). However, he did not sign and opted to attend Navarro Junior College in Texas instead, beginning in 2005. At Navarro, he was used as a third baseman and first baseman. He was once again drafted, by the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, in the 2005 MLB draft, however he did not sign. He was named a pre-season JUCO All-American by "Baseball America" in 2006, earning Region XIV East Zone Most Valuable Player honors. That year with Navarro, he hit 17 home runs, one of which hit a retail building 100 feet away from the 380 sign on the outfield fence. Davis was then drafted again, this time by the Texas Rangers in the fifth round of the 2006 MLB draft.

Davis began his minor league career in 2006 with the Spokane Indians of the Single-A short season Northwest League, splitting time between the outfield and first base. In 69 games, he batted .277 with 70 hits, 18 doubles, 15 home runs, 42 runs batted in (RBI), and 65 strikeouts (eighth). Early in his minor league career, Davis struggled with his weight. At one point, he weighed 265 pounds, but he later learned to eat healthier and lost weight.

In 2007, Davis began the season with the Bakersfield Blaze of the Single-A advanced California League. He tied a California League record by posting a 35-game hitting streak and was selected to the Single-A advanced All-Star Game. On July 30, he was promoted to the Frisco RoughRiders of the Double-A Texas League, where he spent the rest of the season. Despite his call-up, he tied for fourth in the California League with 24 home runs and ranked fourth in the league with a .573 slugging percentage, leading Bakersfield in home runs, RBI, and doubles. With Frisco, he had 11 home runs and 25 RBI in the month of August and was named the Rangers' Minor League Player of the Month. In 129 games combined, used exclusively as a third baseman, Davis batted .297 with 36 home runs and 118 RBI in 2007. After the season, he was named the Rangers' Tom Grieve Minor League Player of the Year.
Entering 2008, "Baseball America" ranked Davis the number two prospect in the Rangers' organization, behind Elvis Andrus. Davis began the season playing first base for Frisco. He batted .333 with 62 hits, 13 home runs, and 42 RBI in 46 games before earning a promotion to the Triple-A Oklahoma RedHawks of the Pacific Coast League. In 31 games with Oklahoma, he hit .333 with 37 hits, 10 home runs, and 31 RBI. He was named to the All-Star Futures Game but was unable to play in it because he was promoted to the major leagues by the Texas Rangers. Later, during his breakout 2013 season, Davis referred to his time with Round Rock in 2008: "I know nobody really cares about Triple-A, but I put up these numbers up in Triple-A. That was kind of the question, 'Was he going to be able to do it at the big league level?' The thing about it was, I just couldn't do it consistently. I couldn't put the bat on the ball. I was striking out an astronomical amount, and this year it's just been consistency day in and day out."

On June 26, 2008, the Rangers called up Davis from Oklahoma, and that day he made his major league debut in a 7–2 loss to the Houston Astros, getting a hit in his first Major League at bat, against Óscar Villarreal. Davis started his first Major League game at first base on June 27, 2008, and hit his first Major League home run during the game, against Clay Condrey in an 8–7 win over the Philadelphia Phillies. He also homered the next day, becoming the first Texas Ranger to homer in both of his first two Major League starts. He took over from Frank Catalanotto at first base.

By virtue of his hot start with the Rangers, and his considerable power as a batter, Davis was dubbed "Crush Davis" by local media and fans (a play on "Crash Davis" from the movie "Bull Durham"). From July 22 through July 26, he had four straight multi-hit games. Davis played well enough that, upon Hank Blalock's return from the disabled list (DL) on August 22, he was moved to third base so he could remain in the lineup. He had four hits on September 26 in a 12–1 victory over the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim. 

In 80 games (295 at bats), Davis batted .285 with 84 hits, 23 doubles, 17 home runs, and 55 RBI. He struck out 88 times, which was 30% of his at bats. Defensively, he was much better at first base than third, with a .997 fielding percentage at first as opposed to a .962 percentage at third and a higher range factor as well.

Davis slumped a bit in 2009 spring training but still began 2009 as the Rangers' first baseman. Rangers' manager Ron Washington said, "I'm not worried about Chris. Chris works hard. He had a little spell where he was trying to get himself together. He's going to have bad times, but what he did tonight is what he's capable of and he'll do that enough to make him love you." On May 14, with the Rangers trailing 2–1 in the ninth inning against the Seattle Mariners, he homered against Brandon Morrow to give the Rangers a 3–2 victory. After a 1-for-29 slump, Davis hit two home runs on May 26 in a 7–3 victory over the New York Yankees. He had four hits on June 25, the fourth a 12th-inning two-run home run against Esmerling Vásquez in a 9–8 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks.

On July 5, Davis was sent back down to make room for Josh Hamilton who was coming off the disabled list. Although he had 15 home runs in 258 at bats, he was leading the American League with 114 strikeouts and had, on June 21, become the quickest player in Major League history to reach 100 strikeouts, requiring only 219 at bats. His batting average was at .202. While talking about the Rangers' handling of another player, Julio Borbon, in 2010, Washington mentioned the decision to send Davis down in 2009: "We gave Chris a good amount of time last year. With young players, they can look bad for 100 at bats and then turn it around the next 100 and look exactly like you want them to." With the RedHawks, Davis played 44 games, batting .327 with six home runs, 12 doubles, and 30 RBI.

Davis was recalled on August 25 after Andruw Jones went on the DL and Blalock struggled. On September 8, in the second game of a doubleheader, he had three hits and four RBI, including a three-run home run against José Veras in a 10–5 victory over the Cleveland Indians. When Davis returned to the majors, his numbers improved dramatically, as he hit .318 in September and October, with five home runs and 21 RBIs in the two-month span. In 113 games (391 at bats), Davis batted .238 with 93 hits, 15 doubles, 21 home runs, and 59 RBI. However, he ranked seventh in the AL with 150 strikeouts. He did do well defensively; Washington said, when Blalock replaced him at first following his demotion, "We can't expect Hank Blalock to be Chris Davis [defensively], but Hank is a professional. I think he can play first base."

Davis was once again optioned to Triple-A after starting 2010 batting .188 in 15 games (48 at bats). He was recalled on July 9 to play first base for the Rangers. A roster spot, as well as a position in the Rangers starting lineup, became available when Justin Smoak was involved in a trade with the Seattle Mariners for Cliff Lee. On July 29, he was sent back to the RedHawks to make room for Mitch Moreland. In 103 games (398 at bats) with the RedHawks, he had 130 hits, 31 doubles, 14 home runs, and 80 RBI. He finished second in the league in hitting (.327, behind John Lindsey's .353) and fifth in strikeouts (105). He was recalled for the final time on September 11 but this time was used as a backup corner infielder and pinch-hitter, as Moreland was playing first base. In 45 games (120 at bats) with Texas, Davis hit .192 with 23 hits, one home run, and four RBI. He was left off the postseason roster as the Rangers entered the World Series for the first time ever but ended up losing in five games to the San Francisco Giants. Attempting to aid Davis's offense, the Rangers tried to get Davis to widen his batting stance. However, playing in the Dominican Winter League over the offseason, Davis "felt like I fouled a lot of pitches off that I should have driven." He stood more upright and kept his feet closer together and, in 2013, said that this was a defining moment in his career.

In 2011, Davis began the season in the minors but was called up from Triple-A to play for the Rangers on April 11 when Hamilton suffered a fracture of the humerus bone in his shoulder. However, it was with reluctance that the Rangers recalled Davis; general manager Jon Daniels said, "We talked about another center fielder or a third catcher and think we will address that at some point. But whoever we called up wasn't going to get regular playing time, so we felt Chris was the most deserving." Used in a part-time role, Davis remained with the club until Hamilton came off the DL on May 23. He was also called up for a game on June 8 when Ian Kinsler was placed on paternity leave. His 2011 totals with the Rangers were a .250 batting average with 19 hits, three home runs, and six RBI in 28 games (76 at bats). Davis fared better with the Rangers' Triple-A affiliate, which had become the Round Rock Express in 2011. He had five-RBI games twice and in June batted .361 with 10 home runs and 28 RBI. Despite playing only 48 games with Round Rock in 2011, Davis finished seventh in the Pacific Coast League with 24 home runs.

On July 30, 2011, Davis was traded with pitcher Tommy Hunter to the Baltimore Orioles for reliever Koji Uehara. Davis became expendable because the Rangers felt Moreland was a better option at first base; Rangers' general manager Jon Daniels said the day of the trade that he knew there was a possibility Davis could turn into a high-impact offensive player and "If he does, we'll live with it." Opinions differ as to Davis's inability to hold a consistent starting role with the Rangers; while one popular theory is that it was because of his many strikeouts and low batting average, Orioles' manager Buck Showalter believes it was due to the presence of Moreland and Adrián Beltré in Texas. Davis said, "I'm glad to get the opportunity to come here", citing his desire to play every day.

In his second game as an Oriole, on August 2, Davis homered for his first Oriole hit against Everett Teaford in an 8–2 victory over the Kansas City Royals. He received everyday playing time but went on the DL on August 14 with a right shoulder strain, an injury which was initially feared to be season-ending but wound up keeping him out only until September 6. In an 11-inning 5–4 victory over the Yankees on September 7, he struck out five times, the first Oriole to strike out that many times since Phil Bradley did so exactly 22 years before. He had three-hit games on September 8 and 19. On September 14, he had a season-high three RBI with a three-run home run against Wade Davis in a 6–2 victory over the Tampa Bay Rays. 

Davis played 31 games for the Orioles, batting .276/.310/.398 with 34 hits, two home runs, 13 RBIs, and 39 strikeouts in 123 at bats. In a combined 59 games with Texas and Baltimore, he batted .266 with 53 hits, 12 doubles, five home runs, 19 RBI, and 63 strikeouts.

Davis received everyday playing time in 2012, starting at first base, at designated hitter, and in the outfield throughout the season. On May 6, in a 17-inning, 9-6 victory over the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park, Davis went hitless in eight at bats, but ended up being the winning pitcher. His feat was the first of its kind since Rube Waddell achieved it on July 4, 1905. Davis was the designated hitter until he was pressed into service as a relief pitcher in the 16th inning after Showalter had depleted the Orioles' bullpen. He struck out two batters and did not allow a run in his two innings of mound work. He was the first position player in the American League (AL) to be the winning pitcher in a game since Rocky Colavito on August 25, 1968, and the first to pitch for the Orioles since Manny Alexander on April 19, 1996. He and losing pitcher Darnell McDonald were the first position players on opposing teams in the same contest to each work in relief since Ty Cobb and George Sisler on October 4, 1925, and the first where both earned pitching decisions since Sam Mertes and Jesse Burkett on September 28, 1902. Davis described his outing: "After the first inning, I was just trying to get it over the plate, and I was like, 'This is a lot harder than it looks.' I told myself to start using my legs so I didn't blow my arm out or anything like that. But in all seriousness, to get a win like that here, to end a road trip like this, it's huge. Neither team wanted to lose today, especially when it goes to extra innings. I mean, they would have pulled people out of the stands to finish that game. It's just a huge win for us."

On July 31, Davis hit his first career grand slam, off Yankees' pitcher Iván Nova in an 11–5 win after the Orioles had faced a five-run deficit. On August 24, Davis had his first career three-homer game in a 6–4 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays. His second home run was his 22nd of the season, setting a new career high, and it marked the first three-homer game by an Oriole since Nick Markakis had one in 2006. After Markakis suffered a season-ending injury on September 8, Davis moved to right field for the remainder of the season and the playoffs. 

Due to a late-season stretch in which he homered six times in the final six games, he finished the regular season with 33 home runs, more than any other Oriole. In 139 games (515 at bats), he batted .270/.326/.501 with 139 hits, 20 doubles, and 85 RBI. His 33 home runs also tied Robinson Canó for eighth in the AL while his 169 strikeouts tied B. J. Upton for fourth.

The Orioles reached the playoffs for the first time since 1997, claiming one of the AL Wild Card spots and defeating the Rangers in the 2012 AL Wild Card Game. In Game 2 of the 2012 AL Division Series (ALDS) against the Yankees, Davis had a two-run single against Andy Pettitte in the Orioles' 3–2 victory. Those were his only RBI of the series; he had four hits in 20 at bats as the Yankees defeated the Orioles in five games.

The Orioles decided to put Davis at first base full-time in 2013 and worked on his defense in spring training; later, Oriole coaches and teammates believed this helped Davis succeed at the plate as well. He set a personal home run goal before the season but refused to share it. On April 5, Davis set a new Major League record with 16 RBI in the first four games of a season. He also became the fourth MLB player in history to hit a home run in the first four games of the season (Nelson Cruz, Mark McGwire, Willie Mays), including a grand slam against Tyler Robertson in the fourth game, a 9–5 victory over the Minnesota Twins.

On June 16, he hit the 100th home run of his career, off Red Sox pitcher Jon Lester in a 6–3 victory. On July 11, he hit his 34th home run of the season, eclipsing his previous season high in a 3–1 victory over the Rangers. He earned his 87th and 88th RBIs of the season with a two-run home run against Mark Buehrle on July 12, setting a new Orioles record for most RBIs before the All-Star break; the previous record was 86 by Boog Powell. He ultimately ended up with 93 RBIs before the All-Star break. On July 14, he hit his 37th home run of the season against Josh Johnson in a 7–4 victory over the Toronto Blue Jays, tying Reggie Jackson for the second most home runs before the All-Star break by any MLB player and the most by an American League player. The home run was also his 500th career hit.

Davis received a tweet on June 30 from Michael Tran in Michigan asking him if he had ever used steroids. He responded "No", that same day. Davis said later in an interview, "I have not ever taken any PEDs. I'm not sure fans realize, we have the strictest drug testing in all of sports, even more than the Olympics. If anybody was going to try to cheat in our game, they couldn't. It's impossible to try to beat the system. Anyway, I've never taken PEDs, no. I wouldn't. Half the stuff on the list I can't even pronounce." Later, Davis would say that he believed Roger Maris's 61 home run season was the true single-season home run record, due to the steroid scandal surrounding Barry Bonds, Sammy Sosa, and Mark McGwire.

On July 6, Davis was elected to start the 2013 All-Star Game, his first ever appearance. He was the leading vote-getter with 8,272,243 votes. Davis was also chosen to participate in the Home Run Derby for the first time, by American League captain Robinson Canó. Davis advanced to the second round and hit a total of 12 home runs. However, a blister broke on his hand, leaving him unable to hit enough homers to advance to the third and final round. At the All-Star Game the next night, July 16, 2013, Davis went 1-3, with a fly out, a single and a strikeout. Davis's single against Patrick Corbin advanced Miguel Cabrera to third, where he would score the game's first run on José Bautista's sacrifice fly.

Davis's 50th home run of the season, which he hit on September 13, tied him with Brady Anderson for the Orioles record of most home runs in a single season. He also became only the third player in MLB history, after Babe Ruth (New York Yankees, 1921) and Albert Belle (Cleveland Indians, 1995), to hit 50 home runs and 40 doubles in a single season. He hit his 51st home run on September 17, setting a new Orioles single season record. This was also his 92nd extra-base hit of the season, again tying Anderson for a franchise record. He later surpassed that by hitting his first triple of the season against Alex Cobb on September 21 in a 5–1 loss to Tampa Bay. Davis broke another Orioles record on September 27 with his 28th home run of the season hit at his home park of Camden Yards, surpassing Frank Robinson's record of 27 home runs hit at Memorial Stadium in 1966.

In 2013, Davis led all MLB batters in home runs (53), runs batted in (138), extra-base hits (96), and total bases (370). His 53 home runs, 96 extra-base hits, and 199 strikeouts all set new Orioles single-season records. In addition to these statistics, which were all career highs, he also set new career highs in games played (160), hits (167), doubles (42), runs scored (103), walks (72), stolen bases (4), batting average (.286), on-base percentage (.370), slugging percentage (.634), and OPS (1.004). In AL Most Valuable Player Award (MVP) voting, Davis finished third behind Cabrera and Mike Trout, as the Orioles failed to return to the playoffs.

Davis's breakout year led to compliments from his peers. Teammate Adam Jones summarized his style: "Most of his home runs are just line drives that get out. Obviously he hits some moonshots too." Cliff Lee, Davis's teammate in Texas in 2010, said, "Watching his highlights, you can totally tell that he's relaxed and just letting it happen. He's not putting anything extra into it. It's just nice and easy, and it's impressive to watch. . . . He and Miguel Cabrera are the two best power hitters in the game, in my opinion."

Davis missed 12 games from April 26, 2014, to May 11, 2014, with a left oblique strain. He hit three home runs and had five RBI on May 20 in a 9–2 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates. On June 17, facing Érik Bédard with the bases loaded, Davis hit a ball to left field that hit off the left field foul pole at Tropicana Field. Initially ruled a double, the umpires changed it to a grand slam after a review. The Orioles went on to defeat the Rays 7–5. After a 4-for-36 slump, Davis was benched on June 23, but he had a pinch-hit walk off three-run home run against Ronald Belisario, giving the Orioles a 6–4 victory over the Chicago White Sox. It was the Orioles' first game-ending pinch hit home run since Larry Sheets had one on August 24, 1988. Davis struggled in the first half of 2014, hitting 15 home runs but batting around .200. The slump continued, as he batted .202 in July and saw himself dropped to seventh in the batting order in August. Showalter said, "It's hard to follow that pace. He spoiled us at a very high level. He wants to get back to it." Despite his slump, the Orioles through August 23 had built a seven-game lead in the AL East.

On September 12, Davis was suspended for 25 games for testing positive for amphetamine. Davis claimed he tested positive due to the use of Adderall, for which he previously had a "therapeutic use exemption", although he did not have that exemption for the 2014 season. Davis' suspension covered the final 17 games of the 2014 regular season and the seven games the Orioles played in the 2014 postseason.

For the 2014 season, he batted .196 (the lowest batting average among all qualified MLB batters)/.300/.404 with 26 home runs and 173 strikeouts (3rd in the AL) in 450 at bats.

Davis received a therapeutic use exemption for Vyvanse, a stimulant drug, prior to the 2015 season. He served the final game of his suspension on Opening Day.

In the month of July, Davis had three home runs robbed from him, more than any other Major Leaguer the entire year. On July 28 against the Atlanta Braves, Davis hit two home runs and drove in 5 runs. It was his tenth career multi-home run game and third of the 2015 season. On July 30, in a game against the Detroit Tigers, Davis hit his 25th home run of the year, which happened to be his 83rd career home run at Oriole Park, which gave him sole possession of 6th place on the stadium's all-time home run list. On August 5, Davis hit his sixth career grand slam and second of the season in the tenth inning in a game against the Oakland Athletics, which helped lift Baltimore to a 7-3 victory. Ten days later, Davis hit a walk-off solo home run against the A's in Baltimore. It was his second home run of the night and number 34 on the year. On September 3, Davis hit a walk off solo home run to help the O's end a six-game losing skid. It was his 38th of the year. It was also his 152nd with the Orioles, giving him sole possession of 11th place on the franchise's all-time list. The home run also happened to be his 90th career home run at OPACY, giving him sole possession of fourth on the stadium's all-time list. On September 4, Davis became the first Orioles player to have back-to-back multi-home run games since 2009. In addition, he became the first Orioles player ever with multiple 40-home-run seasons (hit 53 in 2013). That game, against Toronto, became his sixth multi-homer game of the year and the 13th of his career. Davis led the majors in home runs with 47. This made Davis the only Orioles hitter to ever have two seasons with 40+ homers (53 in 2013 & 47 in 2015). 

He struck out a major-league-leading 31.0% of the time, batted .262/.361/.562. He led the league in strikeouts (with 208) and at bats per home run (12.2), was 2nd in the AL in RBIs (117), was 4th in the AL in slugging percentage (.562), walks (84), and total bases (322), and 7th in the AL in runs (100).

On January 21, 2016, Davis signed a 7-year, $161 million contract to stay with the Orioles, the richest contract in Orioles history. Coincidentally, 161 was the number of home runs Davis hit with the Orioles before signing the contract.

Davis hit his first home run of the season in the Orioles' second game on April 6 against the Minnesota Twins. Davis would go 20-for-85 (.235), hitting seven home runs, while driving in 17 in the month of April. On May 11, Davis hit back-to-back home runs with teammate Mark Trumbo. It was the third consecutive game the Orioles had accomplished the feat, setting an Orioles franchise record. Davis also collected four hits in the game, raising his season average to .242. Davis would end up hitting just .210 in the month of May, but had a .313 on-base percentage for the month. He hit three home runs and drove in 11. On June 3, in a game against the Yankees, Davis homered to the flagcourt in OPACY, giving him his 214th career home run, 172 as an Oriole, and milestone number 100 at Oriole Park at Camden Yards. He moved into third place on the all-time Orioles list for most career home runs hit at OPACY. During the week of June 12, Davis hit a home run in five consecutive games while batting .368, earning him AL Player of the Week honors.

On July 10, Davis passed Ken Singleton for 8th place on the Orioles all-time home run list with 183. Davis hit his 30th home run of the season on August 23 in an 8-1 victory over the Washington Nationals. It was his fourth 30-home run season since joining the Orioles (2012, 2013 & 2015).

On September 6, Davis homered in an 11-2 win against the Rays, giving him 334 career extra-base hits as an Oriole, tying him for 14th on the all-time list with BJ Surhoff. He also joined Boog Powell and Rafael Palmeiro as the only three Orioles to hit 35 or more homers in a season three or more times. 

In 159 games of 2016, Davis finished the year with a .221/.332/.459 batting line. He hit 38 home runs (8th in the American League), 84 RBIs, 88 walks (4th in the AL), and struck out an MLB-leading 219 times and a major-league-leading 32.9% of the time, .

During the second game of the season, Davis hit his 200th career home run in an Orioles uniform, making him the eighth Oriole in franchise history to do so. On May 16, in a game against the Tigers, Davis went 3-5 with three runs scored, four RBIs, two walks, a double and two home runs, including the game-winning home run in the 13th inning of the 13-11 victory. Davis became just the 2nd player in MLB history to hit two home runs in the 12th inning or later of a game, joining Matt Adams of the Cardinals. Davis also became the first Orioles player with multiple extra-inning home runs during a single game since Mike Young on May 28, 1987. His four RBIs also moved him past former teammate Brian Roberts for 21st all-time in franchise history. On May 18, Davis hit his 250th career home run (208th as an Oriole). He became the 221st player in MLB history to reach 250 career home runs. He also collected his 738th career hit as an Oriole, moving him into 50th all-time in franchise history. On May 24, he tied Brady Anderson for 7th in franchise history with his 209th career home run as an Oriole. 

For the 2017 season, he batted .215/.309/.423 overall. He had 195 strikeouts (3rd in the American League), striking out a major-league-leading 37.2% of the time, and batted .208/.293/.326 against left-handers.

Davis started the 2018 season with a .150 batting average and 86 strikeouts in his first 57 games. On June 15, the Orioles announced that Davis would be benched and that they would call up Corban Joseph. 

He ended his season hitting .168/.243/.296 with 16 home runs with 192 strikeouts (4th in the American League) in 128 games, and struck out in a major-league-leading 36.8% of his at bats, as his $23 million salary was the 10th-highest in the league. His .168 batting average, .243 on base percentage, and .296 slugging percentage were each the lowest of all qualified major league batters. He was 4th of all active MLB players in career strikeouts, with 1,696.

Davis, his wife, Jill, and their daughters, Ella, Evelyn, and Dorothy live in Baltimore, Maryland, and Flower Mound, Texas. Before that, they lived in Arlington, Texas. They married in 2011. During the offseason, he enjoys bass fishing.

Davis is a Christian. Growing up, his parents took him to First Baptist Church in Longview, but Davis said it was not until after his difficult 2010 season that he "finally grasped true faith". Davis says, "It's not about how hard you’re working to go against the grain. It's just about surrendering every day. Give God the glory no matter what happens. After every at bat after every play, it just keeps me grounded and keeps my faith strong and keeps my head and heart in the right place." He reads the Bible daily.




</doc>
<doc id="18192594" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18192594" title="Doghouse (song)">
Doghouse (song)

"Doghouse" is a song by American band No Doubt from their independent second studio album, "The Beacon Street Collection" (1995). Produced by the band, it was written by member Eric Stefani and released as the album's second and final single in late 1994. The band recorded "Doghouse" in their garage following Interscope Records's refusal to provide them funding and professional studio time. No Doubt used the proceeds from their concerts to create a 7" single for "Squeal" and "Doghouse". 1,000 copies of the single were distributed as part of the group's Beacon Street Records label.

The song is a blues-inspired ska pop track similar to the other songs on "The Beacon Street Collection". Its beat is accompanied by a saxophone, trombone, and trumpet. The lyrics detail a struggling relationship between a man and a woman; it uses the metaphor of a dog and its master to illustrate the female's desire for control and dominance. It is the first release by No Doubt to feature several musicians, including touring member Gabrial McNair. Critically, "Doghouse" was deemed in desperate need of a tune-up by music journalist and author Jeff Apt. 

Following the release of No Doubt's self-titled debut album in 1992, Interscope Records was disappointed in the project's lack of success, both commercially and critically. Despite the underwhelming performance, the label refused to drop No Doubt and revoked funding for their future releases. The group started creating their own songs from a makeshift recording studio in their garage. Guitarist Tom Dumont recalled that they "didn’t have any music to sell to [the] people coming to our shows", so "Doghouse" was recorded specifically to be handed out to their fans; it was also one of the first songs recorded for "The Beacon Street Collection", the group's second studio album.

In 1994, No Doubt created a two-part series of 7" singles in support of "The Beacon Street Collection" titled ND Beacon Street Singles. The first single released as part of the collection was "Squeal", earlier in 1994, followed by "Doghouse" in late 1994. According to the single's liner notes, the songs were recorded at the band members' homes on Beacon Street, a local road in Fullerton, California. The "Doghouse" 7" single release was limited to 1,000 copies and each single is individually numbered. The B-side song was "You Can't Teach an Ol' Dog New Tricks", a previously unreleased track written by Eric Stefani.

"The Beacon Street Collection" was independently released by No Doubt's Beacon Street Records label on March 25, 1995; "Doghouse" serves as the album's closing track. Following the sale of all 1,000 7" singles for "Doghouse", the record went out of print.

Musically, "Doghouse" is a blues-influenced ska pop track. It contains a progressive sound that author Jeff Apter considered a common element within "The Beacon Street Collection". Like the majority of the parent album, it contains synth arrangements and new wave-style influences to create a rawer sound than the music from its predecessor, "No Doubt". Lead vocals are performed by Gwen Stefani. With an ensemble of instruments, Dumont plays the guitar, Tony Kanal performs bass guitar, Eric Stefani uses the keyboards, and Adrian Young handles the drums. Additional instrumentation is provided by Gerard Boisse on saxophone, Phil Jordan on trumpet, and touring member Gabrial McNair on trombone.

"Doghouse" is set in common time and has a very fast tempo of 158 beats per minute. The key of the song is in B minor, with Stefani's vocal range spanning nearly an octave and a half. During the song's bridge leading up the final iteration of the chorus, she reaches the high note of D, in scientific pitch notation. Lyrically, it is about a man who is bullied and dominated by his girlfriend and is unwilling to force the situation to change. The song uses the metaphor of a dog and its master to illustrate the nature of the relationship, saying that she had got him "by the reins" and he has been "conditioned" by her. In the refrain, Stefani sings: "You're just a doggy / In a snap, you're fetching the bone / And you're barking when she calls / You're hiding behind the fence / You've been disobedient."

Jeff Apter, music journalist and author of the 2009 biography "Gwen Stefani and No Doubt: A Simple Kind of Life", suggested that "Doghouse" was another song on "The Beacon Street Collection" that was in desperate need of a tune-up for a more satisfying sound. However, he attributed the progressive sound of the single to the band's first collaboration with outsider musicians, such as Boisse, Jordan, and McNair.

Obtained from the liner notes of the "Doghouse" 7" single.


</doc>
<doc id="18197946" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18197946" title="King Arthur &amp; the Knights of Justice (video game)">
King Arthur &amp; the Knights of Justice (video game)

King Arthur & the Knights of Justice is an action-adventure game developed by Manley & Associates and published by Enix for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System in May 1995. Based on the cartoon series of the same title, which was loosely inspired by the Arthurian legend, the game was released in North America exclusively.

The player takes on the role of a team of American football players who are transported to Medieval England and given the mission to save King Arthur and destroy the evil sorceress Morgana and her army. The game was the first Enix title developed by an American company, and was inspired in-part by "The Legend of Zelda". It was received with reviews ranging from mediocre to extremely poor.

The game is an action-adventure game, played from a top-down perspective. The player takes on the role of Arthur King and is accompanied by two Knights of Justice controlled by the game console. The player battles enemies using a regular sword swing or a special attack, and can block high and low attacks.

Twelve Knights are available from the start (including Arthur King), each with his own weapon, personality and statistics for life force, defense, strength and speed. Each boss of the game has a specific weakness against one of the Knights. Changing party members is done by visiting the Round Table room in Camelot. Each character has a life meter, and Arthur also has a power meter. Various items must be collected to complete quests and objectives, while some can be used to restore a character's life meter.

An overworld map feature allows the player to directly access locations already visited once. The game has no saving feature but allows accessing various points of the storyline with a system of passwords.

The events of the game are set in a fictional version of Britain in the 5th century. The evil sorceress Morgana has magically imprisoned King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table in the Cave of Glass beneath her castle, past Hadrian's Wall. At Camelot, the King's wizard Merlin uses a crystal ball and locates a brave team of "warriors" in the future, led by Arthur King and dubbed "The Knights". They are actually American football players, though Merlin interprets their names as a sign of fate. He summons them back in time, and the Lady of the Table transforms them into "Knights of Justice". Merlin asks them to break the seal on King Arthur and the Knights of the Round by gathering the twelve Keys of Truth.

The party retrieves the Excalibur sword from the Lady of the Lake, proving their worth by claiming the Pendragon Shield from a young dragon at Shield Heights. They assist Erek, the deposed ruler of Tintagel Castle, and recover the first Key of Truth in the castle. They make their way into the village of Welton, which is under a mind control spell, and recover the second Key of Truth at Gruesome Keep. After breaking the spell on Welton and crossing the Blinder's Way, they claim the third Key of Truth at Castle Sanguine.

During the event, a Warlord infiltrates Camelot and poisons Squire Everett. The party collects an antidote in the Swamp of Zagar and saves the Squire. They then claim the fourth Key of Truth in Stone Keep. They rescue the son of the Gnome King to obtain the fifth Key of Truth, and collects four Elemental Keys to unlock access to Castle Vilor and the sixth Key of Truth. The party finds the seventh and eighth Keys of Truth in Crownhorn village and the Cape of Death, respectively. The ninth and tenth Keys are found in Blackroot Keep and the Dark Citadel while searching for the missing pieces of the Staff of Rhiothamus, which can break open a path in Hadrian's Wall.

Using the Staff, the party goes past Hadrian's Wall and into the Dark Forest, where the eleventh Key of Truth is found. In a cemetery, they stumble upon a statue of Morgana, which fires a magic beam that kills the two Knights in the party. Arthur travels to the Town of the Dead by himself then to the Plain of the Dead and retrieves his two dead Knights. They reach Morgana's castle, Stone Gardens, and defeat Morgana in her dragon form, thus obtaining the last Key of Truth. In the game's ending sequence, the party members are congratulated by the real, freed King Arthur, and Merlin uses Stonehenge to send them back to their era.

"King Arthur & the Knights of Justice" was the first Enix game developed by an American company: Manley & Associates in Issaquah, Washington. Roughly two dozen people worked on the game, though not all at the same time. It was initially planned for a 16-megabit cartridge, but four additional megabits were eventually added to expand the game. Development spanned about two years.

In addition to the original cartoon series, the developers gathered ideas from several sources for inspiration, including "The Legend of Zelda" action-adventure game series, and books such as T. H. White's "The Book of Merlyn" and fables from Medieval poet Marie de France. They noted that the hardest part of development was coming up with puzzles for each of the regions, as they had to be "fun and challenging, but not repetitive". While they tried to maintain a balance between action and puzzles, they noted that they focused more on the puzzle aspect of the game. Favorite parts of the game for the developers include the dragon battles, the boss Blackwing and Morgana's Warlords.

The title received generally negative reviews. Freelance critic Robert Schmitz gave the title a score of 0.5 out of 11, calling it "awful" and explaining the game is almost "better left unsaid." Schmitz blamed Enix's decision to base the game on a little-known cartoon series, The four reviewers of "Electronic Gaming Monthly" were divided. Ed Semrad and Danyon Carpenter said it was "okay", with the strong music, immersive sound effects, and epic quest balanced against the below-average graphics, while Al Manuel and Sushi-X said it was an all-around mediocre clone of "Secret of Mana". Both Carpenter and Sushi-X remarked that the game would have a hard time getting noticed due to it being released in the same month as "Chrono Trigger". Allan Milligan, in a review for the Gaming Intelligence Agency, judged the graphics and audio both mediocre, the character designs "terrible," the plot generic and the puzzles not challenging. He noted that it is impossible for the player to know in advance which Knight is best suited for which boss. Milligan called the game "staggeringly ill-conceived" and likened it to a "succession of fetch quests." He criticized the fact that all enemies on a screen must be defeated to progress through some passages, and the possibility for characters and enemies to be hidden from the player's view behind large objects. The Knights' artificial intelligence was also denounced, as was the lack of animation when a character or enemy is hit.



</doc>
<doc id="18212346" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18212346" title="Nueces Bay">
Nueces Bay

Nueces Bay is a northwestern extension of Corpus Christi Bay in the San Patricio and Nueces counties of Texas. The bay is fed by the Nueces River, forming a natural estuary, which renders it ecologically and economically vital to the surrounding area. It serves as a habitat for the propagation of fish and shellfish, which sustain diverse species of birds and other wildlife. The bay is threatened by pollution from the heavy industry on its southern shore, which prevents oyster farming. Petrochemical production and oil are important to the surrounding economies of the major settlements of Corpus Christi and Portland, found on the eastern shore and connected by the Nueces Bay Causeway at the bay's confluence with Corpus Christi Bay.

Agriculture dominates the northern shore, where many plots of land are still owned by the descendants of early settlers. The largely abandoned historical communities of Rosita and West Portland are also located in this area. To the west, the Odem Bay extension is formed, and is fed by Rincon Bayou and a large complex of marsh formed by the Nueces River delta. Just south of the mouth, are the remains of the abandoned Nuecestown settlement, which is now included in the Corpus Christi city limits.

Nueces Bay formed approximately 9,000 years ago, as the sea level rose at the conclusion of the last ice age. The sea level stabilized 6,000 years later, shaping the present-day Nueces Bay. The first human inhabitants were the nomadic Aransas Indians, who settled between the Copano and Baffin bays about 8,000 years ago, until 1300 CE. In the next century, the Karankawa Indians arrived, and were present when Europeans came ashore.

"Nueces" is Spanish for "nuts", and refers to the pecan trees that grew along the banks of the Nueces River, noted by Spanish explorer Alonso De León in 1689. It is unclear when the name was given to the bay; it was called "San Miguel Arcángel" by Spanish captain Joaquín de Orobio y Basterra in 1747, and an 1835 map of Texas identified it as "Papelote" or "wastepaper" Bay. It appears to have been first noted on a Spanish map in 1527 as the mouth of the "Río Escondido" or hidden river, which is believed to be the Nueces. French explorer René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle sailed into the bay in 1685, mistakenly believing it was the Mississippi River. Spanish colonial governor José de Escandón planned a villa on the mouth of the Nueces River named Villa de Vedoya. Fifty families were sent the site in 1749, but failed to establish a settlement, due to a lack of sufficient supplies. Later that century, missionaries discussed the possibility of moving Nuestra Señora del Refugio Mission to the site, but decided against the idea due to conflict with the Lipan Apaches. Germans attempted to settle the same area, but were turned away by the French during the Pastry War in the 1830s. The next decade, a colony for freed slaves was proposed by abolitionist Benjamin Lundy, who had to cancel after the outbreak of the Texas Revolution.

Corpus Christi, which was founded as a trading post on the southeastern shore in 1839, is believed to be the first permanent settlement on the bay. It soon grew into a major Texas port with a population of 277,454 at the time of the 2000 census. In 1852, a settlement was finally established at the confluence of the Nueces River and Nueces Bay by Henry Kinney, who also founded Corpus Christi. The community was referred to as "The Motts" by German and English settlers for nearby tree clusters, but was officially known as Nuecestown. It was raided by Mexican bandits in 1875, but recovered and grew to a population of 200 by 1896. After the railroad passed on the town in 1905, it declined, and is today included in the city limits of Corpus Christi. To the north of the bay, the Coleman-Fulton Pasture Company controlled a large segment of San Patricio County for ranching during the aftermath of the Texas Revolution. David Sinton and later Charles Phelps Taft, whose names are immortalized by the nearby towns of Sinton and Taft, were involved with the company. They sold a plot of land on the northeast of Nueces Bay to George H. Paul, who hired Mexican immigrants to clear the land of mesquite trees and founded a ranching community later named West Portland. The plots of land in this community are still mostly held by the descendants of the original owners. The town of Portland—on the extreme northeast of the bay—was also established from land purchased from the Coleman-Fulton Pasture Company by future State Senator John G. Willacy with help from a New England company. The town steadily grew and reached a population of 14,827 by 2000. To the northwest of the bay, on the Whites Point peninsula, a settlement was established around 1866 by cattledriver Darius Rachal, who had purchased land on the point from the cattle-driving White family. Soon after his purchase, many of the Whites died of yellow fever as an epidemic swept the area and killed 14 people. Rachal used his land to raise cattle, grow cotton and sell real estate to new settlers. A post office was established at the site in 1892, and was given the name "Rosita" or "little flower" after the names "White Point" and "Rachal" were rejected by United States Postal Service. After a 1915 gas explosion and two massive hurricanes, including a 1919 storm that killed 26 residents (approximately 50 were killed in Portland and 47 in Corpus Christi), the post office was abolished in 1919 and by the next year most residents had relocated to Odem.

Nueces Bay covers an area of and drains the of the Nueces River basin. It has an average depth of 2.3 ft, and a volume of . The bay is considered the southern extreme of the Texas Coastal Plain, which stretches northeast to Galveston Bay, and is part of the geographic transition from the grasslands of the coastal plain to the dry brush region of South Texas. It forms at the base of the Nueces River, which enters at the southwesternmost point of the bay. North of the Nueces entrance is the extension of Odem Bay, named for the nearby settlement of Odem. This extension includes shallow marsh fed by an extensive system of tidal streams including Rincon Bayou, and is headed by Whites Point to the east. Due south of Whites Point at the mouth of Odem Bay, is an oil field, situated against the backdrop of heavy industry on the shore to the southwest. The southern shore, which continues toward Rincon Point, is slender due to the industrial canal dredged to the south to the Port of Corpus Christi. The mouth of Nueces Bay on Corpus Christi Bay from Rincon Point to Indian Point, is crossed by the mile-long (1.6 km) Nueces Bay Causeway, which leads to Portland. West Portland is found on the shoreline of the bay as it curves north and west, which is lined with piers and residences. The bay leads back west to Whites Point on the north shore, which is largely used for agriculture.

The Nueces estuary provides an ecosystem for a wide variety of wildlife. However, since the construction of Choke Canyon Reservoir in 1985, freshwater inflows have decreased from the Nueces River, increasing the bay's salinity, and hurting the natural oyster and shrimp habitat. In response, the City of Corpus Christi, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department and two additional state agencies have worked to restore the natural freshwater inflows into the bay. The Odem Bay extension is low in salinity and serves as a nursery for shrimp, which migrate to Nueces Bay in spring. Oyster beds are common throughout the bay and are known to be hiding spots for such fish as trout, black drum, flounder and redfish. Such finfish must be protected from excessive freshwater introduction for survival.

A diverse collection of birds sustained by the water life, such as the black skimmer, brown pelican, great blue heron, egret, laughing gull, roseate spoonbill, tern, and the white ibis, can be found in the bay, especially near the mouth of Rincon Bayou. Local efforts by the Coastal Bend Bays and Estuaries program have benefited bird populations by adding crushed oyster shells to the bay's small islands for improved nesting conditions, and the restoration of marsh near the Nueces Bay Causeway to increase fish populations to satisfy the birds' dietary requirements. At the nearby Nueces Delta Preserve, countless birds have been observed, as well as bobcats, coyotes, feral hogs, mountain lions, rattlesnakes, Texas spiny lizards, western diamondbacks and white-tailed deer.

Oil has been pumped from the bay since 1912, but fishing has been a mainstay since humans have inhabited the area. In the early 1970s, recreational fishing accounted for a yearly input of $17 million to the local economy, while commercial fishermen contributed $27.3 million. Commercial oyster farming was common in the bay until 1995, when the Texas Department of State Health Services suspended the practice, due to an unhealthy annual average zinc level of nearly 2500 mg/kg in oysters, which as filter feeders, are affected by high levels of zinc in the water. The excessive zinc is believed to have been dumped into the bay by the American Smelting and Refining Company's Encycle Texas Incorporated subsidiary, which operated a zinc refinery at the site from 1942 to 1985. The Nueces Bay Power Station is also believed to have discharged zinc used for coolant until December 2002. Since that time, zinc levels in the bay have been reduced to slightly under 1000 mg/kg, which remains above the healthy levels of 700 mg/kg. The power station has since come under the control of the Topaz Power Group. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality has established the Total Maximum Daily Load Program to measure the level of pollutants throughout the Nueces watershed, in an effort to restore the bay to safe levels of contaminants. Pesticides that seep into the bay from the heavy agricultural activity on the north shore can also spur adverse environmental effects.

Several oil spills have occurred as a result of the heavy petroleum industry on the south shore of Nueces Bay. In 1984, approximately of oil leaked from a busted pipeline, which blackened of the shore. Ten years later, Koch Industries, which owns a refinery on the bay, was responsible for a major spill that resulted in the release of of oil, leaving a slick that seeped into Corpus Christi Bay. The Environmental Protection Agency fined the company $30 million for the spill in 2000, and $2.5 million was later given by the company to the state of Texas to improve the bay's water quality.


</doc>
<doc id="18288707" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18288707" title="Laura Robson">
Laura Robson

Laura Robson (born 21 January 1994) is a British tennis player. She debuted on the ITF Junior Tour in 2007, and a year later won the Wimbledon Junior Girls' Championship at the age of 14. As a junior, she also twice reached the final of the girls' singles tournament at the Australian Open, in 2009 and 2010. She won her first tournament on the ITF Women's Circuit in November 2008.

In singles tennis, Robson was the first British woman since Samantha Smith at Wimbledon in 1998 to reach the fourth round of a Grand Slam tournament, doing so at the 2012 US Open and the 2013 Wimbledon Championships. At the 2012 Guangzhou Women's Open, Robson became the first British woman since Jo Durie in 1990 to reach a WTA Tour final, where she lost to Hsieh Su-wei. She was named WTA Newcomer of the Year for 2012 and reached a career-high singles ranking of world No. 27 the following year.

In doubles, she won a silver medal in the mixed doubles at the 2012 London Olympics playing with Andy Murray, with whom she also reached the 2010 Hopman Cup final. She has a career-high doubles ranking of No. 82 (July 2013).

Robson suffered from various injuries throughout the 2014 and 2015 seasons, notably to her left wrist for which she had surgery in April 2014, resulting in multiple prolonged absences from the WTA Tour. She dropped out of the world rankings in early 2015, returning at No. 906 in July 2015. Since returning to full-time tennis in January 2016 post-injury, Robson has struggled with form and not managed to return to the top 150 in singles tennis. In July 2018, Robson underwent hip surgery.

Robson was born on 21 January 1994 in Melbourne, the third child of Australian parents Andrew, an oil executive with Royal Dutch Shell, and Kathy Robson, a sports coach and former professional basketball player. Robson and her family moved from Melbourne to Singapore when she was 18 months old, and then to the United Kingdom when she was six.

According to her parents, she began playing tennis "as soon as she could hold a tennis racquet", and after being encouraged by them, she entered a junior tennis academy at age seven. She signed with management company Octagon when she was ten, with Adidas at age 11, and also signed a racquet deal with Wilson Sporting Goods.

After working with several coaches, including the head of the Lawn Tennis Association Carl Maes, she chose coach Martijn Bok in 2007. Bok said later that although Robson "had trouble staying emotionally under control", he "saw right away...a lot of potential in Laura." Robson also began training at the National Tennis Centre, under the guidance of Bok, Maes, and the head of women's tennis at the centre, Nigel Sears, while taking school lessons at home.

Robson's first tournament on the Junior ITF Circuit was in 2007. She went from the qualifying draw of the tournament to the quarterfinals, and reached the final of two other tournaments, and won her first titel in October. In the first half of 2008, she reached the finals of three tournaments, but was also eliminated before the third round in three straight tournaments.

Robson competed in her first junior Grand Slam at the Wimbledon girls' event, as an unseeded player. As the youngest player in the tournament, she beat top seed Melanie Oudin on her way to the finals where she defeated third seed Noppawan Lertcheewakarn. Her victory made her the first British player to win the girls' event since Annabel Croft in 1984, and the British media described her as the "new darling" of British tennis, and the "Queen of Wimbledon".

After a brief period on the main tour, Robson returned to junior competition but was knocked out in the second round of a tournament in December. In the same month she played her final junior tournament of 2008, the Orange Bowl, where she had to retire in the third round with a stomach strain. At the end of the year, she was shortlisted for the BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year, but lost out to Paralympic swimmer Eleanor Simmonds.

After recovering from her injury, Robson entered the 2009 Australian Open junior tournament, where she was seeded fifth. In the semifinals she faced a replay of her Wimbledon final, against top seed Noppawan Lertcheewakarn, whom she beat in straight sets to reach her second Grand Slam junior final. Facing third seed Ksenia Pervak from Russia, Robson was defeated in straight sets. She later attributed her loss to Pervak's greater consistency, and her coach Bok said that "everybody has to be patient". After the tournament, Robson started to train with Gil Reyes, the former trainer of Andre Agassi. She was also named the MCC Young Sportswoman of the Year. She claimed the top ranking of ITF Junior Tour in April, despite not playing for two months because of shin splints. 
At the French Open, Robson was the top seed in the junior's competition, but was defeated in round two by Sandra Zaniewska. Robson was the defending champion at Wimbledon, but she fell in the second round to Quirine Lemoine.

Due to her focusing on her senior career, Robson entered the US Open unseeded. In the first round, she beat Ons Jabeur of Tunisia. She then faced the seventh seed Lauren Embree of the United States and beat her in three sets. She went on to face the 12th seed, Tamaryn Hendler, who she defeated in straight sets. Robson then beat Lauren Davis in the quarterfinals. In her semifinal, she faced Yana Buchina of Russia. Due to rain delay, both quarter- and semifinals were played on the same day. Therefore, the semifinal followed the quarterfinal match. Despite starting strongly, Robson tired, losing the match in three sets.

At the junior singles at the 2010 Australian Open, Robson was unseeded and defeated Belinda Woolcock, Yulia Putintseva, and Cristina Dinu to reach the quarterfinals. In the last eight, she easily overcame American Ester Goldfeld to move through to her fourth junior Grand Slam semifinal where she defeated Kristýna Plíšková of the Czech Republic. She was defeated by Kristýna's twin sister Karolína in the final. In the Wimbledon junior singles she reached the semifinals, losing to Sachie Ishizu of Japan.

Following her victory at Wimbledon, Robson made her debut on the ITF senior circuit at a $10,000 tournament in Limoges, France. She won two matches to qualify for the main draw of the tournament, as well as her first-round match, before having to retire with a shoulder injury in the second round against the second seed Marina Melnikova.

Robson was then given a wildcard into the main draw of a $75,000 event in Shrewsbury. After beating 2007 Wimbledon girls' singles champion Urszula Radwańska and fourth seed Tzipi Obziler, Robson lost to second seed Maret Ani in three sets in the semifinals. She was given another wildcard into the $50,000 tournament in Barnstaple, but was defeated in three sets in her first round match against the seventh seed Angelique Kerber, who later said that it was "unbelievable how she's playing".

Her first match on the WTA Tour was courtesy of a wildcard into the Fortis Championships in Luxembourg City. She lost in the first round against world No. 42 Iveta Benešová. Returning to the ITF Circuit, Robson entered as the fifth seed in a $10,000 event held in Sunderland. After beating third seed Laura-Ioana Andrei in the quarterfinals, she also beat fellow Britons Tara Moore and Samantha Vickers in straight sets to win her first ITF title at the age of 14 years and 9 months.

Robson returned to the junior tour for the first half of 2009. On 9 June, Wimbledon announced that Robson received a wildcard for the singles event at the Wimbledon Championships. She faced former world No. 5 and 2002 Wimbledon quarterfinalist Daniela Hantuchová in the first round but lost despite being a break up in the second set. She also entered into the doubles tournament with Georgie Stoop, progressing to the second round before losing to 16th seeds Svetlana Kuznetsova and Amélie Mauresmo.

In August 2009, Robson received also a wildcard into the US Open qualifying. She defeated Stéphanie Foretz of France in the first round in straight sets, and went on to beat Anikó Kapros of Hungary. In the final round, she lost to Eva Hrdinová, after leading 4–1 in the third set.

On 17 October, Robson entered the qualifying draw at the Luxembourg Open. In the first round of qualifying she defeated world No. 180 Zuzana Ondrášková. In the second round she defeated Julia Görges, the world No. 79. In the final round of qualifying she lost to Maria Elena Camerin. On 10 November, Robson beat Yuliya Beygelzimer in the first round of the Minsk ITF competition. She defeated Tetyana Arefyeva in the second round but was defeated in the quarterfinals by Vitalia Diatchenko.

Robson began the season playing with Andy Murray in the Hopman Cup, as part of Great Britain's first team in the tournament since 1992. She lost her opening match to Yaroslava Shvedova of Kazakhstan. Later in the day she won the mixed-doubles match against Kazakhstan, partnering with Murray to secure a win. Robson was defeated by Germany's Sabine Lisicki but won the mixed doubles against Germany. Robson and Murray defeated Russia to advance to the finals. Despite her first win of the tournament against world No. 26 María José Martínez Sánchez of Spain, Robson and Murray lost to Spain's Martínez Sánchez and Tommy Robredo in a very close match.

Robson was granted a wildcard in the qualifying draw for the women's singles of the Australian Open. In her first match, she defeated Sophie Ferguson of Australia. In her second match she lost to Michaëlla Krajicek. Robson, however, received a wildcard into the main draw of the doubles, partnering Sally Peers. They defeated Jill Craybas and Abigail Spears to set up a second-round clash with the 12th seeds Chuang Chia-jung and Květa Peschke, who they beat in straight sets. Peers and Robson won their third-round clash with Vera Dushevina and Anastasia Rodionova to advance to the quarterfinals, before falling to the No. 15 seeds, Maria Kirilenko and Agnieszka Radwańska.

After the Australian Open, Robson did not play again until the start of April. In her third tournament back, Robson made the semifinal losing to Edina Gallovits of the ITF event in Dothan after having to qualify for the main draw. She also played in the doubles, and after reaching the quarterfinals, she reached a career high of No. 102 for doubles. She followed this up with a quarterfinal appearance in Charlottesville losing to Anastasiya Yakimova.

She then qualified for the main draw of the Aegon Classic in Edgbaston, after receiving a wildcard in qualification. She beat Nina Bratchikova and Vitalia Diatchenko. Robson then went on to win her first-ever match on the WTA Tour, after her opponent Stefanie Vögele retired during the second set of their first-round match. She lost to the third seed Yanina Wickmayer in the second round. She also received a wildcard for the UNICEF Open at Rosmalen but was beaten by Slovakian Dominika Cibulková in the first round.

She received a wildcard for Wimbledon, and faced fourth seed Jelena Janković to whom she lost in two sets. Robson's next senior level competition was an Aegon GB Pro-Series event at Woking. Seeded seventh, her first senior seeding, she reached the quarterfinals. Her next competitive match did not come till the end of August 2010, when she entered the qualifying tournament for the US Open. In the first round she shocked second seed Jelena Dokić. She beat Vesna Manasieva, but lost in the third round to Nuria Llagostera Vives.

On 21 September, Robson announced that she was to split with her coach Martijn Bok, as Bok was unwilling to meet her more demanding 2011 tour schedule.

Robson next competed in the Toray Pan Pacific Open. She beat world No. 57 Anastasija Sevastova in the first round of qualifying and reached the main draw by beating world No. 100 Simona Halep. She was defeated in the first round of the main draw by the experienced 31-year-old player Gréta Arn.

For 2011, Robson hired a new coach, Frenchman Patrick Mouratoglou, and moved her working base to Paris. Her season was disrupted by injury at the Hopman Cup and she did not compete in a tournament until March 2011; her comeback was then delayed for a further month by an injury in her second competition. Returning again at the end of April 2011, Robson's best performance to date came at the $50,000 tournament at Indian Harbor Beach, Florida, where she reached the semifinals. Robson split from Mouratoglou just before Wimbledon. She then won her first match at a Grand Slam tournament as she defeated Angelique Kerber, but lost to Maria Sharapova in the second round.

At the US Open, Robson won her three qualifying matches to advance into the main draw. In the first round of the main draw, she was leading when her opponent, Ayumi Morita, retired from the match. She was then beaten by Anabel Medina Garrigues.

Robson came through three rounds of qualifying at the Australian Open, beating Melanie Oudin, Anna Floris and Olga Savchuk to advance to the main draw for the first time. She lost to 13th seed Jelena Janković in the first round.

Robson was selected for the first time in her career to be a member of British Fed Cup team to play in the Europe/Africa Group-1 match at Eilat, Israel, on 1–4 February 2012. In the group stages she played doubles with Heather Watson, defeating pairs from Portugal, Netherlands and Israel in the group stages. Robson and Watson did not need to play the play-off match against Austria as Anne Keothavong and Elena Baltacha won their singles rubbers, and the 2–0 lead qualified the team for a place in the World Group-II promotion play-off in April 2012.

Robson lost in the third round of qualifying for the 2012 French Open at Roland Garros. However, she got a place in the first round of the main draw as a lucky loser when Sílvia Soler Espinosa withdrew, but then lost her first-round match to Anabel Medina Garrigues.

After a second round showing at the Aegon Classic in Birmingham (lost to Marina Erakovic), Robson came through qualifying at the Aegon International. She reached the second round before losing to Ekaterina Makarova. However, the result helped Robson break into the top 100 for the first time in her career. In the first round of Wimbledon, Robson lost to Francesca Schiavone in three sets.

Immediately after Wimbledon, Robson entered the XXV Italiacom Open in Palermo where she reached her first ever WTA semifinal. After beating the world No. 240 Valentyna Ivakhnenko for the loss of just one game in the first round, she shocked the No. 2 seed and world No. 27 Roberta Vinci in straight sets to reach her first ever WTA quarterfinal. She continued her good form in the quarterfinal, where she emerged victorious against No. 5 seed Carla Suárez Navarro in three sets. However, her run came to an end when she lost in the semifinals to Barbora Záhlavová-Strýcová in three sets. Robson then received a wildcard to enter the main draw of the Swedish Open but lost her first match against Medina Garrigues.
She received a late place into the women's singles at the 2012 Olympics due to the withdrawal of Croatian Petra Martić. In her first-round match, she beat the world No. 22 Lucie Šafářová in straight sets, setting up a second round encounter with Maria Sharapova. She lost to the Russian world No. 3 in a tightly contested match. She also competed in the doubles competition with Heather Watson, losing in the first round to the German pairing of Angelique Kerber and Sabine Lisicki. She then received a wildcard entry into the mixed doubles with Andy Murray. They were drawn against Czech pair Lucie Hradecká and Radek Štěpánek in the first round and won in three sets. In the second round the pair beat the Australian duo of Lleyton Hewitt and Samantha Stosur, and reached the final by beating Germans Sabine Lisicki and Christopher Kas, where they were beaten by the Belarusian pair Victoria Azarenka and Max Mirnyi.

Robson had direct entry to the main draw of the US Open from her WTA ranking, where she defeated Samantha Crawford in the first round. In the second she defeated former US Open champion Kim Clijsters in Clijsters' final singles match before her retirement. Robson consequently reached the third round of a Grand Slam tournament for the first time in her career and joined Serena Williams, Lindsay Davenport, Venus Williams, Amélie Mauresmo and Justine Henin as one of the only six people to beat Clijsters at the US Open championships, and the first player to beat her there since 2003. She followed up her performance with her first victory over a top-ten player, beating 9th seed Li Na in the third round in three sets. Robson became the first female British tennis player to reach this stage of a Grand Slam tournament since Samantha Smith reached the fourth round of Wimbledon 14 years previously, but she was defeated by defending champion Stosur, ending her best run at a Grand Slam tournament to date.

Robson's next appearance was at the Guangzhou Open where she beat the then world No. 22 Zheng Jie and the No. 3 seed Sorana Cîrstea on the way to her first WTA Tour final against Hsieh Su-wei. This was the first WTA singles final for any British woman since Jo Durie in 1990. Robson was eventually defeated having saved five championship points in the second set and despite taking a 3–0 lead in the third set. The result pushed her ranking inside the top 70 for the first time.

Robson qualified for the China Open and reached the second round but she lost to Lourdes Domínguez Lino in straight sets. At the HP Open in Japan, she was seeded 8th, the first time in her career she had been seeded at a WTA tournament. She reached the quarterfinals before losing to Chang Kai-chen in three sets, but the result ensured that she finished the year with a ranking of 53.

In October, Robson was nominated for the Sports Journalists' Association Sportswoman of the Year. In November, along with Heather Watson, won "Young Sportswoman of the Year" at the "2012 Sunday Times Sportswomen of the Year Awards". Robson was also nominated for "WTA Newcomer of the Year" and "William Hill" "Sportswoman of the Year" in November, winning the former award.

At the start of the year, Robson had reached the top 50 for the first time in her career. She followed this with her first victory at the Australian Open with a convincing straight sets victory over Melanie Oudin. In the second round she played former Wimbledon champion, and fellow left-hander, Petra Kvitová. Robson came back after losing the first set to beat Kvitová in a three-hour match, to set up a third-round meeting with Sloane Stephens. After stopping for several shoulder treatments, Robson was eventually beaten in two sets. After the Australian Open, Robson played six matches in Fed Cup competition that saw Great Britain earn a World Group II play-off spot against Argentina. Following this success she went on to lose two successive matches, losing to Daniela Hantuchová in Doha and to wildcard Yulia Putintseva in Dubai.

At Indian Wells, Robson lost her first-round match against Sofia Arvidsson in three sets. Her next tournament was at Miami. In the singles, Robson reached the second round before losing to Alizé Cornet. In the doubles Laura Robson was given a wildcard to play with Lisa Raymond. The pair reached the final, beating the world No. 1 pairing of Sara Errani and Roberta Vinci in straight sets in the semifinals, before losing to Nadia Petrova and Katarina Srebotnik.

Robson was seeded 16th at Charleston and reached the second round before losing to Eugenie Bouchard in three sets. At the BNP Paribas Katowice Open Robson was seeded eighth, but lost in the first round to Lourdes Domínguez Lino.

Robson represented Great Britain in the Fed Cup World Group II play-off against Argentina. After Johanna Konta lost her opening rubber to Paula Ormaechea, Robson easily won her first match over Florencia Molinero. Robson lost her second match against Paula Ormaechea in three sets.

After several first-round defeats at the start to the European clay-court season, Robson defeated world No. 4 Agnieszka Radwańska in the second round of the Mutua Madrid Open. She subsequently lost to former world No. 1 Ana Ivanovic in the next round, having led 5–2 in the final set. Robson then made her debut at the Italian Open where she defeated Venus Williams in the first round but subsequently lost to her sister, world No. 1 and eventual champion Serena Williams, in the second round. At the French Open Robson was beaten in the first round by former world No. 1 Caroline Wozniacki in straight sets.

To begin the grass-court season, Robson entered the Aegon Classic tournament in Birmingham where she was seeded seventh. Despite the seeding, she lost in straight sets to the eventual champion Daniela Hantuchová. She then participated in the Aegon International tournament. In the first round, she faced Yuliya Beygelzimer in which she won in straight sets. In the second round, she lost to Caroline Wozniacki in straight sets for the second time in a row.

In the first round of Wimbledon, she was drawn against the No. 10 seed Maria Kirilenko, whom she beat in straight sets. She beat world No. 117, Mariana Duque, in the second round on Centre Court. In the third round, she came from a set down to beat Marina Erakovic to progress to the last 16 where she was beaten by Kaia Kanepi. Her performance pushed her up to 27 in the world, the first Briton in the top 30 since Jo Durie in 1987.

Robson started her US Open Series campaign on 30 July 2013 at the Southern California Open in Carlsbad being drawn against Ayumi Morita, whom she beat having come back from a set down in two hours and 40 minutes. Laura moved into the second round faced with the world No. 7 Petra Kvitová from Czech Republic but lost in straight sets putting an end to her Southern California Open.

To start the Canadian Open in Toronto, Robson was due to play Yanina Wickmayer from Belgium on 5 August 2013 in her opening match, but had to pull out due to a wrist injury. The same injury also led to her pulling out of the tournament in Cincinnati, however her ranking of No. 32 meant that she would be seeded at a Grand Slam tournament for the first time in her career, entering the US Open as the 30th seed.

At the US Open, Robson returned after intensive rehab on her wrist injury and began her campaign against Spain's Lourdes Domínguez Lino, whom she had lost to twice previously. After winning a scrappy first set, Robson powered through the second at love. In the second round, she faced world No. 75 Caroline Garcia, and won in two tight sets. She then fell in straight sets in the next round to Li Na in the same place they had played last year, where Robson had won. The fifth seed Li powered 11 aces to beat her 12-year younger opponent, Robson in straight sets. After a break of around three weeks, Robson returned to action at the Guangzhou Open, a tournament in which she was a finalist the previous year. She started strongly, with straight sets wins over qualifier Jovana Jakšić in the first round, and Zheng Saisai of China in the second round. She subsequently lost to another Chinese player in Zheng Jie, despite taking the first set 6–1.

In October 2013, it was announced that Miles Maclagan's coaching partnership with Laura had ended and that she would be taking a couple of weeks out and starting the search for a new coach.

Robson started her 2014 season at the Hobart International, where she had to retire in her first round match against Yanina Wickmayer due to a left wrist injury. Her wrist continued to affect her at the Australian Open, where Kirsten Flipkens defeated her in straight sets. After taking three-months rest from the tour, Robson underwent surgery on her left wrist in April. The surgery forced her to miss the French Open, Wimbledon and the US Open, and although Robson initially hoped to be playing by the end of the season, she only started training in October, and did not play again in 2014.

Robson did not enter the Australian Open in 2015 and subsequently left the WTA rankings, having not competed for 12 months. Robson planned to return at the $25,000 ITF tournament at Surprise, Arizona, but delayed her return and did not enter another ITF event in February. She declined a wildcard into the qualifying event of the Miami Masters in March. Her agent Eisenbund stated that she had not suffered a setback, and was "closer and closer" to a return.

After an absence of a year and a half, Robson's first competitive match was at the qualifying draw of the Aegon International in Eastbourne in June. She lost to top-seed Daria Gavrilova in straight sets. Robson was granted a wildcard to compete at Wimbledon, but she was defeated in the first round by Evgeniya Rodina.

In July 2015, she played at a $50,000 event in Granby and won a tough three-set match over second seed Naomi Osaka. However, she lost her next match to American qualifier Ellie Halbauer. Robson also reached the final in doubles partnering Erin Routliffe. In Gatineau, she retired from her first-round match, generating fear that her wrist injury had returned, but Robson said that she had been hampered by a stomach strain she had suffered during practice.

After receiving some further surgery on her wrist at the end of 2015, Robson took some more time off from tennis and subsequently missed the Australian Open. She started off the year playing some American challenger events, with limited success. She made her return to WTA events by using her protected ranking to enter Indian Wells. Here she made a reasonable effort in her first round but lost to Magdaléna Rybáriková who subsequently went on to reach the quarterfinals of the event. She also received a wildcard entry into the main draw of Miami and used her protected ranking to enter into the qualifying of Charleston but lost in the first round at both events.

Robson later won her first WTA match since her injury in 2013 by beating Klára Koukalová 6–2, 6–3 in the qualifying of Stuttgart. However, she lost her next match in qualifying to Océane Dodin in straight sets. She also claimed her first main-draw WTA victory since 2013 in Rabat by defeating local wildcard Ghita Benhadi in straight sets. However, she later lost her next match to Tímea Babos.

Robson also used her protected ranking to enter Premier clay events in Madrid and Rome, where she lost her first round matches to Victoria Azarenka and Christina McHale respectively. She had put on a promising display against Azarenka, but was unable to convert 8 out of 9 breakpoints, allowing Azarenka to clinch victory in straight sets. Robson was awarded a wildcard into Wimbledon for a second year, but was defeated in 69 minutes by Angelique Kerber in the first round in an error-strewn performance.
In August Robson won a second tier ITF tournament in USA. She was then given a wildcard entry to the 2016 US Open qualifying tournament. Straight-set victories over Jang Su-jeong, Isabella Shinikova and Tatjana Maria gained her entry to the main draw of the tournament, losing in the first round to fellow Briton Naomi Broady 7–6, 3–6, 4–6.

Post-US Open, Robson lost in the first round in four out of six ITF tournaments, including a loss to a player ranked 1048.

Robson began her 2017 season at the Auckland, but lost in the first round of qualifying to Tereza Martincová. At the Australian Open, she also lost in the first round of qualifying to Amandine Hesse in straight sets. She then played a $60,000 tournament at Andrézieux-Bouthéon and reached the quarterfinals, before losing in straight sets to Amra Sadiković. Between the end of January and the beginning of May, Robson reached three quarterfinals on the ITF Circuit. Robson won the biggest title of her career at a $60,000 tournament in Kurume, defeating fellow Briton Katie Boulter in straight sets. The tournament win moved her up 80 places in the ranking, causing her to reach the top 200 for the first time since 2014.

At the beginning of her grass-court season, Robson played a $100,000 event in Surbiton, but lost in the first round to Marina Erakovic. She then played at Nottingham, but fell to Julia Boserup in the first round. She reached the second round of the Ilkley $100,000 event before falling to Anna Blinkova in three sets. She received a wildcard for Wimbledon, but lost in the first round to Brazil's Beatriz Haddad Maia.

She continued to struggle with form throughout the latter half of the season post-Wimbledon, losing eleven matches and winning just seven on the ITF Circuit, including a loss in the first round of the qualifying draw at the US Open to world No. 311 Alla Kudryavtseva.

Robson was unable to play in the Australian Open qualifying draw as her ranking – at 230 – remained too low to gain direct entry. She did, however, play in the first round of the women's doubles draw with CoCo Vandeweghe, which they lost in straight sets. The following week, she lost in the first round of the Burnie International to world No. 415 Jennifer Elie, but won the doubles title partnering Vania King.

In March 2018, Robson teamed up with Hungarian Fanny Stollár to win the doubles at the ITF event in Yokohama.
In July 2018, she underwent hip surgery.

After eight months recovering from surgery, she returned to tennis on 12 February 2019 at the ITF W60 in Shrewsbury, losing to Liechtenstein's Kathinka von Deichmann in three sets. Robson's world ranking at this point was 511.

Robson plays left-handed, with a two-handed backhand. One of her strengths is her "dominant" serve. She has a strong game from the back of the court and is also noted for having an aggressive forehand return. However, she has been criticised for having "poor lateral movement", as well as an inconsistent second serve, resulting in a considerable number of double faults. She has been praised for showing "extraordinary poise", and having "the attitude and technique required of a leading player". Commentator Simon Reed said that she "has every tool she needs", and former Grand Slam champion Pat Cash called her "a special talent" who "seems to have all the attributes to progress". Former WTA player Ana Ivanovic said that Robson "hits the ball really, really hard", former top British player Samantha Smith said that "she doesn't have any weaknesses at all", and Serena Williams stated that Robson is an "all-around good player". Robson's favourite surface to play on is grass and her favourite shot is her forehand down the line.

Source: WTA Tennis


</doc>
<doc id="18344535" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18344535" title="Antigua and Barbuda at the 2008 Summer Olympics">
Antigua and Barbuda at the 2008 Summer Olympics

Antigua and Barbuda competed at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, China, submitting a delegation that included athletes Daniel Bailey, Brendan Christian, James Grayman, and Sonia Williams in track and field events, and Kareem Valentine in swimming. Antigua and Barbuda's appearance in Beijing marked its eighth appearance at the Summer Olympics since the nation's debut at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montréal, Canada. There were no medalists from Antigua and Barbuda in 2008, although Bailey reached the quarterfinals and Christian the semifinals of their respective events.

Antigua and Barbuda participated in eight Olympic Games between its debut at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montréal and its 2008 appearance in Beijing, competing in every edition except for the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow. The 2008 Summer Olympic delegation was smaller than those of the 1980s and 1990s, when they were composed of thirteen or more athletes, but, with five participants, it was the same size that it had been at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens. As of the conclusion of the Beijing Games, no Antiguan or Barbudan athlete has won a medal, although Brendan Christian progressed to semifinals and Daniel Bailey to quarterfinals of their respective events in 2008. At the 2008 games Kareem Valentine was the youngest athlete at fifteen years of age and Sonia Williams was the eldest at twenty-nine.

The Foreign Ministry of Antigua and Barbuda supported the Chinese handling of the civil unrest in Tibet, an issue marred in controversy due to self-immolations by Tibetans and numerous crackdowns on protesters, and expressed support for Chinese efforts to host the Olympics in Beijing despite the controversy. The flag-bearer for the Games was James Grayman, an Antiguan athlete.

Antigua Track Club athlete Daniel Everton "Bakka" Bailey competed in the men's 100 m dash on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda and was that year's only Antiguan to take part in the event. His participation in Beijing marked his second appearance in the Olympic games, following the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens. In Beijing he was assigned to Heat 1 during the first round on August 14, competing against Usain Bolt of Jamaica and Vicente Lima of Brazil, among others. Bailey ran the event in 10.24 seconds, coming in second place in a heat of eight people, placing behind heat leader Bolt by 0.04 seconds and ahead of Lima by 0.02 seconds. Overall, in the first round, Bailey tied Trinidad and Tobago's Richard Thompson for tenth place out of eighty athletes.

Bailey advanced to the quarterfinals, which occurred later that day. Bailey was placed in Heat 5 against, among others, the United States' Walter Dix and Jamaica's Asafa Powell, completing the second round in 10.23 seconds. He ranked fourth out of eight in the event, falling behind Derrick Atkins of the Bahamas (3rd place with a time of 10.14 seconds) and ahead of Ghana's Aziz Zakari (5th place with a time of 10.24 seconds). Overall, Bailey tied Japan's Naoki Tsukahara for twentieth place out of forty remaining athletes and did not progress to semifinals.

Former University of Texas at Austin student Brendan Kyle Akeem Christian participated on behalf of Antigua and Barbuda in the 200 m dash at the Beijing Olympics. Christian, who broke the best American high school time in the 100 m and 200 m dashes, is the son of former Olympian Donald Christian, a cyclist for Antigua and Barbuda at the 1976 Summer Olympics. Brendan's participation marked his second Olympic appearance, having competed in the 2004 Summer Olympics. In Beijing he raced in Heat 8 during the first round of the event on August 17. He ranked second place out of eight athletes, falling behind heat leader Aaron Armstrong of Trinidad and Tobago by 0.01 seconds and placing ahead of Canada's Jared Connaughton by 0.02 seconds. Overall, Christian tied Trinidad and Tobago's Rondel Sorrillo and Japan's Shinji Takahira for ninth place out of sixty-six athletes.

The next day Christian participated in the quarterfinals and was placed in Heat 3 against athletes that included Churandy Martina of the Netherlands Antilles and Kristof Beyens of Belgium. Christian took first place in the race with a time of 20.26 seconds, beating second-place finalist Martina by 0.18 seconds and ranking second overall out of thirty-two athletes. Christian fell behind the overall quarterfinal leader Brian Dzingai of Zimbabwe by 0.03 seconds and defeated the United States' Walter Dix by 0.01 seconds. Christian advanced to semifinals, which took place on the same day.

Christian competed in Heat 2 against Usain Bolt of Jamaica, Shawn Crawford of the United States, and Kim Collins of Saint Kitts and Nevis, among others, and ranked fifth out of eight after running a time of 20.29 seconds. Collins ran 0.04 seconds faster than Christian, while Mauritius' Stephen Buckland ran 0.11 seconds slower. Christian did not advance to the final round.

James Grayman competed in the Beijing Olympics as Antigua and Barbuda's sole high jumper, where he participated in the second qualifying heat on August 17 against athletes that included Brazil's Jesse Lima and the Czech Republic's Tomáš Janků. Grayman cleared a 2.20 meter height on his second attempt, placing behind tenth-place heat finalist Dmytro Dem'yanyuk of the Ukraine, who made the height on his first try, and eleventh-place heat finalist Linus Thörnblad of Sweden, who also made the height on his second attempt, but had fewer overall misses than Grayman. He finished ahead of the three thirteenth-place heat finalists (Italy's Alessandro Talotti, Spain's Javier Bermejo, and Botswana's Kabelo Kgosiemang) and the sixteenth-place heat finalist (Hup Wei Lee of Malaysia) who achieved the same height, but did so in three tries. Overall, Grayman ranked 28th out of 40 competitors and did not advance to finals on August 19.

Sonia Williams competed for Antigua and Barbuda in the women's 100 m dash and was the only female member of the Antiguan national delegation in Beijing. Her participation these Games marked her second Olympic appearance, her first having been at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta. In Beijing Williams participated in the first round of the event on August 15, when she was placed in Heat 5 against athletes that included Belgian Kim Gevaert and Belarusian Yuliya Nestsiarenka. She completed the race in 12.04 seconds, finishing sixth out of eight athletes. Guam's Cora Alicto, the seventh place finalist, ran 1.35 seconds slower than Williams, while the fifth place finalist, Chisato Fukushima of Japan, ran 0.3 seconds faster. Gevaert, who was the heat leader, earned a time that was 0.71 seconds faster than Williams'. Overall, Williams ranked 54th out of 85 athletes and did not progress to quarterfinals.

Fifteen-year-old Kareem "Grinny" Valentine Sandoval was the only person to compete in a swimming event from Antigua and Barbuda in 2008. At the time he was in his third year in high school. He competed in the men's 50 m freestyle, taking part in the August 14 preliminaries. His participation in the event marked the fifth time that he had swum in a pool, as he usually practiced in the ocean. During the course of his event Valentine was placed in Heat 2 of 12 against swimmers that included Thepphithak Chindavong of Laos. Valentine swam the event in 31.23 seconds, ranking fifth among six competitors. Stany Kempompo Ngangola of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (6th) finished nearly four seconds behind him with a time of 35.19 seconds, while Chindavong led the heat with a time of 29.31 seconds. Overall, Valentine ranked 96th out of 97 swimmers in the event and did not advance to semifinals, which were held that same day.



</doc>
<doc id="18366094" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18366094" title="Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial">
Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial

The Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial is a memorial site in France dedicated to the commemoration of Dominion of Newfoundland forces members who were killed during World War I. The preserved battlefield park encompasses the grounds over which the Newfoundland Regiment made their unsuccessful attack on 1 July 1916 during the first day of the Battle of the Somme.

The Battle of the Somme was the regiment's first major engagement, and during an assault that lasted approximately 30 minutes the regiment was all but wiped out. Purchased in 1921 by the people of Newfoundland, the memorial site is the largest battalion memorial on the Western Front, and the largest area of the Somme battlefield that has been preserved. Along with preserved trench lines, there are a number of memorials and cemeteries contained within the site.

Officially opened by British Field Marshal Earl Haig in 1925, the memorial site is one of only two National Historic Sites of Canada located outside of Canada. (The other is the Canadian National Vimy Memorial). The memorial site and experience of the Newfoundland Regiment at Beaumont-Hamel has come to represent the Newfoundland First World War experience. As a result, it has become a Newfoundland symbol of sacrifice and a source of identity.

During the First World War, Newfoundland was a largely rural Dominion of the British Empire with a population of 240,000, and not yet part of Canada. The outbreak of the First World War in 1914 led the Government of Newfoundland to recruit a force for service with the British Army. Even though the island had not possessed any formal military organization since 1870, enough men soon volunteered that an entire battalion was formed, and later maintained throughout the war. The regiment trained at various locations in the United Kingdom and increased from an initial contingent of 500 men to full battalion strength of 1,000 men, before being deployed. After a period of acclimatization in Egypt, the regiment was deployed at Suvla Bay on the Gallipoli peninsula with the 29th British Division in support of the Gallipoli Campaign. With the close of the Gallipoli Campaign the regiment spent a short period recuperating before being transferred to the Western Front in March 1916.

In France, the regiment regained battalion strength in preparation for the Battle of the Somme. The regiment, still with the 29th British Division, went into the line in April 1916 at Beaumont-Hamel. Beaumont-Hamel was situated near the northern end of the 45-kilometre front being assaulted by the joint French and British force. The attack, originally scheduled for 29 June 1916 was postponed by two days to July 1, 1916, partly on account of inclement weather, partly to allow more time for the artillery preparation. The 29th British Division, with its three infantry brigades faced defences manned by experienced troops of the 119th (Reserve) Infantry Regiment of the 26th (Wurttemberg) Reserve Division. The 119th (Reserve) Infantry Regiment had been involved in the invasion of France in August 1914 and had been manning the Beaumont-Hamel section of the line for nearly 20 months prior to the battle. The German troops were spending a great deal of their time not only training but fortifying their position, including the construction of numerous deep dugouts and at least two tunnels.

The infantry assault by the 29th British Division on 1 July 1916 was to be preceded ten minutes earlier by a mine explosion under the heavily fortified Hawthorn Ridge Redoubt. The explosion of the 18,000 kilogram (40,000 lb) Hawthorn Mine underneath the German lines successfully destroyed a major enemy strong point but also served to alert the German forces to the imminent attack. Following the explosion, troops of the 119th (Reserve) Infantry Regiment immediately deployed from their dugouts into the firing line, even preventing the British from taking control of the resulting crater as they had planned. When the assault finally began, the troops from the 86th and 87th Brigade of the 29th British Division were quickly stopped. With the exception of the 1st Battalion of the Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers on the right flank, the initial assault foundered in No Man's Land at, or short of, the German barbed wire. At divisional headquarters, Major-General Beauvoir De Lisle and his staff were trying to unravel the numerous and confusing messages coming back from observation posts, contact aircraft and the two leading brigades. There were indications that some troops had broken into and gone beyond the German first line. In an effort to exploit the perceived break in the German line he ordered the 88th Brigade, which was in reserve, to send forward two battalions to support attack.

At 8:45 a.m. the Newfoundland Regiment and 1st Battalion of the Essex Regiment received orders to move forward. The Newfoundland Regiment was situated at St. John's Road, a support trench behind the British forward line and out of sight of the enemy. Movement forward through the communication trenches was not possible because they were congested with dead and wounded men and under shell fire. Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Lovell Hadow, the battalion commander, decided to move immediately into attack formation and advance across the surface, which involved first navigating through the British barbed wire defences. As they breasted the skyline behind the British first line, they were effectively the only troops moving on the battlefield and clearly visible to the German defenders. Subjected to the full force of the 119th (Reserve) Infantry Regiment, most of the Newfoundland Regiment who had started forward were dead, dying or wounded within 15 to 20 minutes of leaving St. John's Road trench. Most reached no further than the Danger Tree, a skeleton of a tree that lay in No Man's Land that was being utilized as a landmark. So far as can be ascertained, 22 officers and 758 other ranks were directly involved in the advance. Of these, all the officers and slightly under 658 other ranks became casualties. Of the 780 men who went forward only about 110 survived unscathed, of whom only 68 were available for roll call the following day. For all intents and purposes the Newfoundland Regiment had been wiped out, the unit as a whole having suffered a casualty rate of approximately 80%. The only unit to suffer greater casualties during the attack was the 10th Battalion of the West Yorkshire Regiment, attacking west of Fricourt village.

After July 1916, the Beaumont-Hamel front remained relatively quiet while the Battle of the Somme continued to the south. In the final act in the Somme Offensive, Beaumont-Hamel was assaulted by the 51st (Highland) Division on 13 November 1916 on the opening of the Battle of the Ancre. Within two days, all the 29th Division objectives of 1 July had been taken along with a great many German prisoners. The area of the memorial site then became a rear area with troops lodged in the former German dugouts and a camp was established in the vicinity of the present Y Ravine Cemetery. With the German withdrawal in March 1917 to the Hindenburg Line, about 30 kilometres from Beaumont-Hamel, the battlefield salvage parties moved in, many dugouts were closed off and initial efforts were probably made to restore some of the land to agriculture. However, in March 1918, the German Spring Offensive was here checked on exactly the same battle lines as before. Until the Battle of Amiens and the German withdrawal in late August 1918, the protagonists confronted each other over the same ground, although the only actions were those of routine front line trench raids, patrols and artillery harassment.

In 1921, Newfoundland purchased the ground over which the Newfoundland Regiment made its unsuccessful attack during the first day of the Battle of the Somme. Much of the credit for the establishment of the memorial site is given to Lieutenant Colonel Tom Nangle, the former Roman Catholic Priest of the regiment. As Director of Graves Registration and Enquiry and Newfoundland's representative on the Imperial War Graves Commission he negotiated with some 250 French landowners for the purchase of the site. He also played a leading role in selecting and developing the sites where the Newfoundland memorials currently stand, as well as supervising the construction of each memorial. The memorials, including that at the Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site, were constructed for the Government of Newfoundland between 1924 and 1925.

The Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site was officially opened, and the memorial unveiled, by Field Marshal Earl Haig on 7 June 1925. Since Newfoundland's confederation with Canada in 1949, the Canadian Government, through the Department of Veterans Affairs, has been responsible for the site's maintenance and care. The site had fallen into some disrepair during the German occupation of France in the Second World War and following confederation the replacement of the original site cabin with a modern building as well as some trench restoration work was undertaken in time for the 45th anniversary of the battle. The memorial site was established as one of only two National Historic Sites of Canada located outside of Canada by the then Minister of Canadian Heritage Sheila Copps on 10 April 1997.

The Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site is situated north of Albert, France near the village of Beaumont-Hamel in an area containing numerous cemeteries and memorials related to the Battle of the Somme. The site is one of the few places on the former Western Front where a visitor can see the trench lines of the First World War and the related terrain in a preserved natural state. It is the largest site dedicated to the memory of the Newfoundland Regiment, the largest battalion memorial on the Western Front, and the largest area of the Somme battlefield that has been preserved.

Although the site was founded to honour the memory of the Newfoundland Regiment, it also contains a number of memorials as well as four cemeteries maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission; that of Y Ravine Cemetery, Hawthorn Ridge Cemeteries No. 1 and No. 2 and the unusual mass burial site of Hunter's Cemetery. Beyond being a popular location for battlefield tours the site is also an important location in the burgeoning field of First World War battlefield archaeology, because of its preserved and largely undisturbed state. The ever-increasing number of visitors to the Memorial has resulted in the authorities taking measures to control access by fencing off certain areas of the former battlefield.

Near the entrance to site is situated a memorial to the 29th British Division, the division of which the Newfoundland Regiment was a part. Lieutenant-General Beauvoir De Lisle, wartime commander of the 29th British Division, unveiled the monument the morning of the official opening of the site on 7 June 1925. Each wartime unit of the 29th British Division sent a representative to form a guard of honour for the occasion. Afterwards, this detachment, joined by French infantry from Arras formed the honour guard for the unveiling of the Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial.

The memorial is one of six memorials erected by the Government of Newfoundland following the First World War. Five were erected in France and Belgium and the sixth at Bowring Park in St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada. The memorial is a bronze caribou, the emblem of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment, standing atop a cairn of Newfoundland granite facing the former foe with head thrown high in defiance. At the Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site the mound rises approximately from ground level. The mounds are also surrounded by native Newfoundland plants. At the base of the Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial mound, three bronze tablets carry the names of 820 members of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment, the Newfoundland Royal Naval Reserve, and the Mercantile Marines who gave their lives in the First World War and have no known grave. The memorial is situated close to the headquarters dugout of the 88th Brigade, the brigade of which the Newfoundland Regiment was a part. Sixteen memorial designs were submitted to Nangle for review. He recommended that the government accept British sculptor Basil Gotto’s plan to erect five identical caribou statues in memory of the regiment. Gotto was already well known in Newfoundland as he had been previously commissioned to execute the statue of the "Fighting Newfoundlander" located in Bowring Park. The landscape architect who designed the sites and supervised their construction, was Rudolph Cochius, a native of the Netherlands living in St. John's. It was decided to plant many of Newfoundland’s native tree species, such as spruce, dogberry and juniper, along the boundaries of the site. In total, over 5,000 trees were transplanted before the project was completed in 1925. The memorial was unveiled at the official opening of the site by Field Marshal Earl Haig on 7 June 1925. Those that participated or were present included Chief of the French General Staff, Marshal of France Marie Émile Fayolle, Newfoundland Colonial Secretary John Bennett, Lieutenant Generals Aylmer Hunter-Weston and Beauvoir De Lisle, Major-General D. E. Cayley and former regimental commanding officers Lieutenant-Colonel Arthur Lovell and Adolph Ernest Bernard.

Overlooking Y Ravine is the memorial to 51st (Highland) Division. The ground originally donated by the commune of Beaumont-Hamel to the Veterans of the 51st Division was found to be unstable because of the many dugouts beneath it. Lieutenant Colonel Nangle offered a location overlooking Y Ravine within the Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site. The Y ravine had been the scene of fierce fighting for the division on 13 November 1916. The selected sculptor for the 51st Division Monument was George Henry Paulin. The base of the monument consists of rough blocks of Rubislaw granite which were produced by Garden & Co. in Aberdeen, Scotland, and are assembled in a pyramid form. Company Sergeant Major Bob Rowan of the Glasgow Highlanders was used as the model for the kilted figure atop the memorial. The figure faces east towards the village of Beaumont-Hamel. On the front is a plaque inscribed in Gaelic: which in English translates as "Friends are good on the day of battle". The 51st Division Monument was unveiled on 28 September 1924 by Marshal of France Ferdinand Foch, the former Allied Supreme Commander. The memorial was rededicated on 13 July 1958, the front panel now referring to not only those who died during the First World War but the Second as well. A wooden Celtic cross directly across the track from the memorial was originally sited at High Wood and subsequently moved to the Newfoundland site. The cross commemorates the men of the 51st Highland Division who fell at High Wood in July 1916.

The Danger Tree had been part of a clump of trees located about halfway into No Man's Land and had originally been used as a landmark by a Newfoundland Regiment trench raiding party in the days before the Battle of the Somme. British and German artillery bombardments eventually stripped the tree of leaves and left nothing more than a shattered tree trunk. During the Newfoundland Regiment's infantry assault, the tree was once again used as a landmark, where the troops were ordered to gather. The tree was however a highly visible landmark for the German artillery and the site proved to be a location where the German shrapnel was particularly deadly. As a result, the regiment suffered a large concentration of casualties around the tree. A replica representation of the twisted tree now stands at the spot.

There is a Visitors' Centre which exhibits the historical and social circumstances of Newfoundland at the beginning of the 20th century and traces the history of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment and some of its personalities. A Memorial room within the Centre houses a copy of the Newfoundland Book of Remembrance, along with a bronze plaque listing the Battle Honours won by the Royal Newfoundland Regiment. The centre also incorporates the administrative offices and site archive. Canadian student guides based at the site are available to provide guided tours or explain particular facets of the battlefield and the Newfoundland involvement.

The significance of the events at Beaumont-Hamel on the first day of the Battle of the Somme was perhaps most strongly felt by the Dominion of Newfoundland, as it was the first great conflict experienced by that dominion. Newfoundland was left with a sense of loss that marked an entire generation. The effects on the post-war generation were compounded by chronic financial problems caused both by Newfoundland's large debt from the war, and a prolonged post-war economic recession due to a decline in the fisheries.

Lasting impressions of the war experience are ever-prevalent on the island. In Canada, 1 July is celebrated as Canada Day, in recognition of Canadian confederation. In the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador the date is Memorial Day, in remembrance of the Newfoundland Regiment's losses at Beaumont-Hamel. Memorial University College, now Memorial University of Newfoundland, was originally established as a memorial to Newfoundlanders who had lost their lives in active service during the First World War. Lastly, the six caribou memorials and the National War Memorial erected following the First World War, and the establishment of the preserved battlefield park at Beaumont-Hamel which is visited by thousands of tourists a year. The Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial site also serves an informal ambassadorial function, educating visitors not only about the experience of the Newfoundland Regiment but also regarding the history of the island.



</doc>
<doc id="18379088" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18379088" title="Fight Like Apes">
Fight Like Apes

Fight Like Apes (also referred to as FLApes or FLA) were an Irish alternative rock band formed in Dublin in 2006.

Their final lineup consisted of Mary-Kate "MayKay" Geraghty (vocals and synth), Jamie "Pockets" Fox (keyboard and vocals), Conor Garry (bass), Peter O'Shea (drums) and Frog Cullen. Original members Adrian Mullan (drums) and Tom Ryan (bass) left the band in 2010.

They are known for their elongated record titles, usually inspired by B movies. They have released three EPs, "How Am I Supposed to Kill You If You Have All the Guns?" (2007), "David Carradine is a Bounty Hunter Whos Robotic Arm Hates Your Crotch" (2007) and "Whigfield Sextape" (2014), and two albums, "Fight Like Apes and the Mystery of the Golden Medallion" (2008) and "The Body of Christ and the Legs of Tina Turner" (2010). In 2009, they released an EP for the American market titled "You Filled His Head with Fluffy Clouds and Jolly Ranchers, What Did You Think Was Going to Happen?".

Fight Like Apes have toured the UK with The Von Bondies, The Ting Tings, New Found Glory, The Prodigy and Kasabian and have played several Irish and European festivals throughout their career. They have appeared on several television shows in Ireland, including "Tubridy Tonight", "WeTV", "The View", "Other Voices" and "The Cafe". They have also had some success in Asia, where they have been signed up by Sony Music Entertainment Japan for an album release on that continent in April 2009. The band have been nominated for five Meteor Music Awards, "Fight Like Apes and the Mystery of the Golden Medallion" was nominated for the Choice Music Prize and was named 31st best album of the decade by Phantom FM at the end of 2009. Fight Like Apes were named the fourth best Irish musical act of their generation by "The Irish Times" in 2009.

Fight Like Apes formed late 2006 following the breakup of the band Soft Cuddly Toys by Mary-Kate Geraghty (known as "MayKay"), Jamie Fox (known as "Pockets"), Adrian Mullan and Tom Ryan. MayKay and Pockets first met as teenagers on holiday in Spain where they realised they both went to nearby schools and shared the same "extremely optimistically cynical outlook on life". When MayKay told Pockets she loved singing he had her sign a contract on a piece of tissue in a bar. Pockets's parents were unhappy with their son's "disgusting" taste in music. He dropped out of his final year of study at Dublin City University and a potential career in journalism to pursue his musical career. MayKay had been studying medicinal chemistry, and later a philosophy course at Trinity College Dublin. They habitually met from early morning and spent their days eating together before deciding to form a band. Their chosen name was inspired by Caesar's battle cry of “Now fight like apes” in what they describe as the "notoriously bad" "Battle for the Planet of the Apes".

Their debut EP, "How Am I Supposed to Kill You If You Have All the Guns?", Recorded by Lee Boylan and released by Irish indie label FIFA Records in early 2007, sold out and generated a significant amount of interest in the media and in the Irish blogging community in the process. In May 2007, Fight Like Apes won Phantom FM's Topman Unsigned Band Search; their prize was to be a support act of The Holloways at show in Dublin. Fight Like Apes played both Electric Picnic (their first major Irish festival) and Hard Working Class Heroes in 2007 and also performed at the CMJ Music Marathon in New York City. They were also chosen to play the Futureshock stage at EXIT in Serbia after sending a demo of their songs to the organisers. On 13 October 2007, Fight Like Apes performed "Jake Summers" on television chat show, "Tubridy Tonight".

The title of their second EP, "David Carradine is a Bounty Hunter Whos Robotic Arm Hates Your Crotch", released on 2 November 2007(produced by Lee Boylan), was inspired by the film "Future Force" starring David Carradine, which the band found on the internet. The EP's lead track, "Do You Karate?", was a minor hit on the Irish independent music scene. The band set off on their first UK tour after the EP's release and their "Jake Summers" single was released there through the label, Cool For Cats (sister of Fierce Panda). In February 2008, the band toured Ireland and the UK as a support act of The Von Bondies. Von Bondies member Jason Stollsteimer has described Fight Like Apes as “candy wrapped in barbed wire”. Fight Like Apes were invited to participate in the sixth series of RTÉ's annual "Other Voices" music show, performing on 19 March 2008. They also appeared on RTÉ Two's "WeTV" television show. Fight Like Apes performed at the South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas in 2008. Upon their return from South by Southwest in March/April 2008, they went on a national tour of Ireland. Later that year, Fight Like Apes appeared at several music festivals in Ireland and the UK, including an appearance on the Futures Stage at T in the Park, and two appearances at the 2008 Glastonbury Festival, as well as Oxegen 2008 and Indie-pendence in Ireland. The single "Lend Me Your Face/Lightsabre Cock-sucking Blues" was released in the UK on 21–28 July 2008.

The band spent a month in Seattle, Washington, in early 2008, recording tracks for their debut album, produced by John Goodmanson. The album, titled "Fight Like Apes and the Mystery of the Golden Medallion", was released on 26 September 2008 on Model Citizen Records, selling continually well in Ireland and the UK. It was preceded by the release of the single "Something Global" on 11 July 2008. They played a sold-out launch show at Whelan's in Dublin, which was broadcast live on Phantom FM on the day of release. "The Irish Times" described the album as an "astonishing debut that encompasses melancholy and whimsy (both lyrically and musically)". The "Irish Independent", on the other hand, "strongly urge[d] all not to waste their money" on "the woeful debut" of a band with "lots of blogger and media friends, all aurally challenged". RTÉ also gave the album a lukewarm response. MayKay has said she is unbothered by any criticism as long as the album is simply being reviewed. "Fight Like Apes and the Mystery of the Golden Medallion" reached the top five of the Irish Albums Chart, meaning the band became the first alternative act from Ireland to achieve this for several years, and "Jake Summers" and "Lend Me Your Face" became regularly played at indie clubs throughout Ireland.

They went on to support The Ting Tings on a sell-out UK tour, receiving kung fu lessons from their security guard Preston and a champagne bottle on the final night. They appeared on "The Cafe" on 16 October 2008. The Prodigy personally invited the band to support them on their sold-out arena tour of the UK; all of the members are fans of Fight Like Apes and Liam Howlett entered their dressing room to give his regards. Sony Music Entertainment Japan signed the band for the Asian release of "Fight Like Apes and the Mystery of the Golden Medallion". They headlined the Levi's One to Watch Tour in November 2008. In December 2008, a video of students of the Tisch School of the Arts in New York, featuring several females miming to "Digifuckers", was released.

Fight Like Apes represented Ireland in the Eurosonic Festival in Groningen, the Netherlands, in January 2009, This appearance led to the band qualifying for admission into the European Talent Exchange Programme, allowing the band to be booked for music festivals across Europe, including Glastonbury and T in the Park. "Fight Like Apes and the Mystery of the Golden Medallion" was released in the UK on 26 January 2009. The band played a studio session for Steve Lamacq of BBC Radio 1 around this time, with Maykay also encountering Jonathan Ross, a fan of the band who has played their music on his show. They released a video for a new single, "Tie Me Up with Jackets", later that month and performed the song on "The View" on 10 March 2009. Also In March 2009, came the release of the EP "You Filled His Head with Fluffy Clouds and Jolly Ranchers, What Did You Think Was Going to Happen?" for the US market as well as a return to South by Southwest.
"Fight Like Apes and the Mystery of the Golden Medallion" was released in Japan in April 2009, with Fight Like Apes filming a music video for the international release of their "Something Global" single in Whelan's, Dublin. On 3 April 2009, "The Irish Times" named Fight Like Apes the fourth best contemporary Irish musical act, above Lisa Hannigan and below Cathy Davey, Jape and David Holmes. The newspaper claimed that "Ireland has, quite simply, never seen a band like Fight Like Apes", reasoning that this was due to them "acting as a palette-cleansing antidote to the dour “woolly jumper brigade” that dragged Irish music into the depths of despair not a decade ago". They played at the 2009 Trinity Ball in May, an event likened to "a mini-Oxegen without the mud". The band's 2009 summer tour consisted of both domestic and European festival dates, and an appearance in Wales. Their performance at Festival Internacional de Benicàssim in Spain was cancelled due to a fire and extreme winds. Their performance at Oxegen 2009 was their second at the festival, with band members banging chairs during their performance and "The Irish Times" tipping them to appear on the Main Stage in 2010.

At the end of 2009, Fight Like Apes performed a show in The Academy inside a specially constructed wrestling ring. Their music was also being used to promote television series such as "Making the Band" and "Valemont" in the United States. The first album was named 31st best album of the decade by Phantom FM at the end of 2009. They will appear at Electric Picnic 2010.

"The Body of Christ and the Legs of Tina Turner", the second album by Fight Like Apes, was released in Ireland on August 27, 2010, through Model Citizen Records. The first single was released as a download only in Ireland on August 20, 2010 with the lead single being "Hoo Ha Henry". The band began promoting the album in Ireland on July 30, with live performances in Meath, Cork, Galway and at Electric Picnic in County Laois. The band appeared on Beat 102 103 to promote their new album on August 8, 2010.

Adrian Mullan left the band in 2010 due to "creative differences".

On Friday September 3, 2010, "The Body of Christ and the Legs of Tina Turner" entered the Irish charts at number 3. On 1 November, they announced an extension to their end-of-year national tour. In March 2011, they announced an Irish nationwide tour and released the single "Jenny Kelly". The band performed at The Trinity Ball 2011 with new bassist Conor Garry as Tom Ryan had gone back to college to study.

On April 9, 2013, Fight Like Apes launched its Fund It campaign to help facilitate the making of their third album. The band received €20,000 in donations to cover the cost of PR, album artwork, equipment, mastering among other things. Donations ranged from €10 which would get the donor a signed version of the album up to €5,000 where the donor would receive VIP tickets to regular gigs and festivals. The band aimed to receive all donations within 34 days, and they were successful within a few days.

In the run-up to the launch of this new album, the band performed at two dates one in Dublin and another in Cork in December 2013. The band played a number of new tracks at both live venues. Fans who funded the new album were to receive a special EP. On May 12, 2015, Fight Like Apes released the Whigfield Sextape EP. In early 2015, the band played a number of dates in Japan and Ireland. They released their self-titled third studio album on May 15, 2015.

On 2 November 2016, Fight Like Apes announced that their upcoming three shows would be their last, posting the following on their Facebook wall:

″Stick a fork in us, we’re done.
We’ve been quiet for a while now. We’ve had a lot of thinking and talking to do. 
We’d be here all year if we started listing the people we wanted to thank, so we’ll just do that in our own time.
You’ll see us all again under different musical guises but, these 3 shows will be Fight Like Apes’ last. We want to call it a day while we’re all still pals and are proud of what we’ve done.
And we are very, very proud.
It’s a deadly time in so many ways to be in a band; you can have so much control over your work if you’re clever; you can release it how and when you like and in our opinion, right now, Ireland is the healthiest it’s ever been in terms of talent and diversity.
But, there are massive challenges for a lot of bands, mostly financial, that make this a tough job and sadly, those obstacles have become too big for us.
I think we all know that we're going to hear announcements like this more often. A lot of people don’t seem to understand that we can’t keep producing records if you keep not paying for them. Bands are having to sell beautiful albums for €2.99, labels can’t give you as much support since they’re losing income too and our alternative radio stations* are practically non existent now, meaning so many wonderful bands will not get a chance to get played on radio as they’ll be competing with huge pop acts.
Please buy your music in independent record stores or directly from the band.
Don’t fool yourself in to thinking that your £10 subscription to Deezer and Spotify helps us at all. It does not. Look how many bands are on there and do the maths.
Please go to gigs. Please buy merch.
Thanks to all you entirely crazy, wonderful people who have supported us and danced and screamed with us over the past 10 years. We could never thank you enough.
I still can’t believe some of the amazing things we’ve done together and how far we came.″

BBC Radio 1's Steve Lamacq has described Fight Like Apes as a "great Misfit band" inhabiting "a lonely place out on the periphery of the indie rock world". At one show in June 2008, he witnessed them "thrash about on their guitars and keyboards and wotnot like it's some kind of pop exorcism" and saw them "rolling around the empty dancefloor playflighting ". Today FM presenter Alison Curtis has described them as "really talented... kind of rocky and metallic and their front girl is extremely watchable, almost going into Debbie Harry territory".

The band's influences include B movies, computer games, kung-fu and wrestling. "Do You Karate?", "a thumping bass driven flourish of a song", displays the band's "trademark twin-synth attack" and the Pixies-style "Canhead" has been described as "a concise ode to fish and chips". Musically they are fond of My Bloody Valentine, Mclusky and Tom Waits, Grand Pocket Orchestra, Adebisi Shank, Jape and Giveamanakick. They dislike guitars and have been known to perform with kitchen implements such as pots and pans when on stage; MayKay and Pockets even play keyboards with their heads. They purposefully construct lengthy record titles to "piss off" journalists and radio presenters and their self-defined "karate rock" genre was directed at the "NME" after the British magazine tried to place them in the same category as two other female-fronted bands.

Vocalist MayKay has been described as one of Ireland's "most mesmerising front women" in recent history, with her long black hair and banshee wail provoking male fans to confess simultaneous feelings of terror and attraction online. She is known for lyrics such as "you're like Kentucky Fried Chicken but without the taste" and "you're a fucking disappointment to the human race", taken from the song "Jake Summers", a song inspired by former teen idol of "California Dreams" fame. Pockets writes most of the band's songs, plays the keyboard and provides vocals for some of the band's songs. Adrian and Tom tend to remain in the background, choosing not to be photographed. The band claim to have never written anything fictional and their lyrics have been described by Nadine O'Regan in "The Sunday Business Post" as "occasionally literally gynaecological in their detail and regularly relatively shocking in their honesty". MayKay and Pockets claim that most of their lyrics are shaped by one person who has broken each of their hearts.


The band's debut album, "Fight Like Apes and the Mystery of the Golden Medallion", was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in January 2009. The award was won by Jape for the album "Ritual" on 4 March 2009.

"The Body of Christ and the Legs of Tina Turner" was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in 2011.

Fight Like Apes were nominated for two Meteor Awards in 2008, one for Best Irish Live Performance for their November 2007 show at Whelan's in Dublin and the other for Best Irish Band. In 2009, they were nominated for three Meteor Music Awards, for Best Irish Band, Best Irish Live Performance and Best Irish Album.

In September 2009, Fight Like Apes were nominated in the Best Breakthrough Artists category at the UK Festival Awards, competing against three British and one American acts—Florence and The Machine, Little Boots, Passion Pit and Friendly Fires.

"Something Global" won the award for Most Original Concept at the 2009 Irish Music Television Awards. The video was directed by Eoghan Kidney.



</doc>
<doc id="18395038" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18395038" title="Donna Freedman">
Donna Freedman

Donna Freedman (also Brown) is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera "Neighbours", played by Margot Robbie. The actress contacted the casting director about a role on the show, and was eventually granted a meeting, where she learned that they were casting for a 17 year old girl. Robbie auditioned for the role, but believing she had performed badly, Robbie went on holiday to Canada. She then learned she had won the part and had to return to Australia to begin filming. She made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 2 June 2008. Donna was initially introduced as a guest character, but Robbie was promoted to the regular cast shortly after she made her debut.

Donna was originally portrayed as an obsessive fan of musician Ty Harper (Dean Geyer) and someone who had a desire for friends and acceptance. After befriending the teens of Ramsay Street, Donna changes her ways and matures into a warm, loveable girl. She has been described as being fiery, beautiful, kooky and confident. The character's storylines included a relationship with Ringo Brown (Sam Clark) whom she later married, a same-sex kiss with Sunny Lee (Hany Lee), the introduction of her family, and an affair with Andrew Robinson (Jordan Smith). The character became popular with viewers and Robbie earned various award nominations for her portrayal of Donna, including two Logie Award nominations. In April 2010, it was revealed that Robbie had told producers she would like to leave when her contract expired at the end of the year. Five months later, it was announced that Robbie had quit "Neighbours" and she departed on 26 January 2011.

When Robbie was 17, she moved to Melbourne and repeatedly contacted the serial's casting director Jan Russ to ask for a meeting. Eventually Russ agreed to see her and when she learned how old Robbie was, she revealed that they were casting for the role of a 17-year-old girl. Robbie auditioned for the role of Donna in 2008. She believed that she had performed badly in the audition and decided to leave for a five-week snowboarding holiday in Canada. Robbie had been in Canada for two days when she received a phone call telling her that she had been successful and that she had to return to Australia. Robbie began appearing on-screen in June of that year. Donna was originally supposed to have a guest character role, but Robbie was promoted to the main cast shortly after her debut.

In April 2010, it was revealed that producers were "battling" to keep Robbie with the show after she told them that she would like to leave when her contract expired at the end of the year. Producers began negotiating with Robbie to renew her contract and a spokesperson said "Margot isn't going anywhere for a long while yet. Producers love the character of Donna Freedman and there's plenty in store for her in the coming months, particularly in terms of her on-off romance with Ringo."

Donna's personality has evolved and developed throughout her time on the show. Donna arrives as an obsessed groupie of Ty Harper (Dean Geyer), who manages to force her way into the Ramsay Street teen group. Donna had no one to turn to and buried her love in the music scene and Ty, who became her focus for love and acceptance. Donna is driven by a fierce need for approval and acceptance, which makes her try too hard. Robbie revealed that she shares some of Donna's characteristics. She said "[Donna]'s fiery and outgoing and I'm a bit like that. Sometimes I can be too loud and say things when I shouldn't. But I don't stalk people. Other than that, we're kind of similar." 
"TV Week" described Donna as "beautiful and a free spirit who is also a little loud and obnoxious", while the "Metro" called her "kooky." The teens of Ramsay Street warm to her eventually and with their help, Donna changes her ways and becomes accepted. The official "Neighbours" website states that Donna has become a warm, loveable, charming and playful girl. Her integration into the street and the lives of the other residents has matured Donna and she leads the normal life she always wanted. In May 2009, Robbie said that Donna is a "really likeable character" and that she gets to play out funny and crazy storylines while playing her. In November of that year, it was revealed that Robbie had begged the scriptwriters to let Donna go off the rails or go to rehab. Robbie said that she would like a dramatic storyline, but the show's G rating makes it difficult. Robbie also said that she enjoys playing Donna, as she is "great" and a "bit crazy". She added "I'm really glad I get to play her and not an average, boring teenage girl. You can be an average, boring teenage girl every other day of the week. It's fun to be able to say and do these things you normally wouldn't".

Donna initially lives with and is cared for by her father, Matt Freedman (Benjamin Mitchell), but after he tries to cover up a hit-and-run accident that Donna committed, he tells her that he must leave or face jail. Donna is hurt and humiliated when he leaves her alone. Donna eventually confesses to Elle Robinson (Pippa Black) that Matt has left and Donna moves in with Elle, who later becomes her guardian. At the end of 2008, Donna's younger brother and sister, Simon (Mauricio Merino, Jr.) and Tegan (Chelsea Jones) were introduced to the show. Merino and Jones won three-month contracts with the show through a competition with "Dolly" magazine. It was announced that the siblings would be "Donna's worst nightmare" and they were described as being "cheeky" and "pesky". Robbie said she was looking forward to the arrival of Donna's siblings and developing her character further with their introductions. She added "The more storylines I do, the more real my character becomes. Now, I can do things and relate to her and understand where she's coming from".

Following the introduction of her siblings, Donna's mother was also introduced in February 2009. Australian actress and singer, Tottie Goldsmith was given the role of Cassandra Freedman. Goldsmith described her character as being "manipulative" and "insanely selfish". Donna and her mother were seen clashing on many occasions as Cassandra had hurt her daughter a lot in the past. Cassandra was a young girl when she had Donna and she did not have the maturity to deal with a baby. Goldsmith said that Cassandra "resented Donna and saw her as a threat. Over the years, Cass has hurt Donna so much that her daughter's almost become immune to the way her mother behaves". Goldsmith added that Cassandra is not a "maternal person" and she has not been able to connect with her children. Cassandra moves into the street in a bid to win over wealthy resident, Paul Robinson (Stefan Dennis). She is later driven out of town after she makes her relationship with Donna worse.

Just before Cassandra leaves town, she tells Donna that Matt, the man who raised her, is not her biological father. Cassandra tells Donna that her real father is a man named Nick. In 2009, it was announced that Donna's father had been cast and would be introduced the following year. Brian Vriends was given the role of Nick Nixon. Of the introduction of Brian and Nick, executive producer, Susan Bower said "The Freedman family have provided fantastic drama for us so far and we have lots in store for Brian, it's great to have him with us. This is just one of many, many great storylines we have coming up in 2010". Donna discovers that there are two men that could be her father and she contacts them both. Nick Nixon replies first and Donna begins to believe that he is her father. However, Professor Nicholas McKay (Chris Bunworth) later turns up and Donna becomes confused over the situation. Nicholas has just been released from jail and he is keen to do something right. However, he hurts Donna when he tells her that she is just like her mother and that she will run away. Robbie said "He takes a horrible approach". Nicholas' arrival makes Donna more afraid to find out the results of the DNA test she asked Nick to take. On the situation, Robbie said "She's a hopeless romantic and wants the happily ever after – not only with Ringo, but with her family." The DNA test eventually proves that Nick is her real father.

When Robbie first began filming, she was told that Donna was bisexual. Of this Robbie said, "In one of the blocks she is talking to Bridget about their 'first time' and Donna asks Bridget if it was with a guy or girl? I liked the way the writers conveyed that, it was just really subtle and they didn't make a big coming out scene of it. I think it's a good message to send out because it's not such a big deal to lots of people. Not all of them have such drama surrounding it". Donna's first storyline that included this aspect of her character was a kiss between herself and fellow female character, Sunny Lee (Hany Lee). The kiss occurs after Donna discovers that Sunny has been writing the romantic love letters given to her by her boyfriend. Sunny is shocked when Donna leans over and kisses her on the lips, as it is her first kiss. The show's producers called the kiss between Sunny and Donna as "impulsive" and Robbie agreed saying "It's really not a big deal at all. It's not an actual gay storyline, it's just kind of an impulsive peck". The storyline came weeks after rival soap "Home and Away" endured a backlash to its own same-sex romance.

The storyline received attention from the Australian Family Association, with spokesman John Morrissey saying that he was concerned about TV "normalising" same-sex relationships. Psychologist Dr Janet Hall praised the storyline, saying it allows families to discuss the topic. Bower defended the kiss, which was shot before the "Home and Away" controversy, saying "Ours is a lovely tale about friendship. It's very innocent." She added "If we were going to do a lesbian story – and "Neighbours" is not against lesbian stories – we would do it properly. This is a teenage romance story. There's nothing sexual". In June 2009, Bower was asked if there were any plans to explore Donna's bisexuality, to which she replied that there was not. She said "We're getting an enormous amount of leverage with Donna being the person she is and there's just so much storyline with her and romance with Ringo that I'm not saying it's out of the question, but it's not in any planning stages now".

Shortly after her character's arrival on-screen, Robbie said "There is some love coming up for Donna. She gets into a long term relationship and really falls for someone." Donna first kisses Ringo Brown (Sam Clark) at a kissing booth to get in with the established teen group. Donna and Ringo later begin a relationship, but when Donna wants to take things further, Ringo tells her that he wants to slow things down. Donna believes that she is being rejected and when she hears about Ringo's relationship with Carmella Cammeniti (Natalie Blair) and then sees them together, she confronts Ringo. Ringo then tries to convince Donna that his heart belongs to her. The couple's relationship goes through various problems. During a moment of time together at home, Donna leaves Ringo to retrieve the cat and the house is set alight. Donna is forced to rescue Ringo and drag him outside. After Zeke Kinski (Matthew Werkmeister) returns to Ramsay Street, Ringo believes that Donna had cheated on him with his friend and breaks up with her. Donna then goes to Zeke to seek solace and it leads to a love triangle between the three of them.

Towards the end of 2009, Donna and Ringo's relationship goes through a rocky patch and during schoolies week, Donna sleeps with Andrew Robinson (Jordan Smith). Andrew later turns up in Erinsborough much to Donna's shock. Robbie said that Donna begins to "freak out" because she did not expect to see Andrew again and now he could tell everyone what happened between them. Robbie added "Ringo and Donna were definitely going through a rocky patch for a while, but things were starting to look up. If she comes clean, they might find a way to work through it. But it doesn't look good." Sam Clark said that Ringo and Donna's love for each other is very strong, but he was not sure if it was strong enough to survive a betrayal. Robbie and Clark also said that the couple were heading in different directions career-wise and it would be challenging for them. Donna later begins an affair with Andrew after he helps her out and then puts pressure on her to give in to their attraction. Robbie said that Donna is "flattered" by Andrew's interest in her and when Ringo puts his career before her, Andrew tells Donna what she wants to hear. On Andrew and Donna's compatibility, Robbie said "Andrew's more into the fashion scene than Ringo. He's suave and well-dressed, and he's an aspiring businessman. He's perfect for the world Donna is trying to get into." However, Robbie admitted that Ringo is the perfect guy for Donna as they balance each other out well. Ringo leaves for Sydney after finding out Donna cheated on him and when he returns his relationship with Donna is "frosty". Robbie commented on the ex-couple's future and said "I think at the moment it's quite in the balance. It's right up to the network at the moment as to whether they'll get back together or not."

Ringo and Donna later get back together and to prove that he loves her, Ringo proposes. In June 2010, it was revealed that the 6000th episode celebrations would see the wedding of Donna and Ringo. News.com reported that producers hoped that the wedding would "recreate the magic" of Scott Robinson (Jason Donovan) and Charlene Mitchell's (Kylie Minogue) 1987 wedding. Robbie said she had "big shoes to fill", but she was honoured to be working on her biggest storyline since she arrived. Clark said that Donna and Ringo had made the decision that they are going to be with each other for life and that they are "going to be solid from now on". On the wedding day, Donna's car breaks down and she is forced to ride in the back of Lucas Fitzgerald's (Scott Major) truck. Donna walks down the aisle to Ringo's version of "Suddenly", the original song played at Scott and Charlene's wedding. Clark added "It's a perfect day, but I can't promise they'll live happily ever after." Donna and Ringo became the 36th couple to get married on the show. A month later, Ringo is knocked down by Stephanie Scully's (Carla Bonner) motorcycle and he dies. Donna is devastated and she stays in her room. Steph comes to visit her and as she is apologising, Donna gets up and hugs her. Of Donna's reaction, Robbie said "Donna is almost in a state of confusion and insists that the whole thing was an accident. Donna is just numb and she doesn't know what to feel."

In September 2010, Robbie confirmed rumours that she was to leave "Neighbours" after almost three years. Of her reason to leave Robbie said "I want to go to America; it's always been my goal to work in Hollywood. It's the one stage in my life where I have absolutely nothing holding me down". Robbie filmed her final scenes in October and her character left on-screen in early 2011. Robbie later revealed her character's exit is positive and that Donna departs Ramsay Street for a fashion design school in New York. Robbie said "It is very daunting for Donna at first. Ringo was the one who applied for Donna to do this course – it's like he's doing this one last thing for her." She said that Donna becomes determined to be a success and that it is her last chance to live up to Ringo's expectations of her. Robbie added that she wanted Donna to go to rehab or have a dramatic death, but she got a "boring old happy ending" instead.

Donna comes to Charlie's to see musician Ty Harper, who is her main focus in life. Ty introduces Donna to Rachel Kinski (Caitlin Stasey) and they try to get her to leave. Ringo Brown decides to help Donna make friends. Donna helps to clear an area of the bush and when a fire breaks out, she is suspected of starting it because of her strange behaviour. Daniel Fitzgerald (Brett Tucker), a school counsellor, talks with Donna, who then decides to transfer to Erinsborough High. There she eventually becomes friends with Rachel and Bridget Parker (Eloise Mignon), and starts dating Ringo. Donna's father, Matt, bans her from seeing Ringo and she steals his car. Donna accidentally hits Nicola West (Imogen Bailey) and her dog, Bronte. However, Donna is initially unaware that she hit Nicola and she and Ringo ask Lucas Fitzgerald to fix the car. When she realises that she also hit Nicola, Donna tells Matt what happened. He tries to frame Lucas to save her, but he is caught and then goes on the run. Elle Robinson takes Donna in and becomes her legal guardian.

After she stops taking her birth-control pills, Donna believes she may be pregnant. Donna convinces Rachel and Bridget to take pregnancy tests with her. Donna's is negative, but Bridget discovers that she is pregnant. Donna's younger siblings, Simon and Tegan, arrive in Ramsay Street and their mother, Cassandra, follows not long after. Ringo and Donna break up and she becomes closer to Rachel's brother, Zeke. They share a kiss and Donna decides to leave Erinsborough to sort her head out. On her return, she gets back together with Ringo and clashes with her mother. Before Cassandra leaves town, she tells Donna that Matt is not her biological father. Donna creates an online vlog in a bid to find her father and James Linden (Tim Ross) turns up claiming to be Donna's half brother. They take a DNA test and James tells Donna that it confirms they are related. James later transfers Elle's money out of her online bank account and leaves, devastating Donna. Donna meets fashion designer Saffron Jankievicz (Shanyn Asmar) and she is offered an internship with her company. Donna skips school and neglects her friends and chores. She decides to quit and Saffron slaps her. Donna presses charges and Saffron apologises. Donna befriends Kate Ramsay (Ashleigh Brewer) following Rachel's departure and Bridget's death.

During Schoolies week Donna meets Andrew Robinson and has sex with him. Andrew turns up in Erinsborough and he and Donna eventually continue their affair. One of their trysts is accidentally recorded and Scott Griffin (Eamonn George) finds it and shows at Charlie's. Ringo is devastated and leaves for Sydney. Donna begins university and during her second lecture, Saffron turns up as a guest speaker. Saffron turns Donna's classmates against her, but Donna stands up to her. While going through her mother's diary, Donna discovers that there are two men, Nick Nixon and Nicholas McKay, who could be her biological father. She contacts them both and she gets a job in Nick Nixon's restaurant to see what he is like and she eventually tells him that she might be his daughter. They take a DNA test, which confirms that they are related. Donna tries to be nice to Ringo's new girlfriend, Naomi (Kate Bell), but she struggles. Ringo breaks up with Naomi and Donna discovers that Naomi has been following her. Naomi's trashes Donna's university project and steals her own medical file from the hospital. Donna is arrested, but Declan Napier (Erin Mullally) and Ringo find the file at Naomi's house and Donna is released.

Donna is crushed by some scaffolding after she goes to a building site to pick up Ringo. Earlier in the day, Paul had tampered with the scaffolding platform due to a feud with the site's owner. Ringo helps Donna to breathe and she is rushed to hospital, where she undergoes surgery to repair a ruptured spleen. Donna and Ringo then reunite and Ringo proposes to her. However, Donna turns him down, before proposing to him herself. Ringo wins a green card to the United States and they decide to bring the wedding forward. Donna meets Ringo's mother, Prue (Penny Cook) and she later discovers Prue and Nick together. The wedding venue has to be changed and Donna's car breaks down, so Lucas has to drive Donna and Nick to the new venue. They are stopped by the police, but Donna eventually makes it to the ceremony and she and Ringo marry. Following the honeymoon, Donna moves in with the Kennedy family. On their one-month anniversary, Ringo is knocked down by Stephanie Scully's (Carla Bonner) motorbike and dies. Donna is devastated and she struggles to accept that he has gone. Donna initially blames Kate for Ringo's death because he pushed her out of the way. Donna is upset when she misses Ringo's funeral. Donna is angry when Paul tries to use her to upset Steph at her trial. She later tells the court that Steph should not go to jail as it will not bring Ringo back. Donna receives a letter from a New York design school and Zeke tells her that Ringo applied for a place on her behalf. After initially deciding to stay in Ramsay Street, Donna's friends manage to convince her to leave by staging a fashion show showcasing her designs. Donna says her goodbyes in the street and she leaves for New York with Nick.

In 2009, "Neighbours" became the first Australian series to establish Twitter accounts for its characters. Donna was one of four characters to have an account set up, with the others being Declan, Ringo and Zeke. They began sending daily updates to their fans, giving advice and talking to each other. The updates are "complementary to the show's on-air storylines". FremantleMedia Enterprises vice-president of licensing Ben Liebmann said, "We thought it was a really great way to continue or allow the audience to engage with the "Neighbours" world off-screen". The messages are overseen by the Fremantle digital team, which is integrated with the story department of the "Neighbours" production team.

Robbie earned several award nominations for her portrayal of Donna. She was nominated for Most Popular New Female Talent at the 2009 Logie Awards. She was nominated for Best Newcomer and Funniest Performance at the "Inside Soap" Awards and Fave Aussie Hottie at the Nickelodeon Australian Kids' Choice Awards. In 2011, Robbie received a nomination for the Logie Award for Most Popular Actress.

The character has been well received. The "South Wales Evening Post" called Donna "one of the programme's most popular faces" and the "Bristol Evening Post" said she was "one of the most refreshing "Neighbours" characters to come along for many a moon". Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy said the character had become a favourite with fans. Ruth Deller, of television website Lowculture, called Donna "fierce and fabulous". Robbie's co-star, Scott Major (Lucas Fitzgerald) praised her performance as Donna saying, "Donna could've been played in so many ways, but I think Margot nailed it, she's always fun to work with, she's a barrel of laughs and always works hard at her stuff. She's really created Donna on her own and made Donna her own character".

Website AfterEllen commented on Donna's bisexuality saying that her introduction to "Neighbours" was "progress". They were also happy to see that Donna had been added to the credits, meaning that she would be around for a while. Holy Soap named Donna's most memorable moments as "Stepping out with Zeke after Ringo had dumped her" and "Locking lips with Korean exchange student Sunny". In August 2010, "TV Week" included Donna in their "Top 25 "Neighbours" characters". They said "Ditzy, but kind-hearted Donna always lands herself in trouble".



</doc>
<doc id="18408086" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18408086" title="New York State Route 273">
New York State Route 273

New York State Route 273 (NY 273) was a state highway in northern Washington County, New York, in the United States. It began at an intersection with U.S. Route 4 (US 4) east of the village of Whitehall and ended at the Vermont state line in the town of Hampton, just east of a junction with NY 22A. The route passed through largely rural areas and entered only one community, the small hamlet of East Whitehall.

NY 273 followed part of the former routing of the Hampton and Whitehall Turnpike, a privately maintained highway that linked the village of Whitehall to a bridge over the Poultney River near the hamlet of Hampton, where it continued to Poultney, Vermont, in the 19th century. The portion of the turnpike west of East Whitehall became part of US 4 in 1927; however, US 4 was realigned in the mid-1940s to follow a new, more direct highway between Whitehall and the Vermont state line at Fair Haven, Vermont. NY 273 was assigned in 1949 to the path of old turnpike; however, the NY 273 designation was eliminated in 1980 as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state of New York and Washington County. The former routing of NY 273 west of NY 22A became County Route 18 (CR 18).

NY 273 began at an intersection with US 4 east of the village of Whitehall in the town of Whitehall. After the intersection, the route passed the Our Lady of Angels Cemetery, where it turned to the southeast. NY 273 ran along the base of Ore Red Hill, outside of Whitehall. Near Ore Red Hill, the highway intersected with a local road, which connected to US 4. The route progressed to the southeast, entering the hamlet of East Whitehall, where it intersected with another local road.

NY 273 passed Bartholomew Hill and entered the town of Hampton, where it passed two mountains, Morris Hill, and the larger Thorn Hill. The highway then passed north of Crystal Lake, and entered the hamlet of Hampton. NY 273 intersected NY 22A in the small community before ending at the Vermont state line on a bridge over the Poultney River.

On April 11, 1820, the New York State Legislature created the Hampton and Whitehall Turnpike Road Company, a privately owned tasked with building the Hampton and Whitehall Turnpike. According to the act incorporating the company, the highway would begin at a bridge in the town of Hampton (at the Poultney River) and follow "the most convenient route" to the community of Whitehall Landing on Wood Creek (the modern village of Whitehall) in the town of Whitehall.

The Hampton and Whitehall Turnpike Road Company was initially financed through 800 shares of stock valued at $20 each. Under the text of the act establishing the entity, only one toll gate was permitted on the turnpike. The toll charged at the gate varied by person; the exact amount was based on the vehicle used and the number of livestock and horses that were brought onto the roadway. By 1920, the turnpike company ceased to exist and the state of New York had plans in place to improve the portion of the turnpike west of the hamlet of East Whitehall. The improved road would be part of a state highway extending from the village of Whitehall to the Vermont state line at Fair Haven, Vermont. The contract for the project was awarded on April 5, 1921, and the highway was completed by 1926.
When the Whitehall–Fair Haven highway first opened, it did not have a designation. However, the road was part of the proposed routing of US 4, a route in the new U.S. Highway System. It officially became part of US 4 when the system was officially approved in November of that year. In the early 1940s, construction began on a new highway between Whitehall and Fair Haven that bypassed East Whitehall to the northwest. It was completed by 1946, at which time it became a realignment of US 4. On January 1, 1949, the old Hampton and Whitehall Turnpike was designated as NY 273, a new route connecting US 4 east of Whitehall to the Vermont state line in Hampton.

In 1980, NY 273 was removed from the state highway system as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state of New York and Washington County. On April 1, 1980, ownership and maintenance of NY 273 was transferred from the state of New York to Washington County; however, the NY 273 designation had officially ceased to exist one week earlier on March 24, 1980. Following the swap, the former routing of NY 273 was redesignated as CR 18 while the short connector to Vermont became part of CR 18A, then a loop route off NY 22A. CR 18A has since been reconfigured to follow a new highway leading directly from NY 22A to the Poultney River bridge.



</doc>
<doc id="18418582" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18418582" title="24: Redemption">
24: Redemption

24: Redemption is a television film based on the series "24". It first aired on November 23, 2008, on Fox in the United States, and was released to DVD on November 25. The film was written by executive producer Howard Gordon and was directed by Jon Cassar. "24: Redemption" takes place almost four years after the sixth season and two months before the seventh season in real time between 3:00 pm and 5:00 pm (Sangala Time Zone) on Inauguration Day in the United States.

The main setting is Sangala, a fictional African country, where Jack Bauer (Kiefer Sutherland) tries to find peace with himself, and works as a missionary with Carl Benton (Robert Carlyle), who built the Okavango school to aid war orphans. Bauer is served a subpoena to appear before the United States Senate regarding human rights violations, but refuses to go, and a shadow organization among the United States government aids General Juma (Tony Todd) and his militia in a coup d'état.

The working title was "24: Exile". The concept of the film started since the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike, which delayed the seventh season for a year thus leaving a gap in the series during 2008. "Redemption" was somewhat inspired by the Rwandan Genocide in 1994. The majority of "Redemption" was filmed on location outside Cape Town, South Africa since it was difficult to mimic an authentic African scenery in America.

Two versions of the film were released to DVD, the original broadcast version and an extended directors cut. The original airing was seen by just over 12 million Americans, and received widespread critical acclaim, and was praised for showing a more human side to Bauer. "24: Redemption" was nominated for a Golden Globe as well as five Emmy Awards.

"Redemption" begins with a brief prologue showing a young boy being kidnapped at night, indoctrinated, and drafted along with other boys into a rebel militia led by General Juma (Tony Todd) so they could take part in a coup d'état, which is being funded by an American shadow organization led by Jonas Hodges (Jon Voight).

While Bauer performs missionary work at the Okavango school in Sangala owned by Carl Benton (Robert Carlyle), U.S. embassy official Frank Trammel (Gil Bellows) serves him a subpoena to appear before the Senate regarding torture charges, but Bauer refuses to go. Upon hearing the embassy will cut funding to Benton's school if it continues to protect him, he decides to leave.

Meanwhile, several children playing soccer are ambushed by Juma's rebel soldiers and kidnapped for conscription. When two boys run away, the soldiers open fire, killing one. Benton learns that the rebels are planning to attack his school. He calls Bauer, who hides the children in an underground shelter, and kills several rebels before getting captured and tortured. Benton is able to ambush the remaining soldiers, and Bauer kills the leader, Youssou Dubaku (Zolile Nokwe). His brother, Iké (Hakeem Kae-Kazim) hears of his death and plots revenge, while Bauer and Benton leave with the children to get to the American embassy in the capital before the final helicopter evacuates the country.

In Washington, D.C., stockbroker Chris Whitley (Kris Lemche) is ordered by the conspirators who fund Juma's militia to erase all information that would incriminate them. Instead, he calls his friend Roger Taylor (Eric Lively), the son of President Elect Allison Taylor (Cherry Jones), for help. After Roger hears of the conspiracy, Whitley returns to his home to forward the files, only to be stopped by Hodges' men Halcott and John Quinn (Sebastian Roche) who take the information, kill Whitley and bury the body in concrete.

Benton, Bauer and the boys are spotted by Iké's helicopter. While they flee into the forest, Benton steps on a land mine. With little time to disarm it, Benton urges Bauer to leave, so he can buy time. When he is surrounded by Iké and his men, Benton takes his foot off the trigger and detonates the mine, killing himself and the rebels, though Iké survives. Bauer and the children continue to the capital, where he defeats another rebel ambush. At the gates of the embassy, Trammel denies the children entry and blackmails Bauer into surrendering for the children's safety. He reluctantly accepts, thus sacrificing his freedom. While Taylor is inaugurated President, Bauer and the children evacuate, leaving chaotic Sangala behind.




While the majority of the characters are introduced, there are still a small number of original cast who appeared in the past, namely Kiefer Sutherland, who plays Jack Bauer and Bob Gunton, who plays Ethan Kanin from the sixth season and appears as the outgoing Secretary of Defense and new White House Chief of Staff. Powers Boothe continues to play Noah Daniels, the outgoing president. Peter MacNicol reprises his role as Tom Lennox from the sixth season also.

In Sangala, Robert Carlyle plays Carl Benton, an old friend of Jack Bauer, who runs a school for rescued war orphans. Carlyle suggested that there is a very close friendship between Benton and Bauer, since he seems to let Benton come closer to him than others. Towards the end of the film, he sacrifices himself in order to buy time for Bauer and the children to escape. Gil Bellows plays Frank Tramell, a U.S. State Department official who is ordered to subpoena Bauer. Native South African actor Sean Michael plays Charles Solenz, a UN aid worker helping at Benton's school, and later abandons Benton and the children, claiming that the United Nations is "neutral" in the Sangala conflict.

Siyabulela Ramba plays Willie, one of the war orphans under the care of Benton, who befriends Bauer. Ramba felt an emotional connection with Sutherland during filming, and believes their friendship shows through onscreen. Isaach De Bankolé plays Ule Matobo, the Prime Minister of the nation, who is forced to evacuate the country during the coup. Among the antagonists in Sangala are General Benjamin Juma (Tony Todd), a former dictator and leader of the People's Freedom Army responsible for genocide in Sangala, and Iké Dubaku (Hakeem Kae-Kazim), one of Juma's lieutenants in the coup. Zolile Nokwe plays Youssou Dubaku, Iké's younger brother.

In Washington, Cherry Jones plays Allison Taylor, the first woman to be inaugurated President of the United States. Colm Feore plays Allison's husband and First Gentleman Henry Taylor. Eric Lively plays Roger Taylor, the First Son and son of Taylor, and appears alongside Carly Pope as his girlfriend, Samantha Roth, and Kris Lemche, who plays friend Chris Whitley. Among the antagonists in Washington are Jon Voight, who plays Jonas Hodges, a "very serious villain" involved in a Blackwater-type organization, as well as Mark Kiely, who plays Secret Service Agent Edward Vossler.

The film was conceived as a result of the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike, which delayed the seventh season for an entire year; the producers were exploring ways to get back on the air earlier. Ideas included airing webisodes or mobisodes. According to the President of Entertainment at Fox, "We were going to be off the air for a while and how do you bridge that gap. We thought about doing something online and after talking with [executive producer] Howard Gordon we decided to do it on air." The working title for the film was "24: Exile", until the change to "24: Redemption".

In an interview, Kiefer Sutherland revealed that "Redemption" was inspired by the Rwandan Genocide and the U.S. Government's response to it. "The truth is, one of the things that was said in the prequel, which I think has been a massive problem with how the Western world has dealt with Africa, no one can justify going there, because they have no viable reason – meaning oil or money. Here [the president's] response is a human one. We can stop a genocide. I think that that's something that Bill Clinton apologized for not doing with Rwanda and we centered a show around that."

On April 30, producers began scouting locations in Africa in order to film the feature in the upcoming weeks. The original plan was to shoot three days worth of scenes in Africa and then have Simi Valley, California fill in for the location. After realizing it would be difficult to fake, it was decided to shoot the majority of the film on location in Cape Town, South Africa. Filming took place from June 4 to June 20 with the final scenes being shot in Los Angeles, California. By July 13, principal shooting of the film had been completed and post-production had begun.

Before release of "Redemption", an exclusive six-minute clip was shown to fans at San Diego Comic-Con, 2008, which showed Bauer escorting a group of African children to the U.S. embassy and becomes involved in a gunfight on a crowded street. On September 21, 2008, another trailer was soon uploaded by Fox, focusing more on the conflict in Africa and how Jonas Hodges is involved in the conflict. It premiered on November 23, 2008 in the U.S. with the DVD released two days later. Fox also released an extended creator's cut of the feature. Other extras include an audio commentary, "Making of" and "Children of War" featurettes, a brief summary of the sixth season, an alternate Season 7 trailer featuring scenes from the first thirteen episodes, and the first sixteen minutes of the Season 7 premiere. In the United Kingdom, the film premiered on November 24 on Sky1, one day after first airing in America. It was later released in the UK on December 1, 2008 with both the original and extended versions on DVD. In Australia, "Redemption" aired on November 24, 2008 on the Seven Network. The DVD was later released on February 11, 2009.

"Redemption" was placed the second most viewed Fox release on the week it aired, behind "House"; "Redemption" drew a total of 12.121 million viewers, with a Nielsen rating of 7.0, 4.0/9 among adults aged 18–49. "Redemption" was the highest-rated scripted program of the night, and was 3rd overall for the 8:00 pm to 11:00 pm time slot, behind the American Music Awards and Sunday Night Football. It aired on Sky 1 in the UK, and received an average of 405,000 viewers, nearly triple the regular number of viewers for the series.

 The film garnered widespread critical acclaim reviews from film critics. It holds a 100% approval rating on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 8 reviews. Alessandra Stanley of "The New York Times" gave the film a positive review, stating that Redemption is "a more sober, stripped-down version of "24", and that's refreshing," and that it was the first time a terrorist threat did not take place in Southern California, and the depiction of the conflict in Sangala is highly realistic and compelling. Stanley also said that a two-hour version of "24" proves that downsizing isn't always a bad thing. Mary McNamara of "The Los Angeles Times" praised the film, acknowledging the producers taking on board the criticism and moral issues regarding the use of torture, and stated that a group of innocent young children running for their lives "instantly ratchets up a story's emotional level."

Brian Zoromski of "IGN" rated it "good", 7.5 out of a possible 10. Zoromski stated that the purpose of "Redemption" was to allow the introduction of new characters for the seventh season. He further praised the action scenes involving Bauer on his own, stating it as a "sort of Die Hard in Africa," and called the change of setting from Los Angeles a "refreshing change of pace". However, Zormski criticized the film for containing cludge dialogue and bland scenes, but suggested that it makes up for it with the action scenes and emotional scenes involving Bauer, allowing Sutherland to show his acting range. Oscar Dah; of "BuddyTV" stated that the film should make up for the critics' poor outing of the sixth season, and has said that the film works wonderfully as the start of the seventh season, and praised Robert Carlyle's performance.

In addition, some reviews had mixed responses. Simon Brew of "Den of Geek" rated "Redemption" 3 out of 5 stars, praising it for showing a more human side of Bauer, the acting of Cherry Jones as Allison Taylor, and named "Redemption" as a solid bridge between season six and seven. However, Brew was critical that it plays little to no havoc with the world of "24", and that it is lacking at times in urgency. Gerard Gilbert of "The Independent" stated that the introduction of Jonas Hodges was promising, and praised John Voight's acting, as well as stating that the character is the one most to look forward to in the seventh season. Matthew Gilbert of "The Boston Globe" gave the film a negative review, giving it a 2 out of 10, calling it "un-fun", and stating that Bauer's character has not changed at all from past seasons, and asking, "When does a rogue hero [Bauer] become a tired joke? Based on this un-fun movie, I would say yesterday."

In total, the film itself and its lead actor, Kiefer Sutherland, were nominated for several awards, but none of them resulted in a win. Sutherland was nominated for this performance as "Best Actor in a Miniseries or TV Film" at the 66th Golden Globe Awards, an award which was won by Paul Giamatti for his performance in "John Adams". The TV film was also nominated with five Primetime Emmys, including four Creative Arts Primetime Emmys in its 61st ceremony. Sutherland was again nominated for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or Movie for his role as Jack Bauer, but lost to Brendan Gleeson for his role as Winston Churchill in "Into the Storm". Sean Callery was nominated for "Outstanding Music Composition for a Miniseries, Movie or a Special (Original Dramatic Score)", but lost to "Into the Storm" composer Howard Goodall. Scott Powell was nominated for "Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Miniseries or a Movie", which was won by Lee Percy and Brian A. Kates for "Taking Chance". William D. Dotson, Catherine M. Speakman, Jeffrey R. Whitcher, Pembrooke Andrews, Shawn Kennelly, Daryl Fontenault, Melissa Kennelly, Jeffrey Charboneau, Laura Macias and Vincent Nicastro were nominated for "Outstanding Sound Editing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Special", but lost to the crew of "Generation Kill". Lastly, William Gocke, Colin McFarlane, Michael Olman and Kenneth Kobett were nominated for "Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Miniseries or a Movie", which was won again by the crew of "Generation Kill". Sutherland was also nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie but once again lost to Paul Giamatti in "John Adams". "Redemption" was also nominated for the Satellite Award for Best Television Film but lost to the BBC docudrama "".



</doc>
<doc id="18496136" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18496136" title="Beth Israel Congregation (Jackson, Mississippi)">
Beth Israel Congregation (Jackson, Mississippi)

Beth Israel Congregation () is a Reform Jewish congregation located at 5315 Old Canton Road in Jackson, Mississippi, United States. Organized in 1860 by Jews of German background, it has always been, and remains, the only Jewish synagogue in Jackson. Beth Israel built the first synagogue in Mississippi in 1867, and, after it burned down, its 1874 replacement was at one time the oldest religious building in Jackson.

Originally Orthodox, the congregation joined the Union of American Hebrew Congregations in 1874. After going through a series of rabbis, and periods without one, the congregation hired Meyer Lovitt as rabbi in 1929; he would remain until 1954. The congregation moved to a new building in 1941.

Dr. Perry Nussbaum, Beth Israel's rabbi from 1954 to 1973, was active in the Civil Rights Movement. In 1967 the congregation moved to a new synagogue building, (its current one), and both the new building and Nussbaum's house were bombed by the Ku Klux Klan that year. In 2003, Valerie Cohen became the congregation's first female rabbi.

, the rabbi was Jeffrey Kurtz-Lendner. With a growing membership of over 200 families, Beth Israel was the largest Jewish congregation in the state.

The congregation was originally established in 1860 by [[History of the Jews in Germany|Jews of German background]]. Its primary purpose was to create a Jewish cemetery, which it immediately did, on State Street. In November 1862 the congregation hired a Mr. Oberndorfer as [[hazzan|cantor]]; its next goal was provide a Jewish education for the congregation's children. At the time Jackson had 15 Jewish families.

A number of accounts state that the congregation's first synagogue was built at South State and South streets in 1861 and burned by the [[Union Army]] in 1863, but the veracity of the latter claim is disputed. That year the congregation had 31 members, and adopted its first constitution. In 1867 the congregation constructed a wood [[Framing (construction)|frame]] building at the corner of South State and South streets. The building, which was used both as a schoolhouse and for [[Jewish services|prayer services]], was the first [[synagogue]] in Mississippi.

From the start the congregation was not unified. However, as there were only about 50 Jews in Jackson in 1868, the community was too small for two synagogues. Conflicts arose between the older German Jewish members and post-[[American Civil War]] [[History of the Jews in Poland|Jewish immigrants from Poland]], particularly over synagogue ritual. The synagogue followed the [[Orthodox Judaism|Orthodox]] "[[Nusach#Nusach Ashkenaz|nusach Ashkenaz]]", but some members wanted to adopt [[Isaac Mayer Wise]]'s reformist "[[Minhag America]]" Prayer-Book.

Tensions eased when Beth Israel hired its first Rabbi, the Reverend L. Winter, in 1870. He moved the congregation towards Reform Judaism, replacing Saturday services with Friday night ones, giving sermons in English, and adding [[Confirmation#Judaism|confirmation ceremonies]]. Winter, however, left soon afterward.

Beth Israel's building burned down in July 1874, and was replaced by a stone and brick building at the same location. Dedicated in 1875, the two-story brick [[Gothic Revival architecture|Gothic Revival]] structure had "[[Ogive#Architecture|pointed-arch]] windows", and an auditorium on the second floor that was accessed via two curved staircases. The architect, Joseph Willis, had previously designed or remodeled several significant buildings in Mississippi, including the [[Old Mississippi State Capitol]]. In later years one straight staircase replaced the two curved ones, and the exposed brick walls were covered by [[stucco]].

In 1875, Beth Israel also formalized its move to Reform by joining the Union of American Hebrew Congregations (now [[Union for Reform Judaism]]).

Following its founding the congregation grew very slowly; by 1908 there were still only 37 members, and 16 children in the religious school. By 1918, membership had fallen to 24, and children in the religious school to 10. That year the synagogue's total income was $800 (today $).

In the first decades of the 20th century, the neighborhood around the South State Street building transitioned to industrial use. To accommodate members who had moved away from Jackson's downtown, in 1940 the congregation commenced construction of a new building at 546 East Woodrow Wilson Avenue (west of State Street), while holding services at Galloway Memorial Methodist Church. The congregation moved into the new building in 1941, and dedicated it in January 1942. The sanctuary had solid walnut [[pew]]s that sat 300. Beth Israel's old building at South State and South streets was demolished; at the time of the move, it was the oldest building used for religious purposes in Jackson. In 2005, a historical marker was placed at the location by the State of Mississippi, commemorating the original Beth Israel synagogue buildings.

In its first few decades Beth Israel went through a number of rabbis, whose tenures were all short-lived, and endured many periods without any rabbi at all. One rabbi, Louis Schreiber, was hired in 1915, and fired the next year, for "grossly insulting and hurting the feelings of Beth Israel members". In 1929 the congregation hired Meyer Lovitt as rabbi, and with him Beth Israel achieved a measure of stability. By 1939, the synagogue had 72 members, out of a total Jewish population in Jackson of around 250.

Lovitt was non-confrontational, and avoided getting involved in issues relating to the [[civil rights movement]]. He minimized the differences between Christianity and Judaism, and viewed assimilation positively. He preferred that the congregation celebrate the [[Jewish holidays]] in ways that attracted no attention, and had no objection to members putting up Christmas trees, which he referred to as "[[Hanukkah bush]]es." Lovitt would remain with Beth Israel until his retirement in 1954.

In 1954, Lovitt was succeeded by Dr. Perry Nussbaum. Born in [[Toronto]] in 1908 and raised there, Nussbaum had attended a small [[Orthodox Judaism|Orthodox]] synagogue as a boy, and, after high school, worked as secretary for the [[Holy Blossom Temple]]'s rabbi Barnett R. Brickner. With encouragement from Brickner, in 1926 he applied and was accepted into a combined eight-year rabbinic ordination and degree program at [[Hebrew Union College]] in Cincinnati and [[University of Cincinnati]]. He graduated in 1933, Hebrew Union College's first Canadian graduate. He was the last member of his class to receive an offer of a position, so he had to accept as his first rabbinic posting a role at a Reform synagogue in Melbourne. This did not work out, as he was too inexperienced. Nussbaum subsequently served at a synagogue in [[Amarillo, Texas]], and in 1937 accepted a position as a prison chaplain in [[Pueblo, Colorado]], where he also worked as a part-time librarian at the local university, and taught public speaking. In 1941 he became rabbi of Temple Emanu-El in [[Wichita, Kansas]], and in 1943 he joined the [[Chaplain Corps (United States Army)|Chaplain Corps of the United States Army]]. He served in the [[Philippines]], and eventually became a [[colonel]] in the [[United States Army Reserve]].

After the war, he was assistant rabbi at a synagogue in [[Trenton, New Jersey]] (a position several other rabbis had rejected). Finding that the rabbi there wanted a secretary, not an assistant, Nussbaum resigned after less than a year, and moved to Temple Emanu-el of [[Long Beach, New York]]. He found the position there extremely political, and after three years became rabbi of [[Temple Anshe Amunim (Pittsfield, Massachusetts)|Temple Anshe Amunim]] in [[Pittsfield, Massachusetts]]. After Lovitt retired from Beth Israel, the chair of the Central Conference of American Rabbis (and former classmate and friend), Rabbi Nathan Perilman, recommended the post to Nussbaum. Perilman stated the congregation was wonderful, and would respect and appreciate him. He also lauded the city of Jackson. Looking for stability, and some "rest and relaxation", Nussbaum interviewed for the role; the search committee's first question to him was "Doctor, what's your position on [[school desegregation]]?" He replied that he was a liberal, but was careful not to get his congregants into trouble. Though the committee was concerned about his liberalism, they offered him the role, which he accepted, resigning from Temple Anshe Anusim.

Nussbaum had a forceful personality, and was outspoken and not particularly tactful; some congregants remembered him decades after he retired as "headstrong" and "abrasive". He was a good educator, speaker, and pastor, and had a particular knack for composing original prayers. Nussbaum found Beth Israel's membership highly assimilated, and, in his view, some congregants were "anti-Hebrew, anti-Israel, anti-everything!" He criticized members who put up Christmas trees (a large proportion did), and slowly re-introduced Jewish rituals such as [[bar mitzvah]]s to the congregation's practice. He also developed an annual educational program for adults, and added Hebrew studies.

Nussbaum supported [[Zionism]] and [[Israel]], causes which his congregants typically publicly avoided. Upon arriving at Beth Israel he discovered that some of his richest members were supporters of the anti-Zionist [[American Council for Judaism]], and he immediately prohibited them from meeting in the synagogue's premises, which, according to Nussbaum, "left its scars". He openly declared that Judaism was a religion distinct from Christianity, rather than just an [[Old Testament]] version of it. In 1955, Nussbaum organized the Mississippi Assembly of Jewish Congregations, which had representatives from all twenty-five of Mississippi's synagogues, and was elected its president. He was always keen on ecumenical work, but discovered that rabbis were excluded from the Jackson Ministerial Association, which was Protestant-only. He instead helped found the Jackson Interfaith Fellowship.

Following the [[bombing of the Hebrew Benevolent Congregation Temple]] in 1958, Nussbaum wrote an article in Beth Israel's bulletin titled "It Can Happen Here", in which he expressed the view that such a bombing was quite possible in Jackson. A copy of the article was reprinted in Jackson's secular press, and raised considerable opposition amongst Jackson's leadership. This in turn led to Nussbaum's first battle with his congregation; at the next board meeting it was proposed that Nussbaum be required to clear all public statements with the board before making them. The rabbi's supporters were able to defeat the resolution, but the attempt shook Nussbaum, though he did not end his activism. In 1961 Nussbaum provided considerable support to the early [[Freedom Riders]] imprisoned in Mississippi jails, and in 1966 Nussbaum began sponsoring annual "Clergy Institutes" at Beth Israel, to which he invited local black ministers.

As tensions in the [[Southern United States]] heightened over the [[civil rights movement]], the Jews of Jackson came under threat, being targeted by both the [[Ku Klux Klan]] (KKK) and the Americans for the Preservation of the White Race (APWR). The latter set up a booth at Jackson's state fair selling antisemitic literature, and [[Samuel Bowers]], the KKK's Imperial Wizard in Mississippi, ordered attacks on both the synagogue and Nussbaum. The position of Beth Israel's membership in Jackson was not secure; according to Murray Polner, writing in 1977, "Judaism may rank higher in the moral order of the Bible Belt fundamentalists than, say, Black Christianity or Roman Catholicism, but it remains nonetheless a less–than–equal sect, and extraneous and foreign religion in an area of xenophobes." Jews were unofficially excluded from membership in the Jackson Country Club, and the congregants were used to "customary slights and indignities" from Jackson's dominant white evangelical Protestant community.

In 1967, the congregation moved to its current location, a building on Old Canton Road described by [[Jack Nelson (journalist)|Jack Nelson]] as "an octagonal structure dominated by a massive roof". At the dedication in March of that year, both black and white ministers participated. On September 18, 1967 the new building was wrecked by a dynamite bomb placed by Klan members in a recessed doorway. According to Nelson, the explosion had "ripped through administrative offices and a conference room, torn a hole in the ceiling, blown out windows, ruptured a water pipe and buckled a wall." The bomb caused $25,000 (today $) worth of damage.

Three days later the Greater Jackson Clergy Alliance "expressed their sorrow and support for the Jewish community" by organizing a "Walk of Penance". The Alliance, which had been formed two months earlier, comprised 60 clergy from 10 denominations, "the first racially integrated association of Protestants, Catholics, and Jews in Mississippi." Nussbaum had helped found it, merging into it the Jackson Interfaith Fellowship. The Reverend Thomas Tiller, the Alliance president, stated that "by default, we may have contributed to a climate of opinion which gives rise to terrorism. What concerns us, and others like us, is that we may not have been zealous enough in protecting our God-given freedoms." Despite this show of solidarity, and a reward offered of several thousand dollars, the perpetrators were not discovered.

In November of that year the same group planted a bomb that blew out the front of Nussbaum's house, while he and his wife were sleeping there. Nussbaum blamed the bombings on local [[antisemitism]] and bigotry, but most of his congregation blamed it on Nussbaum's anti-[[Racial segregation in the United States|segregationist]] activism. Though the congregation officially supported him, a number of members privately urged him to leave Beth Israel and find another pulpit. The synagogue's board of trustees voted to prohibit non-Jewish groups from using the synagogue's premises unless they had prior approval from the board; the intent was to put an end to the interracial meetings that Nussbaum held there.

In the wake of the bombings, Nussbaum wanted to leave Jackson, but as a 60-year-old rabbi was unable to find another posting. He stayed at Beth Israel until his retirement in 1973, when he and his wife moved to [[San Diego]].

After Nussbaum's retirement, Beth Israel hired Richard Birnholz as rabbi. Birnholz was ordained at Hebrew Union College in 1971, and had served from 1971 to 1973 as assistant rabbi of [[Temple Israel (Memphis, Tennessee)|Temple Israel]] in Memphis, Tennessee. While serving as rabbi, he was also a visiting professor in [[Millsaps College]]'s religion department. In 1977, he won the Samuel Kaminker Memorial Award for his informal education curriculum, and in 1983 he was alumni-in-residence at Hebrew Union College in New York. He served Beth Israel until 1986, then moved to Congregation Schaarai Zedek in [[Tampa, Florida]].

Birnholz was followed by Eric Gurvis, Steven Engel, and Jim Egolf, all of whom, like Nussbaum before them, also served as the rabbis of Temple Beth El in [[Lexington, Mississippi]], leading services there once a month on Sunday. At the end of the 20th century, Beth Israel was the largest of the fourteen synagogues in Mississippi, with 213 member families.

In 2003, Beth Israel hired Valerie Cohen, Beth Israel's first female rabbi. Cohen had originally earned a B.A. in [[public relations]], then studied at [[Hebrew Union College]]'s Israel, Cincinnati and New York City campuses. She graduated in 1999 and was ordained at [[Manhattan]]'s [[Congregation Emanu-El of New York|Temple Emanuel]]. After serving for three years as assistant rabbi at Temple Israel in Memphis, Tennessee, Cohen joined Beth Israel. She continued the tradition of her predecessors of also serving as the rabbi of Lexington's Temple Beth El.

In 2005 Cohen started classes for adults who wished to celebrate their [[Bar and Bat Mitzvah]], but had not had the opportunity when 12 or 13. That same year, in the aftermath of [[Hurricane Katrina]], Beth Israel welcomed between 75 and 100 evacuees from [[New Orleans]]. In 2006 Beth Israel had a membership of approximately 200 families which, in contrast with Mississippi's other Jewish congregations, was slowly growing. Beth Israel's services were attended by about 50 people in 2008. In 2013, the synagogue's windows were broken and the word "Jew" scratched into the paint of a door.

Cohen accepted an offer to become rabbi of [[Temple Emanuel Sinai (Worcester, Massachusetts)|Temple Emanuel Sinai]] in [[Worcester, Massachusetts]] in 2014. She was followed at Beth Israel by interim rabbis Ted Riter and Stephen Wylen.

Jeffrey Kurtz-Lendner joined as rabbi in 2016. A graduate of [[Brandeis University]] and the [[Jewish Theological Seminary of America|Jewish Theological Seminary]], he served as rabbi of the Northshore Jewish Congregation of [[Mandeville, Louisiana]] from 2002 to 2007, and Temple Solel in [[Hollywood, Florida]] from 2007 to 2015. By 2017, membership had reached 214 families; that year, the congregation held its fiftieth annual charity food bazaar, and celebrated its fiftieth year in the Old Clanton Road building.

In recognition of its contributions to the civil rights movement, the synagogue was added as a stop on the Mississippi Freedom Trail in April, 2018.




[[Category:1861 establishments in Mississippi]]
[[Category:19th-century synagogues]]
[[Category:20th-century attacks on synagogues and Jewish communal organizations]]
[[Category:Antisemitic attacks and incidents in the United States]]
[[Category:Culture of Jackson, Mississippi]]
[[Category:German-Jewish culture in the United States]]
[[Category:History of African-American civil rights]]
[[Category:Ku Klux Klan crimes in Mississippi]]
[[Category:Places of worship in Jackson, Mississippi]]
[[Category:Reform synagogues in Mississippi]]
[[Category:Religious buildings completed in 1941]]
[[Category:Religious organizations established in 1861]]
[[Category:Synagogues completed in 1941]]

</doc>
<doc id="18508737" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18508737" title="She's like a Star">
She's like a Star

"She's like a Star" is a song written, produced and performed by British singer and songwriter Taio Cruz. It was released on 18 August 2008 as the fifth single from his debut studio album "Departure" (2008). An R&B ballad, the lyrics of "She's like a Star" are about the theme of parenthood, an idea which inspired Cruz to compose the song. The song was remixed to feature vocals from English girl group Sugababes and American rapper K.R. , and American rapper Busta Rhymes. It received generally mixed reviews from critics, who were ambivalent towards the composition. Upon release, it peaked at number twenty on the UK Singles Chart. The song's music video features "Hollyoaks" actress Roxanne McKee as Cruz's love interest. Cruz performed the song with the Sugababes at the 2008 MOBO Awards ceremony, and at Radio 1's Big Weekend 2011.

"She's Like a Star" was written and produced by Taio Cruz for his debut studio album "Departure" (2008). He composed the song in the middle of 2007, towards the completion of the album's recording, and was inspired to write it based on the idea of parenthood. During an interview with "Sugar", Cruz explained that the song has a double meaning behind it:

"She's like a Star" is the fifth single from "Departure", and was released in the United Kingdom on 18 August 2008. There are several remixes of the song, including one by Cahill which is more uptempo than the original version. A remix that features vocals from English girl group Sugababes and American rapper Busta Rhymes was also released. According to the "Daily Mirror", the collaboration came about when they ran into each other at the Hot 97 studios in New York City. The remix appears on the Sugababes' sixth studio album "Catfights and Spotlights" (2008).

Alex Fletcher of Digital Spy rated the song three out of five stars and stated that it is "undoubtedly" one of the album's low points. Additionally, he criticised the song's lack of "bravado and pizazz" in comparison to Cruz's previous singles "I Can Be" and "Come On Girl". Andy Welch of the "Halesowen News" described it as "a fine example of a Brit doing R&B as well as the Americans", but was unimpressed with the child's voice sample. Hazel Robinson from the BBC Chart Blog gave the song a full five-star rating, and wrote that its composition and musical arrangement produced a song that sounds natural and "pretty extraordinary". The reviewer admitted that while "She's like a Star" was not the best track from "Departure", it sounds "infinitely cooler" than the album's previous single "I Can Be". "Daily Record"'s Rick Fulton praised "She's like a Star" as "one of the best R&B sounds to come out of the UK". "She's like a Star" earned Cruz a MOBO Award nomination for Best UK Male.

The song debuted at number 44 on the UK Singles Chart in the issue dated 16 August 2008. It peaked at number 20 three weeks later, and spent a total of 15 weeks on the chart. "She's like a Star" became Cruz's fifth consecutive top-thirty hit in the United Kingdom, and outpeaked the album's first two singles "I Just Wanna Know" and "Moving On".

The music video for "She's like a Star" was filmed in Spain. It features an appearance from the actress Roxanne McKee, known for her role as Louise in the British television soap opera "Hollyoaks", in which she plays Cruz's love interest. Cruz, who is friends with McKee, explained how the collaboration came about, saying:

Most scenes of the video take place in a large house. Throughout the video, the pair are touching and kissing with each other, and McKee is shown in the bathtub. In the concluding scenes, she leaves the house and is depicted as a bright star that travels towards the sky, while Cruz stands in front of the house by the pool.

The singer performed "She's like a Star" at the O2 Academy Sheffield, England in August 2008 along with many other tracks from "Departure". The Sugababes, along with Cruz, performed the song as part of a medley with their single "Girls" at the 2008 MOBO Awards ceremony. Cruz performed it on MTV Live Sessions along with many of his previous and follow-up singles. He performed "She's like a Star" on 15 May 2011 at Radio 1's Big Weekend, as the fourth song on the set list, which included his hits "Break Your Heart", "Higher" and "Dynamite".






</doc>
<doc id="18546298" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18546298" title="Health and appearance of Michael Jackson">
Health and appearance of Michael Jackson

Michael Jackson (August 29, 1958 – June 25, 2009) was an American singer who spent over four decades in the public eye, first as a child star with the Jackson 5 and later as a solo artist. From the mid-1980s, Jackson's appearance began to change dramatically. The shape of his face, particularly his nose, triggered widespread speculation of extensive cosmetic surgery. His skin tone became much lighter. Although Jackson was diagnosed with the skin disorder vitiligo, which results in white patches on the skin, and said that he had not purposely bleached his skin but had used makeup to even out his skin tone, it was widely suggested that his lighter skin tone was partly due to skin bleaching.

Jackson and some of his siblings said they had been physically and psychologically abused by their father, Joseph Jackson. In 2003, Joseph admitted to whipping them as children, but emphatically rejected the longstanding abuse allegations. The whippings deeply traumatized Jackson and may have led to the onset of further health problems later in his life. Physicians speculated that he had body dysmorphic disorder.
At some point during the 1990s, it appeared that Jackson had become dependent on prescription drugs, mainly painkillers and strong sedatives. The drug use was later linked to second- and third-degree burns he had suffered years before. Jackson gradually became dependent on these drugs and his health deteriorated. He went into rehabilitation in 1993.
While preparing for a series of comeback concerts scheduled to begin in July 2009, Jackson died of acute propofol and benzodiazepine intoxication after suffering cardiac arrest on June 25, 2009. His personal physician was convicted of involuntary manslaughter in his death and sentenced to four years in prison.

Jackson's skin was a medium-brown color throughout his youth. However, starting in the mid-1980s, it gradually grew paler. This was partly due to vitiligo (a long-term skin condition characterized by patches of the skin losing their pigment) and also considered to be due to skin bleaching. The cause of vitiligo is unknown, but it is believed to be due to genetic susceptibility triggered by an environmental factor such that an autoimmune disease occurs.

Biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli said that Jackson began making his nose smaller around the same time his skin became gradually lighter and was using the over-the-counter skin-bleaching cream, Porcelana, to achieve the lighter skin. Jackson's physical changes gained widespread media coverage and provoked criticism from the public. Some African-American psychologists argued Jackson was "a lousy role model for black youth". Dr. Dennis Chestnut said Jackson had given "black youth a feeling that they can achieve", but might encourage them to believe they had to be esoteric and idiosyncratic to be successful. Dr. Halford Fairchild said Jackson and other African-American celebrities would try "to look more like white people in order to get in films and on television". Jackson has also been confronted with the reaction of the people around him. Filmmaker John Landis, who directed two music videos for Jackson, said when Jackson showed him his bleached chest, he told him the doctor who had done it was a criminal.

However, in 1993, Jackson told Oprah Winfrey "there, as I know of, there is no such thing as skin bleaching. I've never seen it, I don't know what it is." He said he had a hereditary skin disorder (vitiligo), and would use make-up to even out the uneven skin tone. "It is something I cannot help," said Jackson. "When people make up stories that I don't want to be who I am, it hurts me. It's a problem for me. I can't control it. But what about all the millions of people who sit in the sun to become darker, to become other than what they are. Nobody says nothing about that." Winfrey's interview of Jackson was watched by 62 million Americans. It also started a public discourse on the topic of vitiligo, then a relatively unknown condition.

Jackson publicly said that he was proud to be black. He also wrote a letter to photographer William Pecchi Jr. in 1988 which reads: "Maybe I look at the world through rose colored glasses but I love people all over the world. That is why stories of racism really disturb me. [...] Because in truth I believe ALL men are created equal, I was taught that and will always believe it. I just can't conceive of how a person could hate another because of skin color. I love every race on the planet earth. Prejudice is the child of ignorance. Naked we come into the world and naked we shall go out. And a very good thing too, for it reminds me that I am naked under my shirt, whatever its color."

Shortly following Jackson's death, tubes of Benoquin and hydroquinone were found in Jackson's home. Both creams are commonly used to treat vitiligo; Dr. David Sawcer said some patients with vitiligo remove dark areas of skin when most of their skin has become pale. Darkening depigmented skin is also extremely difficult. Depigmentation causes a permanent and extreme sensitivity to the sun. Vitiligo patients are at risk to contract melanoma, and an annual cancer check-up is recommended. Another common way of treating vitiligo is using makeup to camouflage depigmented skin. The treatments Jackson used for his condition further lightened his skin tone, and with the application of pancake makeup to even out his skin tone, he could appear very pale. Jackson also covered his skin disorder with clothing wearing long sleeves and long pants. In the music video for "Remember the Time", all dancers and actors except for Jackson are lightly dressed following the example set by ancient Egyptians. Jackson usually avoided wearing patterned clothing to avoid attention to the disorder.

Jackson's autopsy confirmed that he had vitiligo. His skin was found to have reduced (though not absent) melanocytes, the cells active in skin pigmentation. Vitiligo occurs in three different patterns. Segmental depigmentation means only one side of the body is affected, whereas generalized depigmentation means many parts of the body are affected. Jackson's autopsy report states a "focal depigmentation of the skin" (i.e., the depigmentation occurs on one or a few areas of the body). In Jackson's case, there were five affected areas. When Jackson was diagnosed with vitiligo in the mid-1980s, he started to learn more about the disease. He would often call his dermatologist's nurse and future wife Debbie Rowe to get medical information as well as emotional support.

Taraborrelli said that Jackson was diagnosed with discoid lupus. To treat this condition, Jackson had hydroxychloroquine injected directly into his scalp regularly. He also used Solaquin, Retin A and Benoquin and had to avoid sun exposure more than ever. Taraborrelli said the lupus was on remission later. Jackson's autopsy did not confirm or refute the claim that he had lupus.

Over time, Jackson's facial structure changed as well. Surgeons speculated he also had a forehead lift, cheekbone surgery and altered his lips. Those close to the singer estimated that, by 1990, he had undergone around ten procedures. However, in the biography's original edition published in 1991, Taraborrelli said Jackson had had a total of six nose surgeries including two secondary operations (not considered complete rhinoplasties). According to Taraborrelli, Jackson had his first rhinoplasty after breaking his nose during a rehearsal session whilst dancing. However, the surgery was not a complete success, and he complained of breathing difficulties that would affect his career. He was referred to Steven Hoefflin, who performed his second rhinoplasty in 1981. Taraborrelli said Jackson had a third rhinoplasty three years later and a fourth in 1986. Jackson wrote in his 1988 autobiography "Moonwalk" that, in addition to the two rhinoplasties, he also had a dimple created in his chin. From 1986 onward he was a regular client of Arnold Klein, a dermatologist who specializes in dermal filler injection, a non-surgical cosmetic procedure.

In his book, Jackson attributed the changes in the structure of his face to puberty, a strict vegetarian diet, weight loss, a change in hair style and stage lighting. Jackson denied allegations that he had altered his eyes. In June 1992, the "Daily Mirror" ran a full front-page picture, allegedly of Jackson's face, which they described as "hideously disfigured" by plastic surgery. Jackson sued and, in 1998, the "Daily Mirror" agreed to an out-of-court settlement. At the High Court, the former "Daily Mirror" editor acknowledged that after meeting Jackson in person, he believed that Jackson was neither hideously disfigured nor scarred. A "Daily Mirror" solicitor maintained that the paper had not tampered with the picture.

Media reports stated that Jackson's autopsy reported one scar beside each of his nostrils, one scar behind each of his ears, and two scars on his neck, "probably" from cosmetic surgery, plus cosmetic tattoos on his eyebrows, around his eyes and lips, and on his scalp (at his receding hairline).

In the unedited version of the documentary "Living With Michael Jackson", which was shown in court in 2005, Jackson said he had two procedures on his nose so that he could breathe better. When he was asked about his cheeks, Jackson answered: "These cheekbones? No. My father has the same thing. We have Indian blood."

Over the years, Jackson had various medical problems that were covered by the media. In early 1984, Jackson was treated for scalp burns after his hair caught fire during a commercial shoot.
In June 1990, Jackson was admitted to a Santa Monica hospital with chest pains. According to Dr. Mark Zatzkis, "laboratory and X-ray tests of Jackson's heart and lungs revealed no abnormalities"; the pains "were caused by bruised ribs suffered during a vigorous dance practice".

Various concerts were canceled owing to illness, and a remaining tour was called off due to addiction. 
On March 12, 1988, Jackson canceled a show in St. Louis which was rescheduled for March 14; on March 13, Jackson performed in St. Louis although he was fighting a cold. The cold progressed to laryngitis; the show on March 14, was also canceled.
Three shows in Tacoma, scheduled from October 31 to November 2, 1988, had to be canceled on his physician's advice because Jackson had the flu. Two shows in Los Angeles were canceled due to swollen vocal cords; three shows in Los Angeles scheduled for November 20, 21 and 22 were also canceled; these five concerts were rescheduled for January 1989.

In August 1992, a concert in London, England had to be postponed due to a viral infection. Four days later, Jackson performed in Cardiff, Wales. In September 1992, a concert in Gelsenkirchen, Germany was canceled because Jackson was taken ill with the flu. In Lausanne, Switzerland, an ambulance took Jackson back to his hotel after the show held on September 8; another show in Basel, Switzerland, scheduled for September 11, was also canceled. In October 1992, two concerts in Turkey, Istanbul and Izmir, and another one in Athens, Greece had to be canceled due to loss of voice caused by a cold. His private doctor attended to Jackson in Istanbul. According to organizers, Jackson's "vocal cords were irritated." These concerts were supposed to be the last three shows of the tour's European leg. Jackson was seen by a throat specialist in London and was advised to seek further treatment in Los Angeles.

In August 1993, two shows of Jackson's "Dangerous Tour" in Thailand had to be canceled due to dehydration. On August 27, 1993, Jackson "returned to the concert stage". On August 30, 1993, a show in Singapore had to be canceled due to nausea and a severe headache. In the opinion of his physician, Dr. David Forecast, Jackson "was in no condition to perform." A neurology specialist attended to Jackson. The specialist confirmed Forecast's diagnosis of "late-onset migraine," and medication was prescribed for Jackson who also underwent tests in a hospital in Singapore. The show was held two days later. Jackson consumed a lot of water, preventing dehydration and voice problems.

The first concert in Santiago de Chile, scheduled for October 21, 1993, was canceled due to lumbar problems; two days later, Jackson performed at "Estadio Nacional". Another concert in Lima, Peru, scheduled for October 26, 1993, was canceled due to a torn muscle suffered during a show in Brazil. Several concerts in Mexico City were canceled due to tooth problems. Two abscessed molars were pulled. However, there were five shows in Mexico City. The last concert of the "Dangerous Tour" was held in Mexico City on November 11, 1993.

In November 1993, Jackson announced the cancellation of the remaining "Dangerous Tour" due to an addiction to painkillers which had been prescribed after a recent constructive scalp surgery. It was also reported Jackson canceled shows in Russia and Israel; however, these two concerts did take place. The rescheduling of the concert in Israel was not due to health problems.

In late 1995, Jackson was rushed to a hospital after collapsing during rehearsals for a televised performance. Medics cited irregular beats, gastro-intestinal inflammation, dehydration, and kidney and liver irregularities.

According to Dr. Neil Ratner, Jackson suffered a back injury in July 1997 after one of the stages collapsed during a concert in Munich, Germany. However, the "History Tour" continued; there was only one concert canceled after the fatal accident of Princess Diana about two months later. In fact, such an incident happened during a charity concert in Munich in 1999. Jackson was later taken to a hospital. Jackson's promoter Marcel Avram said he [Jackson] received abrasions and bruises. Jackson left the hospital the next morning.

On February 15, 2005, Jackson was admitted to the Marian Medical Center in Santa Maria with "flu-like symptoms." According to Dr. Chuck Merrill, Jackson was in stable condition and would recover within a few days. Jackson left the hospital on February 16, 2005; Dr. Todd Bailey said Jackson "continued to need care for some persistent viral symptoms, but otherwise he was in good spirits." One week later, the jury selection for the child molestation trial resumed in Jackson's presence.

On March 10, 2005, Jackson appeared late in court after having received treatment in a hospital due to a back problem. During the trial, Jackson occasionally needed help to get to his seat. On June 5, 2005, Jackson was taken to the emergency room at the Santa Ynez Valley Cottage Hospital to seek treatment of a back pain. Jackson's spokeswoman, Raymone Bain, said "stress contributed to the back problem." During the trial, Jackson had briefly been in hospital several times.
The BBC reported that during his 2005 trial, the singer again suffered from stress-related illnesses and severe weight loss.

Dr. Christopher Rogers testified in the trial against Dr. Conrad Murray that, in his opinion, Jackson "was healthier than the average person of his age." Rogers said the arteries around Jackson's heart were free of fat and cholesterol, which is unusual for a 50-year-old individual.

Another publicly discussed aspect of Jackson's private life is his childhood, particularly his relationship with his father, Joseph. Although Jackson credited his father's strict discipline with playing a large role in his success, he and some of his siblings said they were physically and mentally abused by Joseph from a young age through incessant rehearsals, whippings, and the use of derogatory names such as "big nose" for Michael; this abuse affected Michael throughout his life. In one altercation—later recalled by Marlon Jackson—Joseph held Michael upside down by one leg and "pummeled him over and over again with his hand, hitting him on his back and buttocks." Joseph would often trip the boys or push them into walls. One night while Jackson was asleep, Joseph climbed into his room through the bedroom window. Wearing a fright mask, he entered the room screaming and shouting. Joseph said he wanted to teach his children not to leave the window open when they went to sleep. For a number of years afterward, Jackson suffered nightmares about being kidnapped from his bedroom.

By the early 1980s, Jackson was deeply unhappy; he said, "Even at home, I'm lonely. I sit in my room sometimes and cry. It's so hard to make friends... I sometimes walk around the neighborhood at night, just hoping to find someone to talk to. But I just end up coming home."

Although it had been reported for a number of years that Jackson had an abusive childhood, he first spoke openly about it in his 1993 interview with Oprah Winfrey. He grimaced when speaking of the childhood abuse at the hands of his father; he believed he had missed out on much of his childhood years, acknowledging that he often cried from loneliness. In the same interview, speaking of his father, Jackson said, "There were times when he'd come to see me, I'd get sick... I'd start to regurgitate. I'm sorry... Please don't be mad at me... But I do love him." In an interview with Martin Bashir for the 2003 documentary "Living with Michael Jackson", Jackson covered his face with his hand and began crying when talking about his childhood abuse, recalling that Joe often sat in a chair with a belt in his hand as he and his siblings rehearsed, and that "if you didn't do it the right way, he would tear you up, really get you." Also that year, Joe acknowledged that he regularly whipped Jackson as a boy, but he and Jackson's mother, Katherine, have disputed the longstanding allegations of abuse, with Katherine stating that while whipping is considered abuse today, it was a common way to discipline children at the time.

In 2003, Jackson was accused of child sexual abuse and was acquitted two years later. During the investigation, Jackson's profile was examined by Stan Katz, a mental health professional, who also spent several hours with the accuser. According to Taraborrelli, the assessment made by Katz was that Jackson had become a regressed ten-year-old. Some medical professionals believe Jackson also had body dysmorphic disorder, a psychological condition whereby the sufferer has no concept of how his or her physical appearance is perceived by others.

In none of Jackson's hospitalizations, including the one in late 1995, did medics find drugs in Jackson's system.

Taraborrelli states the entertainer took Valium, Xanax and Ativan in 1993. While Jackson himself does not mention sedatives, he said that painkillers were prescribed to soothe excruciating pain that he was suffering after recent reconstructive surgery on his scalp resulting from his accident in 1984. In a court deposition unrelated to alleged child abuse, Jackson was visibly drowsy, lacked concentration, and repeatedly slurred while speaking. He could not remember the dates of his prior album releases or names of people he had worked with. It took him several minutes to name some of his recent albums.

Jackson said during the 1993 interview that he began taking painkiller medications regularly in 1984. On January 24 of that year, Jackson was filming a Pepsi commercial when his hair caught on fire from faulty pyrotechnics on stage that were intended to be part of one of many being filmed. He sustained second-degree burns to his scalp and never fully recovered from the injury or from the lingering pain. He reportedly began taking the painkillers after refusing at first in order to deal with the intense pain.

On November 9, and November 10, 1993, Jackson was questioned about a copyright matter. According to the sworn declaration from the plaintiffs' lawyer, he had been told that Jackson "was taking painkillers because of recent oral surgery."

In November 1993, Jackson announced that he was addicted to painkillers; he said he had recently undergone a scalp surgery, and the painkillers had been prescribed. Jackson said due to the pressure caused by the child molestation allegations and the energy he needed for the "Dangerous Tour," he was "physically and emotionally exhausted." He said he had "become increasingly more dependent on painkillers," and would seek treatment. His lawyers said Jackson would be treated for addiction overseas for one and a half months to two months. In December 1993, Jackson returned to the United States.

Jackson was taken to Charter Nightingale Clinic where he was searched for drugs on entry; vials of medicine were found in a suitcase. He was put on Valium IV to wean him from painkillers. The singer's spokesperson then told reporters that Jackson was "barely able to function adequately on an intellectual level." While in the clinic, Jackson took part in group and one-on-one therapy sessions. According to Taraborrelli, in January 2004, as his trial approached, Jackson became dependent on morphine and Demerol and was being treated for this dependency by herbalist Alfredo Bowman in Colorado.

In an interview with Aphrodite Jones, Patrick Treacy, a cosmetic surgeon who treated Jackson between July 2006 and early 2007, as well as shortly before his death, said that he would have known if Jackson would have been also treated by another physician and that he never saw any drugs in the house. He also said that Jackson did not have insomnia and never asked him for narcotics. Treacy said Jackson was in good physical health; he said Jackson always insisted on the presence of an anesthetist when Propofol was administered.

Jackson was 5 ft. 9 in. and weighed 136 lbs, which would be within a normal weight range, although he was thin, Dr. Rogers testified in court. According to his costumer Michael Bush, Jackson lost so much weight during a concert due to loss of water that the costumes Jackson wore at the end of the show had to be smaller than those he wore at the beginning of the show; usually, he was a 28-inch waist. 
According to Dr. Nader Kamangar, a sleeping expert at UCLA, drugs such as Demerol can cause insomnia. In the case of Jackson, insomnia could have been caused by "anxiety for performing" as well.

Following Jackson's death, a police warrant issued against his attending physician, Conrad Murray, said that Jackson's many doctors had used nineteen distinct aliases, such as "Omar Arnold," "Josephine Baker," "Fernand Diaz," "Paul Farance," "Peter Madonie," "Faheem Muhammad," "Roselyn Muhammad," "Blanca Nicholas," "Jimmy Nicholas," "Bryan Singleton," "Frank Tyson," and "Rob Kaufman" while prescribing medications for Jackson. He also took prescriptions as "Prince," "Michael Amir," and "Kai Chase," the names of one of his sons, his spokesperson, and his former personal chef, respectively. Police found a CD mentioning the "Omar Arnold" alias when they raided the Las Vegas, Nevada home and office of Conrad Murray, Jackson's personal physician. Use of pseudonyms by celebrities' doctors is common practice for maintaining the confidentiality of patients' medical history and does not necessarily indicate addiction.

Following Jackson's death on June 25, 2009, reports of his use of pethidine (Demerol) surfaced. Cherilyn Lee, a nurse who provided nutritional counseling to Jackson, said that on April 12, 2009, he had asked her for unspecified "products for sleep". On April 19, 2009, he told her the only medicine that would help was propofol. Lee refused, telling him, "Michael, the only problem with you taking this medication ... is you're going to take it and you're not going to wake up." Jackson dismissed the warning, telling her he had been given the drug before by IV injection and that his doctor told him it was safe. He did not name the doctor. An overdose of propofol can cause the patient to stop breathing, leading to a shortage of oxygen and a buildup of carbon dioxide in the body which can lead to arrhythmias and cardiac arrest.
It was the last time they met.

Due to an inquiry about a cancellation insurance for the upcoming tour, insurance carriers demanded a medical exam by a doctor they trusted. In February 2009, Jackson had an examination performed by Dr. David Slavit of New York. Later, the broker told an AEG senior vice president Jackson had only slight hay fever and had passed the exam "with flying colors". A second medical exam was supposed to take place on July 6, 2009.

According to Lee, she received a frantic call on June 21, 2009, from an aide on Jackson's staff. The aide reported that Jackson was feeling ill. Lee reported overhearing Jackson complain that one side of his body was hot, the other side cold. She believed that somebody had given him something that affected his central nervous system. She advised the aide to take him to the hospital.

After his death, the autopsy report revealed that Jackson had a strong heart and was a "fairly healthy" 50-year-old. According to BBC, his weight was in the acceptable range for a man of his height, but he had punctured arms and suffered from lung damage and some arthritis. The document shows that Jackson's most serious health problem was his chronically inflamed lungs, but this was not serious enough to be a contributing factor to his death. The post mortem did not uncover any physical problems that may have limited Jackson's ability to perform. "His overall health was fine," said Dr. Zeev Kain of the University of California, who reviewed the report for AP but was not involved in the post-mortem examination, "The results are in normal limits." The autopsy also revealed that he was partially bald and that his lips, eyebrows, and scalp were tattooed.

In 2011, Rogers said in his testimony: "The theory that seems less reasonable to me is that Mr. Jackson woke up, and although he was under the influence of sedative medications, managed to give himself another dose." 
Toxicologist Dan Anderson testified that Demerol was detected in Jackson's system.





</doc>
<doc id="18560748" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18560748" title="Closure (The X-Files)">
Closure (The X-Files)

"Closure" is the eleventh episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series "The X-Files", and the 150th episode overall. It was directed by Kim Manners and written by series creator Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz. The installment explores the series' overarching mythology and is the conclusion of a two-part episode revolving around the final revelation of what really happened to Fox Mulder's (David Duchovny) sister, Samantha. Originally aired by the Fox network on February 13, 2000, "Closure" received a Nielsen rating of 9.1 and was seen by 15.35 million viewers. The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics; many felt that the final reveal was emotional and powerful, although some were unhappy with the resolution.

The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder (Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) who work on cases linked to the paranormal, called X-Files. Mulder is a believer in the paranormal, while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work, but the two have developed a deep friendship. In this episode, after Mulder is forced to accept that his mother’s death was by her own hand, he is led by a man whose son disappeared years earlier to another truth: that his sister, Samantha, was among the souls taken by ‘walk-ins’, saving the souls of children doomed to live unhappy lives.

"Closure" was a story milestone for the series, finally revealing Samantha's fate; this story-arc had driven a large part of the series' earlier episodes. The episode was written as a continuation to the previous episode, "Sein und Zeit," but branched off into different territory. Although a majority of the episode was filmed on a soundstage, several scenes were shot on location, such as the scenes at the former Norton Air Force Base in San Bernardino, California. Several of the sequences, specifically those featuring the souls of dead children, required elaborate filming techniques. The episode has been analyzed due to its themes of belief and hope.

For the first five seasons of the series, FBI federal agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) sought to gain understanding about the disappearance of Mulder's sister, Samantha, who was abducted when Mulder was 12 years old. In the previous episode, "Sein und Zeit", Mulder and Scully tracked down a serial killer who targeted children. While investigating the case, Mulder began to get emotionally involved, due to the similarities with his sister's disappearance.

Mulder and Scully aid the Sacramento Police in the investigation of a brutal murder committed by Truelove, the owner of the Santa Village. As the remains of more children are discovered, he admits killing twenty-four children, but denies murdering Amber Lynn LaPierre, who disappeared from her home in the previous episode. Mulder is approached by psychic Harold Piller, who tells Mulder that he has helped law enforcement across the world, and has proved in various cases that children had been taken by "walk-ins", beings composed of starlight. Piller believes that walk-ins save children who suffer terrible fates.

Scully becomes worried about Piller's influence over Mulder. The agents return to Washington, D.C., where Mulder keeps searching for evidence in the case. Meanwhile, Piller gets another vision of Samantha, leading Mulder to April Air Force Base. Scully finds evidence that Samantha's disappearance is linked to The Smoking Man (William B. Davis); when she returns to her apartment, she finds him waiting for her. He tells her that he had called off the search for Mulder's sister when she vanished because he knew she was dead.

When Mulder returns to April Air Force Base, he uncovers proof that Samantha lived with the Smoking Man along with his son, Jeffrey Spender, and that she was forced to undergo painful tests. Scully finds a 1979 police report of a girl matching Samantha's description, and learns that she was taken to a hospital emergency room. She and Mulder find the nurse who treated her, and the nurse describes how Samantha disappeared the same way as Amber—without a trace. Mulder later walks through the forest and receives a vision of Samantha along with the spirits of other children. Upon telling Scully and Piller—who reacts badly upon hearing that his son is dead—of his vision, Mulder accepts that his sister is dead and in a better place. When Scully comforts Mulder and asks if he is all right, he responds with a choked "I'm fine. I'm free."

"Closure," written by series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz, brought an end to Mulder's quest for his sister, Samantha, who had been abducted when he was a child. While the idea to close the story arc received mixed reactions from various production and crew members, many realized that the time had come for the show to answer one of its biggest questions. Spotnitz explained that, "I think [series star, David Duchovny] grew tired of playing the man who is missing his sister. [...] I told him, 'This is going to be the last time you're going to have to play [that part].'" Paul Rabwin noted that, "It's been seven years. I don't think any of us are going to miss Samantha Mulder. That device and motivation were very strong in the early years of the show. But as the years have gone by, the speculation kind of melted away."

"Closure" continued where the previous episode, "Sein und Zeit", left off but branched off into different territory. Carter later explained that, "emotionally, it was heavy stuff for everybody, but necessarily so. These episodes involved two very personal cases, the search for a serial killer [in 'Sein und Zeit'] and the search for Mulder's sister [in 'Closure']." Marc Shapiro, in his book "All Things: The Official Guide to The X-Files, Vol. 6" noted that, in addition to bringing an end to the Samantha story arc, the episode was "very much a [Smoking Man] episode" in that it explored his involvement in Samantha's abduction and revealed to the audience that he was seriously ill. The episode's tagline was changed from the usual "The Truth is Out There" to "Believe to Understand".

Manners argued that "Closure" was one of the first episodes in which the production staff was able to "shoot in Los Angeles with the sun out". Previous to this episode, the show's production staff was "struggling with the fact that we weren't in Vancouver anymore and that our show had suddenly become very bright and cheery". To amend this, Bill Roe, director of photography, used tree branches and c-stands to block out the sunlight. The first scene with the walk-ins rising up from their grave, shot at Griffith Park above the playground, was "tricky," according to director Kim Manners, as he felt uncomfortable telling the children to rise out of "graves", feeling it could psychologically hurt them; instead, he had the crew call the holes in the ground "forts." The scenes taking place at April Air Force Base were shot in San Bernardino, California at a closed airfield, the former Norton Air Force Base. On the airbase was a large, derelict complex of over 400 buildings (many of them houses) that had been constructed and used by the United States military. According to Manners, the entire area was an "eerie ... ghost town", as many of the houses were still full of old, abandoned furniture. Originally, the producers wanted the name of the fictitious air force base to be "March Air Force Base". However, the presence of a real air reserve base with the same name located less than 10 miles away in Riverside, California, necessitated a change to "April Air Force Base". The scene at the restaurant was shot at the Carriage Inn on Sepulveda Boulevard.

During filming, David Duchovny decided to act out the reunion scene in a manner contrary to what the script called for. Manners later said, "In the script, it called for his sister to run up and hug him, and Mulder was to start crying. David didn't want to cry. I said, 'David, you're finally realizing your sister is, in fact, dead. […] He said, 'Just watch what I do; trust me.' And, he held that little girl actress—there was a beatific smile on his face that was absolutely astounding." Manners was very happy with the change and included it in the final cut of the episode. To create the scene featuring the ghosts of the dead children interacting with the characters, various layers of film had to be overlaid onto each other. The scenes were laborious and took "many passes" to complete. After the shots had been secured, the film of the ghosts had to be made slightly transparent. These scenes were actually shot in daylight, and a specialized "day for night" photography (in which the subjects were illuminated with bright lights and the sky was completely avoided) was used to make the finished scene look as if it had been filmed at night. The scenes were shot at 48 frames a second, twice that of the show's normal filming speed. Rebecca Toolan traveled to Los Angeles from Vancouver specifically for this episode and "Sein Und Zeit". To create her ghostly apparition, the production staff filmed Toolan and superimposed the image over a shot of Duchovny. Manners played the part of the hypnotist in the video that Scully watches, with the director-turned-actor later noting, "I only act when you can't actually see my face". Manners was critical of Duchovny's wig used in this scene—which had been added to make the footage seem older. He sardonically noted that "this is [not] one of the episodes that Cheri Medcalf [the show's make-up director] won an Emmy for."

Composer Mark Snow described his score as possessing a "sense of biblical fervor and religiosity—an elegy—a feeling about it that was so poignant and touching to me." "My Weakness", a song by Moby from his 1999 album "Play", is used in this episode, first when the FBI discover the mass grave and finally at the end when Mulder encounters his sister's spirit. Carter never told Snow about the decision to use someone else's music, although Snow has since said that his reaction to the use of the song was very positive and that the song was a "perfect" fit. Another Moby song, "The Sky is Broken" also from "Play", would be featured in the later seventh-season episode "all things".

According to Amy M. Donaldson in her book "We Want to Believe: Faith and Gospel in The X-Files", Mulder's opening monologue may be an example of "Mulder now being more receptive to the possibility of God's intervention". Throughout much of the series, Mulder has shown a disdain for religion. However, in "Closure", Donaldson points out that "Mulder's belief in God, as always, revolves around his beliefs about his sister's fate". As such, Mulder expresses hope that those who die in a cruel fashion "live on in some other way". Furthermore, she argues that because "Closure" opens with the tagline "Believe to understand", Mulder must "take the leap of faith" in order to find enlightenment, and ultimately the truth about his sister. The first half of the episode plays out according to the tagline; Mulder first believes in "his desire stated in the opening voiceover", and then finds closure.

Donaldson also parallels elements in the episode to the plots of other episodes such as the fourth season entry "Paper Hearts", wherein it is suggested that a serial killer murdered Samantha. In "Paper Hearts", a father of a victim notes that the uncertainty of his daughter's murder allowed those who were involved to "consider the possibilities, both for the best and for the worst". However, once it is revealed that his daughter was murdered, all hope was removed. Conversely, Mulder holds onto the possibility that Samantha is alive through much of the series, but when he realizes that she is indeed dead in "Closure", hope is removed but in its place is found peace. To parallel Mulder's acceptance, Harold Piller refuses to believe his son is dead; as such, he "cling[s] to the possibility [because] uncertainty allows him hope."

"Closure" first aired in the United States on February 13, 2000. The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 9.1, with a 13 share. Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the U.S. This means that roughly 9.1 percent of all television-equipped households, and 13 percent of households watching television, were watching the episode. It was viewed by 15.35 million viewers in the United States. On May 28, 2000 the episode debuted on Sky 1 in the United Kingdom and gathered 0.68 million viewers, making it the eighth most watched program shown on Sky 1 that week, in front of "Angel" and "The Simpsons". The episode was later included on "The X-Files Mythology, Volume 3 – Colonization", a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien Colonist's plans to take over the earth.

Initial reviews were mixed, with some critics applauding the story's conclusion, and others deriding it. Tom Kessenich, in his book "Examinations: An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6–9 of the X-Files", opined that the episode worked best "if some of the previous Samantha-related clues were forgotten", such as when the Alien Bounty Hunter told Mulder that she was still alive in "End Game". Despite this, he wrote that "it was only right that Samantha be dead since Mulder's life had always been defined by what he has lost, not what he has found". He surmised that the episode was not "perfect", but that its "plusses greatly outweighed any missteps along the way". He was also complimentary towards "the ethereal quality of the final few moments", writing that they "lifted this episode up and made it one of the season's most memorable". Kenneth Silber from Space.com was pleased with the episode, and wrote, "'Closure' is a satisfying episode, one that puts to bed the now-tiresome search for Mulder's sister Samantha." Jeremy Conrad from IGN referred to the episode as "excellent" and noted that a large portion of "The X-Files" mythology ended with the resolution of Samantha's abduction, saying, "['Closure' is] a final, and concrete, answer to the single thing that was driving Mulder for the entire run of the series. In some ways, when he got that answer a major part of "The X-Files" story ended."

Not all reviews were positive. Paula Vitaris from "CFQ" gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one-and-a-half stars out of four. She wrote, "Instead of a grand, breath-taking, heart-breaking finale that should be the climax of Mulder's search for Samantha, the story expires limply with some nonsense about Samantha being of the starlight children." Bobby Bryant and Tracy Burlison of "The State" named the episode the "Worst Conspiracy" episode. The two noted that because "a tenet of "The X-Files" was that Mulder's sister, Samantha, had been (a) kidnapped by aliens or (b) kidnapped by government conspirators", the fact that she had actually been turned into a spirit "insanely offers a supernatural explanation to a science-fiction mystery".

Later reviews, however, have seen "Closure" in a much more positive light, with many critics praising its ending. Zack Handlen of "The A.V. Club" awarded the episode an "A–". He argued that the episode worked due to two scenes: the sequence in which Mulder reads aloud from Samantha's diary, and the final shot of Mulder being reunited with his sister. He wrote that the "stark simplicity" of the former made it emotionally powerful, and that the latter was "a bit sappy, a bit surreal, a bit lovely" but nonetheless "a beautiful moment". Meghan Deans of Tor.com felt that the story was "silly", but that, when paired with the idea that Samantha was truly an innocent victim, successfully becomes a "comfort". She called it a move that "the show must give Mulder, and us, in order to shut down this storyline for good." Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated the episode four stars out of five, and called it "brave". The two noted that while some of the sentimentality is pushed too far—such as when Mulder finds his sister's diary speaking to him, or when Mulder talks about all lost souls being stars—the "critical moment" featuring Mulder reuniting with his sister's spirit is "extraordinarily moving".



</doc>
<doc id="18602749" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18602749" title="Ministry of Finance (Soviet Union)">
Ministry of Finance (Soviet Union)

The Ministry of Finance of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) (), formed on 15 March 1946, was one of the most important government offices in the Soviet Union. Until 1946 it was known as the People's Commissariat for Finance ( – "Narodnyi komissariat finansov", or "Narkomfin"). Narkomfin, at the all-Union level, was established on 6 July 1923 after the signing of the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR, and was based upon the People's Commissariat for Finance of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) formed in 1917. The Ministry was led by the Minister of Finance, prior to 1946 a Commissar, who was nominated by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and then confirmed by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. The minister was a member of the Council of Ministers.

During the Russian Civil War, and immediately afterwards, the Commissariat usually confiscated property to support government operations. Following a short period of stability after the civil war the Commissariat introduced several governmental taxes on the population. The commissariat's structure differed little from its Tsarist predecessor, the only notable difference was that the Soviet ministry was very centralised while the Tsarist's finance ministry was a very decentralised one. The Commissariat, and later the Ministry, prepared the state budget in a joint process with its republican and local branches. The Ministry's structure went through few changes due to the Soviet government's conservative approaches to change. Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev introduced several reforms during his rule which had the unintended consequence of considerably hurting the ministry's prestige.

The Ministry's predecessor, the People's Commissariat for Finance of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR), was established by a decree of the second convocation of the All-Russian Congress of Soviets on and was part of the Sovnarkom. The first Commissar was Ivan Skvortsov-Stepanov appointed in 1917. However, following the introduction of the New Economic Policy, Narkomfin was made responsible for Gosbank, the State Bank of the RSFSR and then the State Bank of the Soviet Union. On 26 November 1921 Lenin issued a note calling for the appointment of Grigory Sokolnikov to the newly established post of People's Commissar for Finance. Sokolnikov took control of the organisation in 1922, although his formal position was not ratified until November 1922. In 1946 the Council of People's Commissars was renamed the Council of Ministers and the People's Commissariat for Finance was renamed as the Ministry of Finance.

In 1928 the Soviet government launched a building program headed by the OSA group. The OSA group oversaw the construction of a building which should have housed the employees of the People's Commissariat for Finance. Due to its close connections with the Commissariat for Finance the building was often referred to as "the Narkomfin building". The building was designed by Moisei Ginzburg and Ignati Milinis and has a reputation for being one of the best examples of still-standing Soviet constructivist architecture. The architects tried to give the building a collective feel to it but, when the building was finished in 1932, it was denounced as a remnant of "leftist utopianism" by Joseph Stalin's regime. Unlike many other Soviet constructivist buildings there is an ongoing campaign to save it.

When Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, initiated the 1965 economic reform the Ministry of Finance sabotaged the reform by not fully implementing it which, along with many other reasons, helped the reform to fail.

During the formation of the Soviet state, in the late 1910s and early 1920s, the People's Commissariat for Finance of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) was created. The commissariat did not differ greatly from that of Imperial Russia's Ministry of Finance and its system. The Soviet finance ministry was a heavily centralised structure, while its predecessor was not. During its humble beginnings, the main task of the People's Commissariat of Finance were: confiscation of property, robbery and requisition; printing and creating money; and taxation.

In the immediate aftermath of the October Revolution, and during the Russian Civil War, the Soviet government forcibly confiscated property to support their government. After the inflation of the 1920s printing of money nearly ceased and confiscation of goods became harder; after years of confiscating there was simply not enough property left to fund government operations anymore. After the civil war the confiscation of property ceased and several government taxes were introduced. The ministry's tasks were summed up in the 1971 charter: "The USSR Ministry of Finance prepares the draft of the USSR State Budget and bears responsibility for the fulfilment of the USSR State Budget, both for receipts and for expenditures [...]". Under the rule of Mikhail Gorbachev the Ministry lost much of its power. An example being that before 1990 all foreign trade investments had to be approved by the Ministry of Finance but in 1990 the ministries of finance of the Union republics approved foreign investment. The ministry was of vital importance and in the 1971 charter the Soviet government gave the ministry broad legislative power. As nearly all organisations had some sort of financial aspects the Ministry of Finance set standards and rules for accounting and bookkeeping. It also had the power to issue regulations for the detailed application of the tax legislation. This is also a common feature in the United States Department of Treasury, although the Soviet's regulations differ in being of a highly centralised manner that the US one does not. The Ministry of Finance usually exercised its powers jointly with other government agencies. The 1971 charter states that the Ministry of Finance had the right to participate with the State Committee on Prices for price-setting in the USSR, but it also participated in the setting of salaries and the fulfillment of the five-year plans with the State Planning Committee and the State Bank of the USSR (Gosbank).

The finance ministry started the budget preparation process by preparing instructions, forms and schedules for the upcoming state budget and prepared a preliminary balance of revenues and expenditures using data estimated by the State Planning Committee (Gosplan). This preliminary budget was then sent, together with instructions, to the all-Union ministries and ministries of finance of the Union's republics. The Union branches of the Ministry of Finance then prepared a budget estimate with information received from the lower Union ministries and information given to them by the all-Union Ministry of Finance. The state budget was conceived after the Union Ministry negotiated a compromise with its republican and local branches and each Soviet republic was given its own state budget. The Economic Committees of the Supreme Soviet voted on the state budget which, if it received enough support, would become policy.

The leading office of the ministry was the Minister of Finance (titled "Commissars" until 1946), the head of the ministry. The offices of First Deputy Minister of Finance were seen as the ministry's second-in-command.

There were several Deputy Ministers of Finance, each of them focusing their responsibility in one specific area, for example the financial regulation of the Soviet automobile industry.

There were two departments in the Ministry of Finance, both of which were highly centralised but were sometimes subjected to direct control by the local CPSU Party Control Committees. The two departments had their own distinctive budget. The Head of the Department of Revisory Control was recommended by the Minister of Finance and approved by the Council of Ministers, the Head of the Department of Revisory Control for the Union republics was recommended by the republic's Minister of Finance and the Council of Ministers.

The Department of Revisory Control of the Ministry of Finance enforced financial discipline by the following means: observance of laws, supervising financial discipline, controlling the implementation of the state budget, controlling the activities of financial organs, controlling the national insurance of the workers, examining the activities of the State Bank, controlling the audit functions of the internal financial control and controlling the activities of the chief and his senior accountants.

The Department of Revisory Control of the Ministries of Finance of the Union Republics: Controlled the implementation of the national budget of the republican Ministries of Finance and their local counterparts. The department also exercised control over enterprises and institutions directly subordinate to the Soviet government. The Department of Budget was a department which took part in drafting the budget of the Soviet Republics.

After the failed August Coup of 1991 Boris Yeltsin and the Ministry of Finance of the RSFSR claimed authority over the Ministry of Finance of the USSR, the state bank and the Bank of Foreign Economic Activity. This meant that the institutions could not carry out any orders without the consent of the RSFSR government. The Ministry of Finance continued functioning until the RSFSR government issued a decree completing its takeover of the Soviet financial system. It was succeeded by the Ministry of Economics and Finance of the Russian Federation (1991) and the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation (1992). The last Soviet Minister of Finance was Vladimir Yefimovich Orlov, and Vladimir Rayevsky was acting Minister during the period of transition.

The following persons headed the Commissariat/Ministry as commissars (narkoms), ministers, and deputy ministers:




</doc>
<doc id="18622850" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18622850" title="Everything That Happens Will Happen Today">
Everything That Happens Will Happen Today

Everything That Happens Will Happen Today is the second album made in collaboration between David Byrne and Brian Eno, released on August 18, 2008, by Todo Mundo. The album explores themes of humanity versus technology and optimism in spite of bleak circumstance through the blending of electronic and gospel music. Critical reception was largely positive and the album received awards for both the musical content as well as the packaging and technical production.

This album is the first joint effort between the two musicians since 1981's "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts" and Eno's work producing and co-writing with Talking Heads. Byrne and Eno worked on the tracks in their home studios throughout 2007 and early 2008 and sent digital copies of the recordings to one another over e-mail. The single "Strange Overtones" was released for free to promote the album and Byrne toured through 2008 and 2009, performing songs from this release as well as the duo's previous collaborations. This tour was later documented with the live extended play "" and the concert film "Ride, Rise, Roar".

"Everything That Happens Will Happen Today" was released with a marketing strategy that involved Byrne creating the vanity label Todo Mundo and hiring Internet startup company Topspin Media to promote the album online using word-of-mouth and Internet sales to market the music. Several formats were created to allow users to have options on how to listen to the music—from free streaming audio to a deluxe package housed in a tin.

In December 2007, David Byrne announced on the BBC Radio music show "The Weekender" that he was working with former collaborator Brian Eno on a brand new album of "proper songs," describing it as a "completely different thing" from the experimental "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts". While the two were discussing the 2006 re-release of that album at a dinner party, Eno suggested adding lyrics and vocals to some of his unfinished songs, some of which were eight years old. The duo did not initially plan on making an entire album, but eventually felt confident enough to finish a full collection of songs. Although the two had discussed making an album together for several years, this was their first sincere effort since the early 1980s.

Byrne visited Eno's London studio to listen to the demos and the two decided to collaborate to finish writing the songs, leaving Eno and Peter Chilvers to convert a variety of digital music formats into MIDI, thereby stripping out extraneous information and making them suitable for Byrne to embellish. (Chilvers would be thanked in the liner notes for "Digital Archaeology".) The two continued to work on this and other musical projects for several months and agreed that if the project was not enjoyable, they would abandon it. The duo decided to not announce their new collaboration for fear that they may not complete an album's worth of new material, or that they would end up re-treading their previous collaborations and decide against releasing the new songs.

Eno had several musical compositions, but could not write lyrics to accompany them, whereas Byrne had several lyrics with no accompaniment. Eno wanted to make the vocals the "central event" of the music by pairing gospel singing with unexpected electronic music that also included elements of West African music. The songwriting's emphasis on vocals was partially inspired by Phillip Bimstein. In late 2007, Byrne took a Compact Disc of stereo mixes of the demos from Eno and spent a year trying to write lyrics to finish the songs, attempting to balance the simple chords that Eno had written with the more complex ones Byrne prefers. Although it was uncharacteristic for Eno, many of the songs were written on acoustic guitar, with the help of Steinberg Cubase. The musicians exchanged Eno's demos with the lyrics and vocal melodies completed by Byrne over e-mail and by June 2008, 14 songs had been recorded. Eno initially gave positive feedback, which encouraged Byrne to continue writing and only became critical as the project was finishing. Toward the end of the recording, Eno sent increasingly challenging tracks to see if Byrne could complete them—the final two ended up on the album as "I Feel My Stuff" and "Poor Boy".

At the outset, Byrne was hesitant to add lyrics to the tracks because they sounded too much like folk music. He characterized the process as very slow and full of trepidation, in part because of expectations from their previous collaboration and also due to the strict division of labor they had between writing instrumentation and vocalization. Eno only provided a few vocal demos and suggested simple changes like adding an extra verse. Byrne made minimal changes to the instrumentation on several tracks and avoided changing chords in the melody to suit his singing style. The duo only worked in the studio together on two occasions, including one full week and a weekend on another occasion and neither partner got a veto in the process of track selection or production. According to Byrne, the main challenge in this writing technique "was more emotional than technical: to write simple heartfelt tunes without drawing on cliché."

He later explained, "In a nutshell, Brian wrote most of the music, and I composed most of the vocal melodies and lyrics, and then sang them." If Byrne's vocal harmonies were radical enough, Eno would revise the instrumentation to accompany it, but Byrne avoided writing instrumentation and chose to adapt to the instrumentals as written. Using a style similar to the Talking Heads album "Speaking in Tongues", Byrne scatted and murmured some lyrics before they were completed, due to Byrne's preference for the sonic quality of lyrics rather than their literal meaning and his method of writing lyrics using free association. In composing lyrics for the album, Byrne attempted to write keeping in mind what would please Eno as his collaborator. He also attempted to write harmonies for Eno, who decided against singing any lead vocals on the album. Eno does perform backing vocals throughout the album, which he credits on one track as "inhuman piano"

Both musicians continued to work on their own projects during the composition of "Everything That Happens Will Happen Today". Byrne of "Big Love" and completed his collaborations with Fatboy Slim on the album and musical "Here Lies Love" and the single "Toe Jam". Eno produced Coldplay's "Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends" and U2's "No Line on the Horizon". Byrne and Eno discussed the former's collaboration with Fatboy Slim and Chris Martin of Coldplay wrote lyrics to the instrumental track for "One Fine Day", but acquiesced when he heard Byrne's version (the band would also adapt another one of Eno's instrumental compositions that Byrne did not finish into a track on "Viva la Vida"). Once Byrne's version of "One Fine Day" was finished, the two began in earnest writing the rest of the tracks. Byrne initially had a long delay in writing material, but as the project progressed, he got to working several hours a day on the album and put his collaboration with Fatboy Slim on hold to finish the songs in the early part of 2008. Since the two did not work together face-to-face as they had in the past, it was harder for them to complete material quickly, and they had to rush to complete two of the tracks were finished at the end of the sessions. He later described the process as easy once details were sort out and summed up this method as "pure joy" and declared writing collaboratively to be easier than writing solo. He even credited the time between their last collaboration and the transatlantic distance as a strength, since it allowed the two to keep their own schedules. Eno agreed, as it gave him time to focus on a small piece of music without holding up Byrne's progress. Byrne later used a similar approach through 2010 and 2011 in collaborations with St. Vincent ("Love This Giant") and Will Oldham (the soundtrack to "This Must Be the Place").

The two were inspired by gospel music and both have described their music as "electronic gospel"—in particular the tracks "Life Is Long" and "One Fine Day". In addition to subtle Biblical themes in the lyrics, Eno was influenced by gospel musicality, which he initially discovered through Talking Heads while working on "More Songs About Buildings and Food" by listening to "Surrender to His Will" by Reverend Maceo Woods and The Christian Tabernacle Choir. For several years leading up to this project, Eno had primarily listened to gospel music—even joining a gospel choir—and was attracted to the music's unrestrained vocals and lack of pessimism as well as its inclusive nature. Eno had been thinking about gospel for several years, but could not write lyrics to hopeful songs.

While Byrne considers the music "[un]like any contemporary gospel record that you would hear out there," it is "informed by that feeling and those kind of lyrics, which allude to hope in the face of despair." Eno also considers the album "something that combines something very human and fallible and personal, with something very electronic and mathematical sometimes." The music combines electronic and gospel influences to "make that picture of the human still trying to survive in an increasingly complicated digital world... It's quite easy to make just digital music and it's quite easy to make just human music, but to try and make a combination is sort of, exciting, I think." Tracks such as "My Big Nurse" combine apocalypticism and comfort, blending hopefulness and despair.

The instrumental demos were primarily written in major chords, which Byrne considered slightly "ominous" and surprising from Eno. In spite of this, Byrne's lyrics ended up being hopeful and spiritual, with themes of redemption—what he considers "optimism in spite of the dread." The tension between optimism and pessimism and the spiritual themes quickly emerged over the course of a year in which Byrne was writing lyrics, which he has speculated might be an antidote to being "completely pessimistic and cynical about politics and the state of the world;" for instance, "The River" is about the effects of Hurricane Katrina. He has also cited the political climate of the Iraq War, the beginning of the late-2000s recession, the policies of the George W. Bush administration, and his 2004 divorce from Adelle Lutz as factors that inspired him to create uplifting music. As he explained, "I was surprised that's what came out... The tracks are very different from what I would have done myself. I lean toward things that are more complicated." Eno also thinks the album is much better than the songs he imagined when composing them solo.

Eno has also said the album is about "paint[ing] a picture of the human trying to survive in an increasingly digital world" and Byrne considered his job as lyricist to "bring more humanity" to Eno's instrumentals, which can be "cold and academic." Themes of humanity struggling with technology are apparent on several tracks and Byrne has characterized the "overall vibe" of the album as "We're going to get through this. Humanity will prevail." The lyrical content includes "a sinister inflection" but "many songs feel fairly uplifting and the overall tone is hopeful." Byrne focused on mundane events and attempted to write in a style that was "simple but not corny, basic but heartfelt." His inspiration in writing lyrics for "One Fine Day" was the story of Valentino Achak Deng as told in Dave Eggers' ""—the two are thanked in the liner notes and Byrne had previously performed at a fundraiser for Eggers' 826 Valencia. The story of the Lost Boys of Sudan is emblematic of the spiritual themes of the album as they go through "all kinds of unrelenting horrors, but [are] eternally hopeful and even cheerful, in a way that defies all logic." The music on this album also expresses homesickness—a lyrical trend that is apparent in Byrne's work with Talking Heads.

By March 2008, the duo had recruited Seb Rochford to play drums with Byrne in New York City. Later that month, multi-instrumentalist and previous Eno collaborator Leo Abrahams was enlisted to perform guitar, percussion instruments, and piano in his London home studio. Abrahams and Rochford would continue working on the tracks in Abrahams' studio through May and their work was e-mailed to other collaborators—Byrne attended one session to play guitar. Other musicians worked with Byrne in New York City and Eno in London, such as frequent Byrne collaborator Mauro Refosco, Eno's daughters Darla and Irial, and Jarvis Cocker of Pulp, who added uncredited guitar in London. The duo attempted to record as much of the music from home studios as possible and played almost all instrumentation themselves, saving the drums and percussion for the studio. In addition to the tracks that were released, the musicians had some other instrumentals that Byrne did not complete.

Speaking at an April 2008 event in New York, Byrne confirmed the release of a new album, calling it a "record of sung songs" in contrast to the experimental music from "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts" and later told the "New York Daily News" that "Brian had written a lot of music, but needed some words, which I know how to do. What's it sound like? Electronic gospel. That's all I'm saying." Eno also explained the differences between this album and their previous one saying, "[T]his is quite different from "My Life" in that the intention of that album was to not use our voices at all, but instead to find voices and stick them on to the music. This new one is different—these are songs written and sung by David... They go from electronic folk gospel to quite indefinable areas of music."

Throughout the middle of the year, Abrahams recorded drums at his home studio and Cherif Hashizume recorded more at Cafe Music Studios, while Robert Harder at Harder Sound recorded the drums on "My Big Nurse", "Never Thought", "The Painting", and "Life Is Long". Abrahams collected all of the recordings to have them mixed and Byrne booked tour dates in anticipation of completing the album. Mixing continued through June 2008 in New York by previous Byrne collaborator Patrick Dillett at Kampo Studios, who recorded brass and percussion. They e-mailed the mixes to Eno for final approval and sent the finalized audio to Greg Calbi at Sterling Sound for mastering. On July 28, 2008, details of the album became public knowledge when Byrne posted on his blog that he and Eno had finished the new album and it would be released on August 18. The album website was launched on the same day, with a promotional video of Byrne introducing the new album.

The physical releases of the album came with graphics and packaging designed by Stefan Sagmeister with Richard The, Joe Shouldice, and Jared Stone; illustration by Stephan Walter; and production by Gamil Design. Sagmeister had earlier received a Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package Grammy in 2005 for art direction on the Talking Heads' "Once in a Lifetime" box set and also designed the cover to Byrne's "Feelings". This album would also win a Grammy in 2010 for Best Record Packaging and was additionally recognized by "Creative Review".

His inspiration for the packaging was based on the song "Home" and the artwork reflects an urban scene of a house by a roadside; the liner notes provide closeups on the home and the artwork on the Compact Disc is the grass from the lawn. Sagmeister proceeded to create not only an image for the cover, but an entire three-dimensional model for the house, which was later released as the deluxe edition packaging. Upon repeated listenings to the album, he became convinced that there was a sinister element to the setting and provided clues to the "dark edge" of the scene, such as a discarded condom wrapper in the gutter, a man looking out the window with binoculars, and a gasoline canteen in the kitchen.

The deluxe package comes in a tin with a microchip that plays a sound of someone walking down a hallway in the house and slamming a door when the package is opened. The urban themes of the packaging are expanded in this edition, with the album entitled "Stick" and the bonus content "Rock"; discs are designed to look like they are covered in grass. This design of a pixelated, dimetric projection domestic scene has been compared to "The Sims".

The album was self-released on August 18, 2008, exclusively through the album's website. It was made available there free for streaming and for purchase as a download of DRM-free MP3s. The duo released the album from other online digital music services starting the following month, including 7digital, Amazon MP3, eMusic, the iTunes Store, Napster, and the Zune Marketplace. No record label was involved in releasing the digital format and independent distributors were allowed to handle the physical product, which was released on November 25 as an enhanced CD and a deluxe-packaged CD in a tin.
Initially, three distinct versions of the album were released:

In addition, customers are entitled to lossless FLAC versions of the album at no extra cost. By mid-December 2008, 12 percent of customers chose to download the FLAC option.

This album is catalogued as the second release from Byrne's vanity label Todo Mundo after ""; copies of the CD were marked CD-TODO-002. The CD was released in Japan with a bonus track—"Poor Boy" (Eno & Leo Abrahams Remix)—and obi strip in November 2008 through Beat Records with catalogue number BRC-218. On February 17, 2009, the album was released on 180-gram vinyl LP as LP-TODO-002.

The first single off the album—"Strange Overtones"—was released on August 4, 2008, as a free digital download available only through the album's website. The track has been described as "a song about writing a song" and features thematic elements of humanity versus technology that are explored throughout the album. It was downloaded over 40,000 times within the first three days it was available. In September 2008, Jon Yeo created a music video for the track featuring the paintings of Brian Eno. In May 2009, the song was replaced by "One Fine Day" as a free download to promote the EP "".

 Positive reviews have emphasized the pop songcraft on the album, calling it "exceedingly pleasant" ("Billboard") and "vibrant" ("Tucson Weekly"). Writing for the BBC, Chris Jones summed up the album by saying that it would not break any musical boundaries, but listeners will find music that was "intriguingly and, sometimes, maddeningly infectious."

The music has been compared to the tone of alternative rock bands Radiohead, The Flaming Lips, and R.E.M.'s 1998 album "Up". Furthermore, Barry Walters of "Spin" has compared the music to former Eno collaborators U2 and several reviewers have compared the musicality to Paul Simon—especially his 2006 Eno collaboration "Surprise". The vocals have been declared similar to Neil Young; and the arrangement has been compared to The Beach Boys. Although the music was informed by gospel and digital music, comparisons have been made with genres as diverse as country due to the vocal delivery and old school hip hop. One weakness addressed by several reviewers is the unoriginality of the music, especially in comparison to the duo's previous collaborations.

Contrasting "Everything That Happens Will Happen Today" with "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts", some have found a connection between the two. Reviewers have found similarities in Eno's solo album "Another Green World" and the Eno-produced Talking Heads albums "Fear of Music" and "Remain in Light", as well as "Little Creatures", which was produced by the band. This is partly due to the unique use of technology in the creation of all of the albums associated with Eno. Other commentators have emphasized the differences between the two projects. For instance, "The Age" Bernard Zuel considers these expectations built by the earlier work to be "unfair... and inaccurate." "The Observer" review by Kitty Empire labels this album "conservative" and John Doran of "The Quietus" calls it "less exciting"—"Erie Times-News" reviewer Dr. Rock goes as far as to call it an "antithesis" to "Bush of Ghosts". In particular, the experimental nature of the former has been contrasted with the pop music style of this album and the lack of African beats and world music. Audra Schroeder of "The Austin Chronicle" noted "Thirty years after first collaborating on the Talking Heads, these two don't have to mine the past since there's nothing that remarkable about "Everything"." Francis Jones summed up his review for "Hot Press" by concluding "No boundaries were harmed in its making but "ETHWHT" is an album of unquestionably great songs" and Louise Gray of "New Internationalist" declared that, "it's not got the edgy, funky bricolage that characterized the earlier album and nor does it seek that." At the same time, other reviewers have found the break with the experimental nature of "My Life in the Bush of Ghosts" to be positive. Jim DeRogatis from the "Chicago Sun-Times" observed:

Reviews have emphasized the contrast between optimism and foreboding on the album, as well as the struggle of humanity against technology. In addition, several reviewers have noted parallels between this album and Byrne's "Big Love: Hymnal", particularly their common spiritual themes and atmospheric moods. "Resident Advisor"s review also notes the shift in Eno's recordings toward more gospel vocals. Steve Matteo of "Crawdaddy!" wrote that Eno's production dominates the album, whereas "Filter"s Ken Scrudato considers the album primarily a David Byrne venture. Consequence of Sound's review notes continuity between this album and Byrne's 2004 release "Grown Backwards", while "The Village Voice" has declared this album "more expansive and adventurous" than anything else Byrne has released in decades and Greg Kot of "The Chicago Tribune" wrote that the album features "one of the strongest vocal performances of Byrne's career."

The album was nominated for three Grammy Awards—Best Alternative Music Album, Best Recording Package, and Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package—on December 2, 2008. On February 8, 2009, designer Stefan Sagmeister won the award for Best Recording Package at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards. The deluxe edition packaging was given a bronze medal by the Art Directors Club of New York. The album was nominated for a Technical Excellence & Creativity Award in the Record Production/Album category.

Several year-end lists included the album amongst the best releases of 2008:
DeRogatis' and Kot's reviews were featured on "Sound Opinions" and the album was also placed on two individual writers' lists for "No Ripcord"s best of the year. Two contributors to "No Depression" included the album on their best-of lists for 2008. "The A.V. Club" commissioned celebrities to give their picks for album of the year and Tim Heidecker chose this album, describing it as "the most interesting and listenable pop record of the year, in my book." "The Fader"s 2008 year in review named this one of the "Top Twelve Albums That We Thought Would Have a Bigger Impact On Our Lives", but later declared the album "career-defining." The publication dedicated their annual icon issue to Byrne in 2009 in part due to the success of this album.

Several songs from this album appeared on "The Village Voice"s Pazz & Jop singles poll for 2008—"Strange Overtones" came in at 60, "Life Is Long" placed 337, "My Big Nurse" was 350, "Everything That Happens" ended up at 748, and "I Feel My Stuff" reached 942. In addition, a vote was cast for "".

Although the artists have not released sales figures, they have indicated that the album was purchased across the globe during the first 24 hours it was available and that the servers hosting the album delivered "several terabytes" by September 6. A report in late December asserted that they had sold "nearly 20,000 downloads." In March 2009, Ian C. Rogers of Topspin Media explained that 20 percent of those who listened to the album streaming chose to purchase it and 30 percent of them included a physical copy of the CD; trends that would hold through September of that year. By October 2008, Byrne explained that they had recouped their losses on the album and that sales had "paid back the recording costs and costs for building the Web site." He would later explain that this business model worked well for established acts as well as smaller bands, due to minimal production and distribution costs. Their business model also allowed them to self-release and plan a tour immediately after finishing the music production, rather than wait months for record label advancement.

The album did not chart until it was physically released—a development which surprised Byrne. In the first week of December, "Everything That Happens Will Happen Today" reached the top spot on the "College Music Journal" AAA charts and third on the CMJ Radio 200. The album entered the "Billboard" 200 for the week of January 17, 2009, debuting at 182 with 4,008 copies sold. It peaked the following week at 174 before dropping off the charts. It was on the Independent Albums chart for 10 weeks, reaching 18.

Byrne's 2012 book "How Music Works" gives a more thorough breakdown of the album's sales and distribution. By the time of publication, he claims to have sold 160,000 copies of the album, making a little over $300,000 in sales:

While Byrne and Eno did a few interviews for the album and subsequent tour, the two attempted to market the album via word-of-mouth and Internet hype rather than a traditional marketing scheme. Eno was convinced in part because of his own preferences for digital music from the iTunes Store rather than CDs as well as the success of Radiohead's 2007 album "In Rainbows" and the self-promotional strategies of Nine Inch Nails for the albums "Year Zero", "Ghosts I–IV", and "The Slip". Byrne was also impressed by Radiohead's release strategy as a means of valuing music. The duo carefully avoided Internet leaks by not giving out promotional copies of the album to journalists, but Byrne did preview the song "One Fine Day" prior to the release by performing it with a choir of senior citizens and Eno invited Mark Coles for the BBC World Service program "The Beat" to his home to listen to the songs on Eno's laptop. In 2017, Byrne revealed that he and Eno had collaborated again on Byrne's next solo album.

In 2010, several of the songs from this album—"Home", "I Feel My Stuff", "Life Is Long", "My Big Nurse", and "Strange Overtones"—were included in the Todo Mundo to the film "" along with other David Byrne songs.

Byrne and Eno have both expressed their displeasure with the music industry and traditional models of marketing music, with Eno calling the music business an "exciting mess" and saying:

Byrne has written for "Wired", outlining the relative merits of different distribution models with this one reflecting his "self-distribution model" in which "the artist stands to receive the largest percentage of income from sales per unit—sales of anything. A larger percentage of fewer sales, most likely, but not always. Artists doing it for themselves can actually make more money than the massive pop star, even though the sales numbers may seem minuscule by comparison." The motivation for creating and marketing this album directly came in part from the very article Byrne wrote as well as Eno's belief that music fans want more than just the music on an album and prefer collectible deluxe editions as well as the live performances that promote them. A month after releasing the album, Byrne was skeptical of market saturation claiming "I sense that a lot of people don't know we have a record out" and hoped to counterbalance that ignorance with his tour. He also described the digital music market as "so infinite [that] it's easy for music to get lost out there" and has noted that this business model would not work for performers who are not already established.

The duo enlisted a music marketing startup company—Topspin Media—to design their site, delivery options for the digital music, and promotional web widgets. Like the entirety of the recording process, the marketing was self-financed and controlled by the artists, with Topspin taking a portion of the money made from digital sales. This allowed the artists to control creative aspects of producing music as well as the overhead costs associated with marketing an album. The company used viral marketing techniques to collect potential customers' e-mail addresses and encourage them to post the album streaming on their blogs. By early November, the collected e-mail addresses amounted to 37 percent of the album sales. Topspin has also created a Flickr pool encouraging users to upload screenshots of the widget posted to web sites. No advertisements were taken out for the album.

Byrne and Eno were praised by "Fast Company" for their innovative use of Internet marketing and distribution for this album as well as several other releases and the promotion of this album has been lauded as a way of undermining copyright infringement. Key to their success was the software that Topspin Media developed and later commercially released as a bundle for other companies and artists to use, explaining that "In the first eight weeks following the launch of the David Byrne and Brian Eno self-released record, "Everything That Happens Will Happen Today", the Topspin platform helped us generate Direct-to-Fan revenue at the very least the equivalent to what we would have expected from a label advance," that went directly to Byrne and Eno. Based in part on the success of marketing this album, representatives of Topspin were invited to teach a course on music marketing at Berklee College of Music in September 2009 and Ian C. Rogers led a panel discussion at South by Southwest on options for independent music artists. The album's multiple formats have been praised as a method of incentivizing buying physical copies of albums.

Byrne assembled a band to tour for the album, performing music throughout the latter half of 2008 and early 2009 across North America, Europe, and Australasia. He hired more singers than he had on previous tours to reproduce the complex vocal harmonies of the album and was inspired to bring along dancers after seeing Sufjan Stevens promote the album "Illinois" as well as the Japanese films "Funky Forest" and "The Taste of Tea". Byrne was initially uninvolved in the choreography, but made more suggestions as the tour went on and after he saw a live performance by Deerhoof that incorporated dancing with instruments. He began booking tour dates before the album was completed and continued writing his book "The Bicycle Diaries" throughout the tour.

In planning the set lists for the tour, Byrne initially considered only promoting this album but decided to include songs from his previous collaborations with Eno as well, including the Talking Heads albums "More Songs About Buildings and Food", "Fear of Music", and "Remain in Light" and Byrne's "The Catherine Wheel" soundtrack. By playing music from all of their collaborations, Byrne hoped to "draw a line linking this new material with what we did 30 years ago" with the goal of clarifying the connection between all of the duo's previous work. In reviewing their past music, he found that "[t]here might be more continuity than I imagined, which I hope is going to work in my favor." Although Eno was invited to participate and early reports indicated that he would, Eno ultimately chose not to tour with Byrne, letting Byrne decide how to present this music live.

On May 11, 2009, the live EP "" was released digitally through Todo Mundo to benefit Amnesty International. The album features four songs recorded in December 2008 on the tour. Topspin Media offered the same digital download options to purchase the EP and the company created a second embeddable media player to promote the album.

On February 11, 2010, it was announced that a documentary film entitled "Ride, Rise, Roar" chronicling the tour would be released to the 2010 film festival circuit. The debut was at South by Southwest on March 15, 2010, where it was screened in all three media categories—film, interactive, and music. Byrne attended some British screenings for question and answer sessions.

"Ride, Rise, Roar" is the feature-length directorial debut by Hillman Curtis—Byrne approached him after his satisfaction with the short film that accompanies the deluxe edition of "Everything That Happens Will Happen Today". The documentary includes concert footage, film of the planning and rehearsals for the tour, and exclusive interviews with Byrne, Eno, and the supporting musicians and dancers. Curtis was initially contacted to document the tour with no clear objective for the film and decided to focus on the collaboration between Byrne and his tour mates as well as the unique challenge of combining popular music with modern dance.

All lyrics written by David Byrne; all music by Byrne (vocals) and Brian Eno (instrumentation), except "Strange Overtones" co-written by Leo Abrahams.




















</doc>
<doc id="18707980" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18707980" title="Poitou donkey">
Poitou donkey

The Poitou donkey or Poitou ass (), also called the Poitevin donkey or simply the Poitou, is a breed of donkey originating in the Poitou region of France. It is one of the largest donkey breeds, and was selected for size so that it could be used for the production of large working mules, in conjunction with the Poitevin horse breed. It is known for its distinctive coat, called a "cadanette", which hangs in long, ungroomed cords. Breeders originally prized the coats highly, but today, many Poitou donkeys are shorn for hygiene reasons.

Poitous developed in the French Poitou region, possibly from donkeys introduced to the area by the Romans. They may have been a status symbol during the Middle Ages, and by the early 18th century, their physical characteristics had been established. A studbook for the breed was established in France in 1884, and the 19th and early 20th centuries saw them being used for the production of mules throughout Europe. During this same time, Poitou bloodlines were also used to develop other donkey breeds, including the American Mammoth Jack in the United States. Increasing mechanization in the mid-20th century saw a decline in the need for, and hence population of, the breed, and by 1977, a survey found only 44 members worldwide. Conservation efforts were begun by a number of public and private breeders and organizations, and by 2005 there were 450 purebred Poitou donkeys.

The Poitou donkey is "instantly recognizable" for a number of unusual characteristics that distinguish it from other donkeys. Its shaggy coat, called a "cadanette", hangs in long cords when ungroomed because of the long, soft hair. Animals with great "cadanettes" of matted and tangled hair were most highly valued. A purebred Poitou has a more massive bone structure and a larger foot than a part-bred animal, but the shaggy coat is such a dominant trait that even a 1/8 Poitou donkey may resemble a pure-bred. In modern times, the coat is still considered important but less so than size and measurements. Today, many Poitou donkeys are shorn for the purpose of hygiene, but some are allowed to grow their coats out so as to have ""bourailloux"", or coats of great length. The coat is always dark brown or black. While lacking the stripes and cross-like markings on the coats of some other breeds of donkey, the Poitou should have a white underbelly, nose and rings around its eyes.

The Poitou donkey is a large breed; among other European donkeys only the Andalucian donkey reaches a similar size. In order to breed large mules, the original breeders of the Poitou chose animals with large features, such as ears, heads and leg joints. The ears developed to such an extent that their weight sometimes causes them to be carried horizontally. Minimum height is for jacks and for jennies. They have large, long heads, strong necks, long backs, short croups and round haunches. The limb joints and feet are large, and the legs strong. The temperament of the Poitou has been described as "friendly, affectionate and docile". Historically, most Poitou donkeys were used to breed large mules, but in recent years, they have found an increasing number of uses. Breed enthusiasts use them for agricultural work, driving and riding.

The exact origins of the Poitou breed are unknown, but donkeys and their use in the breeding of mules may have been introduced to the Poitou region of France by the Roman Empire. The Baudet de Poitou (donkey of Poitou), and the "Mulassière" (mule breeder) horse breed (also known as the Poitevin) were developed together for the use of producing superior mules. In the Middle Ages, owning a Poitou donkey may have been a status symbol among the local French nobility. It is not known when the Poitou's distinctive characteristics were gained but they seem to have been well-developed by 1717 when an advisor to King Louis XV described:
There is found, in northern Poitou, donkeys which are as tall as large mules. They are almost completely covered in hair a half-foot long with legs and joints as large as a those of a carriage horse.

In the mid-1800s, Poitou mules were "regarded as the finest and strongest in France", and between 15,000 and 18,000 were sold annually. In 1884, a studbook was established for the Poitou donkey in France. During the first half of the 20th century, the mules bred by the Poitou and the Poitevin continued to be desired throughout Europe, and were called the "finest working mule in the world". Purchasers paid higher prices for Poitou mules than for other mules, and up to 30,000 mules were bred annually in the Poitou region, with some estimates putting the number as high as 50,000. As mechanization increased around World War II, mules became outmoded, and population numbers for both mules and donkeys dropped dramatically.

Poitou donkey and mule breeders were extremely protective of their breeding practices, some of which were "highly unusual and misguided." Jacks were kept in closed-in stalls throughout the year once they had begun covering mares, in often unhygienic conditions. Once the mares had been covered, a folk belief held that if they were underfed, they would produce colts, which were more valuable, rather than fillies. This often led to mares being starved during their pregnancies. Colostrum, vital for foal development, was considered unhealthy and withheld from newborns. A lack of breeding records resulted in fertility problems, and there was a significant amount of foal mortality, due to jacks being used to cover horse mares before jennies of their own kind, resulting in late-born foals that were vulnerable to cold fall and winter temperatures. Despite these husbandry issues, one author, writing in 1883, stated that "mule-breeding is about the only branch of agricultural industry in which France has no rival abroad, owing its prosperity entirely to the zeal of those engaged in it."

A 1977 inventory revealed only 44 Poitou donkeys worldwide, and there were still fewer than 80 animals as of 1980. Conservation efforts were led by several public and private groups in France. In 1979, the Haras Nationaux, (the French national stud) and the Parc Naturel Regional du Marais Poitevin, working with private breeders, launched an effort to improve the genetics of the Poitou, develop new breeding techniques and collect traditional knowledge on the breed. In 1981, 18 large donkeys from Portugal were acquired for use in breeding Poitou donkeys. This preceded the creation of the Asinerie Nationale Experimentale, which opened in Charente-Maritime in Dampierre-sur-Boutonne in 1982, as an experimental breeding farm for Poitous. The Parc also works to preserve the Poitevin horse breed. In 1988, the Association pour la Sauvegarde du Baudet du Poitou (SABAUD) was formed as a breeder network that focuses on marketing and fundraising for the breed, and in 1989 became the financial support arm of the Asinerie Nationale Experimentale. The Association des Éleveurs des Races Équine, Mulassière et Asine, Baudet du Poitou is the registering body for the Poitou donkey. The early conservation efforts were sometimes sidetracked as some breeders sold crossbred Poitous as purebreds, which are worth up to ten times as much. Forged pedigrees and registration papers were sometimes used to legitimize these sales. However, by the 1990s, DNA testing and microchip technology began to be used to identify and track purebred animals.
The conservation efforts in the latter decades of the 20th century and the early years of the 21st were successful, and a 2005 survey revealed 450 purebred registered animals. This number had dropped to just under 400 by 2011. The French studbook for the breed is split into two sections. The first, Livre A, is for purebred animals with documented Poitou parentage on both sides of their pedigree. The second, Livre B, is for animals with one purebred Poitou parent. The American Livestock Breeds Conservancy lists the Poitou as "Critical" on its Conservation Priority List, a category for breeds with less than 2,000 animals worldwide and less than 200 registrations annually in the US.

In 2001, scientists in Australia successfully implanted a Poitou donkey embryo created by artificial insemination in the womb of a Standardbred mare. Worries that joint problems might prevent a healthy pregnancy in the foal's biological mother led to the initiative. The resultant foal became one of three Poitou donkeys in Australia. The procedure was unusual because it is often difficult for members of one "Equus" species to accept implanted embryos from another species in the same genus.

Historical records exist of several sets of exports of Poitous from France to the US during the 19th and early 20th centuries, including a 1910 import of 10 donkeys. Most of these were integrated into the generic pool of donkey bloodstock, rather than being bred pure. During this time, Poitous were used in the creation of the American Mammoth Jack breed. Due to high purchase and transportation costs, the breed played a smaller role in the development of the Mammoth Jack than some breeders would have preferred. Imports to the US continued until at least 1937, when a successful breeding jack name Kaki, who stood high, was brought to the country. The 1940s through the 1960s saw a dearth of Poitou imports, and only a few arrived between 1978 and the 1990s. By 1996, there were estimated to only be around 30 Poitous in North America.

In 1996, Debbie Hamilton, an American, founded the Hamilton Rare Breeds Foundation on a farm in Hartland, Vermont, to breed Poitou donkeys. As of 2004, she owned 26 purebred and 14 partbred Poitous, making hers the largest Poitou breeding operation in the United States, and the second largest in the world, behind the French government-sponsored experimental farm. Hamilton works with French officials toward the preservation of the breed, and has received praise from French veterinarians, who appreciate her technical and financial contributions to the breed. Techniques for using cryopreservation to develop a sperm bank for Poitou donkeys have been in development in France since at least 1997, but Hamilton has pioneered the use of artificial insemination using frozen semen in the breed, in order to use genetic material from France to improve Poitou herds in the US. The North American Baudet de Poitou Society, organized by the American Donkey and Mule Society, is the American registry for the breed, coordinating with French officials for inspections and registrations of American-bred Poitou stock.



</doc>
<doc id="18729001" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18729001" title="Eastbourne">
Eastbourne

Eastbourne () is a town, seaside resort and borough in the non-metropolitan county of East Sussex on the south coast of England, east of Brighton. Eastbourne is immediately to the east of Beachy Head, the highest chalk sea cliff in Great Britain and part of the larger Eastbourne Downland Estate.

With a seafront consisting largely of Victorian hotels, a pier and a Napoleonic era fort and military museum, Eastbourne was developed at the direction of the Duke of Devonshire from 1859 from four separate hamlets. It has a growing population, a broad economic base and is home to companies in a wide range of industries.

Though Eastbourne is a relatively new town, there is evidence of human occupation in the area from the Stone Age. The town grew as a fashionable tourist resort largely thanks to prominent landowner, William Cavendish, later to become the Duke of Devonshire. Cavendish appointed architect Henry Currey to design a street plan for the town, but not before sending him to Europe to draw inspiration. The resulting mix of architecture is typically Victorian and remains a key feature of Eastbourne.

As a seaside resort Eastbourne derives a large and increasing income from tourism, with revenue from traditional seaside attractions augmented by conferences, public events and cultural sightseeing. The other main industries in Eastbourne include trade and retail, healthcare, education, construction, manufacturing, professional scientific and the technical sector.

Eastbourne's population is growing; between 2001 and 2011 it increased from 89,800 to 99,412. The 2011 census shows that the average age of residents has decreased as the town has attracted students, families and those commuting to London and Brighton.

Flint mines and Stone Age artefacts have been found in the surrounding countryside of the Eastbourne Downs.

Celtic people are believed to have settled on the Eastbourne Downland in 500BC.

There are Roman remains buried beneath the town, such as a Roman bath and section of pavement between Eastbourne Pier and the Redoubt Fortress. There is also a Roman villa near the entrance to the Pier and the present Queens Hotel.

In 2014, skeletal remains of a woman who lived around 425AD were discovered in the vicinity of Beachy Head on the Eastbourne Downland Estate. The remains were found to be of a 30-year-old woman who grew up in East Sussex, but had genetic heritage from sub-Saharan Africa, giving her black skin and an African skeletal structure. Her ancestors came from below the Saharan region, at a time when the Roman Empire extended only as far as North Africa.

An Anglo-Saxon charter, circa 963 AD, describes a landing stage and stream at Burne.

The original name came from the 'Burne' or stream which ran through today's Old Town area of Eastbourne. All that can be seen of the Burne, or Bourne, is the small pond in Motcombe Gardens. The bubbling source is guarded by a statue of Neptune. Motcombe Gardens are overlooked by St. Mary's Church, a Norman church which allegedly lies on the site of a Saxon ‘moot’, or meeting place. This gives Motcombe its name.

In 2014 local metal-detectorist Darrin Simpson found a coin minted during the reign of Æthelberht II of East Anglia (died 794), in a field near the town. It is believed that the coin may have led to Æthelberht's beheading by Offa of Mercia, as it had been struck as a sign of independence. Describing the coin, expert Christopher Webb, said, "This new discovery is an important and unexpected addition to the numismatic history of 8th century England." 

Following the Norman conquest, the Hundred of what is now Eastbourne, was held by Robert, Count of Mortain, William the Conqueror's half brother. The Domesday Book lists 28 ploughlands, a church, a watermill, fisheries and salt pans.

The Book referred to the area as 'Borne'. 'East' was added to ‘Borne’ in the 13th century, renaming the town.

A charter for a weekly market was granted to Bartholomew de Badlesmere in 1315–16; this increased his status as Lord of the Manor and improved local industry. During the Middle Ages the town was visited by King Henry I and in 1324 by Edward II. Evidence of Eastbourne's medieval past can seen in the 12th century Church of St Mary, and the manor house called Bourne Place.

In the mid-16th century Bourne Place was home to the Burton family, who acquired much of the land on which the present town stands. This manor house is currently owned by the Duke of Devonshire and was extensively remodelled in the early Georgian era when it was renamed Compton Place. It is one of the two Grade I listed buildings in the town.

Eastbourne has Cornish connections, most notably visible in the Cornish high cross in the churchyard of St Mary's Church which was brought from an unspecified location in Cornwall.

In 1752, a dissertation by Doctor Richard Russell extolled the medicinal benefits of the seaside. His views were of considerable benefit to the south coast and, in due course, Eastbourne became known as "the Empress of Watering Places".

Eastbourne's earliest claim as a seaside resort came about following a summer holiday visit by four of King George III's children in 1780 (Princes Edward and Octavius and Princesses Elizabeth and Sophia).

In 1793, following a survey of coastal defences in the southeast, approval was given for the positioning of infantry and artillery to defend the bay between Beachy Head and Hastings from attack by the French. Fourteen Martello Towers were constructed along the western shore of Pevensey Bay, continuing as far as Tower 73, the Wish Tower at Eastbourne. Several of these towers survive: the Wish Tower is an important feature of the town's seafront and was the subject of a painting by James Sant RA, and part of Tower 68 forms the basement of a house on St. Antony's Hill. Between 1805 and 1807, the construction took place of a fortress known as the Eastbourne Redoubt, which was built as a barracks and storage depot, and armed with 10 cannons.

A connection with India comes in the shape of the 18th-century Lushington monument, also at St Mary's, which commemorates a survivor of the Black Hole of Calcutta atrocity which led to the British conquest of Bengal.

Eastbourne remained an area of small rural settlements until the 19th century.

Four villages or hamlets occupied the site of the modern town: Bourne (or, to distinguish it from others of the same name, East Bourne), is now known as Old Town, and this surrounded the bourne (stream) which rises in the present Motcombe Park; Meads, where the Downs meet the coast; South Bourne (near the town hall); and the fishing settlement known simply as Sea Houses, which was situated to the east of the present pier.

By the mid-19th century most of the area had fallen into the hands of two landowners: John Davies Gilbert (the Davies-Gilbert family still own much of the land in Eastbourne and East Dean) and William Cavendish, Earl of Burlington.

The Gilbert family's holdings date to the late 17th and early 18th centuries when barrister Nicholas Gilbert married an Eversfield and Gildredge heiress. (The Gildredges owned much of Eastbourne by 1554. The Gilberts eventually made the Gildredge Manor House their own. Today the Gildredge name lives on in the eponymous park.)

Trevithick, the inventor of the steam locomotive (a claim disputed on the grave of one Vyvyan in the churchyard at Camborne), is reported to have spent some time here.

An early plan, for a town named Burlington, was abandoned, but on 14 May 1849 the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway arrived to scenes of great jubilation. With the arrival of the railway, the town's growth accelerated.

Cavendish, now the 7th Duke of Devonshire, recruited Henry Currey in 1859 to lay out a plan for what was essentially an entire new town – a resort built "for gentlemen by gentlemen". The town grew rapidly from a population of less than 4,000 in 1851 to nearly 35,000 by 1891. In 1883, it was incorporated as a municipal borough; a purpose-built town hall was opened in 1886. This period of growth and elegant development continued for several decades. A royal visit by
George V and Queen Mary in March 1935 is commemorated by a plaque on chalet number 2 at Holywell.

During the First World War, Summerdown Camp, a convalescent facility, opened in 1915 near the South Downs to treat soldiers who were injured during trench warfare or seriously ill. It was the largest of this type in the UK during this war, treating 150,000; 80% were able to return to fight. The facility was dismantled in 1920. An exhibition about the history of the camp was held in Eastbourne for several months in 2015.

In 1926, the Eastbourne Corporation Act enabled the creation of the Eastbourne Downland Estate.

The Second World War saw a change in fortunes. Initially, children were evacuated to Eastbourne on the assumption that they would be safe from German bombs, but soon they had to be evacuated again because after the fall of France in June 1940 it was anticipated that the town would lie in an invasion zone. Part of Operation Sea Lion, the German invasion plan, envisaged landings at Eastbourne. Many people sought safety away from the coast and shut up their houses. Restrictions on visitors forced the closure of most hotels, and private boarding schools moved away. Many of these empty buildings were later taken over by the services. The Royal Navy set up an underwater weapons school, and the Royal Air Force operated radar stations at Beachy Head and on the marshes near Pevensey. Thousands of Canadian soldiers were billeted in and around Eastbourne from July 1941 to the run-up to D-Day. The town suffered badly during the war, with many Victorian and Edwardian buildings damaged or destroyed by air raids. Indeed, by the end of the conflict it was designated by the Home Office to have been ‘the most raided town in the South East region’. The situation was especially bad between May 1942 and June 1943 with hit–and–run raids from fighter–bombers based in northern France. Ultimately 187 civilian lives were lost in the borough through enemy action.

In the summer of 1956 the town came to national and worldwide attention, when Dr John Bodkin Adams, a general practitioner serving the town's wealthier patients, was arrested for the murder of an elderly widow. Rumours had been circulating since 1935 regarding the frequency of his being named in patients' wills (132 times between 1946 and 1956) and the gifts he was given (including two Rolls Royces). Figures of up to 400 murders were reported in British and foreign newspapers, but after a controversial trial at the Old Bailey which gripped the nation for 17 days in March 1957, Adams was found not guilty. He was struck off for four years but resumed his practice in Eastbourne in 1961. According to Scotland Yard's archives, he is thought to have killed up to 163 patients in the Eastbourne area.
After the war, development continued, including the growth of Old Town up the hillside (Green Street Farm Estate) and the housing estates of Hampden Park, Willingdon Trees and Langney. During the latter half of the 20th century, there were controversies over the demolition of Pococks, a 15th-century manor house on what is now the Rodmill Housing Estate, and the granting of planning permission for a 19-storey block at the western end of the seafront. The latter project (South Cliff Tower) was realised in 1965 despite a storm of protest led by the newly formed Eastbourne and District Preservation Committee, which later became Eastbourne Civic Society, and was renamed the Eastbourne Society in 1999. Local conservationists also failed to prevent the construction of the glass-plated TGWU conference and holiday centre, but were successful in purchasing Polegate Windmill, thus saving it from demolition and redevelopment. Most of the expansion took place on the northern and eastern margins of the town, gradually swallowing surrounding villages. However, the richer western part was constrained by the Downs and has remained largely unchanged. In 1981, a large section of the town centre was replaced by the indoor shops of the Arndale Centre.

In the 1990s, both growth and controversy accelerated rapidly as a new plan was launched to develop the area known as the Crumbles, a shingle bank on the coast to the east of the town centre. This area, now known as Sovereign Harbour, containing a marina, shops and several thousand houses, along with luxury flats, was formerly home to many rare plants. There has been continued growth in other parts of the town, and the central marshland has become farmland and nature reserves.

In 2009, the new Towner Gallery was opened, abutting the listed Congress Theatre built in 1963.
In 2016–19 extensive remodelling work was undertaken to the prominent Arndale Centre, which takes up most of the town centre, and was originally built by Legal & General Assurance in the 1980s.

Eastbourne Local History Society was founded in 1970. It is a charitable, not-for-profit organisation in the United Kingdom whose objective is the pursuit and encouragement of an active interest in the study of the history of Eastbourne and its immediate environs and the dissemination of the outcome of such studies.

As the major landowner, the Cavendish family has had strong connections with Eastbourne since the 18th century. The current President of the Society is William Cavendish, Earl of Burlington.

Containing over 1,500 articles about the history of Eastbourne, the Society's indexed journal, "The Eastbourne Local Historian", is the major historical resource for the town and has been published quarterly since its inception in 1970. Over the years, the Society has published various books about the history of Eastbourne, seven of which are currently in print.

The South Downs dominate Eastbourne and the Eastbourne Downland Estate can be seen from most of the town. These were originally chalk deposits laid down under the sea during the Late Cretaceous, and were later lifted by the same tectonic plate movements that formed the European Alps, during the middle Tertiary period. The chalk can be clearly seen along the eroded coastline to the west of the town, in the area known as Beachy Head and the Seven Sisters, where continuous erosion keeps the cliff edge vertical and white. The chalk contains many fossils such as ammonites and nautilus. The town area is built on geologically recent alluvial drift, the result of the silting up of a bay. This changes to Weald clay around the Langney estate.

A part of the South Downs, Willingdon Down is a designated Site of Special Scientific Interest. This is of archaeological interest due to a Neolithic camp and burial grounds. The area is also a nationally uncommon tract of chalk grassland rich in species. Another SSSI which partially falls with the Eastbourne district is Seaford to Beachy Head. This site, of biological and geological interest, covers the coastline between Eastbourne and Seaford, plus the Seven Sisters country park and the Cuckmere valley. Several nature trails lead across the Downs to areas such as the nearby villages of East Dean and Birling Gap, and landmarks like the Seven Sisters, Belle Tout lighthouse and Beachy Head.

Eastbourne's greater area comprises the town of Polegate, and the civil parishes of Willingdon and Jevington, Stone Cross, Pevensey, Westham and Pevensey Bay village. All are part of the Wealden District. Within Eastbourne's limits are:


There was a community known as Norway, Eastbourne in the triangle now bounded by Wartling Road, Seaside and Lottbridge Drove. The name being a corruption of North Way, as this was the route to the north. The area is now a housing estate and the only evidence there was a Norway are a Norway Road and the local church whose sign reads "St Andrew's Church, Norway".

The former fishing hamlet of Holywell (local pronunciation ‘holly well’) was situated by the cliff on a ledge some 400 yards to the southwest of the public garden known as the Holywell Retreat. It was approached from what is now Holywell Road via the lane between the present Helen Gardens and St Bede’s School which leads to the chalk pinnacle formerly known locally as ‘Gibraltar’ or the 'Sugar Loaf'. The ground around the pinnacle was the site of lime kilns also worked by the fishermen. The fishing hamlet at Holywell was taken over by the local water board in 1896 to exploit the springs in the cliffs. The water board's successors still own the site, and there is a pumping station but little evidence of the hamlet itself, as by now even most of the foundations of the cottages have gone over the cliff.

As with the rest of the British Isles and South Coast, Eastbourne experiences a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters. The local climate is notable for its high sunshine levels, at least relative to much of the rest of England – Eastbourne holds the record for the highest recorded amount of sunshine in a month, 383.9 hours in July 1911. Temperature extremes recorded at Eastbourne since 1960 range from during July 1976, down to In January 1987. Eastbourne's coastal location also means it tends to be milder than most areas, particularly during night. A whole six months of the year have never fallen below 0 °C (32 °F), and in July the temperature has never fallen below . All temperature figures relate to the period 1960 onwards. The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is "" (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).

Eastbourne Borough Council is responsible for much local governance, with representation provided by 27 councillors from 9 wards, with elections to the council being held every four years.

The 2015 election resulted in a council made up of 18 Liberal Democrat and 9 Conservative councillors.

The council operates out of a Victorian town hall designed by W. Tadman Foulkes, and built between 1884 and 1886 under supervision of Henry Currey, the Duke of Devonshire's architect.

East Sussex County Council has responsibility for local education, libraries, social services, civil registration, trading standards and transport. Out of the 49 seats, 9 are returned by Eastbourne voters.

The 2009 East Sussex County Council election resulted in 29 Conservatives, 13 Liberal Democrats, 4 Labour and 3 Independent, of which Eastbourne provided 6 Liberal Democrats and 3 Conservatives.

The Parliament Constituency of Eastbourne covers a greater area than the nine local wards, extending to the north and the east.

Eastbourne is a marginal seat contested between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats.

For 18 years, from 1992 to 2010, the MP for Eastbourne was the Conservative Nigel Waterson.

From 2010 to 2015, the MP for Eastbourne was the Liberal Democrat Stephen Lloyd, who beat Waterson with a 3.8% swing on a turnout of 67% in the 2010 General Election.

At the 2015 general election, Lloyd lost his seat to the Conservative Caroline Ansell, who gained the constituency with a majority of 733 votes.

At the 2017 general election, Lloyd regained the seat for the Liberal Democrats, with a majority of 1,609. Ansell increased her votes by nearly 5,000, while Lloyd received an increase of 7,000.

At European level, Eastbourne is represented by the South-East region, which holds ten seats in the European Parliament. The 2009 election returned 4 Conservatives, 2 Liberal Democrats, 2 UK Independence, 1 Labour and 1 Green.

Whilst the overall population of Eastbourne is growing (between 2001-2008 the population grew from 89,800 to 94,800), the age profile is dropping as younger people move into the town. Ethnically, the town is 93.7% White, with small ethnic minority groups including Chinese, and Whites from other countries in Europe. The 2001 UK Census indicated that the largest non-White ethnic group were Chinese; studies conducted by the local council in 2008 indicated that there has been a growth in people arriving from Eastern Europe, particularly Poland. Unemployment in Eastbourne is below the national average, at 4.1% compared to 4.4% for England and Wales. The percentage of economically active people increased between 2001-2011. There has also been an upward trend in the number of people with qualifications with an increase of 5.19%

2014 data: Eastbourne is the second largest district/borough in East Sussex. Resident population : 101,133. 54% were between 20 and 64, 24% were over 65 years old. 29% of households do not have cars or vans. Defying the retirement age cliche, the average age here is 43, while the town enjoys a steady influx in under 45s at twice the national rate.

With a population of 100,000 people, Eastbourne has been a fast-growing town in the past few years, relative to the rest of the UK. Development around Eastbourne's Sovereign Harbour, Britain's largest composite marina, has created more than 3,000 new homes and an innovation centre for small businesses.

Eastbourne is home to companies in a wide range of industries. Eastbourne's Chamber of Commerce has more than 500 members and holds many networking events to facilitate local business links.

In 2008, Eastbourne was judged to have low productivity, in a national assessment by the National Audit Office. Productivity, measured by gross value added per employee, was recorded as £31,390 per year. This compared unfavourably with the South East overall, where GVA was £40,460 per employee per year. A possible explanation for this is that a high proportion of workers are in sectors which have relatively low productivity and wages.

In recent years, five areas within Eastbourne have regularly featured in the most economically deprived 10% in all of England. Measured as Lower Layer Super Output Areas (LSOAs), two areas within Devonshire ward, two areas within Hampden Park, and one area within Langney, are all among the most deprived LSOAs in the country. Three quarters of LSOAs in the town (45 LSOAs or 76%) had a worse ranking for deprivation in 2010 than in 2007.

In 2016, UK innovation charity NESTA named Eastbourne as a "creative cluster", with 969 creative firms representing 9.1% of total businesses in the town and providing employment for 2,703 people.

The seafront at Eastbourne consists almost entirely of Victorian hotels. Along with its pier and bandstand, this serves to preserve the front in a somewhat timeless manner. The Duke of Devonshire, retains the rights to the seafront buildings and does not allow them to be developed into shops.

A stretch of of shingle beach stretches from Sovereign Harbour in the east to Beachy Head in the west. In a 1998 survey, 56% of visitors said that the beach and seafront was one of Eastbourne best features, although 10% listed the pebbled beach as a dislike.

Other recreation facilities include two swimming pools, three fitness centres and other smaller sports clubs including scuba diving.

A children's adventure park is sited at the eastern end of the seafront. There are various other establishments scattered around the town such as crazy golf, go–karting and Laser Quest. The pier is an obvious place to visit and is sometimes used to hold events, such as the international birdman competition held annually, although this was cancelled in 2005 due to a lack of competitors. An annual raft competition used to take place where competitors, usually local businesses, circumnavigate the pier in a raft made by themselves, while being attacked by a water-cannon.

A major event in the tourist programme of Eastbourne Borough Council is Eastbourne Airbourne, a large air show, held annually in August.

Reports claim a £365m revenue from visitors in 2010, with an estimated 7,160 jobs supported by tourism.

The town is home to the UK's largest book wholesalers, who have a 350,000 sq ft warehouse facility there. Gardners Books are one of the town's largest employers, with a majority of staff involved in packing and shipping books.|

A majority of Eastbourne's total employment is offered by small private businesses, though Eastbourne District General Hospital is a significant public sector employer.

In 2010, it was assessed that Eastbourne had a public sector employment rate of 25.4% of overall jobs. This was noted as below average, compared with the UK as a whole.

The Towner Art Gallery is Eastbourne's principal arts gallery and arts education hub. After being located for many years in Eastbourne Manor House, within Gildredge Park, it relocated next to the Congress Theatre in 2009. The gallery holds one of the most important collections of public art in southern England.

Eastbourne has three council-owned theatres: the Grade II* listed Congress Theatre, the Grade II listed Devonshire Park Theatre and the Grade II listed Winter Garden. The Grade II listed Royal Hippodrome Theatre used to be council-owned, but is now run by an independent charitable trust.

The Devonshire Park Theatre is a fine example of a Victorian theatre with ornate interior decorations, and plays host to touring dramas and comedies and an annual local pantomime. The Royal Hippodrome has the longest running summer show in Britain. The London Philharmonic Orchestra makes regular appearances and has an annual season at the Congress Theatre.

Other theatre venues in the town include the volunteer-run Underground Theatre, in the basement of the town's Central Library, and the Lamb Theatre, based at the Lamb Inn in Old Town, which was launched in August 2009 but reinstated an older tradition at the pub.

Eastbourne has two cinemas — the Curzon Cinema and Cineworld. The Curzon Cinema is a small, family-run, independent cinema in Langney Road, in the town centre. Cineworld is a large Multiplex cinema with six screens, located in the Crumbles Retail Park, near Sovereign Harbour.

In 2013, the owners of the Curzon Cinema declared themselves "shocked" at the threats to their venue from a newly announced eight-screen multiplex, to be built in a renovated Arndale Centre nearby.

Eastbourne Bandstand lies on the seafront, between the Wish Tower and the pier. It stages 1812 Firework Concerts, Rock N Roll nights, Big Band concerts, Promenade concerts and tribute bands.

There was once a second similar bandstand (also built in 1935) in the 'music gardens' near the Redoubt Fortress. The bandstand was removed to make way for the Pavilion Tearooms but the colonnades built around it are still there (behind the tea rooms). Before 1935 each of these sites had a smaller "birdcage" bandstand; the one in the music gardens having been moved from a rather precarious position opposite the Albion Hotel. The kiosk in the music gardens was originally one of the toll kiosks at the entrance to the pier.

Grove Road is the location of two independent record shops and a venue called Printer's Playhouse (which hosts performances of live music and new plays).

Local radio station Sovereign FM broadcasts to Eastbourne from nearby Hailsham.
There are two other regional radio stations, Heart Sussex, (previously Southern FM) which broadcasts across Sussex from Portslade and BBC Sussex which broadcasts from Brighton.

BBC "South East Today" and "ITV Meridian" are the two regional news channels.

The seafront and the iconic cliff at Beachy Head has been used for many scenes in feature films, and the local council set up a film liaison unit to encourage and facilitate the shooting of film sequences in and around the town. The 2006 Academy Award-nominated film "Notes on a Scandal" includes scenes filmed at Beachy Head, Cavendish Hotel and 117 Royal Parade. Beachy Head and the Seven Sisters were used as backdrops for scenes from the Quidditch World Cup in "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire". Scenes from "Half a Sixpence" (1969) were filmed on the pier and near to the bandstand. The seafront area was also used for the film "Angus, Thongs and Perfect Snogging" directed by Gurinder Chadha. The Langham Hotel was a filming location for "Made in Dagenham", which also featured the seafront and pier. A sequence of a rainy day at the seaside for the Doel family has as its backdrop the Wish Tower, the bandstand, the Cavendish Hotel and the pier in the 1987 British/American drama film "84 Charing Cross Road" directed by David Jones.

Television too has used Eastbourne as a backdrop. The series "Little Britain" had the character Emily Howard strolling along the promenade. Other brief appearances were made in the television series "Agatha Christie's Marple", "The Two Ronnies", "French and Saunders" and "Foyle's War". A sequence of sketches that appear in each episode of "Bang, Bang, It's Reeves and Mortimer", was shot in the old Jo Pip's / Cunninghams theatre venue on Seaside Road, which has since been developed into flats. The 1993 BBC drama series "Westbeach" was filmed on location in Eastbourne and surrounding areas.

The elderly female residents of Eastbourne were the inspiration for the song "Eastbourne Ladies" by English singer Kevin Coyne, which appeared on his 1973 album "Marjory Razorblade".

Eastbourne has numerous parks and gardens, although there are several smaller open spaces including Upperton Gardens, the Carpet Gardens and the Western Lawns. The first public park in Eastbourne was Hampden Park, originally owned by Lord Willingdon and opened on 12 August 1902. Facilities include: football pitches, rugby club, indoor bowls, a large lake (formerly a Decoy pond), lakeside cafe, children's recreation area, tennis courts, BMX and skate facility, disc golf course (target) and woodland. The largest and newest park is Shinewater Park, located on the west side of Langney and opened in 2002. There is a large fishing lake, basketball, football pitches, a BMX and skate park and children's playground.

Gildredge Park is a large open park located between the town centre and Old Town; it is very popular with families and has a children's playground, cafe, tennis courts, disc golf course (target) and bowls lawns. The smaller, adjoining, Manor Gardens combines both lawns and shady areas as well as a rose garden. Until 2005, Manor Gardens was the home of the Towner Gallery. This gallery incorporated a permanent exhibition of local art and historical items, plus temporary art exhibitions of regional and national significance. It was relocated to a new, £8.6 million purpose-built facility adjacent to the Congress Theatre, Devonshire Park which opened on 4 April 2009.

Princes Park obtained its name during a visit by the Duke of Windsor as Prince of Wales in 1931. Located at the eastern end of the seafront, it has a children's playground with paddling pool, cafe, bowls and a large lake, noted for its swans. The lake is used by a nearby water-sports centre, which offers kayak and windsurfing training. Princes Park lake is also home to Eastbourne Model Powerboat Club and Eastbourne Model Yacht Club. Close by are tennis and basketball courts and a football pitch. At the north of the park is Eastbourne United F.C.. On 21 July 2018, the park hosted the town's second LGBTQ+ Pride event which was attended by over 4,000 people.

Devonshire Park, home to the pre-Wimbledon ladies tennis championships, is located just off the seafront in the towns cultural district. Other parks include: Helen Gardens and the Italian Gardens at the western end of the seafront, Sovereign Park between the main seafront and the marina and Motcombe Gardens in Old Town.

One feature that has always been heavily promoted is Eastbourne's floral displays, most notably the Carpet Gardens along the coastal road near the pier. These displays, and the town as a whole, frequently win awards – such as the 'Coastal Resort B' category in the 2003 Britain in Bloom competition.

Eastbourne's Devonshire Park is the venue for the Eastbourne International, a tennis tournament held in the town since 1974 and serving as a warm-up to Wimbledon. Previously a women only tournament, in 2009 the Lawn Tennis Association merged it with the men only event the Nottingham Open.

Eastbourne has four senior football clubs: Eastbourne Borough F.C. play in the Conference South. Eastbourne Town F.C., Eastbourne United Association F.C. and Langney Wanderers F.C. play in the Southern Combination League Premier. Langney Wanderers F.C. won promotion to the Southern Combination League Division One. in 2018

Eastbourne Eagles are a speedway club located at Arlington Stadium, just outside the town. Between 1997-2014 they competed in the Elite League, the highest level of speedway in the UK. They were champions in 2000. They now compete in the National League. Arlington stadium also sees stock-car racing on Wednesday evenings in the summer months.

Eastbourne hosted a triathlon in 2016 and 2017, which attracted professional triathletes such as Ben Allen, Jacqui Slack, Lawrence Fanous and 2012 Biathle world champion Richard Stannard in addition to the hundreds of amateurs taking part. The event takes in the town's major landmarks, including the promenade and local South Downs National Park.

Other local sports clubs include cricket, hockey, rugby, lacrosse and golf. Among Eastbourne's golf courses are the Royal Eastbourne, Eastbourne Downs, Willingdon and the Eastbourne Golfing Park. There is an annual extreme sports festival held at the eastern end of the seafront. Eastbourne Sovereign Sailing Club, on the seafront towards the eastern end, organises dinghy sailing for its members and visitors from Easter to Boxing Day and usually holds a National Championship Series for a popular UK class in the summer months.

The Eastbourne Downland provides a spectacular backdrop to the town. The 4,000 acres of farmland and downland are owned by the town of Eastbourne, following the 1926 Eastbourne Corporation Act, which aimed to protect their unspoilt beauty "in perpetuity".

The Eastbourne Downs include Beachy Head cliff, to the west of the town, a famous beauty spot and an infamous suicide spot. Statistics are not officially published to reduce suicidal mimicry, but unofficial statistics show it to be the third most common suicide spot.

The lighthouse at the foot of the cliff came into operation in October 1902. Although originally manned by two keepers, it has been remotely monitored by Trinity House via a landline since June 1983. Prior to its construction, shipping had been warned by the Belle Tout lighthouse on the cliff top some 1,640 yards (1,500 m) to the west. Belle Tout lighthouse was operational from 1834 to 1902, and closed because its light was not visible in mist and low cloud. It became a private residence, but was severely damaged in the Second World War by Canadian artillery. In 1956, it was rebuilt as a house and remains a dwelling to this day. In March 1999, the structure was moved back from the cliff edge to save it from plunging into the sea.The structure may need to be moved again to safeguard it from cliff erosion.

Eastbourne Pier was built between 1866 and 1872 at the junction of Grand and Marine Parades. The pier interrupts what would otherwise have been a ribbon development of buildings – to the west, high-class hotels, with modest family hotels and boarding houses to the east. The Eastbourne Pier Company was registered in April 1865 with a capital of £15,000 and on 18 April 1866 work began. It was opened by Lord Edward Cavendish on 13 June 1870, although it was not actually completed until two years later. On New Year's Day 1877 the landward half was swept away in a storm. It was rebuilt at a higher level, creating a drop towards the end of the pier. The pier is effectively built on stilts that rest in cups on the sea-bed allowing the whole structure to move during rough weather. It is roughly 300 metres (1000 ft) long. A domed 400-seater pavilion was constructed at a cost of £250 at the seaward end in 1888. A 1,000-seater theatre, bar, camera obscura and office suite replaced this in 1899/1901. At the same time, two saloons were built midway along the pier. Access to the camera obscura was destroyed by an arson attack in 1970, but was restored in 2003 with a new stairway built.

On 30 July 2014, a fire broke out in the middle building of the pier. BBC News reported that 80 firefighters attended the scene. One third of the pier was badly damaged.

On 19 August 2014, a worker from Cumbria died after falling through the decking of the damaged pier.

The government promised £2m support for lost trade caused by the pier fire and in lost tourism revenue.

Eastbourne Redoubt on Royal Parade is one of three examples of a type of fortress built to withstand potential invasion from Napoleon's forces in the early 19th century. It houses collections from the Royal Sussex Regiment, the Queen's Royal Irish Hussars and the Sussex Combined Services Collection; including four Victoria Crosses and General Hans-Jürgen von Arnim's Steyr Automobile 1500A Afrika Korps Staff Car.

Eastbourne’s reputation for health, enhanced by bracing air and sea breezes contributed to the establishment of many independent schools in the 19th century and in 1871, the year which saw the arrival of Queenwood Ladies College, the town was just beginning a period of growth and prosperity. By 1896, Gowland’s Eastbourne Directory listed 76 private schools for boys and girls. However, economic difficulties during the inter-war years saw a gradual decline in the number of independent schools.

In 1930, the headmistress of Clovelly-Kepplestone, a well-established boarding school for girls, referred to "heavy financial losses experienced by schools in the past few years". In 1930, this school was forced to merge its junior and senior departments; in 1931, one of its buildings was sold off, and in 1934 the school closed altogether. Finally, indicative of the changes that would later befall many of the larger buildings in the town, the school was demolished to make way for a block of flats, which was completed in 1939.

The Eastbourne (Blue Book) Directory for 1938 lists 39 independent schools in the town. With the fall of France in June 1940, and the risk of invasion, most left – the majority never to return. By 2007, the number had reduced to just four: St. Andrew's Prep School, Eastbourne College, St. Bede’s Preparatory School and Roedean Moira House, a school for girls aged up to 18.

Eastbourne has 6 state secondary schools, 17 state primary schools, 1 primary special school and 2 secondary special schools. Parts of the University of Brighton are based in the Meads area of the town. There are several language colleges and schools, with students coming mainly from Europe.

Sussex Downs College is a large further education college with a campus in Eastbourne. This state-funded college provides a range of GCSE, GCE A Level, BTEC and vocational programmes for students aged 16–19 years of age, plus a full range of adult FE programmes. It gained its current structure in 2003 from a merger of Park College (the old Eastbourne sixth form college), Lewes Tertiary College and Eastbourne College of Arts and Technology (ECAT).

The town is served by Eastbourne District General Hospital, part of East Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust. As of 2014, the maternity unit of the hospital has been permanently transferred to the Conquest Hospital, Hastings after years of campaigning to save the unit. An earlier hospital, St Mary's, opened on Vicarage Road in 1877 as the infirmary to the local workhouse; it was demolished in 1990. 
Eastbourne Fire Station is in Whitley Road, and the town's police station is in Grove Road.
Eastbourne has an RNLI lifeboat station. A new boat named "Diamond Jubilee" was launched in 2012 by the Earl and Countess of Wessex.

Eastbourne Blind Society was founded in 1923 to support eight war-blinded veterans. In 1963 a centre in Longstone Road was opened and today the society has almost 800 members.

As well as the medieval parish church of St Mary in Old Town, another remarkable church building in Eastbourne is the redbrick St Saviour's and St Peter's. Originally consecrated under the former name in 1872, it was designed by George Edmund Street but merged with St Peter’s in 1971 when the latter was made redundant and demolished. The Catholic Church of Our Lady of Ransom is a generously proportioned building with a tall Gothic interior. One of the windows commemorates the exiled Polish-Lithuanian nobleman, Prince Lev Sapieha, who lived in the town, and there is much other artwork in the building. The recently formed Personal Ordinariate of Anglicans reconciled to the Catholic Church meets at St Agnes, another Victorian Gothic building.

The tall flint tower of St Michael's at Ocklynge is one of Eastbourne's landmarks. The church was consecrated in 1902 and built on the site of the mission hall where the nonsense writer Lewis Carroll (the clergyman CL Dodgson) is known to have preached during his holidays in the town. All Souls, in Italian style, is a finely proportioned building with an Evangelical church tradition. Holy Trinity also has a strong history of Evangelism, particularly during the early 20th century when Canon Stephen Warner was the vicar for 28 years. There is a Greek Orthodox Church converted from a 19th-century Calvinistic chapel. The Strict Baptist Chapel in Grove Road is an interesting building, despite its rather grim street frontage. The United Reformed Church in Upperton Road has tall rogue Gothic windows set in red brick walls. Several other denominations have similarly interesting church buildings, including some of 20th century design, such as the Baptist Church in Eldon Road. The copyrights of many well-known hymns used in the English-speaking world are handled by Kingway's Thankyou Music of Eastbourne. There is a tradition of Judaism in Eastbourne, and a Jewish rest home. The Islamic community uses a small mosque that was formerly the Seeboard social club.

Eastbourne is connected by road to London by the A22, and to Brighton and Hove and Hastings by the nearby A27. The car is the most used form of transport in the town, with only 6% of journeys taken by bus; the local council transport plan aims to reduce the amount of car usage. Bus services within Eastbourne have been provided by Stagecoach Group under the name Stagecoach in Eastbourne since November 2008, when the company acquired Eastbourne Buses, a service run by the local council, and subsequently the independent company Cavendish Motor Services. Eastbourne Buses had been formed in 1903 by the County Borough of Eastbourne, who were the first local authority in the world authorised to run motor buses. As well as local journeys within the town, Stagecoach also runs routes to Polegate, Hailsham, Tunbridge Wells, Uckfield and East Grinstead at various frequencies, while the two routes to Hastings via Bexhill are run by Stagecoach South East from Hastings. The other main operator into Eastbourne is Brighton & Hove, owned by the Go-Ahead Group, which runs frequent services seven days a week from Brighton via Seaford and Newhaven. Limited numbers of additional buses are run by the Cuckmere Buses, and a regular National Express coach service operates daily from London's Victoria Coach Station.

The main railway station is situated in the town centre and is served by Southern. The present station (the town's third), designed by F.D. Bannister, dates from 1886. It was originally on what was termed the "Eastbourne Branch" from Polegate. There was a rarely used triangular junction between Polegate and the now-closed "Stone Cross" which allowed trains to bypass the Branch; the track has now been lifted. Also on the erstwhile Branch is Hampden Park railway station to the north of the town. Regular services along the coast have invariably served Eastbourne. All trains, because of the layout, have to pass through Hampden Park once in each direction. This has the effect of making the Hampden Park level crossing very busy. Indeed, it is thought to be the busiest in the country. Regular services are to London Victoria, Gatwick Airport, Hastings and Ashford International and a commuter service to Brighton. Trains leave from London Victoria to Eastbourne with a journey time of 1hr 36mins. A miniature tramway once ran a mile across "the Crumbles" (then undeveloped) from near Princes Park/Wartling Road towards Langney Point. It opened in 1954 but ceased operation in 1970, relocating to Seaton in Devon after the owners had fallen out with the council; it is now the Seaton Tramway.

Eastbourne can claim some notable visitors, residents and scholars:

Lewis Carroll holidayed in Eastbourne 19 times, taking lodgings in Lushington Road, where a blue plaque now marks the location of his first visit in 1877.

Poet Francis William Bourdillon lived in the town.

Charles Webb, writer of "The Graduate", moved to Eastbourne with his wife in 2006.

The novelist and children's writer Annie Keary died in the town in 1879.

Former students at the closed St Cyprian's School include George Orwell, Alaric Jacob, E. H. W. Meyerstein and Alan Hyman. The biographer and historian Philip Ziegler was also a pupil, as was the music historian Dyneley Hussey and politician, historian and diarist Alan Clark.

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels often stayed in the area. Engels' ashes were scattered in the sea off Beachy Head at his request.

The philosopher A. J. Ayer was a pupil at Ascham St Vincent's School in Carlisle Road.

Claude Debussy finished composing "La mer" at the Grand Hotel in 1905.

The pianist Russ Conway was a resident for many years

Several bands have formed in Eastbourne, including: Toploader, Easyworld, the Divided, ROAM and the Mobiles.

Musician Robin Romei is a resident of Eastbourne, and has written a song named after the town.

David Bowie performed in Eastbourne several times. He included a mention of Eastbourne in his 1967 single, The Laughing Gnome: "Well I gave him roasted toadstools and a glass of dandelion wine, Then I put him on a train to Eastbourne, Carried his bag and gave him a fag ..."

"Darwin's Bulldog" Thomas Henry Huxley spent the last few years of his life in Eastbourne.

Frederick Soddy, radiochemist and economist, was born in Eastbourne and studied at Eastbourne College.

NASA aerospace engineer Bruce Woodgate, who attended Eastbourne Grammar School, was the principal investigator and designer of the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, which was installed on the Hubble Space Telescope in 1997.

Polar explorer Lawrence Oates attended South Lynn School in Mill Gap Road.

George Mallory, the noted mountaineer, attended Glengorse Preparatory School in Chesterfield Road between 1896 and 1900.

Count László Almásy, the basis of the lead character of "The English Patient", was educated by a private tutor at Berrow, and was a member of the pioneering Eastbourne Flying Club.

In 1993, following a suggestion to Eastbourne Borough Council by Eastbourne Civic Society (now Eastbourne Society), a joint project was set up to erect blue plaques on buildings associated with famous people. The principles for selection are broadly those already established by English Heritage for such plaques in London. The first was erected in November 1994 in Milnthorpe Road at the former home of Sir Ernest Shackleton, the Antarctic explorer.

The artist Eric Ravilious grew up, was educated and taught in Eastbourne.

Artists Cedric Morris and David Kindersley attended St Cyprian's School.

Prunella Scales and Eddie Izzard attended school in Eastbourne.

Former students at St Cyprians, include the politicians Richard Wood, who had lost both legs in war, and David Ormsby-Gore later ambassador to the USA.

Theresa May was born in the town.

Henry Allingham, briefly the world's oldest man when he died in 2009, aged 113, was a resident.

Percy Sillitoe, director of MI5, lived in the town in the 1950s.

The leading evangelist Canon Stephen Warner was the vicar of Holy Trinity between 1919 and 1947. Novelist Angela Carter was born in Eastbourne in 1940 before moving to South Yorkshire as a child. The current UK Prime Minister, Theresa May, was born in Eastbourne.

Aleister Crowley, occultist and mystic attended Eastbourne College and later edited a chess column for the "Eastbourne Gazette".

Douglas Bader, who became a successful Second World War fighter pilot despite having lost both legs in a flying accident, attended Temple Grove Preparatory School in Compton Place Road.

Military figures who had been students at St Cyprian's include: General Sir Lashmer Whistler; Major General Henry Foot VC; the submarine commander Rupert Lonsdale. Other ex-students at St Cyprian's include: the amateur jockey Anthony Mildmay; Seymour de Lotbiniere, one-time Director of Outside Broadcasts at the BBC; Jagaddipendra Narayan, a reigning Maharaja of Cooch Behar while at the school.



</doc>
<doc id="18791669" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18791669" title="Hurricane Hernan (2008)">
Hurricane Hernan (2008)

Hurricane Hernan was the ninth tropical depression, eighth named storm, fifth hurricane, and first major hurricane of the 2008 Pacific hurricane season. Hernan developed out of a tropical wave that formed off the east coast of Africa on July 24. Over the next week, the wave traversed the Atlantic without development and entered the Eastern Pacific basin on August 2. The wave became better organized over the next several days and was declared Tropical Depression Nine-E on August 6. The depression quickly became Tropical Storm Hernan later that day. Hernan steadily intensified over the next two days and was upgraded to a hurricane on the morning of August 8.

Hernan continued to intensify and became the first major hurricane—a storm with winds of 111 mph (178 km/h) or higher—of the season on August 9. After reaching major hurricane status, Hernan steadily weakened to a minimal hurricane. The weakening continued, and Hernan was further downgraded to a tropical storm on August 11. As Hernan moved over cold waters, the convection associated with the storm dissipated, leaving only a swirl of clouds. By the morning of August 12, almost all of the convection associated with Hernan had dissipated and the system was declared a remnant low-pressure area. The remnants of the hurricane caused light rain to Hawaii.

On July 24, a tropical wave emerged from the east coast of Africa, near the Cape Verde Islands. The wave was disorganized and failed to develop convection as it traversed the Atlantic Ocean over the next several days. The wave eventually entered the Eastern Pacific basin on August 2, and interacted with a broad area of cyclonic flow located a few hundred miles south of Mexico. The wave became better organized throughout the day, and an area of low pressure formed 660 mi (1060 km) south of Manzanillo, Mexico on August 5. Strong convection began to develop. That day, a banding feature formed On the morning of August 6, a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued. Later in the day, the National Hurricane Center determined that the system had developed sufficient convection to be declared Tropical Depression Nine-E while located 775 mi (1230 km) to the south-southwest of the southern tip of Baja California Sur. However, the storm was operationally believed to have become a depression several hours later.

Tropical Depression Nine-E was influenced by a high pressure area located over Mexico, causing it to move 16 mph (26 km/h) to the north-west. The depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Hernan overnight as the storm became more organized. Although Hernan was located over warm waters, moderate wind shear prevented the storm from intensifying quickly, and the storm slowed. Hernan slowly became better organized throughout the night, but wind shear continued to impair Hernan through the morning; as a result, most of the tropical cyclone forecast models did not predict Hernan to become a hurricane.

In the early afternoon of August 7, an eye feature began to form; subsequently, Hernan was nearing hurricane status. However, by the nighttime hours, a microwave satellite found that the center of Hernan was located to the west-southwest of the eye feature, and the intensification ceased for the rest of the day and into the morning of August 8. Later in the morning, the center of Hernan was determined to be located underneath the eye and was determined to have become a hurricane, the fifth of the season, during the afternoon of August 8. Throughout the day, the eye became better defined, indicating that moderate northeasterly wind shear had already begun to diminish. Despite a cloud-filled eye, meteorologists showed Hernan peaking as a category 2 hurricane overnight.

Early on August 9, Hernan was upgraded to a Category 2 hurricane, with winds of 100 mph (155 km/h). Convection around the eye continued become more symmetrical, though the National Hurricane Center had stated that Hernan had most likely reached its peak intensity or was very close to doing so. However, the eye suddenly became better defined. Based on this, Hernan was upgraded to a major hurricane. The intensity of Hernan was uncertain, as there was some difference between intensity estimates. Hernan maintained its appearance through the evening and it was stated that the peak intensity of the storm may have been 125 mph (205 km/h). Overnight, Hernan moved over cooler waters and started to weaken. Although the eye remained well defined, outflow to all the southwestern semicircle became poor.

Hernan rapidly weakened overnight and was barely a Category 2 in the afternoon hours of August 10 as it moved over cooler waters. The erosion of the eyewall was later found to be caused by an eyewall replacement cycle that rapidly completed itself during the afternoon. Continuing to slowly weaken, Hernan was soon downgraded to a strong Category 1. The newly formed eye began to shrink and deteriorate through the early afternoon, but Hernan briefly stopped weakening. Initially, Hernan's strong circulation allowed it to maintain hurricane status over 24 °C waters.

Early on August 11, Hernan was downgraded to a tropical storm. Deep convection diminished around the center of the storm and by August 12, almost all of the deep convection dissipated as Hernan continued to weaken. Over 23 °C water, only a swirl of clouds remained and the storm was barely a tropical system. Later that night, Hernan had degenerated into a remnant low, and the final advisory was issued by the National Hurricane Center. The remnant low still retained tropical storm-force winds for a short while before weakening further by the next morning. The low moved towards the west-southwest over the next several days before dissipating 460 mi (740 km) southeast of the Island of Hawaii on August 16. The remnant low-pressure area of Hernan later brought moisture to the island of Hawaii, causing cloud and shower activity. The associated rainfall was light and insignificant.




</doc>
<doc id="18807746" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18807746" title="Stones Brewery">
Stones Brewery

Stones Brewery (William Stones Ltd) was a brewery founded in 1868 by William Stones in Sheffield, West Riding of Yorkshire, England, and purchased by Bass Brewery in 1968. After its closure in 1999, its major brand, Stones Bitter, has continued to be produced by the Molson Coors Brewing Company.

William Stones had started brewing in 1847 in Sheffield with Joseph Watts. Following Watts' death in 1854, Stones continued brewing by himself. In 1868, he purchased the lease of the Neepsend Brewery and renamed it the Cannon Brewery. He continued to brew there until his death in 1894. Stones' success saw him die as one of the richest men in Sheffield, although he lived a modest life. The company was taken over by Bass in 1968. In 2000, Bass sold its brewing operations to the Belgian brewer Interbrew who were ordered by the Competition Commission to sell the Stones brand. In 2002, the brand was purchased by the American Coors Brewing Company, who merged to become Molson Coors in 2005.

Stones Bitter was brewed at the Cannon Brewery from 1948 and was popular with Sheffield's steel workers. It was originally available across the south of Yorkshire, Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, with distribution extended to the rest of the north of England in 1977, and nationwide from 1979, accompanied by a considerable marketing push. Increasing demand saw it also brewed at other Bass breweries from the 1970s onwards. The beer's popularity reached its apex in 1992 when it was the country's highest selling bitter, selling over a million barrels. The beer has been lauded in certain quarters as "one of Sheffield's most famous exports". After the Cannon's closure production was continued elsewhere. Keg Stones Bitter (3.7 per cent alcohol by volume) is brewed by Molson Coors at their brewery in Tadcaster, North Yorkshire, and the canned product at their Burton upon Trent brewery.

Stones sponsored the Rugby Football League Championship and its successor the Rugby Super League from 1986 until 1997. A well known series of television advertisements for the brand from 1983 until 1991, starring Tony Barton and Michael Angelis, became the longest running bitter advertisements in the country. Since the withdrawal of the majority of marketing support by Bass in 1997 in favour of the Worthington ale brand, the beer has experienced a marked decline in sales volumes, although it remains among the twenty highest selling ale brands in the United Kingdom.

In 1847, Joseph Watts of Dewsbury and William Stones (1827 -1894) of Sheffield began brewing together at the Cannon Brewery in Sheffield's Shalesmoor district near Kelham Island. The name may have come from the nearby foundry that cast gun barrels. In 1852 they acquired their first tied house, the Kelham Tavern. Watts died in May 1854 aged 46, and two years later Stones purchased his share of the business from his former partner's brother. By 1861 the brewery employed 23 men and two boys. In 1868, Stones took over the lease of the Shepherd, Green & Hatfield brewery in the Neepsend district, which had been founded as the Neepsend Brewery in 1838. He renamed it the Cannon Brewery after his original premises. In 1880 Stones built two malthouses in Worksop. Stones died in 1894, and he left the brewery to his cashier, James Haynes, and Richard Wigfull, a corn miller, as tenants in common. William Stones became a limited company in 1895 with £275,000 of capital (£ in 2019 adjusted for inflation) and had by this time grown to become one of the largest businesses in Sheffield, with a tied estate of 84 pubs primarily in its home city and Chesterfield. Distribution was extended to Huddersfield in 1896.

Stones acquired the fourteen tied houses of Chambers’ Brunswick Brewery in Sheffield, after that company entered into liquidation in 1910, for £28,200 in 1911. In 1919, The Crown Inn opposite the Cannon Brewery was purchased and rebuilt to serve as the brewery tap. By 1939 the brewery estate had expanded to include Mansfield and Barnsley.

In 1954, William Stones partnered with Tennant Brothers to acquire the Sheffield Free Brewery, closing the brewery and dividing the estate between themselves. In the same year, the company purchased Mappin's Brewery of Rotherham, and the brewery was closed down the following year. The takeover added around 100 public houses to their tied estate, to make a total of 300. As a result, Stones had the second largest tied estate in Sheffield after Tennant's.

In 1959, William Stones paid £100,000 (£ in 2019 adjusted for inflation) for Ward & Sons of Swinton, a family-run local bottler of beer and mineral water. The Ward bottling plant was capable of filling and labelling 8,000 bottles an hour, which was more productive than Stones' existing plant. The acquisition allowed Stones to bottle national beers such as Bass and Guinness for itself, rather than relying on contractors. Also in that year a reciprocal deal was reached with Whitbread, whereby William Stones supplied draught bitter to the 33 houses of the former Scarsdale Brewing Company of Chesterfield, in return for stocking Whitbread's Mackeson Stout in their own tied estate. In 1960, the company was awarded the rights to bottle the Norwegian Ringnes lager brand for the region. All bottling had transferred to Swinton by 1961, allowing Stones to close its own bottling plant, giving it room to redevelop its Sheffield site. In 1962, a deal was reached with United Breweries to sell Carling Black Label lager in Stones tied houses in exchange for supplying Stones products to United's Sheffield area public houses. In 1965 the company was valued at £5 million, rising to £7.2 million by 1967 (£ in 2019 adjusted for inflation) as takeover rumours mounted. In 1966, William Stones launched its first brewery conditioned beer, Stones Imperial.

By 1967 Bass had built up a 14 per cent stake in the company, and in 1968 they purchased William Stones for £9 million (£ in 2019 adjusted for inflation) The friendly takeover was financed by an exchange of stock. The company had a tied estate of 257 public houses and 70 off-licences, located mainly in the south of Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, as well as a substantial free trade business. Bass retained production of the popular Stones Bitter, but largely replaced the remaining 20 per cent of Stones' sales with its own nationally available brands, such as Worthington E, and Stones' cider supplier was switched from H. P. Bulmer to Bass' own Taunton mill. As a Bass subsidiary, William Stones was given a fair amount of autonomy. The takeover also saw the Swinton bottling plant and the brewery's Worksop maltings closed down. In 1970 Bass suggested that the Cannon Brewery might be shut down, but the continuing popularity of Stones Bitter as well as technical and industrial relations problems at the supposed replacement Runcorn plant in Cheshire ensured the brewery's survival. With Bass' national distribution network, Stones Bitter began to be sold across the entire United Kingdom from 1979, and was intended as a mass-produced equivalent to Bass's regional ales.

By 1982 16 per cent of Yorkshire's public houses were tied to Stones. Bass closed the Cannon Brewery in April 1999 with the loss of 57 jobs. Bass blamed the closure on the steep decline in sales of cask conditioned beers (nationally there had been a 14 per cent decline in sales of cask beer over the previous 12 months) which the brewery produced. The brewer realised £1 million in efficiency savings by closing the brewery. The Campaign for Real Ale blamed the brewery's closure on Bass' failure to promote their cask conditioned products. As well as Stones Bitter, the Cannon brewed the small scale Bass Special, Bass Light and Bass Mild brands from the mid-1990s as declining Stones volumes left the brewery with spare capacity. Bass Light and Bass Mild had been sold in the Sheffield area as Stones Mild and Stones Dark Mild respectively.

Bass moved production of Stones to its Burton upon Trent and Tadcaster breweries. In 2000, Bass sold its brewing interests, including their breweries and the Stones brand to the Belgian brewer Interbrew. Interbrew contracted the production of cask conditioned Stones to Marston's in Burton. Competition concerns forced Interbrew to sell off certain brands in December 2001, including Stones Bitter, which was bought by the American Coors Brewing Company (later Molson Coors). Molson Coors currently produce keg Stones Bitter at their brewery in Tadcaster, and the canned version at their Burton brewery. The cask product was initially contract brewed at the Highgate Brewery in Walsall, West Midlands, before moving to Everards of Leicester in 2005. The cask product ceased production in June 2012.

Stones Bitter has suffered a decline in sales since the closure, and a member of the Bass board of directors that took the decision to close the brewery has admitted that, given the subsequent resurgence in golden ales and local provenance in beer, the decision to close the brewery was the wrong one. Retrospectively, he argues that Bass should have backed Stones over Worthington.

William Stones was born in Sheffield on 29 December 1826. His parents were Eliza and Joseph, both cabinet case makers. By 1870 Stones was living in Sheffield's Lowfield area. Stones purchased a "spacious" terraced house in 1883, although he had been renting the property for several years prior to this. Stones died aged 68 on 14 November 1894, having devoted his whole life to brewing. He died as one of the richest men in Sheffield, leaving over £150,000 in his will (£ in 2019 adjusted for inflation). A bachelor, he left his wealth to his sister, friends and various charitable concerns. Stones is said to have earned his success through clever marketing and a consistently good product.

Situated in Neepsend, Shepherd, Green & Hatfield were the first to brew at the site in 1838 at what was then a respectable residential district. By 1895 the brewery was equipped with "an expensive plant...excellent stores and cellars, spacious covered and open yards, offices, stabling [and] workshops." The marketing and sales offices on the brewery site were completed in 1958. A new £500,000 five storey brewhouse was operational by 1962, and was one of the most up to date in the country. An on-site public house was opened in the basement of the brewery in 1964, initially named "The Underground", but later renamed "The Pig and Whistle"; it was used by brewery workers and visitors. At its peak the brewery produced 50,000 hectolitres of cask conditioned "Stones" each year. The office building was sold off in 1985. In 1992 a visitor's centre building was opened. In 1995, the brewery was used as a shooting location for the film "When Saturday Comes". The office building is occupied by an accountancy firm, however the remainder of the site is currently unoccupied and derelict.

Stones Bitter is a bitter beer first brewed in 1948 at the Cannon Brewery. It was designed for the steelworkers of Sheffield's Lower Don Valley. Bass extended its distribution to include the north of England in 1977, before extending distribution nationwide in 1979. Its popularity during the 1970s and 1980s in its heartland saw it described as "more of a religion than a beer." By 1992 Stones was the UK's highest selling bitter, with a million barrels sold annually. That same year the ABV of Stones was reduced from 4.1 per cent to 3.9 per cent ABV, and then to 3.7 per cent in 1999. The cask conditioned Stones was restored to 4.1 per cent ABV in 2006, before being discontinued in 2012. A famous major television campaign ran nationally from 1983 until 1991 with the tagline "(Wherever you may wander) there's no taste like Stones" and starred Tony Barton and Michael Angelis. By 1987 it had become the UK's longest running bitter campaign of all time. Stones also sponsored the Rugby Football League Championship from 1986 to 1995 and its successor the Rugby Super League from 1996–7.

As with many breweries, occasional special brews were commissioned upon commemorative dates and retirement of long-serving employees. In 1991 a special bottled beer was produced when Sheffield Wednesday reached the finals of the Football League Cup. Two thousand bottles of Stones Centenary Ale were produced in 1995, celebrating 100 years of rugby league. This was followed by the 1996 cask conditioned Stones Super League Bitter (4.8 per cent ABV) celebrating Stones' sponsorship of the League, and the 1998 bottled Stones Commemorative Ale which marked the scheduled closure of the brewery. In summer 2007, Everards brewed a one-off cask conditioned Stones Pure Gold (4.1 per cent ABV) golden ale, and in 2011 four cask conditioned sports themed Stones branded ales were made available throughout the first half of the year, brewed at William Worthington's Brewery in Burton upon Trent.



</doc>
<doc id="18848411" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18848411" title="Fly on the Wall (song)">
Fly on the Wall (song)

"Fly on the Wall" is a song recorded by American recording artist Miley Cyrus for her second studio album, "Breakout" (2008). It was released on November 4, 2008 as the third and final single from the album. The song's lyrics have been interpreted in a number of ways, such as a description of an abusive boyfriend. In actuality, Cyrus says the song describes paparazzi and their extensive personal privacy invasions.

The song received critical praise, with several critics claiming it defied teen pop expectations and was "Breakout"'s best track. Despite only reaching number eighty-four on the United States chart "Billboard" Hot 100, "Fly on the Wall" performed better commercially in various European regions. "Fly on the Wall" reached its highest international peak on the UK Singles Chart, at number sixteen. The single's music video was directed by Philip Andelman and premiered on "FNMTV". The "Thriller" inspired video takes place mainly in a parking garage in which Cyrus encounters and attempts to escape the paparazzi. Cyrus promoted the song through several venues, including a performance on her second headlining tour, the Wonder World Tour, that incorporated a short segment of the "Thriller" dance. Cyrus also performed the song in the Gypsy Heart Tour.

The song's lyrics, written by Cyrus, Antonina Armato, Tim James and Devrim Karaoglu, have been mistakenly interpreted in a variety of ways. The song's protagonist sings in first person perspective while condemning an unspecified subject for wanting to invade her privacy. The majority of reviewers thought the protagonist was referring to a "controlling boyfriend". Ben Ratliff of "The New York Times" sided with the boyfriend, and believed the song's protagonist was "bullying some poor boy for the sin of wanting to know what she talks about with her friends." Sarah Rodman of "The Boston Globe" believed the song could have described a number of subjects, such as "a former boyfriend, the media, and even her fans." However, in an interview with Jocelyn Vena of MTV News, Cyrus said the song was about "the media" and "how they think they know everything about [her], when they don't. They want to be a fly on my wall and watch [her] 24/7." Cyrus elaborated on the concept in an interview with Nancy O'Dell of "Access Hollywood". She stated, 

"Fly on the Wall" is a song with strong uses of electric guitars, keyboards and soprano vocals. Influences derive from electronic music and industrial music. It is set in common time with a moderately fast rock tempo of 143 beats per minute. The song is written in the key of G minor. Cyrus' vocals spans two octaves, from G to D. The song has the following chord progression, G5—D—Gm7. The song's chorus has the use of a vocal hook; the hook sings, "fly on the wall".

"Fly on the Wall" received critical acclaim. Heather Phares of Allmusic said the song was a "G-rated version" of Britney Spears' song "Toxic" and provided hints of Cyrus' future musical direction. Sarah Rodman of "The Boston Globe" said "Fly on the Wall" was a change of pace for Cyrus and called it "the album's most interesting tune." Mikael Wood of the "Los Angeles Times" said the song is a result of regular Walt Disney Company standards, yet "the CD's best cut." Along with "Full Circle," Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said the song was a "more worthy" follow-up to "See You Again". Mordechai Shinefield of "The Village Voice" stated the song was "blazingly brilliant" and that it was "the best, angriest song [on "Breakout"]." Johnny Dee of Virgin Media said the song and "7 Things" were "feisty pop belters" that would encourage a long-term career. Ratliff negatively compared "Fly on the Wall" to the Pussycat Dolls and said that although Cyrus' voice is generally rich with a deep range, it became "pinched and stingy" in the single. However, he also said the song was "teen-accurate".

For the week ending August 9, 2008, "Fly on the Wall" charted at number 69 on Hot Digital Songs due to the release of "Breakout", but failed to reach the "Billboard" Hot 100; the following week, the song completely fell from the sales chart. During late 2008, the song reached its peak on several US charts, reaching number 72 in Hot 100 Airplay, and 64 in the Pop 100 and Pop 100 Airplay. For the week ending January 10, 2009, the song debuted and peaked at number 83 in the Hot 100 due to airplay, falling from the chart in the succeeding week. In the Canadian Hot 100, the peaked and debuted at number 73 on the week ending August 9, 2008 due to digital downloads. It then ascended and descended the Canadian Hot 100 before reaching its last week, ending on February 7, 2009.

The song was more successful in European nations. For the week ending January 1, 2009, "Fly on the Wall" debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 90. Throughout January and February 2009, the song moved up, finding new peaks for four consecutive weeks. For the week ending February 28, the song ascended to number sixteen and became Cyrus' second best charting single in the United Kingdom. It then slid several spots down, until its last week on the singles chart at number 86, for the week ending April 4. In the European Hot 100, "Fly on the Wall" peaked at number fifty-seven on the week ending March 7, 2009 and spent a total of five weeks on the chart. For the week ending January 29 in the Irish Singles Chart, the song debuted at number 49. Weeks later, the song reached its peak at number 23 before falling off the chart on March 12. In Austria, the song debuted and peaked on the week ending March 18 at number 57 and fell from the chart after two weeks. It spent seven weeks on the German Singles Chart, where it debuted and peaked at 62.

In an interview with MTV News, director Philip Andelman explained that Cyrus was already determined to poke fun at the paparazzi when she contacted him for a "Fly on the Wall" music video. Andelman did not want to create "something too serious" and worked to give the video a "playful" aspect. Cyrus elaborated on the concept of the music video in an interview with Nancy O'Dell of "Access Hollywood". Cyrus said, 

The video commences with a short segment of dramatic music. It then focuses on Cyrus, wearing a white tank top, jeans, boots and a black leather jacket, and her boyfriend leaving a movie theater and discussing the movie they saw. Suddenly, Cyrus' boyfriend begins to cough as a full moon emerges from behind the clouds. Cyrus is confused, then horrified as she watches him transform into a paparazzi, and runs away from him as he shouts "Miley, come here! I just want a couple of shots!" and tries to snap pictures of her. The music of "Fly on the Wall" begins as Cyrus runs into a parking garage and tries to hide behind a pillar and a black Mercedes-Benz SLR McLaren. As soon as Cyrus tries to move away from the car, a mob of paparazzi begins to chase her with their cameras. Throughout much of the video, Cyrus runs and hides from the mob. Clips interspaced throughout the video feature her in a long silver shirt and jeans singing and dancing in front of the Mercedes. Eventually, Cyrus is cornered by the paparazzi. She is scared, but then surprised and perplexed when the mob unexpectedly begins to dance in a synchronized manner. Her boyfriend, appearing normal, then arrives in the Mercedes to rescue her. Inside the car, Cyrus describes her strange encounter with the paparazzi to him. Unknown to Cyrus, her boyfriend has planted a video camera in the car; the music video concludes with a shot of the website he posts the video on beneath the headline, "Miley Cyrus Bugs at Paparazzi!!!" The music video to "Fly on the Wall" was first seen on December 5, 2008 on MTV's "FNMTV". The video is inspired by Michael Jackson's iconic music video, "Thriller", but trades zombies for paparazzi. MTV also compared the "Fly on the Wall" video for those for "Circus" by Britney Spears and "Rumors" by Lindsay Lohan.

Cyrus first performed the song at the opening ceremony of the 2008 Disney Channel Games on May 4, 2008. The performance had Cyrus in a red coat and was later used a promotional music video on Disney Channel. On May 17, 2008, she performed the song at the 2008 Zootopia. On July 18, 2008 the song was performed in a concert series for "Good Morning America" along with "Breakout," "7 Things" and "Bottom of the Ocean." During the performance, Cyrus wore a plaid shirt, mini-shorts and boots. On August 1, 2008, Cyrus performed "Fly on the Wall" on "FNMTV". On November 21, it was sung at the 2008 American Music Awards. A critic from ABC stated that Cyrus "fearlessly embraced new creative directions" with her performance of "Fly on the Wall." On November 25, Cyrus performed the song on the season finale of "Dancing with the Stars". On New Year's Eve of 2008, Cyrus wore a white T-shirt, pants, boots and a plaid jacket to present "FNMTV"'s New Year's Special with Pete Wentz. She opened the episode by performing the song, paired with "7 Things." On January 19, 2009, the song was performed at the event in celebration of Barack Obama's inauguration. For the event, she had an abundance of background dancers, and Cyrus wore a casual patterned gray T-shirt, black pants, and boots. She also performed the song in London in an Apple Store. The set, with some songs by Cyrus' father, was sold exclusively by the United Kingdom iTunes Store as an extended play titled "iTunes Live from London". On June 7, 2009 at the twentieth annual A Time for Heroes Celebrity Carnival, Cyrus performed "Fly on the Wall".

"Fly on the Wall" was one of the songs on the set list of Cyrus' first international concert tour, the Wonder World Tour. The performance began with two overhead screens displaying a frog catching a fly while two acrobats scaled imaginary walls. Cyrus and her dancers then emerged from a green tractor to begin the song. She wore an extravagant white dress with a feathered back and used elaborate choreography. At one point during the performance, Cyrus unexpectedly flew over the crowd for a few seconds. At the conclusion, Cyrus and her background dancers grouped together to perform a segment of the dance from Michael Jackson's "Thriller" music video. She performed it at the Rock in Rio concert in Lisbon, Portugal on May 29, 2010 and Madrid, Spain on June 4, 2010.

Cyrus performed the song during the Gypsy Heart Tour.



</doc>
<doc id="18889355" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18889355" title="Typhoon Rammasun (2008)">
Typhoon Rammasun (2008)

Typhoon Rammasun, known in the Philippines as Typhoon Butchoy, was recognized as the second typhoon of the 2008 Pacific typhoon season by the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) and the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA). Rammasun was also recognised as the third tropical storm, the second typhoon and the first super typhoon of the 2008 Pacific typhoon season by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC).

Rammasun formed on May 5 as a tropical disturbance. The next day the Joint Typhoon Warning Center issued a tropical cyclone formation alert on the developing disturbance. On May 7 both the JTWC and the Japan Meteorological Agency designated the disturbance as a tropical depression, while PAGASA named the depression Butchoy. Later that day both the JMA and the JTWC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm with the JMA naming the storm Rammasun. On May 9 both the JTWC and the JMA upgraded Rammasun to a typhoon. The next day the JMA and the JTWC reported that Rammasun had reached its peak winds of 195 km/h (120 mph) and 250 km/h (155 mph) respectively, which made Rammasun a Category 4 super typhoon on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. After reaching its peak intensity, Rammasun weakened and was downgraded to severe tropical storm on May 12, before the JTWC declared it extratropical and issued their final advisory. The JMA did not issue their final advisory until several hours later. Within Japan an estimated 10 hectares (24.7 acres) of farmland were damaged. In all, the typhoon killed four people, injured 40 others and caused $9.6 million (2008 USD) worth of damage in both the Philippines and Japan.

On May 4, 2008, an area of low pressure formed in the Pacific Ocean to the southeast of Yap. The next day, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) upgraded the area of low pressure to a tropical disturbance and assessed the disturbances chances of forming into a significant tropical cyclone within 24 hours as poor. This was because the developing low level circulation center was weak. Early on May 6, the JTWC upgraded the disturbances chances of forming into a tropical cyclone within 24 hours to "fair", as the low level circulation center had consolidated further. A Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was then issued later that day, by the JTWC who upgraded the disturbance's chances of becoming a tropical cyclone by the next day as good.

Early the next day both the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) and the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA) designated the tropical disturbance as a tropical depression with PAGASA assigning the local name of Butchoy to the depression. At this time the depression was located 790 km, (490 miles), to the east of Mindanao in the Philippines. Later that morning the JMA started to issue full advisories on the tropical depression as forecasts showed that the depression could become a tropical storm within 24 hours. The JTWC then designated the depression as Tropical Depression 02W. Later that day both the JTWC and the JMA reported that the depression intensified into a tropical storm, with the JMA assigning the name "Rammasun" to the storm.
Rammasun continued to intensify and was designated as a severe tropical storm late on May 8. The next day both the JMA and the JTWC reported that Rammasun had intensified into a typhoon. Later that day the JTWC reported that the typhoon had rapidly intensified within the last six hours and had become a Category 3 typhoon on the Saffir–Simpson hurricane wind scale. At the same time the JMA were reporting that Rammasun had winds of 150 km/h (90 mph). The typhoon then continued to intensify quickly with the JMA reporting that Rammasun had winds of 160 km/h (100 mph), the JTWC then reported that Rammasun had become a Category 4 typhoon with winds of 225 km/h (140 mph).<ref name="JMA Advisory 10-05-2008 00/03z"></ref> Later that day both the JMA and the JTWC reported that the typhoon had reached its peak winds. The JMA reported peak winds of 195 km/h (120 mph) whilst the JTWC reported that Rammasun had peak winds of 250 km/h (155 mph), making it a category 4 super typhoon. Typhoon Rammasun's minimum pressure was officially estimated at 915 hPa which tied with Intense Tropical Cyclone Hondo as second strongest storm of 2008.

The JTWC kept Rammasun as a super typhoon until early on May 11, when they reported that the typhoon had weakened into a category four typhoon, while the JMA were reporting that the typhoon had wind speeds of 175 km/h (110 mph).<ref name="JMA Advisory 11-05-2008 06/09z"></ref> Later that day both agencies reported that the typhoon had weakened even further, with the JMA reporting that Rammasun had winds of 160 km/h (100 mph), while the JTWC reported that Rammasun had weakened into a Category 3 typhoon.<ref name="JMA Advisory 11-05-2008 12/15z"></ref> The JTWC then reported within their next advisory that Rammasun had weakened into a Category 2 typhoon whilst the JMA reported that the typhoon had winds of 140 km/h (90 mph).<ref name="JMA Advisory 11-05-2008 18/21z"></ref> The next day as the Typhoon moved out of PAGASA's area of responsibility Rammasun was downgraded to a Category 1 typhoon by the JTWC. Later that day the JMA downgraded Rammasun to a Severe Tropical Storm whilst the JTWC downgraded it to an extratropical cyclone and released their final advisory on the system. The JMA continued to issue advisories on severe tropical storm Rammasun until early the next day when they downgraded it to an extratropical low.

The name "Rammasun" was one of the 10 original names submitted by Thailand to the ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee for use from January 1, 2000. Rammasun is the Thai god for thunder. The name was last used in the 2002 Pacific typhoon season, though it was retired in 2015 after Typhoon Rammasun (the same name used for the 2014 season, Typhoon Glenda in the Philippines) left considerable damages in the Philippines, China and Vietnam. The Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA) also assigned the local name of "Butchoy" to Rammasun; the name "Butchoy" was last used by PAGASA to name a tropical depression in the Philippines in 2004 to name Tropical Storm 02W.

Within the Philippines, PAGASA issued no public storm warning signals, as the storm was too far away from the country to prompt the issuance of such advisories. However, they did warn that the cyclone was expected to enhance the southwest monsoon and bring rain over Central and Southern Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao.

On May 12, a father of two drowned in rough seas produced by Rammasun after saving his children. Later that day, a boat carrying 17 people capsized due to rough seas produced by the typhoon. All of the passengers were rescued the following day by the Philippine Coast Guard. Heavy rains from the outer bands of Rammasun triggered flooding and mudslides in the Philippines. Strong winds also downed numerous trees, one of which, measured at in diameter, fell on three forest guards, killing two and critically injuring the other. In Jaro, Iloilo City, a swollen river overflowed its banks, inundating the district. Local reports stated that water in the area was waist-deep in places. In Cauayan, a 15-year-old girl drowned after being washed away while crossing a bridge. Flooding in Hinoba-an, Negros Occidental destroyed six homes and damaged 24 others. An estimated 3,153 families were affected by the storm in the Philippines. A strong extratropical storm from the "tail" of the former typhoon struck the Philippines after Rammasun had become extratropical. The associated winds caused severe damage to buildings, and numerous trees were uprooted. The damage may have been due to a possible tornado, although this possibility is not confirmed. At least 40 people were injured and damage totaled to PHP 61 million ($1.2 million USD).

On May 12, the Japan Meteorological Agency issued warnings for the Tokyo area as Rammasun was forecast to make landfall near the city. As Rammasun became extratropical, the storm brushed the Japanese coastline on May 13, producing winds gusting up to 85 km/h (50 mph) and high waves for several hours. An estimated 10 hectares (24.7 acres) of farmland were damaged. Damage from the storm amounted to ¥770 million ($8.4 million 2008 USD) in agricultural losses.




</doc>
<doc id="18934072" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18934072" title="Lactarius blennius">
Lactarius blennius

Lactarius blennius (commonly known as the Slimy Milkcap or Beech Milkcap) is a medium-sized mushroom of the genus "Lactarius" found commonly in beech forests in Europe, where it is mycorrhizal, favouring the European Beech (though associations with other trees are known). It was first described by Elias Magnus Fries. Though its colour and size vary, it is distinctive because it is slimy when wet and exudes copious amounts of milk. It has been the subject of some chemical research, and it can be used to produce pigments and blennins. Blennins, some of which have shown potential medical application, are derived from lactarane, a chemical so named because of their association with "Lactarius". The edibility of "L. blennius" is uncertain, with different mycologists suggesting that it is edible (though not recommended), inedible or even poisonous.

"Lactarius blennius" was first described by Swedish mycologist Elias Magnus Fries as "Agaricus blennius" in 1815, before being given its current binomial name by the same author in 1838. Within the genus "Lactarius", it is closely related to "Lactarius cinereus", another "Lactarius" species that also favours beech. It has been suggested that the two species (forming a group) could have a coevolutionary pathway with beech. The specific epithet is derived from a Latin adjective "blennius", meaning "slimy". "Lactarius" mushrooms are commonly known as milkcaps, and "L. blennius" is known as the Slimy Milkcap or the Beech Milkcap.

"Lactarius blennius" is synonymous with "Agaricus blennius" (the name under which Fries first described the species in 1815) and "Agaricus viridis", a name given earlier by Heinrich Schrader, in 1794. "Galorrheus blennius" (a name proposed in 1871 by Paul Kummer), "Lactarius viridis" (proposed in 1888 by Lucien Quélet) and "Lactifluus blennius" (proposed by Otto Kuntze in 1891) are also now recognised as synonyms. "Lactarius albidopallens" was originally described as a form of "L. blennius" as "Lactarius blennius" f. "albidopallens" by Jakob Emanuel Lange in 1928, before being classified as a separate species by J. Blum. Lange also described "Lactarius blennius" f. "virescens", which is now recognised as nomen invalidum (an invalid name). "Lactarius fluens" is another species that has been included in "L. blennius"; originally described in 1899 by Jean Louis Émile Boudier, in 1999, German Joseph Krieglsteiner suggested that it is actually a variety of "L. blennius", naming it "Lactarius blennius var. fluens". The situation with "Lactarius viridis" is similar; first described as a separate species by Quélet in 1888, A. Marchand proposed that it is in fact a variety of "L. blennius", naming it "Lactarius blennius var. viridis".

"Lactarius blennius" has a flattened convex cap that is 4–10 cm (1.6–4 in) across that later becomes depressed in the centre. In colour, it is pale olive to a greenish grey, sometimes a dull green or pale grey-sepia, and has blotches of darker colouration in concentric bands, though the colour can vary greatly. Heavily spotted specimens are also known, and a very brown specimen similar to "Lactarius circellatus" was recorded in Scotland. The cap is very slimy when moist and has a margin that is curved inwards. The stem is a paler colour than the cap, but also very slimy, and measures from 4–5 cm (1.6–2 in) tall by 1–1.7 cm (0.4–0.7 in) thick, tapering a little towards the bottom. The flesh is whitish, similar in colour to the gills, which later become a creamy or pale buff colour. The gills turn a brownish-grey colour when wounded, and are crowded. In shape, they are slightly decurrent or adnate, meaning that they run a small way down the stem in attachment, or that they are attached to the stem by the whole depth of the gills. The milk is white and dries grey, and is very plentiful. "L. blennius" spores leave a creamy print, and are elliptic with low warts joined by ridges with a small number of cross-connections, measuring from 6–9 by 5.5–7 µm.

"Lactarius blennius" is very common and is found in broad-leaved woodland, favouring beech; it is most associated with "Fagus sylvatica", the European Beech, though it has also been observed growing in association with species of oak. It forms an ectomycorrhizal association with trees, and can grow on a wide variety of subsoil types, but is more typical of acidic soil. It is found between late summer and late autumn, and is native to Europe. The distribution of the mushroom coincides with the distribution of beech. In the British Isles, the species is one of the one hundred most common mushrooms. Other areas in which it has been recorded include Sweden, France, Italy, and Poland.

Mycologist Roger Phillips claims that "L. blennius" is edible when cooked, but not recommended, while others describe it as inedible or even poisonous. The milk tastes very hot and acrid.

"L. blennius" has been the subject of some research in chemistry. Lactarane derivatives (known as "blennins") have been acquired from the mushroom, including the lactone blennin D, and blennin A, which was first isolated from this species. Lactaranes are chemicals so named because of their occurrence in "Lactarius" species. Blennins have been shown to be potentially useful- blennin A, for instance (a lactarane-type sesquiterpene) has been shown to be an anti-inflammatory, having a strong inhibitative affect against leukotriene C biosynthesis. "L. blennius" can also be refined to create a green pigment, known as blennione.




</doc>
<doc id="18938156" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18938156" title="J. D. Salinger">
J. D. Salinger

Jerome David Salinger (; January 1, 1919 January 27, 2010) was an American writer known for his widely read novel, "The Catcher in the Rye". Following his early success publishing short stories and "The Catcher in the Rye", Salinger led a very private life for more than a half-century. He published his final work in 1965, and gave his last interview in 1980.

Salinger was raised in Manhattan and began writing short stories while in secondary school. Several were published in "Story" magazine in the early 1940s before he began serving in World War II. In 1948, his critically acclaimed story "A Perfect Day for Bananafish" appeared in "The New Yorker" magazine, which became home to much of his later work. "The Catcher in the Rye" was published in 1951 and became an immediate popular success. His depiction of adolescent alienation and loss of innocence in the protagonist Holden Caulfield was influential, especially among adolescent readers. The novel remains widely read and controversial, selling around 250,000 copies a year.

The success of "The Catcher in the Rye" led to public attention and scrutiny. Salinger became reclusive, publishing new work less frequently. He followed "Catcher" with a short story collection, "Nine Stories" (1953); a volume containing a novella and a short story, "Franny and Zooey" (1961); and a volume containing two novellas, "Raise High the Roof Beam, Carpenters" and "" (1963). His last published work, a novella entitled "Hapworth 16, 1924", appeared in "The New Yorker" on June 19, 1965. Afterward, Salinger struggled with unwanted attention, including a legal battle in the 1980s with biographer Ian Hamilton and the release in the late 1990s of memoirs written by two people close to him: Joyce Maynard, an ex-lover; and Margaret Salinger, his daughter. In 1996, a small publisher announced a deal with Salinger to publish "Hapworth 16, 1924" in book form, but amid the ensuing publicity the release was indefinitely delayed. He made headlines around the globe in June 2009 when he filed a lawsuit against another writer for copyright infringement resulting from that writer's use of one of the characters from "The Catcher in the Rye".

Salinger died of natural causes on January 27, 2010, at his home in Cornish, New Hampshire. In November 2013, three unpublished stories by Salinger were briefly posted online. One of the stories, "The Ocean Full of Bowling Balls", is said to be a prequel to "The Catcher in the Rye".

Jerome David Salinger was born in Manhattan, New York on January 1, 1919. His father, Sol Salinger, sold kosher cheese, and was from a Jewish family of Lithuanian descent, his own father having been the rabbi for the Adath Jeshurun Congregation in Louisville, Kentucky. Salinger's mother, Marie ("née" Jillich), was born in Atlantic, Iowa, of German, Irish, and Scottish descent, but changed her name to Miriam and considered herself Jewish after marrying Salinger's father. Salinger did not learn that his mother was not of Jewish ancestry until just after he celebrated his bar mitzvah. He had only one sibling, an older sister, Doris (1912–2001).

In his youth, Salinger attended public schools on the West Side of Manhattan. Then in 1932, the family moved to Park Avenue, and Salinger was enrolled at the McBurney School, a nearby private school. Salinger had trouble fitting in at his new school and took measures to conform, such as calling himself Jerry. His family called him Sonny. At McBurney, he managed the fencing team, wrote for the school newspaper and appeared in plays. He "showed an innate talent for drama", though his father opposed the idea of his becoming an actor. His parents then enrolled him at Valley Forge Military Academy in Wayne, Pennsylvania. Salinger began writing stories "under the covers [at night], with the aid of a flashlight". Salinger was the literary editor of the class yearbook, "Crossed Sabres". He also participated in the Glee Club, Aviation Club, French Club, and the Non-Commissioned Officers Club.

Salinger's Valley Forge 201 file reveals that he was a "mediocre" student, and unlike the overachievement enjoyed by members of the Glass family about whom he wrote, his recorded IQ between 111 and 115 was slightly above average. He graduated in 1936. Salinger started his freshman year at New York University in 1936. He considered studying special education but dropped out the following spring. That fall, his father urged him to learn about the meat-importing business, and he went to work at a company in the Austrian city of Vienna and the Polish city of Bydgoszcz. Surprisingly, Salinger went willingly, but he was so disgusted by the slaughterhouses that he firmly decided to embark on a different career path. His disgust for the meat business and his rejection of his father probably had a lot to do with his vegetarianism as an adult. He left Austria one month before it was annexed by Nazi Germany on March 12, 1938.

In the fall of 1938, Salinger attended Ursinus College in Collegeville, Pennsylvania, and wrote a column called "skipped diploma", which included movie reviews. He dropped out after one semester. In 1939, Salinger attended the Columbia University School of General Studies, where he took a writing class taught by Whit Burnett, longtime editor of "Story" magazine. According to Burnett, Salinger did not distinguish himself until a few weeks before the end of the second semester, at which point "he suddenly came to life" and completed three stories. Burnett told Salinger that his stories were skillful and accomplished, accepting "The Young Folks", a vignette about several aimless youths, for publication in "Story". Salinger's debut short story was published in the magazine's March–April 1940 issue. Burnett became Salinger's mentor, and they corresponded for several years.

In 1942, Salinger started dating Oona O'Neill, daughter of the playwright Eugene O'Neill. Despite finding her immeasurably self-absorbed (he confided to a friend that "Little Oona's hopelessly in love with little Oona"), he called her often and wrote her long letters. Their relationship ended when Oona began seeing Charlie Chaplin, whom she eventually married. In late 1941, Salinger briefly worked on a Caribbean cruise ship, serving as an activity director and possibly as a performer.

The same year, Salinger began submitting short stories to "The New Yorker". Seven of Salinger's stories were rejected by the magazine that year, including "Lunch for Three", "Monologue for a Watery Highball", and "I Went to School with Adolf Hitler". In December 1941, however, the publication accepted "Slight Rebellion off Madison", a Manhattan-set story about a disaffected teenager named Holden Caulfield with "pre-war jitters". When Japan carried out the attack on Pearl Harbor that month, the story was rendered "unpublishable." Salinger was devastated. Later, in Raise High the Roof Beam, Carpenters, he wrote, "I think I'll hate 1942 till I die, just on general principles." The story did not appear in "The New Yorker" until 1946. In the spring of 1942, several months after the United States entered World War II, Salinger was drafted into the army, wherein he saw combat with the 12th Infantry Regiment, 4th Infantry Division. He was present at Utah Beach on D-Day, in the Battle of the Bulge, and the Battle of Hürtgen Forest.

During the campaign from Normandy into Germany, Salinger arranged to meet with Ernest Hemingway, a writer who had influenced him and was then working as a war correspondent in Paris. Salinger was impressed with Hemingway's friendliness and modesty, finding him more "soft" than his gruff public persona. Hemingway was impressed by Salinger's writing and remarked: "Jesus, he has a helluva talent." The two writers began corresponding; Salinger wrote Hemingway in July 1946 that their talks were among his few positive memories of the war. Salinger added that he was working on a play about Holden Caulfield, the protagonist of his story "Slight Rebellion off Madison", and hoped to play the part himself.

Salinger was assigned to a counter-intelligence unit, for which he used his proficiency in French and German to interrogate prisoners of war. In April 1945 he entered Kaufering IV concentration camp, a subcamp of Dachau. Salinger earned the rank of Staff Sergeant and served in five campaigns. Salinger's experiences in the war affected him emotionally. He was hospitalized for a few weeks for combat stress reaction after Germany was defeated, and he later told his daughter: "You never really get the smell of burning flesh out of your nose entirely, no matter how long you live." Both of his biographers speculate that Salinger drew upon his wartime experiences in several stories, such as "For Esmé—with Love and Squalor", which is narrated by a traumatized soldier. Salinger continued to write while serving in the army, publishing several stories in slick magazines such as "Collier's" and "The Saturday Evening Post". He also continued to submit stories to "The New Yorker", but with little success; it rejected all of his submissions from 1944 to 1946, a group of 15 poems in 1945 alone.

After Germany's defeat, Salinger signed up for a six-month period of "Denazification" duty in Germany for the Counterintelligence Corps. He lived in Weissenburg and, soon after, married Sylvia Welter. He brought her to the United States in April 1946, but the marriage fell apart after eight months and Sylvia returned to Germany. In 1972, Salinger's daughter Margaret was with him when he received a letter from Sylvia. He looked at the envelope, and, without reading it, tore it apart. It was the first time he had heard from her since the breakup, but as Margaret put it, "when he was finished with a person, he was through with them."

In 1946, Whit Burnett agreed to help Salinger publish a collection of his short stories through "Story" Press's Lippincott Imprint. Titled "The Young Folks", the collection was to consist of twenty stories—ten, like the title story and "Slight Rebellion off Madison", were already in print; ten were previously unpublished. Though Burnett implied the book would be published and even negotiated Salinger a $1,000 advance on its sale, Lippincott overruled Burnett and rejected the book. Salinger blamed Burnett for the book's failure to see print, and the two became estranged.

By the late 1940s, Salinger had become an avid follower of Zen Buddhism, to the point that he "gave reading lists on the subject to his dates" and arranged a meeting with Buddhist scholar D. T. Suzuki.

In 1947, the author submitted a short story titled simply "The Bananafish" to "The New Yorker". William Maxwell, the magazine's fiction editor, was impressed enough with "the singular quality of the story" that the magazine asked Salinger to continue revising it. He spent a year reworking it with "New Yorker" editors and the magazine accepted the story, now titled "A Perfect Day for Bananafish", and published it in the January 31, 1948 issue. The magazine thereon offered Salinger a "first-look" contract that allowed them right of first refusal on any future stories. The critical acclaim accorded "Bananafish", coupled with problems Salinger had with stories being altered by the "slicks", led him to publish almost exclusively in "The New Yorker". "Bananafish" was also the first of Salinger's published stories to feature the Glasses, a fictional family consisting of two retired vaudeville performers and their seven precocious children: Seymour, Buddy, Boo Boo, Walt, Waker, Zooey, and Franny. Salinger eventually published seven stories about the Glasses, developing a detailed family history and focusing particularly on Seymour, the brilliant but troubled eldest child.

In the early 1940s, Salinger had confided in a letter to Whit Burnett that he was eager to sell the film rights to some of his stories in order to achieve financial security. According to Ian Hamilton, Salinger was disappointed when "rumblings from Hollywood" over his 1943 short story "The Varioni Brothers" came to nothing. Therefore, he immediately agreed when, in mid-1948, independent film producer Samuel Goldwyn offered to buy the film rights to his short story "Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut". Though Salinger sold his story with the hope—in the words of his agent Dorothy Olding—that it "would make a good movie", the film version of "Wiggily" was lambasted by critics upon its release in 1949. Renamed "My Foolish Heart" and starring Dana Andrews and Susan Hayward, the melodramatic film departed to such an extent from Salinger's story that Goldwyn biographer A. Scott Berg referred to it as a "bastardization". As a result of this experience, Salinger never again permitted film adaptations to be made from his work. When Brigitte Bardot wanted to buy the rights to "A Perfect Day for Bananafish", Salinger refused the request, but told his friend, Lillian Ross, longtime staff writer for "The New Yorker", "She's a cute, talented, lost "enfante", and I'm tempted to accommodate her, "pour le sport"."

In the 1940s, Salinger confided to several people that he was working on a novel featuring Holden Caulfield, the teenage protagonist of his short story "Slight Rebellion off Madison", and "The Catcher in the Rye" was published on July 16, 1951, by Little, Brown and Company. The novel's plot is simple, detailing 16-year-old Holden's experiences in New York City following his expulsion and departure from an elite college preparatory school. Not only was he expelled from his current school, he had also been expelled from three previous schools. The book is more notable for the persona and testimonial voice of its first-person narrator, Holden. He serves as an insightful but unreliable narrator who expounds on the importance of loyalty, the "phoniness" of adulthood, and his own duplicity. In a 1953 interview with a high school newspaper, Salinger admitted that the novel was "sort of" autobiographical, explaining, "My boyhood was very much the same as that of the boy in the book ... [I]t was a great relief telling people about it."

Initial reactions to the book were mixed, ranging from "The New York Times" hailing "Catcher" as "an unusually brilliant first novel" to denigrations of the book's monotonous language and the "immorality and perversion" of Holden, who uses religious slurs and freely discusses casual sex and prostitution. The novel was a popular success; within two months of its publication, "The Catcher in the Rye" had been reprinted eight times. It spent 30 weeks on the "New York Times" Bestseller list.

The book's initial success was followed by a brief lull in popularity, but by the late 1950s, according to Ian Hamilton, it had "become the book all brooding adolescents had to buy, the indispensable manual from which cool styles of disaffectation could be borrowed." It has been compared to Mark Twain's "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn". Newspapers began publishing articles about the "Catcher Cult", and the novel was banned in several countries—as well as some U.S. schools—because of its subject matter and what "Catholic World" reviewer Riley Hughes called an "excessive use of amateur swearing and coarse language". According to one angry parent's tabulation, 237 instances of "goddamn," 58 uses of "bastard", 31 "Chrissakes," and one incident of flatulence constituted what was wrong with Salinger's book.

In the 1970s, several U.S. high school teachers who assigned the book were fired or forced to resign. A 1979 study of censorship noted that "The Catcher in the Rye" "had the dubious distinction of being at once the most frequently censored book across the nation and the second-most frequently taught novel in public high schools" (after John Steinbeck's "Of Mice and Men"). The book remains widely read; in 2004, the novel was selling about 250,000 copies per year, "with total worldwide sales over 10 million copies".

In the wake of its 1950s success, Salinger received (and rejected) numerous offers to adapt "The Catcher in the Rye" for the screen, including one from Samuel Goldwyn. Since its publication, there has been sustained interest in the novel among filmmakers, with Billy Wilder, Harvey Weinstein, and Steven Spielberg among those seeking to secure the rights. Salinger stated in the 1970s that "Jerry Lewis tried for years to get his hands on the part of Holden." Salinger repeatedly refused, though, and in 1999, Joyce Maynard definitively concluded: "The only person who might ever have played Holden Caulfield would have been J. D. Salinger."

In a July 1951 profile in "Book of the Month Club News", Salinger's friend and "New Yorker" editor William Maxwell asked Salinger about his literary influences. Salinger responded: "A writer, when he's asked to discuss his craft, ought to get up and call out in a loud voice just the names of the writers he loves. I love Kafka, Flaubert, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Dostoevsky, Proust, O'Casey, Rilke, Lorca, Keats, Rimbaud, Burns, E. Brontë, Jane Austen, Henry James, Blake, Coleridge. I won't name any living writers. I don't think it's right" (although O'Casey was in fact living at the time). In letters written in the 1940s, Salinger had expressed his admiration of three living, or recently deceased, writers: Sherwood Anderson, Ring Lardner, and F. Scott Fitzgerald; Ian Hamilton wrote that Salinger even saw himself for some time as "Fitzgerald's successor". Salinger's "A Perfect Day for Bananafish" has an ending similar to that of Fitzgerald's earlier published short story "May Day".

Salinger wrote friends of a momentous change in his life in 1952, after several years of practicing Zen Buddhism, while reading "The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna" about Hindu religious teacher Sri Ramakrishna. He became an adherent of Ramakrishna's Advaita Vedanta Hinduism, which advocated celibacy for those seeking enlightenment, and detachment from human responsibilities such as family. Salinger's religious studies were reflected in some of his writing. The story "Teddy" features a ten-year-old child who expresses Vedantic insights. He also studied the writings of Ramakrishna's disciple Vivekananda; in the story "Hapworth 16, 1924", the character of Seymour Glass describes him as "one of the most exciting, original and best-equipped giants of this century."

In 1953, Salinger published a collection of seven stories from "The New Yorker" ("Bananafish" among them), as well as two that the magazine had rejected. The collection was published as "Nine Stories" in the United States, and "For Esmé—with Love and Squalor" in the UK, after one of Salinger's best-known stories. The book received grudgingly positive reviews, and was a financial success—"remarkably so for a volume of short stories", according to Hamilton. "Nine Stories" spent three months on the "New York Times" Bestseller list. Already tightening his grip on publicity, though, Salinger refused to allow publishers of the collection to depict his characters in dust jacket illustrations, lest readers form preconceived notions of them.

As the notoriety of "The Catcher in the Rye" grew, Salinger gradually withdrew from public view. In 1953, he moved from an apartment at
300 East 57th Street, New York, to Cornish, New Hampshire. Early in his time at Cornish he was relatively sociable, particularly with students at Windsor High School. Salinger invited them to his house frequently to play records and talk about problems at school. One such student, Shirley Blaney, persuaded Salinger to be interviewed for the high school page of "The Daily Eagle", the city paper. Nonetheless, after Blaney's interview appeared prominently in the newspaper's editorial section, Salinger cut off all contact with the high schoolers without explanation. He was also seen less frequently around town, meeting only one close friend—jurist Learned Hand—with any regularity. He also began to publish with less frequency. After the 1953 publication of "Nine Stories", he published only four stories through the rest of the decade; two in 1955 and one each in 1957 and 1959.

In February 1955, at the age of 36, Salinger married Claire Douglas, a Radcliffe student (her father was the art critic Robert Langton Douglas). They had two children, Margaret (also known as Peggy - born December 10, 1955) and Matthew (born February 13, 1960). Margaret Salinger wrote in her memoir "Dream Catcher" that she believes her parents would not have married, nor would she have been born, had her father not read the teachings of Lahiri Mahasaya, a guru of Paramahansa Yogananda, which brought the possibility of enlightenment to those following the path of the "householder" (a married person with children). After their marriage, Salinger and Claire were initiated into the path of Kriya yoga in a small store-front Hindu temple in Washington, D.C., during the summer of 1955. They received a mantra and breathing exercises to practice for ten minutes twice a day.

Salinger also insisted that Claire drop out of school and live with him, only four months shy of graduation, which she did. Certain elements of the story "Franny", published in January 1955, are based on his relationship with Claire, including her ownership of the book "The Way of the Pilgrim". Because of their isolated location and Salinger's proclivities, they hardly saw other people for long stretches of time. Claire was also frustrated by Salinger's ever-changing religious beliefs. Though she committed herself to Kriya yoga, she remembered that Salinger would chronically leave Cornish to work on a story "for several weeks only to return with the piece he was supposed to be finishing all undone or destroyed and some new 'ism' we had to follow." Claire believed "it was to cover the fact that Jerry had just destroyed or junked or couldn't face the quality of, or couldn't face publishing, what he had created."

After abandoning Kriya yoga, Salinger tried Dianetics (the forerunner of Scientology), even meeting its founder L. Ron Hubbard, but according to Claire he was quickly disenchanted with it. This was followed by an adherence to a number of spiritual, medical, and nutritional belief systems including an interest in Christian Science, Edgar Cayce, homeopathy, acupuncture, and macrobiotics.

Salinger's family life was further marked by discord after the first child was born; according to Margaret's book, Claire felt that her daughter had replaced her in Salinger's affections. The infant Margaret was sick much of the time, but Salinger, having embraced the tenets of Christian Science, refused to take her to a doctor. According to Margaret, her mother admitted to her years later that she went "over the edge" in the winter of 1957 and had made plans to murder her and then commit suicide. Claire had supposedly intended to do it during a trip to New York City with Salinger, but she instead acted on a sudden impulse to take Margaret from the hotel and run away. After a few months, Salinger persuaded her to return to Cornish.

Salinger was romantically involved with television actress Elaine Joyce for several years in the 1980s. The relationship ended when he met Colleen O'Neill (b. June 11, 1959), a nurse and quiltmaker, whom he married around 1988. O'Neill, forty years his junior, once told Margaret Salinger that she and Salinger were trying to have a child.

Salinger published "Franny and Zooey" in 1961, and "" in 1963. Each book contained two short stories or novellas, previously published in "The New Yorker", about members of the Glass family. These four stories were originally published between 1955 and 1959, and were the only ones Salinger had published since "Nine Stories". On the dust jacket of "Franny and Zooey", Salinger wrote, in reference to his interest in privacy: "It is my rather subversive opinion that a writer's feelings of anonymity-obscurity are the second most valuable property on loan to him during his working years."

On September 15, 1961, "Time" magazine devoted its cover to Salinger. In an article that profiled his "life of recluse", the magazine reported that the Glass family series "is nowhere near completion ... Salinger intends to write a Glass trilogy." Nonetheless, Salinger published only one other story after that: "Hapworth 16, 1924", a novella in the form of a long letter from seven-year-old Seymour Glass while at summer camp. His first new work in six years, the novella took up most of the June 19, 1965, issue of "The New Yorker", and was universally panned by critics. Around this time, Salinger had isolated Claire from friends and relatives and made her—in the words of Margaret Salinger—"a virtual prisoner". Claire separated from him in September 1966; their divorce was finalized on October 3, 1967.

In 1972, at the age of 53, Salinger had a relationship with 18-year-old Joyce Maynard that lasted for nine months. Maynard, at this time, was already an experienced writer for "Seventeen" magazine. "The New York Times" had asked Maynard to write an article for them which, when published as "An Eighteen-Year-Old Looks Back On Life" on April 23, 1972, made her a celebrity. Salinger wrote a letter to her warning about living with fame. After exchanging 25 letters, Maynard moved in with Salinger the summer after her freshman year at Yale University. Maynard did not return to Yale that fall, and spent ten months as a guest in Salinger's Cornish home. The relationship ended, he told his daughter Margaret at a family outing, because Maynard wanted children, and he felt he was too old. Nevertheless, in her own autobiography, Maynard paints a different picture, saying Salinger abruptly ended the relationship and refused to take her back. She had dropped out of Yale to be with him, even forgoing a scholarship. Maynard later writes in her own memoir how she came to find out that Salinger had begun relationships with young women by exchanging letters. One of those letter recipients included Salinger's last wife, a nurse who was already engaged to be married to someone else when she met the author.

While he was living with Maynard, Salinger continued to write in a disciplined fashion, a few hours every morning. According to Maynard, by 1972 he had completed two new novels. In a rare 1974 interview with "The New York Times", he explained: "There is a marvelous peace in not publishing ... I like to write. I love to write. But I write just for myself and my own pleasure." According to Maynard, he saw publication as "a damned interruption". In her memoir, Margaret Salinger describes the detailed filing system her father had for his unpublished manuscripts: "A red mark meant, if I die before I finish my work, publish this 'as is,' blue meant publish but edit first, and so on." A neighbor said that Salinger told him that he had written 15 unpublished novels.

Salinger's final interview was in June 1980 with Betty Eppes of "The Baton Rouge Advocate", which has been represented somewhat differently, depending on the secondary source. By one account, Eppes was an attractive young woman who misrepresented herself as an aspiring novelist, and managed to record audio of the interview as well as take several photographs of Salinger, both without his knowledge or consent. In a separate account, emphasis is placed on her contact by letter writing from the local Post Office, and Salinger's personal initiative to cross the bridge to meet with the woman, who in the course of the interview made clear she was a reporter (and who did indeed, at the close, take pictures of Salinger as he departed). According to the first account, the interview ended "disastrously" when a local passer-by from Cornish attempted to shake the famous author's hand, at which point Salinger became enraged. A further account of the interview published later in "The Paris Review", purportedly by Eppes as author, has been disowned by Eppes and separately ascribed as a derived work of Review Editor George Plimpton.

Although Salinger tried to escape public exposure as much as possible, he continued to struggle with unwanted attention from both the media and the public. Readers of his work and students from nearby Dartmouth College often came to Cornish in groups, hoping to catch a glimpse of him. In May 1986 Salinger learned that the British writer Ian Hamilton intended to publish a biography that made extensive use of letters Salinger had written to other authors and friends. Salinger sued to stop the book's publication. The court in "Salinger v. Random House" ruled that Hamilton's extensive use of the letters, including quotation and paraphrasing, was not acceptable since the author's right to control publication overrode the right of fair use.
The book was not published.
Later, Hamilton published "In Search of J.D. Salinger: A Writing Life (1935–65)", but this book was more about his experience in tracking down information and the copyright fights over the planned biography than about Salinger himself.

An unintended consequence of the lawsuit was that many details of Salinger's private life, including that he had spent the last twenty years writing, in his words, "Just a work of fiction ... That's all", became public in the form of court transcripts. Excerpts from his letters were also widely disseminated, most notably a bitter remark written in response to Oona O'Neill's marriage to Charlie Chaplin:

In 1995, Iranian director Dariush Mehrjui released the film "Pari", an unauthorized and loose adaptation of Salinger's "Franny and Zooey". Though the film could be distributed legally in Iran since the country has no official copyright relations with the United States, Salinger had his lawyers block a planned screening of the film at the Lincoln Center in 1998. Mehrjui called Salinger's action "bewildering", explaining that he saw his film as "a kind of cultural exchange".

In 1996, Salinger gave a small publisher, Orchises Press, permission to publish "Hapworth 16, 1924", the previously uncollected novella. It was to be published that year, and listings for it appeared at Amazon.com and other book-sellers. After a flurry of articles and critical reviews of the story appeared in the press, the publication date was pushed back repeatedly before apparently being cancelled altogether. Amazon anticipated that Orchises would publish the story in January 2009, but at the time of his death it was still listed as "currently unavailable".

In June 2009, Salinger consulted lawyers about the upcoming publication in the U.S. of an unauthorized sequel to "The Catcher in the Rye" written by Swedish book publisher Fredrik Colting under the pseudonym 'J. D. California'. California's book is called "", and appears to pick up the story of Salinger's protagonist Holden Caulfield. In Salinger's novel, Caulfield is 16 years old, wandering the streets of New York after being expelled from his private school; the California book features a 76-year-old man, "Mr. C", musing on having escaped his nursing home. Salinger's New York literary agent Phyllis Westberg told Britain's "Sunday Telegraph": "The matter has been turned over to a lawyer". The fact that little was known about Colting and the book was set to be published by a new publishing imprint called 'Windupbird Publishing' gave rise to speculation in literary circles that the whole thing might be a stunt. District court judge Deborah A. Batts issued an injunction which prevents the book from being published within the U.S. The book's author filed an appeal on July 23, 2009; it was heard in the Second Circuit Court of Appeals on September 3, 2009. The case was settled in 2011 when Colting agreed not to publish or otherwise distribute the book, e-book, or any other editions of "60 Years Later" in the U.S. or Canada until "The Catcher in the Rye" enters the public domain, while also refraining from using the title "Coming through the Rye", dedicating the book to Salinger or referring to the title "The Catcher in the Rye", while Colting remains free to sell the book in other international territories without fear of interference.

On October 23, 1992, "The New York Times" reported, "Not even a fire that consumed at least half his home on Tuesday could smoke out the reclusive J. D. Salinger, author of the classic novel of adolescent rebellion, "The Catcher in the Rye". Mr. Salinger is almost equally famous for having elevated privacy to an art form." 

In 1999, 25 years after the end of their relationship, Joyce Maynard auctioned a series of letters Salinger had written her. Maynard's memoir of her life and her relationship with Salinger, "At Home in the World: A Memoir", was published the same year. Among other topics, the book described how Maynard's mother had consulted with her on how to appeal to the aging author: by dressing in a childlike manner, and described Joyce's relationship with him at length. In the ensuing controversy over both the memoir and the letters, Maynard claimed that she was forced to auction the letters for financial reasons; she would have preferred to donate them to the Beinecke Library at Yale. Software developer Peter Norton bought the letters for US$156,500 and announced his intention to return them to Salinger.
A year later, Salinger's daughter Margaret, by his second wife Claire Douglas, published "Dream Catcher: A Memoir". In her book, she described the harrowing control that Salinger had over her mother and dispelled many of the Salinger myths established by Ian Hamilton's book. One of Hamilton's arguments was that Salinger's experience with post-traumatic stress disorder left him psychologically scarred, and that he was unable to deal with the traumatic nature of his war service. Margaret Salinger allowed that "the few men who lived through Bloody Mortain, a battle in which her father fought, were left with much to sicken them, body and soul", but she also painted a picture of her father as a man immensely proud of his service record, maintaining his military haircut and service jacket, and moving about his compound (and town) in an old Jeep.

Both Margaret Salinger and Maynard characterized the author as a devoted film buff. According to Margaret, his favorite movies included "Gigi" (1958), "The Lady Vanishes" (1938), "The 39 Steps" (1935; Phoebe's favorite movie in "The Catcher in the Rye"), and the comedies of W.C. Fields, Laurel and Hardy, and the Marx Brothers. Predating VCRs, Salinger had an extensive collection of classic movies from the 1940s in 16 mm prints. Maynard wrote that "he loves movies, not films", and Margaret Salinger argued that her father's "worldview is, essentially, a product of the movies of his day. To my father, all Spanish speakers are Puerto Rican washerwomen, or the toothless, grinning-gypsy types in a Marx Brothers movie". Lillian Ross, a staff writer for "The New Yorker" and longtime friend of Salinger's, wrote following his death, "Salinger loved movies, and he was more fun than anyone to discuss them with. He enjoyed watching actors work, and he enjoyed knowing them. (He loved Anne Bancroft, hated Audrey Hepburn, and said that he had seen "Grand Illusion" ten times.)"

Margaret also offered many insights into other Salinger myths, including her father's supposed long-time interest in macrobiotics, and involvement with "alternative medicine" and Eastern philosophies. A few weeks after "Dream Catcher" was published, Margaret's brother Matt discredited the memoir in a letter to "The New York Observer". He disparaged his sister's "gothic tales of our supposed childhood" and stated: "I can't say with any authority that she is consciously making anything up. I just know that I grew up in a very different house, with two very different parents from those my sister describes."

Salinger died of natural causes at his home in New Hampshire on January 27, 2010. He was 91. Salinger's literary representative told "The New York Times" that the writer had broken his hip in May 2009, but that "his health had been excellent until a rather sudden decline after the new year." The representative believed that Salinger's death was not a painful one. His third wife and widow, Colleen O'Neill Zakrzeski Salinger, and Salinger's son Matt became the executors of his estate.

Salinger continued to write throughout his life, although he did not publish any later works. His widow, Colleen O’Neill, and son Matt Salinger prepared this work for publication after his death, announcing in 2019 that "all of what he wrote will at some point be shared", but that it was a big job and not yet ready.

In a contributor's note Salinger gave to "Harper's Magazine" in 1946, he wrote: "I almost always write about very young people", a statement that has been referred to as his credo. Adolescents are featured or appear in all of Salinger's work, from his first published short story, "The Young Folks" (1940), to "The Catcher in the Rye" and his Glass family stories. In 1961, the critic Alfred Kazin explained that Salinger's choice of teenagers as a subject matter was one reason for his appeal to young readers, but another was "a consciousness [among youths] that he speaks for them and virtually "to" them, in a language that is peculiarly honest and their own, with a vision of things that capture their most secret judgments of the world." For this reason, Norman Mailer once remarked that Salinger was "the greatest mind ever to stay in prep school". Salinger's language, especially his energetic, realistically sparse dialogue, was revolutionary at the time his first stories were published and was seen by several critics as "the most distinguishing thing" about his work.

Salinger identified closely with his characters, and used techniques such as interior monologue, letters, and extended telephone calls to display his gift for dialogue. Such style elements also "[gave] him the illusion of having, as it were, delivered his characters' destinies into their own keeping." Recurring themes in Salinger's stories also connect to the ideas of innocence and adolescence, including the "corrupting influence of Hollywood and the world at large", the disconnect between teenagers and "phony" adults, and the perceptive, precocious intelligence of children.

Contemporary critics discuss a clear progression over the course of Salinger's published work, as evidenced by the increasingly negative reviews received by each of his three post-"Catcher" story collections. Ian Hamilton adheres to this view, arguing that while Salinger's early stories for the "slicks" boasted "tight, energetic" dialogue, they had also been formulaic and sentimental. It took the standards of "The New Yorker" editors, among them William Shawn, to refine his writing into the "spare, teasingly mysterious, withheld" qualities of "A Perfect Day for Bananafish" (1948), "The Catcher in the Rye", and his stories of the early 1950s. By the late 1950s, as Salinger became more reclusive and involved in religious study, Hamilton notes that his stories became longer, less plot-driven, and increasingly filled with digression and parenthetical remarks. Louis Menand agrees, writing in "The New Yorker" that Salinger "stopped writing stories, in the conventional sense ... He seemed to lose interest in fiction as an art form—perhaps he thought there was something manipulative or inauthentic about literary device and authorial control." In recent years, some critics have defended certain post-"Nine Stories" works by Salinger; in 2001, Janet Malcolm wrote in "The New York Review of Books" that "Zooey" "is arguably Salinger's masterpiece ... Rereading it and its companion piece "Franny" is no less rewarding than rereading "The Great Gatsby"."

Salinger's writing has influenced several prominent writers, prompting Harold Brodkey (himself an O. Henry Award-winning author) to state in 1991: "His is the most influential body of work in English prose by anyone since Hemingway." Of the writers in Salinger's generation, Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist John Updike attested that "the short stories of J. D. Salinger really opened my eyes as to how you can weave fiction out of a set of events that seem almost unconnected, or very lightly connected ... [Reading Salinger] stick[s] in my mind as really having moved me a step up, as it were, toward knowing how to handle my own material." The critic Louis Menand has observed that the early stories of Pulitzer Prize-winner Philip Roth were affected by "Salinger's voice and comic timing".

National Book Award finalist Richard Yates told "The New York Times" in 1977 that reading Salinger's stories for the first time was a landmark experience, and that "nothing quite like it has happened to me since". Yates describes Salinger as "a man who used language as if it were pure energy beautifully controlled, and who knew exactly what he was doing in every silence as well as in every word." Gordon Lish's O. Henry Award-winning short story "For Jeromé—With Love and Kisses" (1977, collected in "What I Know So Far", 1984) is a play on Salinger's "For Esmé—with Love and Squalor".

In 2001, Louis Menand wrote in "The New Yorker" that ""Catcher in the Rye" rewrites" among each new generation had become "a literary genre all its own". He classed among them Sylvia Plath's "The Bell Jar" (1963), Hunter S. Thompson's "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas" (1971), Jay McInerney's "Bright Lights, Big City" (1984), and Dave Eggers's "A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius" (2000). Writer Aimee Bender was struggling with her first short stories when a friend gave her a copy of "Nine Stories"; inspired, she later described Salinger's effect on writers, explaining: "[I]t feels like Salinger wrote "The Catcher in the Rye" in a day, and that incredible feeling of ease inspires writing. Inspires the pursuit of voice. Not his voice. My voice. Your voice." Authors such as Stephen Chbosky, Jonathan Safran Foer, Carl Hiaasen, Susan Minot, Haruki Murakami, Gwendoline Riley, Tom Robbins, Louis Sachar, Joel Stein and John Green have cited Salinger as an influence. Musician Tomas Kalnoky of Streetlight Manifesto also cites Salinger as an influence, referencing him and Holden Caulfield, the main character of "Catcher in the Rye", in the song "Here's To Life". Biographer Paul Alexander called Salinger "the Greta Garbo of literature".

In the mid-1960s, J. D. Salinger was himself drawn to Sufi mysticism through the writer and thinker Idries Shah's seminal work "The Sufis", as were others writers such as Doris Lessing and Geoffrey Grigson, and the poets Robert Graves and Ted Hughes. As well as Idries Shah, Salinger also read the Taoist philosopher Lao Tse and the Hindu Swami Vivekananda who introduced the Indian philosophies of Vedanta and Yoga to the Western world.









</doc>
<doc id="18947749" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18947749" title="Effects of Hurricane Dean in Mexico">
Effects of Hurricane Dean in Mexico

The effects of Hurricane Dean in Mexico were more severe than anywhere else in the storm's path. Hurricane Dean, the most intense storm of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season, formed in the Atlantic Ocean west of Cape Verde on August 14, 2007. The Cape Verde-type hurricane sped through the Caribbean Sea, rapidly intensifying before making landfall on Mexico's Yucatán Peninsula. Accurate forecasts of the storm's location and intensity enabled thorough preparations; nevertheless when the massive storm made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula as a catastrophic Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale it damaged thousands of homes.

Weakening as it crossed the peninsula, Dean emerged into the Bay of Campeche and re-strengthened before making a second landfall in Veracruz. Although the second landfall did not bring winds as intense as the first, it brought more rainfall and caused devastating landslides in the states of Veracruz and Tabasco. Between the two landfalls, Dean caused MXN$2 billion (US$184 million; 2007 dollars) of damage and killed 13 people.

Forecasters and computer models at the Miami-based National Hurricane Center predicted that Hurricane Dean would impact the Yucatán Peninsula a full 6 days before the storm actually arrived. The hurricane's stable and well predicted path gave all of the countries in the region ample time to prepare for its arrival. On August 17, at the request of the Quintana Roo state government, which was expecting their state to suffer a direct hit, the Civil Protection Office of Mexico's federal Interior Ministry declared a state of emergency for the entire state. This included the towns and cities of Cancún, Playa del Carmen, and Chetumal as well as the islands of Cozumel, Isla Mujeres and Holbox.

On August 18 authorities began evacuating people from parts of Quintana Roo, moving 2,500 people from Holbox Island and a further 80,000 tourists from elsewhere in the state. Air-evacuations of tourists were stopped when Dean's outer rainbands closed almost a dozen Cancún and Cozumel airports on the evening of August 20. The Campeche airport closed shortly thereafter. The state government set up 530 storm shelters in schools and other public buildings, prepared to hold 73,000 people. With 20,000 food packages ready, the state of Yucatán, Quintana Roo's neighbor to the northwest, declared a green alert indicating a low but significant level of danger.

World Vision and other international aid agencies prepared blankets, sheets, personal hygiene items and medicines for quick transport to affected areas. The United States pre-positioned a three-person disaster
management team into the Yucatán before the storm's arrival with the intent of helping coordinate disaster management if necessary. The U.S. State Department urged its citizens in Quintana Roo, Yucatán, and Campeche to prepare for the storm and to evacuate if necessary. The department also relocated its non-essential personnel from those states to Mexico City. At 1500 UTC on August 19 a hurricane watch was issued on the Yucatán Peninsula from Chetumal to San Felipe and final preparations were rushed to completion.

On August 20, warnings for Dean's second landfall were issued. The coast from Progreso to Ciudad del Carmen was put under a hurricane warning and the coast from Cancún at the tip of the Yucatán Peninsula west to Progreso. At 0300 UCT, August 21, a tropical storm watch was issued for the coast from Chilitepec to Veracruz, and a hurricane watch was issued from Chilitepec to Tampico, Tamaulipas. As Dean began to cross the Yucatán Peninsula and maintained its structure better than forecasters had expected, these watches and warnings were expanded. At their peak, a hurricane warning covered the area from Campeche, Campeche, to Coatzacoalcos, Veracruz, and a tropical storm warning stretched from Tampico to La Cruz, Tamaulipas.

Residents in Veracruz stocked up on essential supplies, especially food and water, ahead of the storm's second landfall. At the request of the government of Veracruz, federal Secretary of the Interior Francisco Ramírez Acuña declared a state of emergency for 81 municipalities ahead of Hurricane Dean's expected landfall in the state. This gave local authorities access to the resources of the Revolving Fund of the National Natural Disaster Fund to take care of the nutrition, health, and shelter their populations should the storm's damage require it.

Although Dean was still a hurricane and was expected to re-strengthen slightly before making its second landfall, the fact that it had weakened caused some residents to let down their guard. As a result, residents of Veracruz and Campeche were much less prepared for the storm than those on the Yucatán Peninsula.

The hurricane hit land near Majahual on the Quintana Roo coast of the Yucatán Peninsula at 0830 UTC on August 21. Wind gusts of 200 mph (320 km/h) were reported. The state's tourist cities of Cancún and Cozumel were spared the worst of the storm, but it wreaked havoc in the state capital Chetumal, some 40 mi (65 km) south of landfall, causing significant flooding. Communication with the Mayan communities near the landfall location was initially difficult, but the town of Majahual, which had a population of 200, was "almost flattened" by the storm. Storm surge and high winds severely damaged or destroyed hundreds of buildings and had the strength to crumple steel girders. About 15,000 families were left homeless, primarily in small villages around Quintana Roo. At the Costa Maya cruise port, waves tore away portions of the concrete docks and destroyed the boardwalk. The damage made the port unsuitable for cruise ships, effectively freezing the region's tourism industry until they could be repaired. The hurricane's winds damaged 2.3 million ha (5.7  million acres) of jungle, almost all of it in Quintana Roo, Yucatán, and Campeche.

At its first landfall, the bulk of Hurricane Dean's damage was to agriculture. 12,000 producers suffered losses, mostly in the states of Quintana Roo and Yucatán. 30,000 ha (74,000 acre) of habanero peppers were destroyed, along with 150,000 ha (370,000 acre) of corn and 60,000 ha (150,000 acre) of citrus. Extensive damage to fields planted with bananas, avocados, cucumbers, squash, jalapeño peppers, and other crops were also reported on the Yucatán Peninsula.

President Felipe Calderón cut short a visit to Canada to return to Mexico and assess the damage. Hurricane Dean's Category 5 landfall–the first such landfall in the Atlantic basin in 15 years–took no lives. International organizations, including the United Nations, attributed this to the government's thorough preparations and forecasters' ample warning.

The next day, at 1630 UTC on August 22, Hurricane Dean made a second landfall, this time near the town of Tecolutla, Veracruz, as a Category 2 hurricane. Following the second landfall on the Veracruz coast, the town of Joloapan then saw the eye pass directly over it. In addition, two rivers in the mountains of the state of Hidalgo overflowed, and rain fell as far west as the Pacific coast. Veracruz Governor Fidel Herrera said there was "a tremendous amount of damage". Petroleum production was not severely damaged and quickly returned to normal, although its brief interruption was responsible for a 6% year-on-year decrease in third quarter.
Hurricane Dean, at its second landfall, dropped 4 to 8 in (100 to 200 mm) of rainfall across the western states of Jalisco and Nayarit. This rainfall triggered a mudslide in Jalisco which fell on 10 houses and killed one of the occupants. Landslides in Puebla killed five people, and another was crushed when a wall in his house collapsed. One person in Veracruz was electrocuted after touching a power line while repairing his roof. In Michoacán, as the outer bands of the storm swept over the state, a man sheltering under a tree was struck by lightning. Two women died in Hidalgo when heavy rain collapsed their house's roof. Another man drowned while trying to cross a rain-swollen river in Tlacolula, Oaxaca. The heavy rains caused dozens of smaller landslides throughout the country, particularly in Veracruz and Tabasco, but most of them caused no fatalities. At least 50,000 houses were damaged to varying degrees throughout the country. Although Dean's rains caused flooding as far inland as Mexico City, where they closed a portion of Puebla-Mexico highway, the damage was concentrated in the states of Quintana Roo and Veracruz.

As with its first landfall, Hurricane Dean damaged crops throughout its impact area. In Puebla it destroyed 135,000 ha (335,000 acre) of corn and more than 22,000 ha (54,000 acre) of coffee, while in Veracruz 15,000 ha (37,000 acre) of various crops were lost. Unlike in Belize and the Eastern Caribbean, the storm spared the sugarcane crop in Veracruz.

Between the hurricane's two landfalls, Dean affected an estimated 207,800 people in the states of Quintana Roo, Campeche, Veracruz, Hildalgo, Puebla and Tabasco. The storm damaged 85 miles (140 km) of power lines and left more than 100,000 people without electricity. Landslides, storm tides, and widespread structural damage combined to compromise water sources throughout the country. The extent of the damage was never calculated at a federal level, but hundreds of villages lost access to fresh water in the days following the storm. Hurricane Dean killed 12 people in Mexico but none of the deaths occurred during its first and most powerful landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula. Between the two landfalls the storm caused a total of Mex$2 billion (US$184 million) of damages.

Post-storm analysis showed that, while less deadly, Dean's first and more powerful landfall caused significantly more infrastructural damage than its second. Where the landfall occurred at the town of Majahual specifically, and the state of Quintana Roo generally, communities took longer to recover than in the rest of the country. Quintana Roo Governor Félix González Canto reported that although the cleanup in the state capital of Chetumal was completed within three weeks, it took more than six months to fix all of the region's rural roads. Unable to handle the hurricane's aftermath, the state government appealed to federal authorities and secured Mex$755 million (US$74.8 million) of aid. Combined with the state's contribution of $270 million (US$26.7 million), a housing-repair fund of over $1,025 million (US$101.5 million) was established. In the three months immediately following the storm, over 37,000 houses were rebuilt or repaired using monies from this fund.

In the days following the hurricane, immediate access to clean water was a priority for international aid agencies working in Mexico. The National Commission of Water spent another $25 million (US$2.47 million) of federal funds repairing the damaged infrastructure for irrigation and drinking water.

Carnival Cruise Lines and Royal Caribbean Cruises, the world's two largest cuise operators, diverted their ships away from the damaged cruise port of Puerto Costa Maya. Their plans originally expected diversions until at least 2009, but the central government was quick to fund rebuilding of the destroyed concrete piers. By June 2008 they were rebuilt to accommodate even larger ships than before, and ships scheduled stops there for September 2008.

The federal government was initially lauded for its swift and thorough preparation to which most observers, including the United Nations, attributed Dean's low death toll. However, after the storm there were several accusations of political motivation in the distribution of aid. Members of President Felipe Calderón's Partido Accion Nacional (PAN) distributed bags of bread, funded by the nation's disaster relief coffers, carrying the party's logo. In Veracruz Governor Fidel Herrera was accused by both the PAN and his own Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI) of using state resources, including hurricane relief, to support the campaigns of PRI candidates.



</doc>
<doc id="18951262" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18951262" title="Anne Rice">
Anne Rice

Anne Rice (born October 4, 1941) is an American author of gothic fiction, Christian literature, and erotic literature.
She is perhaps best known for her series of novels, "The Vampire Chronicles", revolving around the central character of Lestat. Books from "The Vampire Chronicles" were the subject of two film adaptations, "Interview with the Vampire" in 1994, and "Queen of the Damned" in 2002.

Born in New Orleans, Rice spent much of her early life there before moving to Texas, and later to San Francisco. She was raised in an observant Catholic family, but became an agnostic as a young adult. She began her professional writing career with the publication of "Interview with the Vampire" in 1976, while living in California, and began writing sequels to the novel in the 1980s. In the mid-2000s, following a publicized return to Catholicism, Rice published the novels "" and "", fictionalized accounts of certain incidents in the life of Jesus. Several years later she distanced herself from organized Christianity, citing disagreement with the Church's stances on social issues but pledging that faith in God remained "central to [her] life." However, she now considers herself a secular humanist.

Rice's books have sold nearly 100 million copies, placing her among the most popular authors in recent American history. While reaction to her early works was initially mixed, she became more popular with critics and readers in the 1980s. Her writing style and the literary content of her works have been deeply analyzed by literary commentators. She was married to poet and painter Stan Rice for 41 years, from 1961 until his death from brain cancer in 2002 at age 60. She and Stan had two children, Michele, who died of leukemia at age five, and Christopher, who is also an author.

In addition to her vampire novels, Rice has authored books such as "The Feast of All Saints" (adapted for television in 2001) and "Servant of the Bones", which formed the basis of a 2011 comic book miniseries. Several books from "The Vampire Chronicles" have been adapted as comics and manga by various publishers. Rice has also authored erotic fiction under the pen names Anne Rampling and A. N. Roquelaure, including "Exit to Eden", which was later adapted into a 1994 film.

Born on October 4, 1941 in New Orleans, Rice is the second of four daughters of parents of Irish Catholic descent, Howard O'Brien and Katherine "Kay" Allen O'Brien. Her father, a Naval veteran of World War II and lifelong resident of New Orleans, worked as a Personnel Executive for the U.S. Postal Service, and authored one novel, "The Impulsive Imp", which was published posthumously. Her older sister, Alice Borchardt, later became a noted author of fantasy and horror fiction.

Rice spent most of her childhood and teenage years in New Orleans, a city that forms the backdrop against which many of her works are set. Her early years were marked by coping with the family's poverty and her mother's alcoholism. She and her family lived in the rented home of her maternal grandmother, Alice Allen, known as "Mamma Allen," at 2301 St. Charles Avenue in the Irish Channel, which Rice says was widely considered a "Catholic Ghetto". Allen, who began working as a domestic shortly after separating from her alcoholic husband, was an important early influence in Rice's life, keeping the family and household together as Rice's mother sank deeper into alcoholism. Allen died in 1949, but the O'Briens remained in her home until 1956, when they moved to 2524 St. Charles Avenue, a former rectory, convent, and school owned by the parish, to be closer to both the church and support for Katherine's addiction. As a young child, Rice studied at St. Alphonsus School, a Catholic institution previously attended by her father.

About her unusual given name, Rice said:

However, according to the authorized biography "Prism of the Night", by Katherine Ramsland, Rice's father was the source of his daughter's birth name: "Thinking back to the days when his own name had been associated with girls, and perhaps in an effort to give it away, Howard named the little girl Howard Allen Frances O'Brien." Rice became "Anne" on her first day of school, when a nun asked her what her name was. She told the nun "Anne," which she considered a pretty name. Her mother, who was with her, let it go without correcting her, knowing how self-conscious her daughter was of her real name. From that day on, everyone she knew addressed her as "Anne", and her name was legally changed in 1947. Rice was confirmed in the Catholic Church when she was twelve years old and took the full name Howard Allen Frances Alphonsus Liguori O'Brien, adding the names of a saint and of an aunt, who was a nun. "I was honored to have my aunt's name," she said, "but it was my burden and joy as a child to have strange names."

When Rice was fifteen years old, her mother died as a result of alcoholism. Soon afterward, she and her sisters were placed by their father in St. Joseph's Academy. Rice described St. Joseph's as "something out of Jane Eyre ... a dilapidated, awful, medieval type of place. I really hated it and wanted to leave. I felt betrayed by my father."

In November 1957, Rice's father married Dorothy Van Bever. On the subject of the couple's first meeting, Rice recalled, "My father wrote her a formal letter inviting her to lunch which I hand-delivered to her house ... I was so nervous. In the note he enclosed a pin which she was to wear if she accepted the invitation. The next day she had the pin on." In 1958, when Rice was sixteen, her father moved the family to north Texas, purchasing their first home in Richardson. Rice first met her future husband, Stan Rice, in a journalism class while they were both students at Richardson High School.

Graduating from Richardson High in 1959, Rice completed her freshman year at Texas Woman's University in Denton and transferred to North Texas State College for her sophomore year, but dropped out when she ran out of money and was unable to find employment. She soon decided to move to San Francisco, and received permission from her friend, Dennis Percy, to stay with his family there until she found work as an insurance claims processor. She persuaded her former roommate from Texas Woman's University, Ginny Mathis, to join her, and they found an apartment in the Haight-Ashbury district. Mathis acquired a job at the same insurance company as Rice. Soon after, they began taking night courses at University of San Francisco, an all-male Jesuit school that allowed women to take night courses. For Easter vacation Anne returned home to Texas, rekindling her relationship with Stan Rice. After her return to San Francisco, Stan Rice came for a week-long visit during summer break. He returned to Texas, Rice moved back in with the Percys, and Mathis left San Francisco in August to enroll in a nursing program in Oklahoma. Some time later, Anne received a special delivery letter from Stan Rice asking her to marry him. They married on October 14, 1961, in Denton, Texas, soon after she turned twenty years old, and when he was just weeks from his nineteenth birthday.

The Rices moved back to San Francisco in 1962, experiencing the birth of the Hippie movement firsthand as they lived in the soon-to-be fabled Haight-Ashbury district, Berkeley, and later the Castro District. "I'm a totally conservative person," she later told "The New York Times", "In the middle of Haight-Ashbury in the 1960s, I was typing away while everybody was dropping acid and smoking grass. I was known as my own square." Rice attended San Francisco State University and obtained a B.A. in Political Science in 1964. Their daughter Michele, later nicknamed "Mouse", was born to the couple on September 21, 1966, and Rice later interrupted her graduate studies at SFSU to become a Ph.D. candidate at the University of California, Berkeley. However, she soon became disenchanted with the emphasis on literary criticism and the language requirements. In Rice's words, "I wanted to be a writer, not a literature student."

Rice returned to San Francisco State in 1970 to finish her studies in Creative Writing, and in 1972 graduated with an M.A. Stan Rice became an instructor at San Francisco State shortly after receiving his own M.A. in Creative Writing from the institution, and later chaired the Creative Writing department before retiring in 1988. In 1970, while Rice was still in the graduate program, her daughter was diagnosed with acute granulocytic leukemia. Rice later described having a prophetic dream, months before Michele became ill, that her daughter was dying from "something wrong with her blood." On August 5, 1972, Michele died at Stanford Children's Hospital in Palo Alto.

Rice's son Christopher was born in Berkeley, California, in 1978; he would become a best-selling author in his own right, publishing his first novel at the age of 22. In mid-1979, Rice, an admitted alcoholic, and her husband, Stan Rice, quit drinking so their son would not have the life that she had as a child.

Rice has stated that Charles Dickens, Virginia Woolf, John Milton, Ernest Hemingway, William Shakespeare, the Brontë sisters, Jean-Paul Sartre, Henry James, Arthur Conan Doyle, and H. Rider Haggard are writers who have influenced her work.

In 1973, while still grieving the loss of her daughter, Rice took a previously written short story and turned it into her first novel, the bestselling "Interview with the Vampire". She based her vampires on Gloria Holden's character in "Dracula's Daughter": "It established to me what vampires were—these elegant, tragic, sensitive people. I was really just going with that feeling when writing "Interview With the Vampire". I didn't do a lot of research." After completing the novel and following many rejections from publishers, Rice developed obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). She became obsessed with germs, thinking that she contaminated everything she touched, engaged in frequent and obsessive hand washing and obsessively checked locks on windows and doors. Of this period, Rice says, "What you see when you're in that state is every single flaw in our hygiene and you can't control it and you go crazy."

In August 1974, after a year of therapy for her OCD, Rice attended the Squaw Valley Writer's Conference at Squaw Valley, conducted by writer Ray Nelson. While at the conference, Rice met her future literary agent, Phyllis Seidel. In October 1974, Seidel sold the publishing rights to "Interview with the Vampire" to Alfred A. Knopf for a $12,000 advance of the hardcover rights, at a time when most new authors were receiving $2,000 advances. "Interview with the Vampire" was published in May 1976. In 1977, the Rices traveled to both Europe and Egypt for the first time.

Following the publication of "Interview with the Vampire", while living in California, Rice wrote two historical novels, "The Feast of All Saints" and "Cry to Heaven", along with four erotic novels ("The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty", "Beauty's Punishment", and "Beauty's Release") under the pseudonym A. N. Roquelaure, and two more under the pseudonym Anne Rampling ("Exit to Eden" and "Belinda"). Rice then returned to the vampire genre with "The Vampire Lestat" and "The Queen of the Damned", her bestselling sequels to "Interview with the Vampire".

Shortly after her June 1988 return to New Orleans, Rice penned "The Witching Hour" as an expression of her joy at coming home. Rice also continued her popular "Vampire Chronicles" series, which later grew to encompass ten novels, and followed up on "The Witching Hour" with "Lasher" and "Taltos", completing the "Lives of the Mayfair Witches" trilogy. She also published "Violin", a tale of a ghostly haunting, in 1997.

Rice calls "Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt", published in 2005, the beginning of a series chronicling the life of Jesus. The second volume, "", was published in March 2008. The third book in the series, "Christ the Lord: Kingdom of Heaven", has been postponed.

After moving to Rancho Mirage, California, in December 2005, Rice wrote "Christ the Lord: The Road to Cana", "Angel Time", and "Of Love and Evil" (the latter two being the first two books in her "Songs of the Seraphim" series), in addition to her memoir, "Called Out of Darkness: A Spiritual Confession".

On March 9, 2014, Rice announced on her son Christopher's radio show, "The Dinner Party with Christopher Rice and Eric Shaw Quinn", that she had completed another book in the "Vampire Chronicles", titled, "Prince Lestat", a "true sequel" to "Queen of the Damned". The book was released on October 28, 2014. In 2015, a sequel to the Beauty trilogy, "Beauty's Kingdom," was released.

Following its debut in 1976, "Interview with the Vampire" received many negative reviews from critics, causing Rice to retreat temporarily from the supernatural genre. When "The Vampire Lestat" debuted in 1985, reaction—both from critics and from readers—was more positive, and the first hardcover edition of the book sold 75,000 copies. Upon its publication in 1988, "The Queen of the Damned" was given an initial hardcover printing of 405,000 copies. The novel was a main selection of the Literary Guild of America for 1988, and reached the #1 spot on "The New York Times" Best Seller list, staying on the list for more than four months.

Rice's novels are popular among many members of the LGBT community, some of whom have perceived her vampire characters as allegorical symbols of isolation and social alienation. Similarly, a reviewer writing for "The Boston Globe" observed that the vampires of her novels represent "the walking alienated, those of us who, by choice or not, dwell on the fringe." On the subject, Rice herself commented, "From the beginning, I've had gay fans, and gay readers who felt that my works involved a sustained gay allegory ... I didn't set out to do that, but that was what they perceived. So even when Christopher was a little baby, I had gay readers and gay friends and knew gay people, and lived in the Castro district of San Francisco, which was a gay neighborhood."

Rice's writings have also been identified as having had a major impact on later developments within the genre of vampire fiction. "Rice turns vampire conventions inside out," writes Susan Ferraro of "The New York Times". "Because Rice identifies with the vampire instead of the victim (reversing the usual focus), the horror for the reader springs from the realization of the monster within the self. Moreover, Rice's vampires are loquacious philosophers who spend much of eternity debating the nature of good and evil."

In addition, Rice's writing style has been heavily analyzed. Ferraro, in a statement typical of many reviewers, describes her prose as "florid, both lurid and lyrical, and full of sensuous detail". However, others have criticized Rice's writing style as both verbose and overly philosophical. Author William Patrick Day comments that her writing is often "long, convoluted, and imprecise".

In June 1988, following the success of "The Vampire Lestat" and with "The Queen of the Damned" about to be published, the Rices purchased a second home in New Orleans, the Brevard-Rice House, built in 1857 for Albert Hamilton Brevard. Stan took a leave of absence from his teaching, and together they moved to New Orleans. Within months, they decided to make it their permanent home.

Rice returned to the Catholic Church in 1998 after decades of atheism. On December 14, 1998, she fell into a coma, later determined to be caused by diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), and nearly died. She was later diagnosed with Diabetes mellitus type 1, and is now insulin-dependent. In 2003, following the recommendation of her husband and shortly after his death, Rice underwent gastric bypass surgery and shed 103 pounds.

In 2004, Rice nearly died again from an intestinal blockage or bowel obstruction, a common complication of gastric bypass surgery. In 2005, "Newsweek" reported, "[Rice] came close to death last year, when she had surgery for an intestinal blockage, and also back in 1998, when she went into a sudden diabetic coma; that same year she returned to the Roman Catholic Church, which she'd left at 18." Her return did not come with a full embrace of the Church's stances on social issues; Rice remained a vocal supporter of equality for gay men and lesbians (including marriage rights), as well as abortion rights and birth control, writing extensively on such issues. In October 2005, while promoting her book, "", she announced in "Newsweek" that she would now use her life and talent of writing to glorify her belief in God, but did not renounce her earlier works.

In the Author's Note from "Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt", Rice states:

I had experienced an old-fashioned, strict Roman Catholic childhood in the 1940s and 1950s ... we attended daily Mass and Communion in an enormous and magnificently decorated church... Stained-glass windows, the Latin Mass, the detailed answers to complex questions on good and evil—these things were imprinted on my soul forever...

I left this church at age 18... I wanted to know what was happening, why so many seemingly good people didn't believe in any organized religion yet cared passionately about their behavior and value of their lives... I broke with the church... I wrote many novels that without my being aware that they reflected my quest for meaning in a world without God.

In her memoir "Called Out of Darkness: A Spiritual Confession", Rice also states:

In the moment of surrender, I let go of all the theological or social questions which had kept me from [God] for countless years. I simply let them go. There was the sense, profound and wordless, that if He knew everything I did not have to know everything, and that, in seeking to know everything, I'd been, all of my life, missing the entire point. No social paradox, no historic disaster, no hideous record of injustice or misery should keep me from Him. No question of Scriptural integrity, no torment over the fate of this or that atheist or gay friend, no worry for those condemned and ostracized by my church or any other church should stand between me and Him. The reason? It was magnificently simple: He knew how or why everything happened; He knew the disposition of every single soul. He wasn't going to let anything happen by accident! Nobody was going to go to Hell by mistake.

On January 18, 2004, Rice announced on her website that she had made plans to leave New Orleans. She cited living alone since the death of her husband and her son moving to California as the reasons for her move. On January 30, 2004, Rice put the largest of her three homes up for sale and moved to a gated community in Kenner, Louisiana. "Simplifying my life, not owning so much, that's the chief goal", said Rice. "I'll no longer be a citizen of New Orleans in the true sense." She sold her New York City condominium on January 20, 2005. In 2005, after completing "Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt", Rice left New Orleans, shortly before the events of Hurricane Katrina in August. None of her former New Orleans properties were flooded, and Rice remains a vocal advocate for the city and related relief projects.

After leaving New Orleans, Rice settled first in La Jolla, California. In November 2005, she described the weather in La Jolla as "like heaven." However, she left La Jolla less than a year after moving there, stating in January 2006 that the weather was too cold. She purchased a six-bedroom home in Rancho Mirage, California, in December 2005, allowing her to be closer to her son in Los Angeles.

On July 18, 2010, Rice auctioned off her large collection of antique dolls at Thierault's in Chicago. Beginning in mid-2010 and continuing through early 2011, Rice also began auctioning off her household possessions, collectibles featured in her many books, jewelry, and wardrobe on eBay. She also sold a large portion of her library collection to Powell's Books.

On July 28, 2010, Rice publicly announced her disdain for the current state of Christianity on her Facebook page, stating, "Today I quit being a Christian... I remain committed to Christ as always but not to being 'Christian' or to being part of Christianity. It's simply impossible for me to 'belong' to this quarrelsome, hostile, disputatious, and deservedly infamous group. For ten years, I've tried. I've failed. I'm an outsider. My conscience will allow nothing else." Shortly thereafter, she clarified her statement: "My faith in Christ is central to my life. My conversion from a pessimistic atheist lost in a world I didn't understand, to an optimistic believer in a universe created and sustained by a loving God is crucial to me. But following Christ does not mean following His followers. Christ is infinitely more important than Christianity and always will be, no matter what Christianity is, has been, or might become."

Following her announcement, Rice's critique of Christianity was commented upon by numerous journalists and pundits. In an interview with the "Los Angeles Times", Rice elaborated on her view regarding being a member of a Christian church: "I feel much more morally comfortable walking away from organized religion. I respect that there are all kinds of denominations and all kinds of churches, but it's the entire controversy, the entire conversation that I need to walk away from right now." In response to the question, "how do you follow Christ without a church?" Rice replied: "I think the basic ritual is simply prayer. It's talking to God, putting things in the hands of God, trusting that you're living in God's world and praying for God's guidance. And being absolutely faithful to the core principles of Jesus' teachings." In 2011, Rice participated in the "I Am Second" project, with a short documentary about her spiritual journey. On April 14, 2013, Rice stated in a Facebook post that she was a secular humanist. On July 28, 2014, Rice stated in a Facebook post that Christ is still central to her life, but not in the way he is presented by organized religion.

In 1994, Neil Jordan directed a motion picture adaptation of "Interview with the Vampire", based on Rice's own screenplay. The movie starred Tom Cruise as Lestat, Brad Pitt as the guilt-ridden Louis, and a young Kirsten Dunst in her breakout role as the deceitful child vampire Claudia.

A second film adaptation, "Queen of the Damned," was released in February 2002, starring Stuart Townsend as the vampire Lestat and singer Aaliyah as Akasha. The movie combined plot points from both the novel "The Queen of the Damned", as well as from "The Vampire Lestat". Produced on a budget of $35 million, the film recouped only $30 million at the U.S. box office. On her Facebook page, Rice distanced herself from the film, and has stated that she feels the filmmakers "mutilated" her work in adapting the novel.

The 1994 film "Exit to Eden," based loosely on the book Rice published as Anne Rampling, starred Rosie O'Donnell and Dan Aykroyd. The work was transformed from a BDSM-themed love story into a police comedy, and was widely considered a box-office failure, receiving near-universal negative reviews.

A film adaptation of "Christ the Lord" was reported to be in the early stages of development in February 2012. It was reported that Chris Columbus had signed on to produce, and that Cyrus Nowrasteh had already completed the script. On November 8, 2014, during an interview with her long-time editor, Victoria Wilson, at the Chicago Humanities Festival, Rice revealed that filming had finished on the movie and was going into post-production. The film, titled "The Young Messiah", was released in 2016.

In August 2014, Universal Pictures had acquired the rights to Rice's "Vampire Chronicles". However, in November 2016, when Universal Pictures did not renew the contract, the film and television rights reverted to Rice, who began developing "The Vampire Chronicles" into a television series with her son, Christopher.

In 1997, Rice wrote the story for a television pilot entitled "Rag and Bone", featuring elements of both horror and crime fiction. Screenwriter James D. Parriott penned the screenplay, and the pilot ultimately aired on CBS, starring Dean Cain and Robert Patrick.

"The Feast of All Saints" was made into a Showtime original miniseries in 2001, directed by Peter Medak and starring James Earl Jones and Gloria Reuben. As of 2002, NBC had plans to adapt Rice's "Lives of the Mayfair Witches" trilogy into a miniseries, but the project never entered production.

"Earth Angels" was an NBC presentation pilot that wasn't picked up as a series. The pilot was filmed in Toronto in 2001. It's a good-versus-evil story about warring angels on Earth and the concept is by Anne Rice. Four parts of Anne Rice's story treatment for the series have been published in 1999 as a bonus in the comic book series called "Anne Rice's Tale of the Body Thief".

On November 26, 2016, Rice announced in a personal statement on her Facebook page that the film and television rights to the entire "Vampire Chronicles" franchise had reverted to her and that she and her son, novelist Christopher Rice, would be "developing a pilot script and a detailed outline for an open-ended series faithfully presenting Lestat’s story as it is told in the books, complete with many situations that readers expect to see." 

On April 28, 2017, Rice released on her Facebook page the press released stating that the Vampire Chronicles have been optioned by Paramount Television and Anonymous Content.

On April 25, 2006, the musical "Lestat", based on Rice's "Vampire Chronicles" books, opened at the Palace Theatre on Broadway after having its world premiere in San Francisco, California, in December 2005. With music by Elton John and lyrics by Bernie Taupin, it was the inaugural production of the newly established Warner Brothers Theatre Ventures. Despite Rice's own overwhelming approval and praise, the show received disappointing attendance and largely negative reviews from critics. "Lestat" closed a month later on May 28, 2006, after just 33 previews and 39 regular performances. The release of the cast recording of the show is reportedly on hold indefinitely.

Several of Anne Rice's novels have been adapted into comic books and manga. Below is a list of adaptations to date, along with their publishers and years of publication.


Rice initially expressed an adamant stance against fan fiction based on her works, and particularly in opposition to such fiction based on "The Vampire Chronicles", releasing a statement on April 7, 2000, that disallowed all such efforts, citing copyright issues. She subsequently requested that FanFiction.Net remove stories featuring her characters. In 2012, "Metro" reported that Rice developed a milder stance on the issue. "I got upset about 20 years ago because I thought it would block me," she said. "However, it's been very easy to avoid reading any, so live and let live. If I were a young writer, I'd want to own my own ideas. But maybe fan fiction is a transitional phase: whatever gets you there, gets you there."

















</doc>
<doc id="18996942" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18996942" title="Martyn Woolford">
Martyn Woolford

Martyn Paul Woolford (born 13 October 1985) is an English professional footballer who plays as a winger for club Grimsby Town.

Woolford started his career in the Northern Counties East Football League Premier Division with Glasshoughton Welfare after progressing through their youth system. After three seasons at Glasshoughton, he moved to the Northern Premier League Premier Division with Frickley Athletic and scored 14 goals during the 2005–06 season. He joined York City in the Conference National in 2006 and spent two seasons with the club, being joint top scorer with 17 goals in the second season. He moved to League One team Scunthorpe United in 2008 and featured in the 2009 Football League Trophy Final before scoring the winning goal in the 2009 League One play-off Final against Millwall.

After a season-and-a-half of playing Championship football with Scunthorpe, he signed for their divisional rivals Bristol City in 2013. Two years later he signed for another Championship club, Millwall, but was released after their relegation to League One in 2015. He joined League One club Sheffield United, where he played one season before joining their divisional rivals Fleetwood Town. He played for the England C team, who represent England at non-League level, in 2008, earning two caps. He made his debut against Grenada and earned his second and final cap against India.

Born in Castleford, West Yorkshire, Woolford started his career with Northern Counties East Football League Premier Division team Glasshoughton Welfare in 2002 after progressing through their youth system. Following the end of the 2002–03 season, he was given the award for the club's Most Improved Player, and early into 2003–04, he established himself as an "emerging talent". He played one match for the youth team of Doncaster Rovers in April 2005, but was not taken on by the club, and was also rejected by Barnsley and Bradford City. After three seasons at Glasshoughton, he joined Northern Premier League Premier Division club Frickley Athletic in August 2005, having impressed during several pre-season matches. He was awarded an FA contract running to the end of 2005–06 in October, with the option of another year. He made 40 league appearances and scored 12 goals for Frickley in 2005–06, with 14 goals in all competitions, after which the club exercised their option to extend his contract for another season.

He had a trial with Stockport County of League Two during their pre-season trip to Ibiza in August 2006, but was not offered a contract. He was being tracked by Hartlepool United and York City, and also attracted interest from Guiseley. He eventually signed for Conference National club York on 31 August for an undisclosed five-figure fee after having made four appearances and scored one goal for Frickley at that point in 2006–07. He made his debut a day later in a 0–0 draw with Stafford Rangers after coming on as a 57th minute substitute. During his first start for the team, he was substituted for goalkeeper Arran Reid in the 17th minute after Tom Evans was sent off. He scored his first goal for York in the team's 3–2 home loss to Morecambe on 12 September. A week later, he scored both York's goals in a 2–1 away victory over Woking. He featured in both legs of York's play-off semi-final defeat to Morecambe 2–1 on aggregate and finished 2006–07 with 45 appearances and eight goals, after which the club exercised their option to extend his contract for another season.

He signed a new contract with York in October 2007, which would expire in the summer of 2009. He played in a more central position behind the strikers in 2007–08. He scored two goals in two minutes against Altrincham on 19 January 2008, which earned York a 2–2 draw, during which he played as a striker. Manager Colin Walker confirmed that several enquiries had been made about signing Woolford during the January transfer window. Woolford was set a 20-goal target by Walker in April 2008, at which point he had scored 16 goals. He was watched by Crewe Alexandra's director of football Dario Gradi in April 2008, after which Walker insisted he was still a part of York's plans for the next season. He finished 2007–08 with 57 appearances and 17 goals. He rejected speculation linking him with a move away from York in June, saying he would only move to a club two divisions higher.

Woolford rejected a new contract with York during the summer of 2008, with Cheltenham Town and another club believed to be interested in signing him. He eventually joined League One club Scunthorpe United for an undisclosed fee on a three-year contract on 8 August 2008, with the fee believed to be a six-figure fee with a sell-on clause. He made his Football League debut as an 87th-minute substitute in a 1–0 victory against Peterborough United on 23 August 2008. He scored four minutes into his first start for Scunthorpe against Brighton & Hove Albion on 6 September 2008, giving his team the lead, in a match which eventually finished 4–1. He came on as a 77th-minute substitute for Scunthorpe in the 2009 Football League Trophy Final on 5 April 2009, which was lost 3–2 to League Two team Luton Town after extra time. Woolford scored the winning goal for Scunthorpe in the 2009 League One play-off Final against Millwall on 24 May 2009, with a goal in the 85th minute that gave the team a 3–2 victory, and also assisting the other two goals. This resulted in promotion to the Championship for Scunthorpe and he was named man of the match.

His first appearance of 2009–10 was in a 4–0 defeat at Cardiff City on 8 August 2009. He scored the winning goal for Scunthorpe against Derby County on 15 August 2009, which finished as a 3–2 victory. Woolford scored two goals against Newcastle United on 20 October 2009 to give Scunthorpe a 2–1 victory. He finished the season with 46 appearances and five goals.

Woolford started 2010–11 after playing in a 2–1 victory at Reading on 7 August 2010 and his first goal of the season was the winner in the 83rd minute of a 2–1 victory over League One team Oldham Athletic in the League Cup on 10 August.

Woolford signed a three-and-a-half-year contract with fellow Championship club Bristol City after joining for an undisclosed fee on 31 January 2011. He made his debut in a 4–0 victory at Preston North End on 5 February 2011, in which he assisted a Brett Pitman goal.

Woolford signed a two-and-a-half-year contract with Championship club Millwall on 9 January 2013. He made his debut after starting in a 1–1 draw away to Bolton Wanderers on 12 January 2013. Woolford was released by Millwall on 7 May 2015 after their relegation to League One, having made 40 appearances and scored three goals in 2014–15.

Woolford signed a two-year contract with League One club Sheffield United on 14 July 2015, having previously played under manager Nigel Adkins at Scunthorpe. He was released by United on 19 August 2016, having fallen out of favour under manager Chris Wilder, and immediately joined League One club Fleetwood Town on a one-year contract. He was released at the end of 2016–17.

On 31 August 2017, Woolford signed a one-year contract with League Two club Grimsby Town on a free transfer. He made his debut two days later, starting in a 1–0 home win over Crewe Alexandra, in which he was substituted in the 69th minute. He was offered a new contract by Grimsby at the end of the 2017–18 season.

Woolford was placed on standby for the England C team for their 2007–09 International Challenge Trophy match against Wales in February 2008. He was called into the squad in May for two matches in the Caribbean after an injury to Dean Moxey. His debut came in a 1–1 draw with Grenada on 31 May 2008 and was described as a "constant threat down the left", and earned his second cap as a 67th-minute substitute against Barbados on 2 June.

Woolford plays as a left winger, where he has been described as being "fleetfooted". He is versatile and has also played as a wing-back, left midfielder and a striker and has also been used in a more "roaming, attacking role" to offer support to a lone striker.

He was studying for a degree in civil engineering at Leeds Metropolitan University while playing for Frickley and a degree in surveying in 2006. While at university, he worked on a building site. He achieved a Higher National Diploma in civil engineering and has said he is looking to complete this degree before the end of his football career. He comes from a family of professional sportsmen; father Neil and grandfather Cyril were both rugby league players with Featherstone Rovers. He has cited his father's encouragement as the main influence in his footballing career. He is a supporter of Manchester United.

Scunthorpe United



</doc>
<doc id="19043821" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19043821" title="1993 child sexual abuse accusations against Michael Jackson">
1993 child sexual abuse accusations against Michael Jackson

Jackson asked his lawyer Bert Fields to intervene. On July 15, Mathis Abrams, a psychologist, sent Chandler's attorney Barry Rothman a letter stating there was "reasonable suspicion" of sexual abuse. He wrote that if it had been a real case, he would be required by law to contact the Los Angeles County Department of Children's Services. On August 4, Chandler and Jordan met with Jackson and Anthony Pellicano, Jackson's private investigator, and Chandler read out Abrams' letter. He then opened negotiations to resolve the issue with a financial settlement. Chandler and Rothman had rejected a $350,000 offer from Jackson. On August 16, Jackson's attorney notified Rothman that he would file papers to force Chandler to return Jordan to allow him to accompany Jackson on his Dangerous World Tour.

On the day Jackson began the third leg of his tour, news of the allegations broke to the public and received worldwide media attention. Jackson cancelled the remainder of the tour due to health problems arising from the scandal. In January 1994, Jackson reached a financial settlement for $23 million with the Chandlers, and in September a criminal investigation was closed. The allegations affected his public image and commercial standing, and several endorsement deals were canceled, including Jackson's decade-long Pepsi endorsement. Similar allegations were made by other parties in the following decades, leading to a trial in which Jackson was found not guilty. In 2009, five months after Jackson's death, Chandler committed suicide in his apartment in Jersey City.

Jackson became friends with Jordan Chandler and his family after a meeting in May 1992, as Jordan was a fan of Jackson. Their friendship became so close that the "National Enquirer" ran a featured story with the title "Michael's New Adopted Family". The story implied that Jackson had "stolen" the boy from his estranged father, Evan Chandler, a dentist. Chandler was jealous over Jackson's influence on his son.

Jackson invited Jordan, his stepsister and his mother to visit his Neverland Ranch on the weekends. They would also take trips to Las Vegas and Florida. These trips interfered with Jordan's scheduled visits with his father, with Jordan preferring to visit Neverland Ranch. By mid-1993, reports surfaced that Jackson had children sleep in his bed with him at Neverland, which attracted media scrutiny. 

In May 1993, when Jackson and Jordan stayed with Chandler, Chandler urged Jackson to spend more time with his son, and suggested that Jackson build an addition to the house so that Jackson could stay there. After the zoning department said this could not be built, Chandler suggested that Jackson build him a new home. That month, Jordan and June flew with Jackson to Monaco for the World Music Awards. According to June's lawyer, Michael Freeman, "Evan began to get jealous of the involvement and felt left out." Upon their return, Chandler was pleased with a five-day visit from Jackson, during which Jackson slept in a room with Jordan and his stepbrother. Chandler said this is when he became suspicious of sexual misconduct by Jackson, although he said that Jackson and Jordan were clothed when he saw them in bed together, and has never claimed to have witnessed sexual misconduct.

On July 2, 1993, in a private telephone conversation, Chandler who was unknowingly being recorded by Anthony Pellicano, Jackson's private investigator said: 

In the same conversation, when asked how this would affect his son, Chandler replied:

The recorded conversation was a critical aspect of Jackson's defense against the allegations made against him. Jackson and his supporters argued that he was the victim of a jealous father whose only goal was to extort money from him. In October 1994, Mary A. Fischer of "GQ" magazine reported it was Chandler who initially accused Jackson of molesting his son, before he demanded a screenwriting deal from Jackson instead of going to the police.

According to Taraborrelli, Chandler was forced to admit that he had used the controversial sedative sodium amytal when he extracted a tooth from Jordan in early August 1993. Sodium amytal is a barbiturate that puts people in a hypnotic state when injected intravenously. Studies done in 1952 demonstrated that it enabled false memories to be implanted. 

Dr. Phillip Resnick, a Cleveland psychiatrist, said it was "a psychiatric medication" and, "People will say things under sodium amytal that are blatantly untrue". In May 1994, in Napa County, California, Gary Ramona won a lawsuit against his daughter's therapist and the psychiatrist who had given her sodium amytal. The psychiatrist claimed the drug helped Ramona's daughter remember specific details of molestation by Ramona, but a court brief written by Martin Orne, a University of Pennsylvania psychiatrist who pioneered research of hypnosis and sodium amytal, stated that the drug is "not useful in ascertaining 'truth' . . . The patient becomes sensitive and receptive to suggestions due to the context and to the comments of the interviewers." This was the first successful legal challenge to the "repressed memory phenomenon". 

Dr. Kenneth Gottlieb, a San Francisco psychiatrist, said: "It's absolutely a psychiatric drug ... I would never want to use a drug that tampers with a person's unconscious unless there was no other drug available. And I would not use it without resuscitating equipment, in case of allergic reaction, and only with an M.D. anesthesiologist present." According to Dr. John Yagiela, coordinator of the anesthesia and pain control department of the UCLA School of Dentistry, "It's unusual for it to be used [for pulling a tooth]" and "better, safer alternatives are available."

On May 3, 1994, KCBS-TV reported that Chandler claimed the drug was used for tooth extraction and that Jordan was under the influence of the drug when the controversy broke. Mark Torbiner, the dental anesthesiologist who administered the drug, told "GQ" that if sodium amytal was used, "it was for dental purposes". According to Diane Dimond of the tabloid TV program "Hard Copy", Torbiner's records show that Robinul and Vistarol were administered instead of sodium amytal. The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration was investigating Torbiner's administration of drugs during house calls, where he mostly gave patients morphine and Demerol. His credentials with the Board of Dental Examiners indicated that he was restricted by law to administering drugs solely for dental-related procedures, but he had not adhered to those restrictions. For instance, he had given general anesthetic to Barry Rothman during hair-transplant procedures. Torbiner had introduced Chandler and Rothman in 1991, when Rothman needed dental work.

Over the next couple of months, the parties of Jackson and Chandler engaged in unsuccessful out-of-court negotiations. Chandler and his legal team asked for $20 million, or threatened to take the dispute to a criminal court. Jackson refused, saying, "No way in hell". A few weeks later, Jackson's legal team gave a counter-offer of $1 million, which was declined by Chandler. Pellicano said he made the offers in an attempt to catch Chandler's negotiating and recorded one of the telephone calls to Rothman to demonstrate this. Chandler lowered his request to $15 million. Jackson refused and lowered his offer to $350,000, which Chandler refused. With both sides unable to reach an agreement, Chandler decided to take the matter to court. 

Chandler took Jordan to a psychiatrist, Dr. Mathis Abrams. Over a three-hour session with Abrams, Jordan said he had had a sexual relationship with Jackson that went on for several months, and which included kissing, masturbation and oral sex. He repeated these allegations to police and gave a detailed description of what he alleged was Jackson's penis.

On August 18, the Los Angeles Police Department's Sexually Exploited Child Unit began a criminal investigation into Jackson. The same day, June told police that she did not believe Jackson had molested her son. On August 21, a search warrant was issued, allowing police to search Neverland Ranch. Police questioned 30 children who were friends of Jackson, who all stated that Jackson was not a child molester. A police officer involved in the investigation told the "Los Angeles Times" that no evidence (medical, photographic or video) could be found that would support a criminal filing. 

On the day the allegations were made public, August 24, Jackson began the third leg of his Dangerous World Tour, in Bangkok. That same day, Pellicano held a press conference accusing Chandler of trying to extort $20 million from the singer. He did not mention that Jackson had made several counter-offers. On August 25, Jackson's young friends Brett Barnes and Wade Robson held a press conference in which they stated that they had slept in the same bed as Jackson, but nothing sexual in nature had occurred. Jackson's family held another press conference, saying it was their "unequivocal belief" that Michael was a victim of an attempt to take advantage of his fame and wealth. 

The police also began an investigation into Chandler, finding that he was $68,400 behind in his child support payments, despite being well-paid as a dentist. On November 8, police searched the Jackson family home, Hayvenhurst, but found nothing of importance. They increased their efforts after no supporting evidence was found, and after questioning almost 30 children and their families, all of whom said Jackson had done nothing wrong. Officers flew to the Philippines to interview two ex-housekeepers who had sold a molestation story to the tabloids but decided it lacked credibility. Several parents also complained of aggressive investigative techniques by the police; for example, they claimed the police frightened their children with lies such as "we have nude photos of you", and told parents their children had been molested even though their children had denied it.

According to internal reports from the LA County DCFS at the time, Chandler's story remained largely consistent but dates, places, times and some details were inconsistent. According to reports, the DCFS had investigated Jackson beginning in August 1993 with the Chandler allegation and again in 2003. The DCFS report was leaked to the press in 1993. Jackson's attorney and private investigator claimed the allegations were part of an extortion attempt, but the father told friends the reports about his comments were untrue.

In the winter of 1993, Jackson's sister La Toya Jackson, who had been estranged from the family and not seen him for several years, claimed that Jackson was a pedophile. La Toya stated: "I cannot and will not be a silent collaborator in his crimes against young children ... Forget about the superstar, forget about the icon. If he was any other 35-year-old man who was sleeping with little boys, you wouldn't like this guy." She claimed that checks had been made out to several boys and that Jackson's own physical abuse as a child had turned him into an abuser. She later claimed that Jackson had tried to kidnap and kill her. 

LaToya claimed to have proof of Jackson's pedophilia and offered to disclose it for $500,000. A bidding war between US and UK tabloids began, but fell through when they realized that her revelations were not what she had claimed. The rest of the family disowned her, and in later years she insisted she had been forced to make the allegations by her then-husband Jack Gordon for financial gain. Just prior to making the allegations, her husband had been arrested for assaulting her. By the turn of the millennium Jackson had forgiven his sister.

Jackson met Lisa Marie Presley around May 26, 1974, during a Jackson 5 engagement in Lake Tahoe. Her father, Elvis Presley, was closing a two week engagement at the Sahara Tahoe while the Jackson 5 were just about to begin one. In November 1992, Jackson was reconnected with Presley through a mutual friend, and they talked almost every day by telephone. As the abuse accusations became public, he became dependent on Presley for emotional support; she was concerned about his faltering health. She explained, "I believed he didn't do anything wrong and that he was wrongly accused and yes I started falling for him. I wanted to save him. I felt that I could do it." She described him in one call as high, incoherent and delusional. He proposed to her over the phone towards the fall of 1993, saying, "If I asked you to marry me, would you do it?" The marriage was, in her words, "a married couple's life ... that was sexually active". They divorced less than two years later, but remained friends.

Jackson began taking painkillers, Valium, Xanax and Ativan to deal with the stress of the allegations. Within a few months of the allegations becoming news, he had lost approximately 10 pounds and stopped eating. According to Jackson, he had a tendency to stop eating when "really upset or hurt" and his friend Elizabeth Taylor had to make him eat: "She took the spoon and would put it into my mouth." He said that he eventually became unconscious and had to be fed intravenously. 

In a court deposition unrelated to the alleged child abuse, Jackson appeared drowsy, lacked concentration and slurred while speaking. He said he could not remember the dates of his album releases or the names of people he had worked with, and took several minutes to name some of his recent albums. His health had deteriorated such that he canceled the remainder of his tour and flew with Taylor and her husband to London. When Jackson arrived at the airport, he had to be held up. He was rushed to the home of Elton John's manager and afterwards to a clinic. When he was searched for drugs on entry, 18 vials of medicine were found in a suitcase. Jackson booked the whole fourth floor of the clinic, and was put on a Valium IV to wean him from painkillers. His spokesperson told reporters that Jackson was "barely able to function adequately on an intellectual level". While in the clinic, he took part in group and one-on-one therapy sessions.

In December 1993, Jackson was served with a warrant for a strip search, as police wanted to verify Jordan Chandler's description of Jackson's private anatomy. The order stated that officers were to examine, photograph and videotape Jackson's entire body, "including his penis, anus, hips, [and] buttocks". The police were looking for discoloration or any other signs of vitiligo that Jordan had spoken about, or any other skin disorder. Refusal to comply would be used in court as an indication of guilt. 

The search took place on December 20, 1993, at Neverland Ranch. Those present for the prosecution were District Attorney Tom Sneddon, a detective, a photographer, and a doctor. Those present on behalf of Jackson were his two attorneys, a physician, a detective, a bodyguard and a photographer. The attorneys and Sneddon agreed to leave the room when the examination took place. At Jackson's insistence, the prosecution detective also left. In an emotional state, Jackson stood on a platform in the middle of the room and disrobed. The search lasted for approximately 25 minutes. He was never touched.

Reports vary on whether the photographs of Jackson corroborated Jordan's allegations. "Reuters" reported that an unidentified source informed them on January 27, 1994, that "photos of Michael Jackson's genitalia do not match description given by the boy", which was reported in "USA Today" on January 28. However, according to child sexual abuse consultant Bill Dworin, one of the lead detectives on the case, Jordan's description comported with the photos taken of Jackson's genitalia. Dr. Richard Strick, who conducted the examination of Jackson's genitals, said "I was told later that the photos and description absolutely matched". Sneddon later stated that "the photographs reveal a mark on the right side of Defendant's penis at about the same relative location as the dark blemish located by Jordan Chandler on his drawing of Defendant's erect penis", and that "Chandler's graphic representation of the discolored area on Defendant's penis is substantially corroborated by the photographs". Sergeant Gary Spiegel, the sheriff's photographer, claims he observed a dark spot on the lower side of Jackson's penis.

Jordan claimed that Jackson was circumcised. However, Jackson's autopsy report showed that he had not been circumcised and his foreskin appeared naturally intact, with no signs of having been restored from a circumcision. Taraborrelli claims that Jordan correctly noted patchy colored skin on his buttocks, short pubic hair, and testicles marked pink and brown; however, initially investigators claimed Chandler said Jackson had splotches on his genitals a color "similar to the color of his face" rather than pink and brown. 

On February 10, 1993, Jackson had revealed in a televised interview that he had vitiligo, a skin disorder that destroys skin pigmentation and creates blotches, and that he used make-up to even out his skin. The interview was watched by 90 million, and after it aired, expert information on vitiligo was widely shared in the media. According to private investigator Anthony Pellicano, who questioned Jordan in July 1993 after hearing Evan's taped phone call, Jordan denied that he ever saw Jackson's body but said he did lift his shirt once to show him the blotches on his skin. Investigators made a probe into Jackson's history, including family interviews, to see if he had undergone procedures to alter his body's appearance.

On December 22 1993, Jackson responded to events for the first time via satellite from Neverland Ranch: 

A poll at the time, conducted by "A Current Affair", found that nearly 75 percent of Americans believed Jackson was telling the truth.

Most of the information available on the allegations was released (officially or unofficially) by the prosecution and unchallenged by Jackson. Jackson was largely portrayed as guilty by the media, which used sensational headlines implying guilt when the content itself did not support the headline, purchased stories of his alleged criminal activity leaked material from the police investigation, and deliberately used unflattering photographs.

Two weeks after the allegations were reported, the headline "Michael Jackson: A Curtain Closes" reflected the attitude of most tabloid media. The "New York Post" ran the headline "Peter Pan or pervert". In a piece for "Hard Copy", Dimond—a journalist who spent the next fifteen years trying to prove Jackson was a pedophile—ran a story stating it had acquired "new documents in the criminal investigation of Michael Jackson, and they are chilling; they contain the name of child movie actor Macaulay Culkin". In fact, the document stated that Culkin denied being abused by Jackson.

Two tabloid media outlets bought confidential leaked documents from the LAPD for $20,000. A number of Jackson's former employees—most of whom had worked at Neverland—sold stories which alleged prior sexual misconduct on Jackson's part, instead of reporting their claims to police. One couple asked for $100,000, claiming that Jackson had sexually caressed Culkin. For a fee of $500,000, they would also allege that Jackson put his hands down Culkin's pants. Culkin strongly denied the allegation, and did so again in court during Jackson's 2005 trial. 

A former security guard made various allegations about Jackson, saying he was fired because he "knew too much", and alleged that he was ordered by Jackson to destroy a photo of a naked boy. Instead of reporting this to police, he sold the story to "Hard Copy" for $150,000. Afterwards, Jackson's maid, Branca Francia, alleged that she "quit in disgust" after seeing Jackson in a shower with a child, but did not inform the police. It emerged that Francia had been fired in 1991, but nevertheless sold her story to "Hard Copy" for $20,000.

When Jackson left the US to go into drug rehabilitation, the "Daily Mirror" (UK) held a "Spot the Jacko" contest, offering readers a trip to Disney World if they could correctly predict where he would appear next. A "Daily Express" headline read "Drug treatment star faces life on the run", while a "News of the World" headline said Jackson was a fugitive. These tabloids also falsely alleged that Jackson had traveled to Europe to have cosmetic surgery that would make him unrecognizable. Geraldo Rivera set up a mock trial, with a jury made up of audience members, even though Jackson had not been charged with a crime.

On September 14, 1993, Jordan Chandler and his parents filed a civil lawsuit against Jackson. In late 1993, district attorneys in Santa Barbara and Los Angeles counties convened grand juries to assess whether criminal charges should be filed. By 1994, prosecution departments in California had spent $2 million and the grand juries had questioned 200 witnesses, but Jordan's allegations could not be corroborated. 

On January 4, 1994, Chandler's attorney, Larry Feldman, filed a motion for the photos from Jackson's strip search, saying Jackson's attorneys and the L.A. district attorney had refused to give him copies. A few weeks later, Feldman petitioned the court for access to Jackson's finances, arguing that Jackson's wealth would give him an unfair advantage in court. One adviser to Jackson said: "You can take pictures of Michael's dick and he's not gonna like it, but once you start trying to figure out how much money he has, that's where he stops playing around." 

Jackson and his lawyers filed a motion for Superior Court Judge David M. Rothman to postpone the civil case until the criminal investigation concluded. It is legal to postpone a civil lawsuit past the criminal statute of limitations as a lawsuit can still be filed past that date. Additionally, the constitutional right to a speedy trial only applies to criminal cases, not civil cases. Feldman filed a counter-motion, saying the delay would hurt Jordan's chances for recovery and make it more difficult to gather evidence. On November 23, Judge Rothman accepted Feldman's motion and set March 21, 1994, as the start date for the civil trial. 

Rothman ordered Jackson's deposition scheduled before the end of January 1994, but said he might reconsider if Jackson was indicted on criminal charges. Jackson agreed to be deposed on January 18. His attorneys said he was eager to testify, but also said they might oppose the deposition if criminal charges were filed or were still under consideration on his deposition date. They said if charges were filed, they would want the criminal trial to go first. However, when authorities notified Jackson's lawyers that they expected their investigation to continue at least through February, Jackson's team failed to win a delay of the civil case. Jackson's lawyers also lost a motion to prevent Feldman from turning over information (e.g. from the civil deposition) to prosecutors pursuing possible criminal charges.

The concerns about a civil trial during an ongoing criminal investigation, and about the prosecutor's access to the plaintiff's information in the civil trial, stemmed from Jackson's Fifth Amendment rights. As two grand juries had deemed there was insufficient evidence for charges as of January 1, the prosecution might have been able to form the elements of a criminal case around the defense strategy in the civil trial, creating a situation akin to double jeopardy.

On January 24, 1994, prosecutors announced that they would not bring charges against Chandler for attempted extortion, as Jackson's camp had been slow to report the extortion claim to the police and had tried to negotiate a settlement with Chandler for several weeks. Evan had made his demand for a financial settlement on August 4, 1993, and the Jackson camp filed extortion charges against Evan and his attorney, Rothman, in late August 1993. After tape recordings supporting the extortion claim were released to the media on August 30, a lawyer for Jackson said they had not gone to the police earlier because "It was our hope that this would all go away. We tried to keep it as much in-house as we could." 

In the extortion investigation, a search warrant was never sought to search the homes and offices of Chandler and Rothman, and no grand jury convened when both men refused police interviews. In contrast, the police had searched Jackson's residences solely based on Jordan's allegations reported by a psychiatrist with no particular expertise in child sexual abuse, and taken lengths to interview or intimidate witnesses. 

While Jackson sought medical help for his faltering health, his legal team and friends, such as Presley and Taylor, took control of his defense and finances. Jackson's legal team would meet three times a week at Taylor's home to discuss the case. Eventually, Presley, Taylor, and Jackson's team agreed that Jackson was too sick to endure a lengthy trial, and that he should settle out of court.

The lawsuit was settled on January 25, 1994, with $15,331,250 to be held in a trust fund for Jordan, $1.5 million for each of his parents, and $5 million for the family's lawyer, for a total of approximately $23 million. Another source showed Feldman was to receive $3 million based on a September 1993 retainer, for a total of $21 million. According to a motion passed to Judge Melville in 2004, it was Chandler who initiated the settlement with Jackson's insurer. 

Jackson's insurance company "negotiated and paid the settlement, over the protests of Mr. Jackson and his personal legal counsel" and was "the source of the settlement amounts", as noted in a 2005 memorandum in "People v. Jackson". The memorandum also noted that "an insurance carrier has the right to settle claims covered by insurance where it decides settlement is expedient and the insured may not interfere with nor prevent such settlements", as established by a number of precedents in California. Defeating the right would involve convincing a court with the power to overrule the precedent that the earlier decision was either wrongly decided or more often, "clearly" wrong (depending on the criteria of the court) or the court must be convinced to distinguish the case. That is, to make the ruling narrower than that in the precedent due to some difference in facts between the current and precedent case while supporting the result reached in the earlier case. 

In 2004, Jackson's attorney Thomas Mesereau said: "People who intended to earn millions of dollars from [Jackson's] record and music promotions did not want negative publicity from these lawsuits interfering with their profits. Michael Jackson now regrets making these payments. These settlements were entered into with one primary condition – that condition was that Mr. Jackson never admitted any wrongdoing. Mr. Jackson always denied doing anything wrong ... Mr. Jackson now realizes the advice he received was wrong." Jackson explained why he had settled: "I wanted to go on with my life. Too many people had already been hurt. I want to make records. I want to sing. I want to perform again ... It's my talent. My hard work. My life. My decision." He also wanted to avoid a "media circus".

Although some perceived the settlement as an admission of guilt, the settlement agreement specifically stated that Jackson admitted no wrongdoing and no liability. Legally, a settlement cannot be used as evidence of guilt in future civil and criminal cases. The settlement payment was "for alleged personal injuries arising out of claims of negligence and not for claims of intentional or wrong acts of sexual molestation." In the settlement, both parties agreed they would not speak about the case details in public but it did not prevent the Chandlers from testifying in a criminal trial or sharing information with authorities in a criminal investigation. The settlement document states there is no admission of wrongdoing on Jackson's part and no admission of molestation or immodesty and that under no circumstances shall any payment be withheld from the complainants, even if they were to testify against Jackson.

The Chandlers' lawyer, Larry Feldman, said that "nobody bought anybody's silence". Bribery to not testify in a trial is a felony according to California Penal Code 138. Receiving such a bribe is also a felony according to this law.

District Attorney Gil Garcetti said that the settlement did not affect criminal prosecution and that the investigation was ongoing. Jordan Chandler was interviewed after the settlement by detectives seeking evidence of child molestation, but no criminal charges were filed. A Santa Barbara County grand jury disbanded on May 2 1994 without indicting Jackson, while a Los Angeles County grand jury continued to investigate the sexual abuse allegations. 

The Chandlers stopped co-operating with the criminal investigation around July 6, 1994. The police never pressed criminal charges. Citing a lack of evidence without Jordan's testimony, the state closed its investigation on September 22, 1994. According to the grand juries, the evidence presented by the Santa Barbara police and the LAPD was not convincing enough to indict Jackson or subpoena him, even though grand juries can indict the accused purely on hearsay evidence. According to a 1994 report by "Variety", a source in contact with the grand juries said that none of the witnesses had produced anything to directly implicate Jackson. According to a 1994 report by "Showbiz Today", one of the 1994 grand jurors claimed they "did not hear any damaging testimony" during the hearings.

A week after the lawsuit settlement was announced on January 25, 1994, L.A. District Attorney Gil Garcetti announced that he supported amending a law that prohibits forcing people who say they have been sexually assaulted to testify in criminal proceedings. The amendment, introduced into the state assembly the week of February 7, would have immediately allowed Garcetti to compel Jordan to testify. 

Around the same time, Santa Barbara police interviewed the 13-year-old son of one of Jackson's former maids who had told them her son had spent time with Jackson. After he repeatedly denied being abused, they arranged for him to see a therapist. In a deposition, his mother said she had asked the police about who she could speak to about her concerns about Jackson spending private time with her son. According to the mother, they arranged for her and her son to see separate therapists. 

On April 11, 1994, the grand jury session in Santa Barbara was extended by 90 days to allow Sneddon to gather more evidence. Prosecution sources said they were frustrated in their grand jury probe, failing to find direct evidence of the molestation charges. The final grand jury disbanded without returning an indictment against Jackson.

Three years later, Jordan's account of the relationship was detailed in a book by journalist Victor M. Gutierrez. The book was said to be based on a diary Jordan had kept at the time and included details of alleged sexual encounters with Jackson. In 1995, Jackson filed a civil suit against Gutierrez for slander unrelated to the book; the jury found in Jackson's favor, awarding him $2.7 million in damages. However, the judgement does not refute the allegations contained in the book. In 1996, Chandler sued Jackson for around $60 million, claiming Jackson had breached an agreement never to discuss the case. In 1999, a court ruled in Jackson's favor and threw out the lawsuit.

Jordan legally emancipated himself from his parents in 1994, at age 14. In 2006, Jordan accused his father of attacking him with a barbell, choking him and spraying his face with mace. The charges were dropped. On November 5, 2009, fourteen weeks after Jackson's death, Evan Chandler was found dead following an apparent suicide. 

Music journalist Charles Thomson noted a continued media bias against Jackson after Chandler's suicide. Thomson said he was contacted by a British tabloid to supply information about the 1993 allegations, only to have them replace his carefully researched information with the misinformation he advised them to avoid. According to Thomson, when Jackson's FBI file was released the following month, the media reported that it created the impression of guilt, even though the file supported his innocence. He noted that Gene Simmons' allegations in 2010 about Jackson molesting children received over a hundred times more coverage than his interview with Jackson's long-time guitarist, Jennifer Batten, who rebutted Simmons' claims.

Jackson's commercial appeal and public image declined in the wake of the allegations. The government of Dubai barred him from performing in response to an anonymous pamphlet campaign that attacked him as immoral. Jackson backed out of a deal to create a song and video to tie-in with the film "Addams Family Values", returning an estimated $5 million, and a brand of fragrances was canceled because of Jackson's drug problems. PepsiCo also ended their ten-year partnership with him, causing some fans to boycott the company. According to conflicting sources, Jackson agreed to compose music for the video game "Sonic the Hedgehog 3", but left the project and went uncredited, possibly due to the allegations.

Jackson produced a special show for the premium cable network HBO, "For One Night Only", to be recorded in front of a special invited audience at New York City's Beacon Theatre for broadcast in December 1995. The shows were canceled after Jackson collapsed at the theater on December 6 during rehearsals. Jackson was admitted overnight to Beth Israel Medical Center North. The shows were never rescheduled. The following year, Jackson began the HIStory World Tour. Despite the show's success, Jackson's only concerts in the USA were two shows at the Aloha Stadium in Honolulu, Hawaii. Jackson completed the video once planned for "Addams Family Values" and released it as "Ghosts," with a framing story about an eccentric maestro who entertains children and is pursued by a bigoted local official. 

Jackson's album "", released shortly after the allegations, "creates an atmosphere of paranoia," according to one writer. Its content focuses on the public struggles Jackson went through prior to its production. In the songs "Scream", "Tabloid Junkie", and "You Are Not Alone", Jackson expresses his anger and hurt at the media. In the ballad "Stranger in Moscow", he laments his "swift and sudden fall from grace". In "D.S.", he attacks a character identified as Tom Sneddon, the District Attorney that requested his strip search. He describes the person as a white supremacist who wanted to "get my ass, dead or alive". Sneddon said: "I have not, shall we say, done him the honor of listening to it, but I've been told that it ends with the sound of a gunshot."

On December 18, 2003, Jackson was charged with seven counts of child sexual abuse and two counts of administering an intoxicating agent to commit a child sexual abuse felony against Gavin Arvizo. Jackson denied the allegations. Sneddon again led the prosecution. 

The People v. Jackson trial began in Santa Maria, California, on January 31, 2005. The judge allowed testimony about past allegations, including the 1993 case, to establish whether the defendant had a propensity to commit certain crimes. However, Jordan Chandler had left the country to avoid testifying. Mesereau later said: "The prosecutors tried to get [Chandler] to show up and he wouldn't. If he had, I had witnesses who were going to come in and say he told them it never happened and that he would never talk to his parents again for what they made him say."

June Chandler testified that she had not spoken to her son in 11 years. During her testimony, she claimed that she could not remember being counter-sued by Jackson and said that she had never heard of her own attorney. However, she said she never witnessed any molestation. Jackson was found not guilty of all charges on June 13, 2005.



</doc>
<doc id="19085093" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19085093" title="Help at Any Cost">
Help at Any Cost

Help at Any Cost: How the Troubled-Teen Industry Cons Parents and Hurts Kids is a non-fiction book by Maia Szalavitz analyzing the controversy surrounding the tough love behavior modification industry. The book was published February 16, 2006, by Riverhead Books. Szalavitz focuses on four programs: Straight, Incorporated, a copy of the Straight Inc. program called KIDS, North Star wilderness boot camp, and the World Wide Association of Specialty Programs and Schools. She discusses the background, history and methodology of the troubled-teen industry, including techniques drawn from attack therapy and Synanon. She uses first-person accounts and court testimony in her research, and states that no evidence exists proving that these programs are effective. The book also includes advice for parents and an appendix with additional resources on how to get responsible help for teenagers.

The book received positive reviews in academic journals, literary journals, and in the media. Psychologist Steve K. D. Eichel reviewed the book for "Cultic Studies Review" and called it a "must read", psychologist and psychiatrist Robert John McAllister described it as "an excellent and informative book on the subject of the 'troubled-teen industry' " in his book "Emotions: Mystery Or Madness", and a review in "Psychology Today" described Szalavitz's work as "a meticulously reported and thoughtful investigation". The book also received positive reviews in "Publishers Weekly", "Booklist", and "Newsday". The book later led to an investigation into the troubled-teen industry by the United States House Committee on Education and Labor of the United States House of Representatives, and Representative George Miller held hearings on the matter in October 2007 and April 2008.

Teenagers have been participating in tough love behavior modification programs since the 1960s. Many of these programs take place in the wilderness in the style of military recruit training (also known as boot camps) and the teenagers are subjected to rigid discipline, including mandatory marches, physical abuse, solitary confinement, and deprivation of food and sleep. These programs have little to no oversight from the United States federal or state governments. Teenagers' claims of abuse at these facilities have not been investigated because the programs are not regulated.

Maia Szalavitz is a senior fellow at the Statistical Assessment Service (stats.org), a media watchdog organization which monitors news coverage of statistics and science. She has served as a researcher for journalist Bill Moyers, a part-time contributor to "Psychology Today", and has written articles for "The New York Times", "The Washington Post", "Reason", and "The American Prospect". Szalavitz is the co-author of "Recovery Options: The Complete Guide" with Joseph Volpicelli, and "The Boy Who Was Raised As a Dog" with Bruce D. Perry.

In "Help at Any Cost" Szalavitz investigates the teen rehabilitation industry and focuses on four programs: Straight, Incorporated, a copy of the Straight Inc. program called KIDS of Bergen County, North Star wilderness boot camp, and the World Wide Association of Specialty Programs and Schools. Some of these programs cost parents over US$2,000 per month. She discusses the history of the troubled-teen industry and its origins in a controversial group founded in 1958 called Synanon. Synanon claimed that it could cure addiction to heroin, and its methodologies such as attack therapy, forced confessions, and imposed powerlessness spread throughout the United States. After a rattlesnake was placed in the mailbox of an attorney suing Synanon, the group's founder was convicted of conspiracy to commit murder. Synanon later went bankrupt, but Szalavitz maintains that it influenced organizations related to the troubled-teen industry.

Szalavitz notes that according to a 2004 statement released by the National Institutes of Health, teen programs using "fear and tough treatment" are not successful and evidence shows that they can worsen existing behavioral problems. Many of the children that enter these programs suffer from mental illness, and already have a history of prior trauma and abuse. Szalavitz uses first-person accounts from teenagers that participated in these programs, and asserts that the programs have potentially serious negative consequences, including post-traumatic stress and deaths.

An emotional story in the book recounts the death of 16-year-old Aaron Bacon. Bacon suffered from a treatable ulcer, and died after being out in the wilderness in Utah for weeks while in the care of the group North Star. Bacon lost in 20 days, but was called "gay" and a "faker" when he complained of abdominal pain, and was punished by North Star supervisors—his sleeping bag and food were taken away from him. The individuals responsible for Bacon were charged with negligent homicide, but did not serve any jail time.

In addition to these first-person accounts, she also incorporates court reports and testimony in her research. Szalavitz highlights controversial practices used by these tough love teen industry programs which the Geneva Convention banned as being too extreme for prisoners of war. She states that there is no evidence that any of the programs are effective. Portions of the book are addressed to parents and provide resources and advice on how to select better choices instead of programs in the tough love teen industry, and the book includes an appendix aimed at educating parents on how to find help for their teenagers.

In his book "Emotions: Mystery Or Madness", psychologist and psychiatrist Robert John McAllister highly recommended "Help at Any Cost", and called it "an excellent and informative book on the subject of the 'troubled-teen industry' ", and "important reading for any parent who is considering sending a teenager to a tough love program, a boot camp, or a wilderness program." In a review of the book in "Library Journal", Linda Beck commented: "This book is excellent owing to its whistle-blowing approach: it exposes an unregulated industry and alerts adults to the severe harm inflicted by these 'schools.' " She called the book "chilling" and "Highly recommended for public libraries."

In a review in "Mother Jones", Nell Bernstein highlighted the sources given for parents at the back of the book, commenting: ""Help at Any Cost" winds up with an appendix that helpfully outlines "evidence based" alternatives to the tough-love approach." Steve Weinberg of the "St. Louis Post-Dispatch" gave the book a positive review, and described Szavalitz as "a talented, relentless investigator". He noted: "Her outrage surfaces frequently as children die, as once-loving families are atomized and as troubled-teen entrepreneurs escape criminal prosecution while using legal maneuvers to prevail in civil court lawsuits seeking damages", and characterized "Help at Any Cost" as "an important book about an industry that sometimes helps troubled youth but causes harm way too often."

A review in "Psychology Today" called the book "An alarming exposé of the burgeoning business of boot camps and drug rehab centers that promise to reform troubled teens", and described Szalavitz's work as "a meticulously reported and thoughtful investigation". Vanessa Bush of "Booklist" characterized the book as "a revealing, at times horrifying look at the troubled-teen industry." "Publishers Weekly" noted: "With a useful appendix discussing when and how to get responsible help for a troubled teen, this book, filled with first-person accounts, should be required reading in Parenting 101", calling the work "a courageous—if horrifying—study of the tough-love industry".

Karen Karbo, author of "The Stuff of Life", gave the book a positive review in "Newsday", writing: "Maia Szalavitz's brisk investigation of America's so-called "tough love" treatment programs, which bill themselves as the last hope for out-of-control, drug-taking teens, would be the stuff of a bad TV movie, if it weren't so smart, well-researched and even-handed." Mark Sauer of "The San Diego Union-Tribune" noted: "Some of the stories reveal physical and psychological abuse that rivals tales from Iraq's Abu Ghraib Prison."

"Help at Any Cost" succeeded in bringing attention to deaths related to medical neglect and child abuse in the troubled-teen industry. On October 10, 2007, the United States House Committee on Education and Labor of the United States House of Representatives held a full committee investigative hearing chaired by Representative George Miller on "Cases of Child Neglect and Abuse at Private Residential Treatment Facilities". The Government Accountability Office presented findings from an investigation into the troubled-teen industry, and parents of teens who died under care of these organizations testified at the hearing. Maia Szalavitz attended the hearing as well.

After the book's publication, Szalavitz continued to write about the controversy surrounding the troubled-teen industry for Statistical Assessment Service, "The New York Times", "The Washington Post", "Reason", and "The American Prospect". The House Committee on Education and Labor held additional hearings on the matter on April 24, 2008, again chaired by Representative George Miller.






</doc>
<doc id="19192667" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19192667" title="Love, Blactually">
Love, Blactually

"Love, Blactually" is the first episode in the seventh season of the American animated television series "Family Guy". It originally aired on Fox in the United States on September 28, 2008. The episode features anthropomorphic dog Brian as he meets a fellow atheist named Carolyn (Kat Foster) at a book store, and the two begin dating. Heeding advice from Stewie (also voiced by MacFarlane), Brian decides not to have sex with her. Carolyn is led to believe that Brian does not want a substantive relationship, so she begins to date Cleveland (Mike Henry).

The episode was written by Henry, and directed by Cyndi Tang. It received generally positive reviews from critics for its storyline. According to Nielsen ratings, it was watched by 9.2 million viewers in its original airing. The episode featured guest performances by Foster and Meredith Baxter, along with several recurring voice actors from the series. "Love, Blactually" was released on DVD along with eight other episodes from the season on June 16, 2009.

During a costume party, Lois suggests Brian to find a girlfriend. After going to the bookstore to buy "The God Delusion", Brian meets an atheist named Carolyn, who happens to be looking for the same book. Brian becomes interested in Carolyn, and the two begin to date. When she invites him to her house, Stewie apprehends Brian and tells him that his relationships fail because he has sex with his girlfriends immediately when they meet. Brian realizes that Stewie is right and decides to listen to his advice. However, he finds out that Carolyn has begun to date Cleveland, since Brian did not want to have sex for the three weeks they have dated, and assumed he just wanted to be friends. A heartbroken Brian tries to deal with his loss, but keeps running into Cleveland and Carolyn having sex in various locations. Blaming Stewie for his advice that cost him a relationship with Carolyn, Brian is about ready to give up on love. Apologizing for his botched attempt to help him out, Stewie suggests that he can convince Cleveland's ex-wife, Loretta, to reconcile with him.

The two visit Loretta in her own room and find out that she feels guilty for cheating on him with Quagmire, and believes she can never go back to Cleveland. Later, Cleveland visits Brian to clear any negative feeling he has against him and Carolyn, as they are at "a point of great soreness", but then Cleveland announces to Brian plans to elope with Carolyn in Hawaii, which makes their friendship tense. Just as Cleveland leaves, Loretta appears out of nowhere. Loretta apologizes to Cleveland for her affair with Quagmire, she then announces that she wants to get their family back together and promises she'll never betray him again. Cleveland goes to Peter and Lois for advice on what should be done. Peter and Lois think Cleveland shouldn't go back to Loretta, but Brian (seeing this as his only chance at getting back with Carolyn) says Cleveland should "forgive and forget", and points out Loretta's good qualities (which he's obviously lying, as his nose starts to grow). Peter suspects that Brian is lying and points out that she can't be trusted after what she did. Cleveland decides to talk to Loretta tomorrow to see how he feels about getting back together with her. Thinking Loretta hasn't changed and suspecting that Brian was using her to sabotage his chances to be with Carolyn, Peter recruits Quagmire to have sex with Loretta again so Cleveland can see she hasn't changed. Quagmire meets her at the hotel she's staying in, but this time, Loretta resists his advances and tells him to beat it after smashing him in the face with an iron. When Cleveland shows up to her hotel room, Cleveland forgives her, but insists that it is time for the both of them to move on while Loretta lives her life as amazing and wonderful as she can. Cleveland finally leaves as Loretta tearfully watches on. When Cleveland visits Carolyn, he finds her and Quagmire having sex, apparently the same way it happened to Brian. Since both Brian and Cleveland have been cheated on by the same woman, Cleveland apologizes to him for stealing Carolyn and they make amends, with the former revealing himself to have received a genital wart.

"Love, Blactually" is the season premiere of the seventh season of "Family Guy". It was written by one of the show's main voice actors, Mike Henry, in his first episode of the season. The episode dealt a lot with the character of Cleveland Brown, which is one of the characters for which Henry provides the voice. The episode was directed by Cyndi Tang, who has been with the show since its fifth season. Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors for the episode. The episode is one of the last to concentrate on the character of Cleveland, since he would be moved to "The Cleveland Show" (which Henry co-created).

"Love, Blactually", along with the first eight episodes of the seventh season were released on DVD by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment in the United States and Canada on June 16, 2009, one month after it had completed broadcast on television. The "Volume 7" DVD release features bonus material including deleted scenes, animatics, and commentaries for every episode.

In addition to the regular cast, actress Kat Foster portrayed the voice of Carolyn, and actress Meredith Baxter portrayed herself. Recurring voice actors Ralph Garman, writer Danny Smith, writer Alec Sulkin, and writer John Viener also made minor appearances. Then-series writer and regular voice actress Alex Borstein portrayed the voice of Loretta Brown.

The episode begins with a costume party, where Brian and Stewie are both dressed as Snoopy from "Peanuts", Quagmire dresses up as Napoleon Dynamite, Peter as Laura Bush, Lois as Michael Dutton Douglas, Joe as Mark Spitz (although people believe he is a crippled Thomas Magnum), and Cleveland as Charlie Chaplin. Woodstock, another character from "Peanuts" also makes a cameo appearance. The popular conversation between Stewie and Brian which draws attention to a hard "h" consonant sound is directly sourced from dialogue within the film "Hot Rod". Stewie finds a book entitled "Horton Hears Domestic Violence in the Next Apartment and Doesn't Call 911!", a parody of "Horton Hears a Who!" Cleveland's deadpan exclamation of "...and boom goes the dynamite" is a reference to the popular catchphrase which became an Internet sensation. Cleveland and Carolyn meet at a Starbucks. Peter doesn't remember the name of Cleveland's ex-wife (Loretta) and he guesses that it's Jennifer Hudson.

The episode was watched by 9.2 million viewers, compared to 9.3 million that tuned in to "The Simpsons" and 7 million that watched "King of the Hill" for their season openers on Fox. The episode received positive reviews. Ahsan Haque of IGN praised "Love, Blactually", writing that it had "many memorable scenes, quote-worthy dialogue, politically incorrect references, and great storyline". He graded the episode 8.9 out of 10. Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club wrote that the episode was "pretty funny overall" with "some great meta-commentary", and graded it B+. In contrast Robin Pierson of The TV Critic gave the episode a negative review, saying that "Family Guy" has become like the shows it mocked in its earlier seasons and he ended his review by stating that it has become "predictable, stale and irritating to watch" and he gave it a 29 out of a possible 100.



</doc>
<doc id="19193239" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19193239" title="Big Brother (UK series 10)">
Big Brother (UK series 10)

Big Brother 2009, also known as Big Brother 10, was the tenth series of the British reality television series "Big Brother". The show followed a total of twenty-two contestants, who were isolated from the outside world for an extended period of time in a custom built House. Each week, one or more of the housemates were evicted by a public vote. The last remaining housemate, Sophie Reade, was declared the winner, winning a cash prize of £71,320.

The series launched on Channel 4 on 4 June 2009 and ended on 4 September 2009, lasting 93 days - the joint-second longest British edition of "Big Brother" to date (together with the seventh and ninth series, and one day shorter than the eighth series). Davina McCall returned as presenter for her tenth consecutive year. Sixteen housemates entered on launch night, with an additional six being introduced in later weeks.

"Big Brother 10" was watched by an average of 2.5 million viewers. It was the lowest rated series of the show since its inception, becoming the first series to draw an average of less than 3 million, and remains the lowest rated series of "Big Brother" to be broadcast on Channel 4. During the series, Channel 4 announced that it would not be renewing its contract to show the series with Endemol once it expired in 2010, meaning that the subsequent eleventh series would be the last to be broadcast on Channel 4.

"Big Brother 10" was produced by Brighter Pictures, a division of Endemol. This series of the programme had been confirmed since 2006 as part of a £180 million contract between Endemol and Channel 4. Phil Edgar-Jones was the creative director of the series whilst Sharon Powers was the executive producer. Open auditions for the programme, which were confirmed during the final of "Celebrity Big Brother 6", began on 3 January 2009 in Edinburgh and ended on 7 February in Manchester. Internet auditioning via YouTube, which saw 2,600 apply, ended on 3 February 2009. Auditionees were subjected to three interviews with various producers, additional meetings with a psychologist and a psychiatrist and a final "talk of doom", in which they were warned about the negative impact that appearing on "Big Brother" could have on their lives. In the weeks preceding the series, the selected housemates were put into "hiding" with no access to the outside world. Housemates were offered aftercare from the production team for up to six months after they left the programme.

The programme's logo, the Big Brother Eye, is based on a black, purple and blue thumbprint and was released on 11 May. It was designed by Daniel Eatock. From 19 May, Channel 4 began uploading teaser clips to the official Big Brother UK YouTube channel; these were also aired during commercial breaks on Channel 4 and its related channels. The series was sponsored by Lucozade Energy and the promotional break bumpers were created by M&C Saatchi and are based upon a 'little brother versus big brother' scenario. The programme began on 4 June, with a 95-minute special programme which introduced the initial 16 participants, and was broadcast on Channel 4 and E4 over a period of 93 days, concluding with the final on 4 September.

The main television coverage of "Big Brother 10" was screened using daily highlights programmes, narrated by Marcus Bentley. These episodes summarised the events of the previous day in the House. Alongside these highlights shows were spin-off programmes, "Big Brother's Big Mouth" and "Big Brother's Little Brother", that commented on fandom, cultural reaction to the events within the House and included interviews with celebrities, former housemates and family and friends of housemates. On Fridays, a live eviction programme was hosted by Davina McCall in which the evicted contestant left the house and received an interview from McCall and two guests. For 2009, "BBLB" returned with George Lamb presenting five weekday evening programmes and one Sunday edition per week. "Big Mouth" was also fronted by McCall and was broadcast on E4 on Friday nights for an hour after the main eviction programme.

In a change to normal eviction interviews this series saw McCall and the evictee on a panel joined by two celebrity fans or psychologists, joining them were:

The panel was not used for the finale, however, Judi James made a recorded segment about each finalist. The panel format was scrapped for the following celebrity and regular series, where McCall interviewed the evictee in the traditional format.

As with each series since "Big Brother 2002", the programme was filmed at Elstree Studios in Borehamwood, Hertfordshire. A total of 27 editing suites, manned by over 300 members of staff, were situated in the "George Lucas Stage" to produce the programme. In the 18 May issue of "Star" magazine, aerial photographs of the House were published, showing the garden under construction. Official pictures of the House interior were released by Channel 4 on 1 June, showing the entrance stairway, living room and garden. The entrance stairway had images of insects on its walls whilst the garden and living room had a science fiction theme; the former included a bus stop as the designated smoking area. On 3 June, "Metro" published an image of the Diary Room, which has a multicoloured chair and wall pattern. There was also a shipping container-based bathroom, a sitting room with red sofas, a wood panelled kitched with purple, black and white fittings and a bedroom with splats of paint covering the walls. The house contained 44 cameras, 75 two-way mirrors and 57 fixed microphones, as well as individual microphones for each housemate.

The format remained largely unchanged from previous series. Housemates were incarcerated in the Big Brother House with no contact to and from the outside world. Each week, the housemates took part in a compulsory task that determined the amount of money they were allocated to spend on their shopping; if they passed, they received a luxury budget and they were allocated a basic budget if they failed. Housemates were instructed to nominate two fellow housemates for eviction each week. This compulsory vote was conducted in the privacy of the Diary Room and housemates were not allowed to discuss the nomination process or influence the nominations of others. On Day 68, Big Brother changed the rules to allow housemates to discuss nominations until further notice. The two or more housemates who gathered the most nominations per week faced a public vote and the housemate receiving the most votes was evicted from the House on the Friday and interviewed by Davina McCall. Housemates could voluntarily leave the House at any time and those who broke the rules could have been ejected by Big Brother.

In a change from previous series, Channel 4 announced that it would no longer donate any of its income from the premium-rate telephone lines, by which viewers vote for whom they would like to see evicted or win the programme, to charitable organisations. The broadcaster said that the current economic downturn is to blame for this decision and that the change would bring "Big Brother" into line with other programmes of its kind, such as "The X Factor" and "Strictly Come Dancing". The format of the live eviction interview programme was altered for this series. Unlike previous series in which McCall interviewed evicted housemates by herself, she was instead joined by two guest panellists to "interrogate" the evictee. Panellists included former housemates, journalists, psychologists, and fans of the programme. A new rule was added to the programme at the start of the series; "fake romances" were not permitted.

"Big Brother 10" saw 22 contestants competing to win. Sixteen participants entered the House on Day 1 and an additional five housemates entered the House on Day 44, followed by one other on Day 56.




During the first three days, the group undertook a series of tasks by which they could earn the right to become housemates. The remaining non-housemates were instructed to change into a special uniform. Anyone not obeying would lose the opportunity to become a housemate. Lisa gained housemate status in the early hours of Day 2 when she answered a ringing phone in the living room. Given 15 minutes to select the fourth housemate, she chose Kris. Charlie and Saffia later became housemates after walking barefoot over broken sugar glass, believing it to be real glass, and Karly became the seventh housemate after being tricked into believing that she had a motorbike ridden over her stomach. Freddie and Sophie became housemates after changing their names, documented by deed poll to Halfwit and Dogface respectively. On Day 3 Cairon earned housemate status by dunking a biscuit in a cup of tea for 25.5 seconds without it disintegrating. Remaining non-housemates Angel, Beinazir, Marcus, Siavash, Sophia and Sree faced the public vote on Day 4 to determine which five would become housemates and which one would be evicted. With 6.8% of a vote to save, Beinazir became the first evictee without ever becoming a housemate.

The first round of nominations took place on Day 6 and resulted in Halfwit and Sophia facing the public vote. On Day 8, the first shopping task saw Kris negotiate his way through a field of laser beams to retrieve the "Emerald of Hope", with one of his fellow housemates being soaked by a bursting balloon full of gunge whenever he interrupted a beam. He completed the task successfully, earning a luxury budget. However, as punishment for Marcus, Sophia and Sree discussing nominations, Big Brother doubled the price of every item on the shopping list. Later that day, Saffia left the House voluntarily to be with her children and Sophia was evicted with 91.2% of the public vote the following night.
The housemates successfully learned and performed the song and dance routine "Me Ol' Bamboo" from the film "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" and won a luxury shopping budget of £5 per person per day.

Day 18, the first day of week three, began with a day-long hippy-themed celebration of Halfwit's 24th birthday, in which Big Brother gave him the "Gift of Normality" that he could keep for himself or give to either Dogface or Noirin. He chose Noirin, freeing her from the obligation to draw a moustache and glasses on her face each day. The housemates failed every part of the Tudor-themed shopping task and received only a basic budget. During the task, Siavash, playing King Henry VIII, was called upon to ban one housemate from nominating and to grant another immunity. He chose Charlie and Marcus respectively. On Day 21, the housemates nominated against the clock in a live programme, resulting in Angel and Halfwit facing the public vote.

In an Italy-themed shopping task, Siavash played the role of a fashionista who was required to change his outfit at Big Brother's request and strike a pose whenever Madonna's "Vogue" was played into the House. Sree and Dogface's contribution was to run a 24-hour ice cream delivery service, while Marcus and Noirin created paintings based on the works of Leonardo da Vinci and Sandro Botticelli. Charlie and Kris played Italian footballers and Lisa had to predict football scores correctly.

In week five, on Day 33, Big Brother punished Charlie for discussing nominations, telling him to remain silent for the rest of the day or else face the public vote. Later, Dogface and Kris were similarly punished, also for discussing nominations. All three failed to keep quiet and faced the public vote, along with Halfwit and Marcus, who received the most nominations. On Day 35, the housemates failed the circus-themed shopping task and received a basic shopping budget. On Day 37, Kris became the sixth person to be evicted from the House with 63.0% of the vote.

In week six, on Day 39, Big Brother told Siavash and Dogface that, because they had discussed nominations earlier in the week, they would face eviction if they uttered a single profanity before 3 p.m. They both failed and therefore faced the public vote, along with Karly and Noirin who received the most nominations. The shopping task consisted of nine separate challenges from previous editions of "Big Brother", in which housemates had to compete against former contestants (see the week seven shopping task section). The housemates failed to pass the required number of challenges and therefore failed the overall task. On Day 44, five new housemates, Kenneth, Bea, David, Hira and Tom entered the House and Karly became the seventh person to be evicted with 50.4% of the vote.

Week seven saw housemates take part in a Greek-themed shopping task with a twist, which involved Charlie and Rodrigo learning a routine by Stavros Flatley, a dance duo featured on "Britain's Got Talent". However, playing Zeus, Halfwit was the only housemate aware of the true nature of the task. In each of three challenges he had to ensure, while still keeping the secret, that his chosen champion defeated the appropriate Greek god. He failed and the housemates received a basic shopping budget. Bea, Charlie, David, Dogface, Halfwit, Hira, Kenneth, Marcus, Noirin, Siavash and Tom all faced eviction. In the early hours of Day 50, Kenneth escaped from the House via the rooftop with help from Marcus, and this led to the eviction being cancelled.

In week eight, in the early hours of Day 53, Tom voluntarily left the Big Brother House. For the shopping task the housemates split into two groups, creating human puppets with one housemate providing the head and feet and another providing the arms, and making them dance to music by Girls Aloud and Take That. Visitors to the Big Brother web site decided by voting that the housemates had failed the task. On Day 56, Noirin's ex-boyfriend Isaac entered the House, but left voluntarily shortly after Noirin's eviction on Day 58 with 60.0% of the public vote.

Bea and Marcus received the most nominations in week nine, but Marcus's attempts to persuade the housemates to nominate him and Siavash's refusal to nominate backfired when Big Brother declared the result void and made all housemates face the public vote to save, not evict. The shopping task was based on Lewis Carroll's Victorian children's novel "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" in which Hira, in the role of Alice, having first been "shrunk" in the Diary Room, spent more than five hours searching for a key buried inside a giant cupcake using only her face. The housemates passed the task and received a luxury shopping budget.

In week ten, following continual rule breaking by a number of housemates, Big Brother decided to allow the discussion of nominations until further notice. Halfwit and Marcus received the most nominations and faced the public vote. The housemates took part in a "Best of British" shopping task in which they had to bog snorkel, play the bagpipes and convince Rodrigo he had met the Queen, who was in fact the impersonator Janette Charles. On Day 72, as a special prize for succeeding in this task, Halfwit and Dogface legally changed their names back to Freddie and Sophie.

In the House of Horrors-themed shopping task Charlie, in the role of Dr Frankenstein, played a version of the game "Operation" in which Bea, playing his Monster, received a shock whenever his hand faltered. On Day 79, Bea was evicted with 88.2% of the vote.

The housemates participated in a future-related task during week twelve, in which Sophie and Rodrigo learned a robotic dance routine to Daft Punk's song "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger" and Lisa and David left the House with instructions to have photographs taken by members of the public in front of three London landmarks whilst dressed as aliens. While they were away, the rest of the housemates attempted to break out of the House and Big Brother responded by reducing the £100,000 prize fund to zero, later announcing that the housemates would be given a chance to win back the money over the course of the next few days. As Siavash refused to nominate, Big Brother allocated his nominations to Charlie and Sophie and Marcus and Siavash were put up for eviction. On Day 85, Siavash accepted the offer of £10,000 towards the prize fund for exchanging his clothes with an outfit provided by Big Brother and the Housemates received a £20 cheque after requesting a mystery prize from the weekly shopping list. Later that day, Marcus rejected Big Brother's offer of £15,000 to shave his ponytail and the group turned down the chance to win £1,500 by swimming 1,500 lengths of the pool. On Day 86, Rodrigo won £6,000 towards the prize fund by correctly guessed the regional locations of three animals after listening to a series of sound effects. Later that day, Marcus was evicted with 64.0% of the public vote.

The housemates competed in a "task with no name" on Day 87, the first day of week thirteen. In this task, the Housemates were provided with several challenges and puzzles but were unaware that they all had to leave the room in order to pass. The housemates passed the task and added £10,000 to the prize fund. The following day, the housemates' previous nominations were shown to the group and Big Brother set them a quiz on what they had seen in order to add money to the prize fund. The group answered 53 of the 60 questions correctly, gaining £5,300 to the winner's prize. A round of nominations took place on this day, which Charlie, Siavash and Sophie refused to participate in. This meant that all of the housemates faced eviction, as David, Lisa and Rodrigo received the most eligible nominations. On Day 89, the housemates were shown the episode of "Big Brother" which documented Day 50 in the House and were told to re-enact it over a five-hour period. They passed this task, earning a luxury shopping budget. However, in order to view the reconstruction the group had to replicate the music video of "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)", a song by Beyoncé Knowles. The group did so, with David portraying Knowles, and were therefore rewarded with a screening of the task after Lisa was evicted with 68.6% of the vote. On Day 91, Charlie, Rodrigo, Sophie and Siavash were instructed to rank themselves in different categories, such as order of selfishness and likelihood to win. David, who was isolated in the Diary Room, had to answer questions based on their answers. As he answered four of the ten questions correctly, he added £40,000 to the prize fund. This meant that the prize fund was settled at £71,320.

After Lisa's eviction on Day 90, the viewers began voting for who they wanted to win the programme. On Day 93, the final day, Rodrigo was the first to be evicted with 11.0% of the five-way vote and he was followed by Charlie, who received 13.2% of the five-way vote. It was then announced that David had finished in third place after gaining 19.0% of the three-way vote. Davina McCall then revealed that Sophie had won this series with 74.4% of the final two-way vote, with Siavash finishing in second place.

Three special, one-off programmes aired on E4 before the launch to commemorate ten years of the programme. The first of which, entitled "Jade: As Seen On TV" aired on 26 May and commented on the life of "Big Brother 2002" contestant Jade Goody and the infamy that surrounded her. The most successful "Big Brother" housemate worldwide, Goody died of cervical cancer two months before the programme aired. The programme was watched by 305,000 people; 1.8% of the TV audience.

"Big Brother's Big Quiz", hosted by Davina McCall, aired on 29 May and featured celebrity team captains singer Jamelia, TV presenter and "Celebrity Big Brother" winner Ulrika Jonsson and comedians Danny Wallace and Jack Whitehall. It also featured former "Big Brother" housemates such as Craig Phillips and Sam and Amanda Marchant.

"Big Brother: A Decade in the Headlines" was transmitted on 30 May and looked back at the social, political and cultural changes that "Big Brother" had made to society since it began. The documentary was hosted by Grace Dent and featured participation from Mark Frith, Carole Malone, Oona King, Peter Tatchell, Krishnan Guru-Murthy and Ian Hyland.

Spin-off programme "Big Brother's Little Brother" featured new competitions and features to mark the event. The first, "The George Lamb Quiz of the Decade", was launched on 7 June. The participants had to show their knowledge of the programme by participating in a quiz relating to every series of "Big Brother". Another competition was established as part of the Greek-themed task in week eight. Here, male "Big Brother's Little Brother" viewers were asked to apply to become a date for Bea Hammill, who was playing the role of Aphrodite. The contestant chosen was Robin from Bristol. The programme also offered a viewer the chance to become Big Brother and talk to the housemates via the Diary Room on the final day of the programme; this was won by Simon "Jobby" Jobson, a 22-year-old DJ from Alnwick, Northumberland. Former housemates, such as Nadia Almada and Rachel Rice, also appeared as guests to mark the occasion.

The shopping task for week seven saw housemates from the previous nine series temporarily return, as current housemates competed against them in a series of "classic" tasks. Former housemates were not paid; a donation was made to Jade Goody's trust fund instead. Phillips was drafted in after "Nasty" Nick Bateman withdrew. Later that day, Lisa competed in a task to build a sugar cube tower alongside Dean O'Loughlin of series two. Day 41 saw Alex Sibley, Sophie Pritchard and Lee Davey from the programme's third edition compete in a re-creation of the egg and spoon race task with Rodrigo trying to predict the outcome. Later that day, Federico Martone from series four participated in a gymkhana competition against Noirin using fake horses and Dogface and Michelle Bass both sang "Pie Jesu", which featured in the wedding task of series five, with viewers deciding which performance was the best. On Day 42, Craig Coates and Makosi Musambasi challenged Siavash to the box task from the sixth series and series seven's Nikki Grahame reenacted her silent disco task alongside Karly. The task drew to a close on Day 43 when Rex Newmark from the previous series returned to participate in the electric shock task with Marcus, in which the rest of housemates were subjected to shocks. The housemates failed to pass the required minimum of seven of the nine challenges and therefore failed the overall task.

In comparison with other contemporary reality television programmes and previous editions of "Big Brother", this series has received lower viewing figures and less press coverage. Bookmakers have also reported that this series has attracted the lowest amount of bets placed for any reality programme in the last decade. Four weeks before the programme began, former chat show presenter Michael Parkinson was critical of the programme; "I object to the exploitation of the underclass in shows like "Big Brother". It is the modern version of Bedlam, where you pay to see the poor benighted people making asses of themselves". Charlie Brooker of "The Guardian" said that the series contained forgettable participants and that the producers were alienating the viewers with confusing tasks that seemed to take place "every four minutes". Simmy Richman of "The Independent" wrote that the programme had become predictable after ten editions and that it had a "here-we-go-again feel". They also complained that the format had become clichéd and the housemates stereotypical, and they criticised the producers for enrolling participants who were using the programme as "a springboard to a "Heat" magazine cover and temporary free entry to dodgy nightclubs". Maggie Brown, writing in her book "A Licence to be Different — The Story of Channel 4", believed that the programme limited its broadcaster as the cost to produce the programme were not justified by the number of viewers it attracted. Mark Lawson, also writing in "The Guardian", suggested that the lack of viewers linked with a tired format and minimal press coverage, claiming that the newspapers had become preoccupied with stories such as the outbreak of swine flu, death of Michael Jackson and MPs' expenses scandal. Lawson also believed that the death of "Big Brother 2002" participant Jade Goody prior to the launch of "Big Brother 2009" contributed to the low viewing figures. Journalist James Donaghy branded the programme a "sorry atrocity" and celebrity gossip blogger Darryn Lyons said that the series had been "massively disappointing", pinpointing Isaac Stout's entrance as a "desperate stunt" to attract viewers. Despite returning to the House to participate in a task, former housemate Dean O'Loughlin has also been critical of this series, describing it as "way too superficial".

However, the series has also received praise from various parties. For example, Gerard Gilbert of "The Independent" argued that in comparison to contemporary TV dramas, "Big Brother" provides much more entertainment, psychological depth and social impact. Gilbert also commented that the storylines of the programme were equal to that of the works of Samuel Beckett. Craig Phillips, the winner of the first series of "Big Brother", and the programme's presenter Davina McCall have responded to the criticisms of the programme's decreasing viewing figures, respectively arguing that the programme achieves low numbers due to the different way in which viewers can watch the programme and that the programme is achieving well considering its timeslot and broadcaster. Brian Dowling, who won the second edition of Big Brother in 2001, defended both the programme and the reality genre as a whole, telling BBC Breakfast that producers were simply providing viewers what they want, such as extreme participants. "The Guardian"'s Heidi Stephens also complimented the series by claiming that it has "seen the emergence of some truly fascinating personalities" and welcomed the return to the basic format of the programme. Stephens went on to compare the storylines and characters of the programme with that of a John Hughes film. Aisleyne Horgan-Wallace, who came third in the seventh series, and "Big Brother 2003" winner Cameron Stout praised the selection of housemates, both claiming that the quality of the programme had improved on previous years. Entertainment website Digital Spy was also complimentary of the series, naming Sophie "Dogface" Reade and Kris Donnelly as two of the sexiest housemates of the past ten years and Angel McKenzie as one of the most outrageous. Towards the end of the programme's airing, Neil Boom of "The Independent" argued that the series is "one of the best ever" despite a decline in the number of viewers. He claimed that there was still high interest on internet forums and that the lower television ratings might be due to the removal of the 24-hour live feed. He praised the selection of housemates and highlighted Siavash, Freddie and Marcus as particular examples. Following the end of the series, Davina McCall also considered "Big Brother 10" to be "Big Brother at its best."

These viewing figures are taken from BARB.


</doc>
<doc id="19280644" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19280644" title="Eleanor Roosevelt">
Eleanor Roosevelt

Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (; October 11, 1884 – November 7, 1962) was an American political figure, diplomat and activist. She served as the First Lady of the United States from March 4, 1933 to April 12, 1945 during her husband President Franklin D. Roosevelt's four terms in office, making her the longest serving First Lady of the United States. Roosevelt served as United States Delegate to the United Nations General Assembly from 1945 to 1952. President Harry S. Truman later called her the "First Lady of the World" in tribute to her human rights achievements.

Roosevelt was a member of the prominent American Roosevelt and Livingston families and a niece of President Theodore Roosevelt. She had an unhappy childhood, having suffered the deaths of both parents and one of her brothers at a young age. At 15, she attended Allenwood Academy in London and was deeply influenced by its headmistress Marie Souvestre. Returning to the U.S., she married her fifth cousin once removed, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in 1905. The Roosevelts' marriage was complicated from the beginning by Franklin's controlling mother, Sara, and after Eleanor discovered her husband's affair with Lucy Mercer in 1918, she resolved to seek fulfillment in leading a public life of her own. She persuaded Franklin to stay in politics after he was stricken with a paralytic illness in 1921, which cost him the normal use of his legs, and began giving speeches and appearing at campaign events in his place. Following Franklin's election as Governor of New York in 1928, and throughout the remainder of Franklin's public career in government, Roosevelt regularly made public appearances on his behalf, and as First Lady, while her husband served as President, she significantly reshaped and redefined the role of First Lady.

Though widely respected in her later years, Roosevelt was a controversial First Lady at the time for her outspokenness, particularly on civil rights for African-Americans. She was the first presidential spouse to hold regular press conferences, write a daily newspaper column, write a monthly magazine column, host a weekly radio show, and speak at a national party convention. On a few occasions, she publicly disagreed with her husband's policies. She launched an experimental community at Arthurdale, West Virginia, for the families of unemployed miners, later widely regarded as a failure. She advocated for expanded roles for women in the workplace, the civil rights of African Americans and Asian Americans, and the rights of World War II refugees.

Following her husband's death in 1945, Roosevelt remained active in politics for the remaining 17 years of her life. She pressed the United States to join and support the United Nations and became its first delegate. She served as the first chair of the UN Commission on Human Rights and oversaw the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Later she chaired the John F. Kennedy administration's Presidential Commission on the Status of Women. By the time of her death, Roosevelt was regarded as "one of the most esteemed women in the world"; "The New York Times" her called "the object of almost universal respect" in an obituary. In 1999, she was ranked ninth in the top ten of Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century.

Anna Eleanor Roosevelt was born in 1884 at 56 West 37th Street in Manhattan, New York City, to socialites Anna Rebecca Hall and Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt. From an early age she preferred to be called by her middle name, Eleanor. Through her father, she was a niece of President Theodore Roosevelt. Through her mother, she was a niece of tennis champions Valentine Gill "Vallie" Hall III and Edward Ludlow Hall. Her mother nicknamed her "Granny" because she acted in such a serious manner as a child. Anna was also somewhat ashamed of her daughter's plainness.

Roosevelt had two younger brothers: Elliott Jr. and Hall. She also had a half brother, Elliott Roosevelt Mann, through her father's affair with Katy Mann, a servant employed by the family. Roosevelt was born into a world of immense wealth and privilege, as her family was part of New York high society called the "swells".

Her mother died from diphtheria on December 7, 1892, and Elliott Jr. died of the same disease the following May. Her father, an alcoholic confined to a sanitarium, died on August 14, 1894, after jumping from a window during a fit of delirium tremens. He survived the fall but died from a seizure. Roosevelt's childhood losses left her prone to depression throughout her life. Her brother Hall later suffered from alcoholism. Before her father died, he implored her to act as a mother towards Hall, and it was a request she made good upon for the rest of Hall's life. Roosevelt doted on Hall, and when he enrolled at Groton School in 1907, she accompanied him as a chaperone. While he was attending Groton, she wrote him almost daily, but always felt a touch of guilt that Hall had not had a fuller childhood. She took pleasure in Hall's brilliant performance at school, and was proud of his many academic accomplishments, which included a master's degree in engineering from Harvard.

After the deaths of her parents, Roosevelt was raised in the household of her maternal grandmother, Mary Livingston Ludlow of the Livingston family in Tivoli, New York. As a child, she was insecure and starved for affection, and considered herself the "ugly duckling". However, Roosevelt wrote at 14 that one's prospects in life were not totally dependent on physical beauty: "no matter how plain a woman may be if truth and loyalty are stamped upon her face all will be attracted to her."

Roosevelt was tutored privately and with the encouragement of her aunt Anna "Bamie" Roosevelt, she was sent to Allenswood Academy at the age of 15, a private finishing school in Wimbledon, outside London, England, where she was educated from 1899 to 1902. The headmistress, Marie Souvestre, was a noted educator who sought to cultivate independent thinking in young women. Souvestre took a special interest in Roosevelt, who learned to speak French fluently and gained self-confidence. Roosevelt and Souvestre maintained a correspondence until March 1905, when Souvestre died, and after this Roosevelt placed Souvestre's portrait on her desk and brought her letters with her. Roosevelt's first cousin Corinne Douglas Robinson, whose first term at Allenswood overlapped with Roosevelt's last, said that when she arrived at the school, Roosevelt was " 'everything' at the school. She was beloved by everybody." Roosevelt wished to continue at Allenswood, but she was summoned home by her grandmother in 1902 to make her social debut.

At age 17 in 1902, Roosevelt completed her formal education and returned to the United States; she was presented at a debutante ball at the Waldorf-Astoria hotel on December 14. She was later given her own "coming out party". She said of her debut in a public discussion once, "It was simply awful. It was a beautiful party, of course, but I was so unhappy, because a girl who comes out is so utterly miserable if she does not know all the young people. Of course I had been so long abroad that I had lost touch with all the girls I used to know in New York. I was miserable through all that."

Roosevelt was active with the New York Junior League shortly after its founding, teaching dancing and calisthenics in the East Side slums. The organization had been brought to Roosevelt's attention by her friend, organization founder Mary Harriman, and a male relative who criticized the group for "drawing young women into public activity".

In the summer of 1902, Roosevelt encountered her father's fifth cousin, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, on a train to Tivoli, New York. The two began a secret correspondence and romance, and became engaged on November 22, 1903. Franklin's mother, Sara Ann Delano, opposed the union and made him promise that the engagement would not be officially announced for a year. "I know what pain I must have caused you," he wrote to his mother of his decision. But, he added, "I know my own mind, and known it for a long time, and know that I could never think otherwise." Sara took her son on a Caribbean cruise in 1904, hoping that a separation would squelch the romance, but Franklin remained determined. The wedding date was set to accommodate President Theodore Roosevelt, who was scheduled to be in New York City for the St. Patrick's Day parade, and who agreed to give the bride away.

The couple were married on March 17, 1905, in a wedding officiated by Endicott Peabody, the groom's headmaster at Groton School. Her cousin Corinne Douglas Robinson was a bridesmaid. Theodore Roosevelt's attendance at the ceremony was front-page news in "The New York Times" and other newspapers. When asked for his thoughts on the Roosevelt–Roosevelt union, the president said, "It is a good thing to keep the name in the family." The couple spent a preliminary honeymoon of one week at Hyde Park, then set up housekeeping in an apartment in New York. That summer they went on their formal honeymoon, a three-month tour of Europe.

Returning to the U.S., the newlyweds settled in a New York City house that was provided by Franklin's mother, as well as in a second residence at the family's estate overlooking the Hudson River in Hyde Park, New York. From the beginning, Roosevelt had a contentious relationship with her controlling mother-in-law. The townhouse that Sara gave to Eleanor and Franklin was connected to her own residence by sliding doors, and Sara ran both households in the decade after the marriage. Early on, Roosevelt had a breakdown in which she explained to Franklin that "I did not like to live in a house which was not in any way mine, one that I had done nothing about and which did not represent the way I wanted to live", but little changed. Sara also sought to control the raising of her grandchildren, and Roosevelt reflected later that "Franklin's children were more my mother-in-law's children than they were mine". Roosevelt's eldest son James remembered Sara telling her grandchildren, "Your mother only bore you, I am more your mother than your mother is."
Roosevelt and Franklin had six children:


Despite becoming pregnant six times, Roosevelt disliked having sex with her husband. She once told her daughter Anna that it was an "ordeal to be borne". She also considered herself ill-suited to motherhood, later writing, "It did not come naturally to me to understand little children or to enjoy them".

In September 1918, Roosevelt was unpacking one of Franklin's suitcases when she discovered a bundle of love letters to him from her social secretary, Lucy Mercer. He had been contemplating leaving his wife for Lucy. However, following pressure from his political advisor, Louis Howe, and from his mother, who threatened to disinherit Franklin if he followed through with a divorce, the couple remained married. Their union from that point on was more of a political partnership. Disillusioned, Roosevelt again became active in public life, and focused increasingly on her social work rather than her role as a wife.

In August 1921, the family was vacationing at Campobello Island, New Brunswick, Canada, when Franklin was diagnosed with a paralytic illness, at the time believed to be polio. During the illness, through her nursing care, Roosevelt probably saved Franklin from death. His legs remained permanently paralyzed. When the extent of his disability became clear, Roosevelt fought a protracted battle with her mother-in-law over his future, persuading him to stay in politics despite Sara's urgings that he retire and become a country gentleman. Franklin's attending physician, Dr. William Keen, commended Roosevelt's devotion to the stricken Franklin during the time of his travail. "You have been a rare wife and have borne your heavy burden most bravely," he said, proclaiming her "one of my heroines".

This proved a turning point in Roosevelt and Sara's long-running struggle, and as Eleanor's public role grew, she increasingly broke from Sara's control. Tensions between Sara and Roosevelt over her new political friends rose to the point that the family constructed a cottage at Val-Kill, in which Roosevelt and her guests lived when Franklin and the children were away from Hyde Park. Roosevelt herself named the place Val-Kill, loosely translated as "waterfall-stream" from the Dutch language common to the original European settlers of the area. Franklin encouraged his wife to develop this property as a place where she could implement some of her ideas for work with winter jobs for rural workers and women. Each year, when Roosevelt held a picnic at Val-Kill for delinquent boys, her granddaughter Eleanor Roosevelt Seagraves assisted her. She was close to her grandmother throughout her life. Seagraves concentrated her career as an educator and librarian on keeping alive many of the causes Roosevelt began and supported.

In 1924, she campaigned for Democrat Alfred E. Smith in his successful re-election bid as governor of New York State against the Republican nominee and her first cousin Theodore Roosevelt, Jr. Theodore never forgave Roosevelt. Her aunt, Anna "Bamie" Roosevelt, publicly broke with her after the election. She wrote of her niece to her son, "I just hate to see Eleanor let herself look as she does. Though never handsome, she always had to me a charming effect. Alas and alack, ever since politics have become her choicest interest, all her charm has disappeared!". Roosevelt dismissed Bamie's criticisms by referring to her as an "aged woman". However, Bamie and Roosevelt eventually reconciled.

Theodore's elder daughter Alice also broke with Roosevelt over her campaign. Alice and her aunt reconciled after the latter wrote Alice a comforting letter upon the death of Alice's daughter, Paulina Longworth.

Roosevelt and her daughter Anna became estranged after she took over some of her mother's social duties at the White House. The relationship was further strained because Roosevelt desperately wanted to go with her husband to Yalta in February 1945 (two months before FDR's death), but he took Anna instead. A few years later, the two were able to reconcile and cooperate on numerous projects. Anna took care of her mother when she was terminally ill in 1962.

Roosevelt's son Elliott authored numerous books, including a mystery series in which his mother was the detective. However, these murder mysteries were researched and written by William Harrington. They continued until Harrington's death in 2000, ten years after Elliott's death. With James Brough, Elliot also wrote a highly personal book about his parents called "The Roosevelts of Hyde Park: An Untold Story", in which he revealed details about the sexual lives of his parents, including his father's relationships with mistress Lucy Mercer and secretary Marguerite ("Missy") LeHand, as well as graphic details surrounding the illness that crippled his father. Published in 1973, the biography also contains valuable insights into FDR's run for vice president, his rise to the governorship of New York, and his capture of the presidency in 1932, particularly with the help of Louis Howe. When Elliott published this book in 1973, Franklin Delano Roosevelt Jr. led the family's denunciation of him; the book was fiercely repudiated by all Elliot's siblings. Another of the siblings, James, published "My Parents, a Differing View" (with Bill Libby, 1976), which was written in part as a response to Elliot's book. A sequel to "An Untold Story" with James Brough, published in 1975 and titled "A Rendezvous With Destiny", carried the Roosevelt saga to the end of World War II. "Mother R.: Eleanor Roosevelt's Untold Story", also with Brough, was published in 1977. "Eleanor Roosevelt, with Love: A Centenary Remembrance", came out in 1984.

In the 1930s, Roosevelt had a very close relationship with legendary aviator Amelia Earhart. One time, the two sneaked out from the White House and went to a party dressed up for the occasion. After flying with Earhart, Roosevelt obtained a student permit but did not further pursue her plans to learn to fly. Franklin was not in favor of his wife becoming a pilot. Nevertheless, the two women communicated frequently throughout their lives.

Roosevelt also had a close relationship with Associated Press (AP) reporter Lorena Hickok, who covered her during the last months of the presidential campaign and "fell madly in love with her". During this period, Roosevelt wrote daily 10- to 15-page letters to "Hick", who was planning to write a biography of the First Lady. The letters included such endearments as, "I want to put my arms around you & kiss you at the corner of your mouth," and, "I can't kiss you, so I kiss your 'picture' good night and good morning!" At Franklin's 1933 inauguration, Roosevelt wore a sapphire ring Hickok had given her. FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover despised Roosevelt's liberalism, her stance regarding civil rights, and her and her husband's criticisms of Hoover's surveillance tactics, and so Hoover maintained a large file on Roosevelt, which the filmmakers of the biopic "J. Edgar" (2011) indicate included compromising evidence of this relationship, which Hoover intended to blackmail Roosevelt with. Compromised as a reporter, Hickok soon resigned her position with the AP to be closer to Roosevelt, who secured her a job as an investigator for a New Deal program.

There is considerable debate about whether or not Roosevelt had a sexual relationship with Hickok. It was known in the White House press corps at the time that Hickok was a lesbian. Scholars, including Lillian Faderman and Hazel Rowley, have asserted that there was a physical component to the relationship, while Hickok biographer Doris Faber has argued that the insinuative phrases have misled historians. Doris Kearns Goodwin stated in her 1994 Pulitzer Prize–winning account of the Roosevelts that "whether Hick and Eleanor went beyond kisses and hugs" could not be determined with certainty. Roosevelt was close friends with several lesbian couples, such as Nancy Cook and Marion Dickerman, and Esther Lape and Elizabeth Fisher Read, suggesting that she understood lesbianism; Marie Souvestre, Roosevelt's childhood teacher and a great influence on her later thinking, was also a lesbian. Faber published some of Roosevelt and Hickok's correspondence in 1980, but concluded that the lovestruck phrasing was simply an "unusually belated schoolgirl crush" and warned historians not to be misled. Researcher Leila J. Rupp criticized Faber's argument, calling her book "a case study in homophobia" and arguing that Faber unwittingly presented "page after page of evidence that delineates the growth and development of a love affair between the two women". In 1992, Roosevelt biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook argued that the relationship was in fact romantic, generating national attention. A 2011 essay by Russell Baker reviewing two new Roosevelt biographies in the "New York Times Review of Books" ("Franklin and Eleanor: An Extraordinary Marriage", by Hazel Rowley, and "Eleanor Roosevelt: Transformative First Lady", by Maurine H. Beasley) stated, "That the Hickok relationship was indeed erotic now seems beyond dispute considering what is known about the letters they exchanged."

In the same years, Washington gossip linked Roosevelt romantically with New Deal administrator Harry Hopkins, with whom she worked closely. Roosevelt also had a close relationship with New York State Police sergeant Earl Miller, who was assigned by the president to be her bodyguard. Roosevelt was 44 years old when she met Miller, 32, in 1929. He became her friend as well as her official escort, teaching her different sports, such as diving and riding, and coached her in tennis. Biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook writes that Miller was Roosevelt's "first romantic involvement" in her middle years. Hazel Rowley concludes, "There is no doubt that Eleanor was in love with Earl for a time ... But they are most unlikely to have had an 'affair'."

Roosevelt's friendship with Miller occurred at the same time that her husband had a rumored relationship with his secretary, Marguerite "Missy" LeHand. Smith writes, "remarkably, both ER and Franklin recognized, accepted, and encouraged the arrangement... Eleanor and Franklin were strong-willed people who cared greatly for each other's happiness but realized their own inability to provide for it." Roosevelt and Miller's relationship is said to have continued until her death in 1962. They are thought to have corresponded daily, but all letters have been lost. According to rumor, the letters were anonymously purchased and destroyed, or locked away when she died.

Roosevelt was longtime friends with Carrie Chapman Catt and gave her the Chi Omega award at the White House in 1941.

In later years, Roosevelt was said to have developed a romantic attachment to her physician, David Gurewitsch, though it was likely limited to a deep friendship.

In the 1920 presidential election, Franklin was nominated as the running mate of Democratic presidential candidate James M. Cox. Roosevelt joined Franklin in touring the country, making her first campaign appearances. Cox was defeated by Republican Warren G. Harding, who won with 404 electoral votes to 127.

Following the onset of Franklin's paralytic illness in 1921, Roosevelt began serving as a stand-in for her incapacitated husband, making public appearances on his behalf, often carefully coached by Louis Howe. She also started working with the Women's Trade Union League (WTUL), raising funds in support of the union's goals: a 48-hour work week, minimum wage, and the abolition of child labor. Throughout the 1920s, Roosevelt became increasingly influential as a leader in the New York State Democratic Party while Franklin used her contacts among Democratic women to strengthen his standing with them, winning their committed support for the future. In 1924, she campaigned for Democrat Alfred E. Smith in his successful re-election bid as governor of New York State against the Republican nominee and her first cousin Theodore Roosevelt Jr. Franklin had spoken out on Theodore's "wretched record" as Assistant Secretary of the Navy during the Teapot Dome scandal, and in return, Theodore said of him, "He's a maverick! He does not wear the brand of our family," which infuriated her. She dogged Theodore on the New York State campaign trail in a car fitted with a "papier-mâché" bonnet shaped like a giant teapot that was made to emit simulated steam (to remind voters of Theodore's supposed, but later disproved, connections to the scandal), and countered his speeches with those of her own, calling him immature. She would later decry these methods, admitting that they were below her dignity but saying that they had been contrived by Democratic Party "dirty tricksters." Theodore was defeated by 105,000 votes, and he never forgave her. By 1928, Roosevelt was promoting Smith's candidacy for president and Franklin's nomination as the Democratic Party's candidate for governor of New York, succeeding Smith. Although Smith lost the presidential race, Franklin won handily and the Roosevelts moved into the governor's mansion in Albany, New York. During Franklin's term as governor, Roosevelt traveled widely in the state to make speeches and inspect state facilities on his behalf, reporting her findings to him at the end of each trip.

In 1927, she joined friends Marion Dickerman and Nancy Cook in buying the Todhunter School for Girls, a finishing school which also offered college preparatory courses, in New York City. At the school, Roosevelt taught upper-level courses in American literature and history, emphasizing independent thought, current events, and social engagement. She continued to teach three days a week while FDR served as governor, but was forced to leave teaching after his election as president.

Also in 1927, she established Val-Kill Industries with Cook, Dickerman, and Caroline O'Day, three friends she met through her activities in the Women's Division of the New York State Democratic Party. It was located on the banks of a stream that flowed through the Roosevelt family estate in Hyde Park, New York. Roosevelt and her business partners financed the construction of a small factory to provide supplemental income for local farming families who would make furniture, pewter, and homespun cloth using traditional craft methods. Capitalizing on the popularity of the Colonial Revival, most Val-Kill products were modeled on eighteenth-century forms. Roosevelt promoted Val-Kill through interviews and public appearances. Val-Kill Industries never became the subsistence program that Roosevelt and her friends imagined, but it did pave the way for larger New Deal initiatives during Franklin's presidential administration. Cook's failing health and pressures from the Great Depression compelled the women to dissolve the partnership in 1938, at which time Roosevelt converted the shop buildings into a cottage at Val-Kill, that eventually became her permanent residence after Franklin died in 1945. Otto Berge acquired the contents of the factory and the use of the Val-Kill name to continue making colonial-style furniture until he retired in 1975. In 1977, Roosevelt's cottage at Val-Kill and its surrounding property of 181 acres (0.73 km2), was formally designated by an act of Congress as the Eleanor Roosevelt National Historic Site, "to commemorate for the education, inspiration, and benefit of present and future generations the life and work of an outstanding woman in American history."

Roosevelt became First Lady of the United States when Franklin was inaugurated on March 4, 1933. Having known all of the twentieth century's previous First Ladies, she was seriously depressed at having to assume the role, which had traditionally been restricted to domesticity and hostessing. Her immediate predecessor, Lou Henry Hoover, had ended her feminist activism on becoming First Lady, stating her intention to be only a "backdrop for Bertie." Eleanor's distress at these precedents was severe enough that Hickok subtitled her biography of Roosevelt "Reluctant First Lady".

With support from Howe and Hickok, Roosevelt set out to redefine the position. According to her biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook, she became "the most controversial First Lady in United States history" in the process. Despite criticism of them both, with her husband's strong support she continued with the active business and speaking agenda she had begun before assuming the role of First Lady in an era when few married women had careers. She was the first presidential spouse to hold regular press conferences and in 1940 became the first to speak at a national party convention. She also wrote a daily and widely syndicated newspaper column, "My Day", another first for a presidential spouse. She was also the first First Lady to write a monthly magazine column and to host a weekly radio show.

In the first year of her husband's administration, Roosevelt was determined to match his presidential salary, and she earned $75,000 from her lectures and writing, most of which she gave to charity. By 1941, she was receiving lecture fees of $1,000, and was made an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa at one of her lectures to celebrate her achievements.

Roosevelt maintained a heavy travel schedule in her twelve years in the White House, frequently making personal appearances at labor meetings to assure Depression-era workers that the White House was mindful of their plight. In one famous cartoon of the time from "The New Yorker" magazine (June 3, 1933), satirizing a visit she had made to a mine, an astonished coal miner, peering down a dark tunnel, says to a co-worker, "For gosh sakes, here comes Mrs. Roosevelt!" 
In early 1933, the "Bonus Army", a protest group of World War I veterans, marched on Washington for the second time in two years, calling for their veteran bonus certificates to be awarded early. The previous year, President Hoover had ordered them dispersed, and the US Army cavalry charged and bombarded the veterans with tear gas. This time, Roosevelt visited the veterans at their muddy campsite, listening to their concerns and singing army songs with them. The meeting defused the tension between the veterans and the administration, and one of the marchers later commented, "Hoover sent the Army. [President] Roosevelt sent his wife."

Also in 1933 after she became First Lady, a rose was discovered and named after Roosevelt, with the name Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt (Rosa x hybrida "Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt"). It is a hybrid tea rose. However, though this is true, there is no evidence to support the story that Roosevelt later quipped, "I once had a rose named after me and I was very flattered. But I was not pleased to read the description in the catalogue: no good in a bed, but fine up against a wall".

In 1937 she began writing her autobiography, all volumes of which were compiled into "The Autobiography of Eleanor Roosevelt" in 1961 (Harper & Brothers, ).

The American Youth Congress was formed in 1935 to advocate for youth rights in U.S. politics, and was responsible for introducing the "American Youth Bill of Rights" to the U.S. Congress. Roosevelt's relationship with the AYC eventually led to the formation of the National Youth Administration, a New Deal agency in the United States, founded in 1935, that focused on providing work and education for Americans between the ages of 16 and 25. The NYA was headed by Aubrey Willis Williams, a prominent liberal from Alabama who was close to Roosevelt and Harry Hopkins. Speaking of the NYA in the 1930s, Roosevelt expressed her concern about ageism, stating that "I live in real terror when I think we may be losing this generation. We have got to bring these young people into the active life of the community and make them feel that they are necessary." In 1939 the Dies Committee subpoenaed leaders of the AYC, who, in addition to serving the AYC, also were members of the Young Communist League. Roosevelt was in attendance at the hearings and afterward invited the subpoenaed witnesses to board at the White House during their stay in Washington D.C. Joseph P. Lash was one of her boarders. On February 10, 1940, members of the AYC, as guests of Roosevelt in her capacity as First Lady, attended a picnic on the White House lawn where they were addressed by Franklin from the South Portico. The President admonished them to condemn not merely the Nazi regime but all dictatorships. The President was reportedly booed by the group. Afterwards, many of the same youth picketed the White House as representatives of the American Peace Mobilization. Among them was Joseph Cadden, one of Roosevelt's overnight boarders. Later in 1940, despite Roosevelt's publication of her reasons "Why I still believe in the Youth Congress," the American Youth Congress was disbanded. The NYA was shut down in 1943.

Roosevelt's chief project during her husband's first two terms was the establishment of a planned community in Arthurdale, West Virginia. On August 18, 1933, at Hickok's urging, Roosevelt visited the families of homeless miners in Morgantown, West Virginia, who had been blacklisted following union activities. Deeply affected by the visit, Roosevelt proposed a resettlement community for the miners at Arthurdale, where they could make a living by subsistence farming, handicrafts, and a local manufacturing plant. She hoped the project could become a model for "a new kind of community" in the U.S., in which workers would be better cared for. Her husband enthusiastically supported the project.

After an initial, disastrous experiment with prefab houses, construction began again in 1934 to Roosevelt's specifications, this time with "every modern convenience", including indoor plumbing and central steam heat. Families occupied the first fifty homes in June, and agreed to repay the government in thirty years' time. Though Roosevelt had hoped for a racially mixed community, the miners insisted on limiting membership to white Christians. After losing a community vote, Roosevelt recommended the creation of other communities for the excluded black and Jewish miners. The experience motivated Roosevelt to become much more outspoken on the issue of racial discrimination.

Roosevelt remained a vigorous fundraiser for the community for several years, as well as spending most of her own income on the project. However, the project was criticized by both the political left and right. Conservatives condemned it as socialist and a "communist plot", while Democratic members of Congress opposed government competition with private enterprise. Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes also opposed the project, citing its high per-family cost. Arthurdale continued to sink as a government spending priority for the federal government until 1941, when the U.S. sold off the last of its holdings in the community at a loss.

Later commentators generally described the Arthurdale experiment as a failure. Roosevelt herself was sharply discouraged by a 1940 visit in which she felt the town had become excessively dependent on outside assistance. However, the residents considered the town a "utopia" compared to their previous circumstances, and many were returned to economic self-sufficiency. Roosevelt personally considered the project a success, later speaking of the improvements she saw in people's lives there and stating, "I don't know whether you think that is worth half a million dollars. But I do."

During Franklin's administration, Roosevelt became an important connection to the African-American population in the era of segregation. Despite the President's desire to placate Southern sentiment, Roosevelt was vocal in her support of the civil rights movement. After her experience with Arthurdale and her inspections of New Deal programs in Southern states, she concluded that New Deal programs were discriminating against African-Americans, who received a disproportionately small share of relief money. Roosevelt became one of the only voices in her husband's administration insisting that benefits be equally extended to Americans of all races.

Roosevelt also broke with tradition by inviting hundreds of African-American guests to the White House. In 1936 she became aware of conditions at the National Training School for Girls, a predominantly black reform school once located in the Palisades neighborhood of Washington, D.C. She visited the school, wrote about it in her "My Day" column, lobbied for additional funding, and pressed for changes in staffing and curriculum. Her White House invitation to the students became an issue in Franklin's 1936 re-election campaign. When the black singer Marian Anderson was denied the use of Washington's Constitution Hall by the Daughters of the American Revolution in 1939, Roosevelt resigned from the group in protest and helped arrange another concert on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. Roosevelt later presented Anderson to the King and Queen of the United Kingdom after Anderson performed at a White House dinner. Roosevelt also arranged the appointment of African-American educator Mary McLeod Bethune, with whom she had struck up a friendship, as Director of the Division of Negro Affairs of the National Youth Administration. To avoid problems with the staff when Bethune would visit the White House, Roosevelt would meet her at the gate, embrace her, and walk in with her arm-in-arm.

She was involved by being "the eyes and the ears" of the New Deal. She looked to the future and was committed to social reform. One of those programs helped working women receive better wages. The New Deal also placed women into less machine work and more white collar work. Women did not have to work in the factories making war supplies because men were coming home so they could take over the long days and nights women had been working to contribute to the war efforts. Roosevelt brought unprecedented activism and ability to the role of the First Lady.
In contrast to her usual support of African-American rights, the "sundown town" Eleanor, in West Virginia, was named for her and was established in 1934 when she and Franklin visited the county and developed it as a test site for families. As a "sundown town", like other Franklin Roosevelt towns around the nation (such as Greenbelt, Greenhills, Greendale, Hanford, or Norris), it was for whites only. It was established as a New Deal project.

Roosevelt lobbied behind the scenes for the 1934 Costigan-Wagner Bill to make lynching a federal crime, including arranging a meeting between Franklin and NAACP president Walter Francis White. Fearing he would lose the votes of Southern congressional delegations for his legislative agenda, however, Franklin refused to publicly support the bill, which proved unable to pass the Senate. In 1942, Roosevelt worked with activist Pauli Murray to persuade Franklin to appeal on behalf of sharecropper Odell Waller, convicted of killing a white farmer during a fight; though Franklin sent a letter to Virginia Governor Colgate Darden urging him to commute the sentence to life imprisonment, Waller was executed as scheduled.

Roosevelt's support of African-American rights made her an unpopular figure among whites in the South. Rumors spread of "Eleanor Clubs" formed by servants to oppose their employers and "Eleanor Tuesdays" on which African-American men would knock down white women on the street, though no evidence has ever been found of either practice. When race riots broke out in Detroit in June 1943, critics in both the North and South wrote that Roosevelt was to blame. At the same time, she grew so popular among African-Americans, previously a reliable Republican voting bloc, that they became a consistent base of support for the Democratic Party.

Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, Roosevelt spoke out against Japanese-American prejudice, warning against the "great hysteria against minority groups." She also privately opposed her husband's Executive Order 9066, which required Japanese-Americans in many areas of the U.S. to enter internment camps. She was widely criticized for her defense of Japanese-American citizens, including a call by the "Los Angeles Times" that she be "forced to retire from public life" over her stand on the issue.

On May 21, 1937, Roosevelt visited Westmoreland Homesteads to mark the arrival of the community's final homesteader. Accompanying her on the trip was the wife of Henry Morgenthau Jr., the president's Secretary of the Treasury. "I am no believer in paternalism. I do not like charities," she had said earlier. But cooperative communities such as Westmoreland Homesteads, she went on, offered an alternative to "our rather settled ideas" that could "provide equality of opportunity for all and prevent the recurrence of a similar disaster [depression] in the future." Residents were so taken by her personal expression of interest in the program that they promptly agreed to rename the community in her honor. (The new town name, Norvelt, was a combination of the last syllables in her names: EleaNOR RooseVELT.) The Norvelt firefighter's hall is also named Roosevelt Hall in honor of her.

Roosevelt was an unprecedentedly outspoken First Lady who made far more use of the media than her predecessors; she held 348 press conferences over the span of her husband's 12-year presidency. Inspired by her relationship with Hickok, Roosevelt placed a ban on male reporters attending the press conferences, effectively forcing newspapers to keep female reporters on staff in order to cover them. She relaxed the rule only once, on her return from her 1943 Pacific trip. Because the Gridiron Club banned women from its annual Gridiron Dinner for journalists, Roosevelt hosted a competing event for female reporters at the White House, which she called "Gridiron Widows". She was interviewed by many newspapers; the New Orleans journalist Iris Kelso described Roosevelt as her most interesting interviewee ever. In the early days of her all-female press conferences, she said they would not address "politics, legislation, or executive decision", since the role of the First Lady was expected to be non-political at that time. She also agreed at first that she would avoid discussing her views on pending congressional measures. Still, the press conferences provided a welcome opportunity for the women reporters to speak directly with the First Lady, access that had been unavailable in previous administrations.
Just before Franklin assumed the presidency in February 1933, Roosevelt published an editorial in the "Women's Daily News" that conflicted so sharply with his intended public spending policies that he published a rejoinder in the following issue. On entering the White House, she signed a contract with the magazine "Woman's Home Companion" to provide a monthly column, in which she answered mail sent to her by readers; the feature was canceled in 1936 as another presidential election approached. She continued her articles in other venues, publishing more than sixty articles in national magazines during her tenure as First Lady. Roosevelt also began a syndicated newspaper column, titled "My Day", which appeared six days a week from 1936 to her death in 1962. In the column, she wrote about her daily activities but also her humanitarian concerns. Hickok and George T. Bye, Roosevelt's literary agent, encouraged her to write the column.

Beasley has argued that Roosevelt's publications, which often dealt with women's issues and invited reader responses, represented a conscious attempt to use journalism "to overcome social isolation" for women by making "public communication a two-way channel".

Roosevelt also made extensive use of radio. She was not the first First Lady to broadcast—her predecessor, Lou Henry Hoover, had done that already. But Hoover did not have a regular radio program, whereas Roosevelt did. She first broadcast her own programs of radio commentary beginning on July 9, 1934. On that first show, she talked about the effect of movies on children, the need for a censor who could make sure movies did not glorify crime and violence, and her opinion about the recent All-Star baseball game. She also read a commercial from a mattress company, which sponsored the broadcast. She said she would not accept any salary for being on the air, and that she would donate the amount ($3,000) to charity. Later that year, in November 1934, she broadcast a series of programs about children's education; it was heard on the CBS Radio Network. Sponsored by a typewriter company, Roosevelt once again donated the money, giving it to the American Friends Service Committee, to help with a school it operated. During 1934, Roosevelt set a record for the most times a First Lady had spoken on radio: she spoke as a guest on other people's programs, as well as the host of her own, for a total of 28 times that year. In 1935, Roosevelt continued to host programs aimed at the female audience, including one called "It's A Woman's World." Each time, she donated the money she earned to charity. The association of a sponsor with the popular First Lady resulted in increases in sales for that company: when the Selby Shoe Company sponsored a series of Roosevelt's programs, sales increased by 200%. The fact that her programs were sponsored created controversy, with her husband's political enemies expressing skepticism about whether she really did donate her salary to charity; they accused her of "profiteering." But her radio programs proved to be so popular with listeners that the criticisms had little effect. She continued to broadcast throughout the 1930s, sometimes on CBS and sometimes on NBC.

On May 10, 1940, Germany invaded Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands, marking the end of the relatively conflict-free "Phoney War" phase of World War II. As the U.S. began to move toward war footing, Roosevelt found herself again depressed, fearing that her role in fighting for domestic justice would become extraneous in a nation focused on foreign affairs. She briefly considered traveling to Europe to work with the Red Cross, but was dissuaded by presidential advisers who pointed out the consequences should the president's wife be captured as a prisoner of war. She soon found other wartime causes to work on, however, beginning with a popular movement to allow the immigration of European refugee children. She also lobbied her husband to allow greater immigration of groups persecuted by the Nazis, including Jews, but fears of fifth columnists caused Franklin to restrict immigration rather than expanding it. Roosevelt successfully secured political refugee status for eighty-three Jewish refugees from the S.S. "Quanza" in August 1940, but was refused on many other occasions. Her son James later wrote that "her deepest regret at the end of her life" was that she had not forced Franklin to accept more refugees from Nazism during the war.
Roosevelt was also active on the home front. Beginning in 1941, she co-chaired the Office of Civilian Defense (OCD) with New York City Mayor Fiorello H. LaGuardia, working to give civilian volunteers expanded roles in war preparations. She soon found herself in a power struggle with LaGuardia, who preferred to focus on narrower aspects of defense, while she saw solutions to broader social problems as equally important to the war effort. Though LaGuardia resigned from the OCD in December 1941, Roosevelt was forced to resign following anger in the House of Representatives over high salaries for several OCD appointments, including two of her close friends.

Also in 1941, the short film "Women in Defense", written by Roosevelt, was released. It was produced by the Office of Emergency Management and briefly outlines the way in which women could help prepare the country for the possibility of war. There is also a segment on the types of costumes women would wear while engaged in war work. At the end of the film, the narrator explains women are vital to securing a healthy American home life and raising children "which has always been the first line of defense".

In October 1942, Roosevelt toured England, visiting with American troops and inspecting British forces. Her visits drew enormous crowds and received almost unanimously favorable press in both England and America. In August 1943, she visited American troops in the South Pacific on a morale-building tour, of which Admiral William Halsey, Jr. later said, "she alone accomplished more good than any other person, or any groups of civilians, who had passed through my area." For her part, Roosevelt was left shaken and deeply depressed by seeing the war's carnage. A number of Congressional Republicans criticized her for using scarce wartime resources for her trip, prompting Franklin to suggest that she take a break from traveling.
Roosevelt supported increased roles for women and African-Americans in the war effort, and began to advocate for women to be given factory jobs a year before it became a widespread practice. In 1942, she urged women of all social backgrounds to learn trades, saying: "if I were of a debutante age I would go into a factory–any factory where I could learn a skill and be useful." Roosevelt learned of the high rate of absenteeism among working mothers, and she campaigned for government-sponsored day care. She notably supported the Tuskegee Airmen in their successful effort to become the first black combat pilots, visiting the Tuskegee Air Corps Advanced Flying School in Alabama. She also flew with African-American chief civilian instructor C. Alfred "Chief" Anderson. Anderson had been flying since 1929 and was responsible for training thousands of rookie pilots; he took her on a half-hour flight in a Piper J-3 Cub. After landing, she cheerfully announced, "Well, you can fly all right." The subsequent brouhaha over the First Lady's flight had such an impact it is often mistakenly cited as the start of the Civilian Pilot Training Program at Tuskegee, even though the program was already five months old. Roosevelt did use her position as a trustee of the Julius Rosenwald Fund to arrange a loan of $175,000 to help finance the building of Moton Field.

After the war, Roosevelt was a strong proponent of the Morgenthau Plan to de-industrialize Germany in the postwar period. In 1947 she attended the National Conference on the German Problem in New York, which she had helped organize. It issued a statement that "any plans to resurrect the economic and political power of Germany" would be dangerous to international security.

Franklin died on April 12, 1945 after suffering a cerebral hemorrhage at the Little White House in Warm Springs, Georgia. Roosevelt later learned that FDR's mistress Lucy Mercer Rutherfurd had been with him when he died, a discovery made more bitter by learning that her daughter Anna had also been aware of the ongoing relationship between the President and Rutherfurd. It was Anna who told her that Franklin had been with Lucy when he died; in addition, she told her that Franklin had continued the relationship for decades, and people surrounding him had hidden the information from his wife. After the funeral, Roosevelt temporarily returned to Val-Kill. Franklin left instructions for her in the event of his death; he proposed turning over Hyde Park to the federal government as a museum, and she spent the following months cataloging the estate and arranging for the transfer. After FDR's death, she moved into an apartment at 29 Washington Square West in Greenwich Village. In 1950, she rented suites at the Park Sheraton Hotel (202 West 56th Street). She lived here until 1953 when she moved to 211 East 62nd Street. When that lease expired in 1958, she returned to the Park Sheraton as she waited for the house she purchased with Edna and David Gurewitsch at 55 East 74th Street to be renovated. The Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum opened on April 12, 1946, setting a precedent for future presidential libraries.

In December 1945, President Harry S. Truman appointed Roosevelt as a delegate to the United Nations General Assembly. In April 1946, she became the first chairperson of the preliminary United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Roosevelt remained chairperson when the Commission was established on a permanent basis in January 1947. Along with René Cassin, John Peters Humphrey and others, she played an instrumental role in drafting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).

In a speech on the night of September 28, 1948, Roosevelt spoke in favor of the Declaration, calling it "the international Magna Carta of all men everywhere". The Declaration was adopted by the General Assembly on December 10, 1948. The vote was unanimous, with eight abstentions: six Soviet Bloc countries as well as South Africa and Saudi Arabia. Roosevelt attributed the abstention of the Soviet bloc nations to Article 13, which provided the right of citizens to leave their countries.

Roosevelt also served as the first United States Representative to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and stayed on at that position until 1953, even after stepping down as chair of the Commission in 1951. The UN posthumously awarded her one of its first Human Rights Prizes in 1968 in recognition of her work.

In the late 1940s, Democrats in New York and throughout the country courted Roosevelt for political office.
Catholics comprised a major element of the Democratic Party in New York City. Roosevelt supported reformers trying to overthrow the Irish machine Tammany Hall, and some Catholics called her anti-Catholic. In July 1949, Roosevelt had a bitter public disagreement with Cardinal Francis Spellman, the Archbishop of New York, over federal funding for parochial schools. Spellman said she was anti-Catholic, and supporters of both took sides in a battle that drew national attention and is "still remembered for its vehemence and hostility."

In 1949, she was made an honorary member of the historically black organization Alpha Kappa Alpha.

She was an early supporter of the Encampment for Citizenship, a non-profit organization that conducts residential summer programs with year-round follow-up for young people of widely diverse backgrounds and nations. She routinely hosted encampment workshops at her Hyde Park estate, and when the program was attacked as "socialistic" by McCarthyite forces in the early 1950s, she vigorously defended it.

In 1954, Tammany Hall boss Carmine DeSapio led the effort to defeat Roosevelt's son, Franklin Delano Roosevelt Jr., in the election for New York Attorney General. Roosevelt grew increasingly disgusted with DeSapio's political conduct through the rest of the 1950s. Eventually, she would join with her old friends Herbert Lehman and Thomas Finletter to form the New York Committee for Democratic Voters, a group dedicated to opposing DeSapio's reincarnated Tammany Hall. Their efforts were eventually successful, and DeSapio was forced to relinquish power in 1961.

Roosevelt was disappointed when President Truman backed New York Governor W. Averell Harriman—a close associate of DeSapio—for the 1952 Democratic presidential nomination. She supported Adlai Stevenson for president in 1952 and 1956, and urged his renomination in 1960. She resigned from her UN post in 1953, when Dwight D. Eisenhower became President. She addressed the Democratic National Convention in 1952 and 1956. Although she had reservations about John F. Kennedy for his failure to condemn McCarthyism, she supported him for president against Richard Nixon. Kennedy later reappointed her to the United Nations, where she served again from 1961 to 1962, and to the National Advisory Committee of the Peace Corps.

By the 1950s, Roosevelt's international role as spokesperson for women led her to stop publicly criticizing the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), although she never supported it. In the early 1960s, she announced that, due to unionization, she believed the ERA was no longer a threat to women as it once may have been and told supporters that they could have the amendment if they wanted it. In 1961, President Kennedy's undersecretary of labor, Esther Peterson, proposed a new Presidential Commission on the Status of Women. Kennedy appointed Roosevelt to chair the commission, with Peterson as director. This was Roosevelt's last public position. She died just before the commission issued its report. It concluded that female equality was best achieved by recognition of gender differences and needs, and not by an Equal Rights Amendment.

Throughout the 1950s, Roosevelt embarked on countless national and international speaking engagements. She continued to pen her newspaper column and made appearances on television and radio broadcasts. She averaged one hundred fifty lectures a year throughout the 1950s, many devoted to her activism on behalf of the United Nations.

Roosevelt received the first annual Franklin Delano Roosevelt Brotherhood Award in 1946. Other notable awards she received during her life postwar included the Award of Merit of the New York City Federation of Women's Clubs in 1948, the Four Freedoms Award in 1950, the Irving Geist Foundation Award in 1950, and the Prince Carl Medal (from Sweden) in 1950. She was the most admired living woman, according to Gallup's most admired man and woman poll of Americans, in 1948, 1949, 1950, 1952, 1953, 1954, 1955, 1956, 1957, 1958, 1959, 1960, and 1961.

In 1958 the play "Sunrise at Campobello" premiered; the drama portrayed Franklin Roosevelt's struggle with polio. Mary Fickett played the role of Eleanor and was nominated for Best Supporting or Featured Actress in a Play. In 1960, a film adaptation of the play premiered, also called "Sunrise at Campobello". It was produced with the cooperation of the Roosevelt's family, and she herself was present on the set during location shooting at the family estate in Hyde Park, New York. Greer Garson, who played Roosevelt, won the Golden Globe and National Board of Review Award for Best Actress. The film received four Academy Award nominations: Best Actress (Garson), Art Direction, Sound and Costume Design.

In April 1960, Roosevelt was diagnosed with aplastic anemia soon after being struck by a car in New York City. In 1962, she was given steroids, which activated a dormant case of tuberculosis in her bone marrow, and she died of resulting cardiac failure at her Manhattan home at 55 East 74th Street on the Upper East Side on November 7, 1962, at the age of 78. Her daughter Anna took care of Roosevelt when she was terminally ill in 1962. President John F. Kennedy ordered all United States flags lowered to half-staff throughout the world on November 8 in tribute to Roosevelt.

Among other prominent attendees, President Kennedy, Vice President Lyndon Johnson and former presidents Truman and Eisenhower honored Roosevelt at funeral services in Hyde Park on November 10, 1962, where she was interred next to her husband in the Rose Garden at "Springwood", the Roosevelt family home. At the services, Adlai Stevenson said: "What other single human being has touched and transformed the existence of so many?", adding, "She would rather light a candle than curse the darkness, and her glow has warmed the world."

After her death, her family deeded the family vacation home on Campobello Island to the governments of the U.S. and Canada, and in 1964 they created the Roosevelt Campobello International Park.


In 1966, the White House Historical Association purchased Douglas Chandor's portrait of Eleanor Roosevelt; the portrait had been commissioned by the Roosevelt family in 1949. The painting was presented at a White House reception on February 4, 1966, that was hosted by Lady Bird Johnson and attended by more than 250 invited guests. The portrait hangs in the Vermeil Room.

Eleanor was posthumously inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in 1973. In 1989, the Eleanor Roosevelt Fund Award was founded; it "honors an individual, project, organization, or institution for outstanding contributions to equality and education for women and girls."

The Eleanor Roosevelt Monument in New York's Riverside Park was dedicated in 1996, with First Lady Hillary Clinton serving as the keynote speaker. It was first monument to an American woman in a New York City park. The centerpiece is a statue of Eleanor sculpted by Penelope Jencks, and the surrounding granite pavement contains inscriptions designed by the architect Michael Middleton Dwyer, including summaries of her achievements, and a quote from her 1958 speech at the United Nations advocating universal human rights. The following year, the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial was dedicated; it has a bronze statue of Eleanor Roosevelt standing before the United Nations emblem, which honors her dedication to the United Nations. It is the only presidential memorial to depict a First Lady.

In 1998, President Bill Clinton established the Eleanor Roosevelt Award for Human Rights to honor outstanding American promoters of rights in the United States. The award was first awarded on the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, honoring Eleanor Roosevelt's role as the "driving force" in the development of the UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The award was presented from 1998 to the end of the Clinton Administration in 2001. In 2010, then-Secretary of State of the United States Hillary Clinton revived the Eleanor Roosevelt Award for Human Rights and presented the award on behalf of the then-President of the United States Barack Obama.

The Gallup Organization published the poll Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century, to determine which people around the world Americans most admired for what they did in the 20th century in 1999. Eleanor Roosevelt came in ninth. In 2001, the Eleanor Roosevelt Legacy Committee (Eleanor's Legacy) was founded by Judith Hollensworth Hope, who was its president until April 2008. It inspires and supports pro-choice Democratic women to run for local and state offices in New York. The Legacy sponsors campaign training schools, links candidates with volunteers and experts, collaborates with like-minded organizations and provides campaign grants to endorsed candidates. In 2007, she was named a Woman hero by The My Hero Project.

On April 20, 2016, United States Secretary of the Treasury Jacob Lew announced that Eleanor Roosevelt will appear with Marian Anderson and noted suffragettes on the redesigned US $5 bill scheduled to be unveiled in the year 2020, the 100th anniversary of the 19th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which guaranteed women the right to vote.

In 1972, the Eleanor Roosevelt Institute was founded; it merged with the Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Foundation in 1987 to become the Roosevelt Institute. The Roosevelt Institute is a liberal American think tank. The organization, based in New York City, states that it exists "to carry forward the legacy and values of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt by developing progressive ideas and bold leadership in the service of restoring America’s promise of opportunity for all."

Eleanor Roosevelt High School, a public magnet high school specializing in science, mathematics, technology, and engineering, was established in 1976 at its current location in Greenbelt, Maryland. It was the first high school named for Eleanor Roosevelt, and is part of the Prince George's County Public Schools system.
Eleanor lived in a stone cottage at Val-Kill, which was two miles east of the Springwood Estate. The cottage had been her home after the death of her husband and was the only residence she had ever personally owned. In 1977, the home was formally designated by an act of Congress as the Eleanor Roosevelt National Historic Site, "to commemorate for the education, inspiration, and benefit of present and future generations the life and work of an outstanding woman in American history." In 1998, Save America's Treasures (SAT) announced Val-Kill cottage as a new official project. SAT's involvement led to the Honoring Eleanor Roosevelt (HER) project, initially run by private volunteers and now a part of SAT. The HER project has since raised almost $1 million, which has gone toward restoration and development efforts at Val-Kill and the production of "Eleanor Roosevelt: Close to Home", a documentary about Roosevelt at Val-Kill. Due in part to the success of these programs, Val-Kill was given a $75,000 grant and named one of 12 sites showcased in "Restore America: A Salute to Preservation", a partnership between SAT, the National Trust and HGTV. The Roosevelt Study Center, a research institute, conference center, and library on twentieth-century American history located in the twelfth-century Abbey of Middelburg, the Netherlands, opened in 1986. It is named after Eleanor Roosevelt, Theodore Roosevelt, and Franklin Roosevelt, all of whose ancestors emigrated from Zeeland, the Netherlands, to the United States in the seventeenth century.

In 1988, Eleanor Roosevelt College, one of six undergraduate residential colleges at the University of California, San Diego, was founded. ERC emphasizes international understanding, including proficiency in a foreign language and a regional specialization. Eleanor Roosevelt High School, a small public high school on the Upper East Side of Manhattan in New York City, was founded in 2002. Eleanor Roosevelt High School in Eastvale, California, opened in 2006.

In 1965, "The Eleanor Roosevelt Story" was released; it was a 1965 American biographical documentary film directed by Richard Kaplan. It won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature in 1965. The Academy Film Archive preserved it in 2006.

In 1976, Talent Associates released the American television miniseries "Eleanor and Franklin", starring Edward Herrmann as Franklin Roosevelt and Jane Alexander as Eleanor Roosevelt; it was broadcast on ABC on January 11 and 12, 1976 and was based on Joseph P. Lash's biography from 1971 with the same title (and longer additional sub-title) based on their correspondence and recently opened archives. The film won numerous awards, including 11 Primetime Emmy Awards, a Golden Globe Award, and the Peabody Award. The director Daniel Petrie won a Primetime Emmy for Director of the Year – Special. In 1977 they released a sequel entitled "", with the same stars. It won 7 Primetime Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Special of the Year. Daniel Petrie again won a Primetime Emmy for Director of the Year – Special for the second film. Both films were acclaimed and noted for historical accuracy.

In 1996, "Washington Post" writer Bob Woodward reported that Hillary Clinton had been having "imaginary discussions" with Eleanor Roosevelt from the start of Clinton's time as First Lady. Following the Democrats' loss of congressional control in the 1994 elections, Clinton had engaged the services of Human Potential Movement proponent Jean Houston. Houston encouraged Clinton to pursue the Roosevelt connection, and while no psychic techniques were used with Clinton, critics and comics immediately suggested that Clinton was holding séances with Roosevelt. The White House stated that this was merely a brainstorming exercise, and a private poll later indicated that most of the public believed these were indeed just imaginary conversations, with the remainder believing that communication with the dead was actually possible. In her 2003 autobiography "Living History", Clinton titled an entire chapter "Conversations with Eleanor", and stated that holding "imaginary conversations [is] actually a useful mental exercise to help analyze problems, provided you choose the right person to visualize. Eleanor Roosevelt was ideal."

In 1996, the children's book "Eleanor" by Barbara Cooney, about Eleanor Roosevelt's childhood, was published.

In 2014 "" was released; it was a 2014 American documentary film directed and produced by Ken Burns. In it Meryl Streep provided the voice of Eleanor Roosevelt. The series premiered to positive reviews and was nominated for three Primetime Emmy Awards, winning the Emmy Award for Outstanding Narrator for Peter Coyote's narration of the first episode. In September 2014, "The Roosevelts" became the most streamed documentary on the PBS website to date. However, one critic of the series, Michelangelo Signorile, wrote in "The Huffington Post" that the production was entertaining but noticeably omitted any references to the Newport sex scandal and another scandal involving Sumner Welles. Signorile also criticized Burns' dismissal of a possible sexual relationship between Eleanor Roosevelt and Lorena Hickok as "tabloid" material. Pulitzer Prize winning historian John Loughey was similarly dismayed that the Newport affair was not included in the series.

Roosevelt and Hickok's relationship is the subject of Susan Quinn's 2016 novel, "Eleanor and Hick: The Love Affair That Shaped a First Lady".





</doc>
<doc id="19293758" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19293758" title="In the Name of the Grandfather">
In the Name of the Grandfather

"In the Name of the Grandfather" is the fourteenth episode of the twentieth season of "The Simpsons". It first aired on Sky1 on St. Patrick's Day, March 17, 2009 and aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 22, 2009. It was the first episode of the show to premiere in Europe before airing on Fox. In the episode, the Simpsons buy a new hot tub and spend so much time relaxing in it that they neglect Abraham "Grampa" Simpson. Homer decides to make it up to Grampa by helping him do one thing he wants to do. Grampa reminisces about O'Flanagan's pub in Ireland where he once had the best night of his life so the Simpsons travel there. Marge, Bart and Lisa visit various Irish landmarks while Homer and Grampa buy O'Flanagan's during a night of binge drinking and soon discover that pubs are no longer popular in Ireland.

"In the Name of the Grandfather" was directed by Ralph Sosa and was the first episode of the show to be written by Matt Marshall. Marshall pitched the idea in 2007 and the script was ready for a table read later that year, but the Writers Guild of America strike delayed work on the episode. Described by executive producer Al Jean as "an affectionate love letter to Ireland", the episode was inspired by a "New York Times" article about the effects of Ireland's smoking ban on pubs. Guest stars for the episode include Colm Meaney as Tom O'Flanagan, Glen Hansard as a street musician and Markéta Irglová as an Eastern European woman. Kenneth Branagh and Kathy Ireland were also reported to have roles in the episode but neither appeared in the final version. The episode contains numerous jokes about Ireland and references to Irish culture including the Giant's Causeway, Blarney Castle, James Joyce, Bloomsday, leprechauns, Guinness, "Riverdance", U2 and the film "Once".

The special broadcast of the episode in Ireland was part of Fox's year-long "Best. 20 Years. Ever." celebration which commemorates the 20th anniversary of the show. To promote the broadcast, Jean, Brooks and voice actor Nancy Cartwright visited Ireland and participated in the Saint Patrick's Day parade in Dublin. Critics in Ireland mostly enjoyed the jokes about the nation but felt that the episode itself was average. The initial broadcast on Sky1 in Ireland was watched by 511,000 viewers, with a 33% share making it the most watched Sky1 broadcast in Ireland ever. In the United Kingdom, an average of 957,000 viewers (with a 4.7% share) watched. The first airing of the episode on Fox in the United States finished with a 3.6 Nielsen rating and was viewed in 6.15 million homes, finishing third in its timeslot.

The Simpson family visits a home and garden show where they decide to purchase a hot tub. They spend hours soaking in the tub and become so relaxed that they forget to visit Abraham "Grampa" Simpson at a family event. Grampa angrily unplugs and destroys the hot tub, scolding them for ignoring him. Homer and the family decide to make up for their neglect by doing something he's always wanted to do but never got the chance for. Grampa reminisces about a pub in Dunkilderry, Ireland called O'Flanagan's, where he claims to have had the best night of his life many years ago. Homer and the family agree to go to Ireland with Abe so he can have one last drink at the pub. When the family arrives they realize Ireland has become a commercialized, hi-tech country of consumers and workaholics. The pub itself has also run out of business as many of the patrons are now yuppies who have no interest in drinking. The pub owner, a man named Tom O'Flanagan, is happy to have customers again. Homer and Grampa sit down at the pub and start drinking while Marge takes Bart and Lisa to visit various Irish landmarks, such as the Giant's Causeway, Blarney Castle, the Guinness brewery and the city of Dublin.

After a long night of drinking, Homer and Grampa awaken and discover that they bought the pub from Tom O'Flanagan during the previous night's binge, much to their shock and dismay. They rename the bar and try to continue running it but get no business and have to find a way to market their unwelcoming business. Homer gets help from Moe Szyslak, who suggests that they allow people to do illegal things in their pub. The guys discover that it's illegal to smoke indoors in Ireland, so they turn the bar into a smokeasy. They do a roaring trade, but are closed down by the Irish authorities. As punishment, Homer and Grampa are deported back to America and have to pay a small fine. Chief Wiggum arrives to bring them back to the U.S., but accidentally hits himself with his nightstick and then maces and Tasers himself.

"In the Name of the Grandfather" was the first episode written by Matt Marshall who had previously worked on the show as a writers' assistant. In 2007, he pitched the idea of Grampa being neglected and the Simpsons taking him to Ireland. The script was ready for a table read in late 2007, but the Writers Guild of America strike delayed work on the episode. Executive producer Al Jean said the episode is intended to be "an affectionate love letter to Ireland" because many of the writers have Irish roots. He added, "The episode is based on the experiences of myself and a lot of the writers on "The Simpsons" who have Irish ancestry and come back to visit to find it very different, much more hi-tech." According to James L. Brooks, the story was also inspired by a "New York Times" article about the effects of the smoking ban in Ireland on pubs.

Previous episodes of the show where the Simpsons visit other countries have been controversial. For example, the Simpsons visited Australia in "Bart vs. Australia" (season six, 1995) and Brazil in "Blame It on Lisa" (season 13, 2002) and both episodes generated controversy and negative reaction in the visited countries. In the latter case, Rio de Janeiro's tourist board—who claimed that the city was portrayed as having rampant street crime, kidnappings, slums, and monkey and rat infestations—went so far as to threaten Fox with legal action. When asked whether he thought this episode would generate similar controversies, Al Jean replied "I'm Irish American and I know Irish people have an excellent sense of humor so we weren't very worried."

Colm Meaney guest starred as Tom O'Flanagan. Al Jean felt that Meaney was "just perfect with his voice". For the episode, Glen Hansard and Markéta Irglová reprised their roles as a street musician and Eastern European woman, respectively, from the film "Once". They recorded their parts in October 2008 in Los Angeles during their tour of the United States.

In a September 2008 interview, Jean said that Kenneth Branagh would guest star as the pub owner and that he had come in to record the part. However, Branagh was replaced by Meaney and did not appear in the episode. According to Fox's official press release, Kathy Ireland was to have a cameo as herself. However, although she appeared in animated form in the episode, a caption stated that the producers asked her to guest voice and that she had declined. The voice of her character was performed by Tress MacNeille.

The episode featured numerous jokes about and references to Ireland and its culture. The title refers to the Irish film "In the Name of the Father". The Simpson family visits landmarks including Blarney Castle and Guinness Brewery as well as the Giant's Causeway. The fictional village of Dunkilderry contains yuppie leprechauns described by Grampa as "yuprechauns" and Homer drinks Guinness beer. An advertising executive with Guinness stated that a deal had to be worked out with "The Simpsons" producers in order for the brand to appear in the episode. The Simpsons visit Dublin on Bloomsday, a day when people recreate the events in James Joyce's novel "Ulysses". Homer says that he wants to take Ireland back to the "good old days of "Angela's Ashes"", referencing Irish author Frank McCourt's memoir. In his flashback, Grampa dances in "Riverdance" style. Musicians Glen Hansard and Markéta Irglová reprise their roles from the 2007 Irish film "Once" - much of which was originally shot in Mountjoy Square, Dublin, coincidentally a location that is also featured in "Ulysses". A billboard in Ireland advertises a U2 moving company with the slogan "We Move in Mysterious Ways".

Apart from the references to Ireland Bart also makes a derogatory remark about Belgium, causing Marge to threaten him with "taking his Tintins away", whereupon Bart clutches a copy of the Tintin album "The Crab with the Golden Claws" to his chest, promising he'll behave.

"In the Name of the Grandfather" was first episode of "The Simpsons" to premiere in Europe before airing on Fox in the United States. Previously, new episodes of the show occasionally aired on the Global Television Network in Canada a half-hour before they aired on Fox. Global simulcasts shows from several American networks and the occasional special forces them to push episodes of "The Simpsons" to an earlier timeslot.

The episode aired at 7:30 PM on Sky1 and was paired with "Sex, Pies and Idiot Scrapes", the season premiere episode of "The Simpsons", which begins with a visit to a St. Patrick's Day parade. The special broadcast is part of Fox's year-long "Best. 20 Years. Ever." celebration which commemorates the 20th anniversary of the show. To promote the broadcast, executive producers Al Jean and James L. Brooks, as well as Nancy Cartwright visited Ireland and participated in the Saint Patrick's Day parade in Dublin. The episode was screened at the Lighthouse Cinema in Dublin on March 16. In addition, Homer was announced as the special guest editor of the March edition of "Sky Magazine". To promote the episode in the United States, several people dressed as Marge visited pubs in various major cities on March 17 and gave away codes for free cell phone ringtones and wallpaper. A clip from the episode was played all day on the JumboTron screen in Times Square, New York City.

Before "In the Name of the Grandfather" aired, Irish bookmaker Paddy Power started taking bets on what would happen in the episode. It offered odds on things such as which Irish phrase Homer would use first, number of viewers, and which Irish star would make a cameo appearance.

The initial airing of the episode on Sky1 in the United Kingdom drew an average of 957,000 viewers with a 4.7% share of the audience. The initial broadcast on Sky1 in Ireland was watched by 511,000 viewers, with a 33% share. The episode became the most watched Sky1 broadcast in Ireland, breaking the previous record set in April 2004. The episode also had a 60.5% share of child viewers and a 40% share of the 15- to 24-year-old demographic, both records. The original airing of the episode on Fox in the United States finished with a 3.6 Nielsen rating and was viewed in 6.15 million homes. Combined with an episode of "King of the Hill", the episode finished third in its timeslot.

Shane Hegarty of "The Irish Times" wrote that it "may not have been a vintage episode [...] but it had plenty of good moments, and from an Irish perspective it was a fascinating opportunity to see ourselves through the eyes of the greatest comedy series ever written." He added that "even as it reveled in stereotypes, it used them to continue the running joke about how Ireland doesn't conform to American's ["sic"] views of it." Pat Stacey of the "Evening Herald" gave the episode two stars. He wrote that he enjoyed the jokes about the Irish landmarks but called it "a fairly slapdash, ramshackle half-hour" and mentioned that Colm Meaney deserved a better role. Evan Fanning of the "Sunday Independent" wrote "Yes, The Simpsons came to Ireland and all we got was some lousy rehashed jokes and a feeling that the whole thing was a bit of a waste of time."

Robert Canning of IGN wrote "It wasn't the funniest of foreign land adventures, but it was serviceable. [...] The saving grace of the episode was all the Irish-centric vignettes with Marge and the kids. These quick hitting gags were the funniest moments and kept the episode from being completely blah." Steve Heisler of "The A.V. Club" gave the episode a B, commenting that the episode "allowed the show to have fun with its surroundings", adding that it was one of his favorites of the twentieth season.



</doc>
<doc id="19326995" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19326995" title="Circus (Britney Spears album)">
Circus (Britney Spears album)

Circus is the sixth studio album by American singer Britney Spears. It was released on November 28, 2008 through Jive Records. Looking to transition from her "darker and more urban" fifth studio album "Blackout" (2007), Spears wanted to make her next project "a little bit lighter". Spears recorded the record during the summer of 2008, after her much-publicized personal struggles saw her placement under a temporary conservatorship earlier that year. As executive producers, Larry Rudolph and Teresa LaBarbera Whites enlisted collaborators including Spears' longtime colleague Max Martin and Nate "Danja" Hills.
Upon its release, "Circus" received generally favorable reviews from music critics, who complimented its production but were ambivalent towards its lyrical content. It debuted at number one on the US "Billboard" 200 with first-week sales of over 505,000 copies, making it her fifth album to reach the top of the chart.

Four singles were released from the album, three of which became international hits. Its lead single "Womanizer" peaked atop the US "Billboard" Hot 100 and registered as the largest jump to the top of the chart at the time after debuting at number ninety-six. It became Spears's best-selling song in the country since "...Baby One More Time", and received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Dance Recording at the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards (2010). The second and third singles "Circus" and "If U Seek Amy" peaked at numbers three and nineteen in the country, respectively. Consequentially, "Circus" became Spears's second album after her debut effort "...Baby One More Time" (1999) to have two top-ten singles and three top-twenty singles, also being her first to have two top-five singles in the United States along with five charting songs on the "Billboard" Hot 100. To promote the album, Spears embarked on a concert tour titled The Circus Starring Britney Spears, which commenced in March 2009.

During the summer of 2008, it was confirmed that Spears was in the process of recording her sixth studio album. With the album's announcement came the additional confirmation of the involvement of producers Sean Garrett, Guy Sigsworth, Danja and Bloodshy & Avant. During its development, Garrett and vocal producer Jim Beanz complimented Spears's work ethic after her much-publicized personal struggles the previous year.

Spears chose to write much of the material for the album and worked to develop a more pop-influenced record with collaborators she had worked with earlier in her career. She stated that "Circus" marked the longest time she had spent recording an album, adding, "I think it is more urban [...] I'm writing every day, right here at the piano in this living room" and also described the album as her best work to date.

Producer Claude Kelly discussed the album's initial lack of concept saying, "When I went in with [Dr. Luke] we knew we were going to maybe write something for [Britney], but there was no concept, it was just knowing her style and knowing what she does. Max Martin, who produced Spears' debut single "...Baby One More Time", produced "If U Seek Amy" for the album. The Outsyders, an Atlanta-based production team, produced the album's first single, while Fernando Garibay worked on two bonus songs for Spears. Danja reported that he worked on the tracks at Chalice Recording Studios in Los Angeles, and Spears recorded them at Glenwood Place Studios in Burbank; the Canadian trio Let's Go to War co-wrote and produced the track "Mmm Papi". Lil Jon, Rodney Jerkins, Sean Garrett, and Taio Cruz announced they were working with Spears, though their songs weren't included on the official track listing.

Bonus track and the fourth single from the album "Radar" was, since it was included on Spears's previous studio album "Blackout" (2007), recorded on November 8, 2006, the day after Spears filed for divorce from Kevin Federline, at Sony Music Studios in New York City.

Spears commented of the album's title: "I like the fact that you're always on the edge of your seat when you're at a circus. You're never bored [...] You're just really engulfed in what's going on around you. And you want to know what's going to happen next."

"Circus" has been described as a sequel to Spears's fifth studio album "Blackout". She described the album as "lighter" than "Blackout", which was more urban sounding. Its "fiery" and "confrontational" lyrics have been also compared to those of its predecessor. The album has been compared to the works of Janet Jackson, Eurythmics, New Order and the songwriting of Prince, Leiber & Stoller and Phil Spector. "Circus" incorporates themes that were acknowledged in Spears's earlier work. "Circus" and "Kill the Lights" discuss fame, which was previously seen in "Piece of Me", while "Womanizer" and "Shattered Glass" talk about a womanizing man.

"Circus" opens with its lead single "Womanizer". It features synth sirens with a repetitive chorus, and lyrically discusses a cheating man; it was described by Spears as a girl anthem. "Circus" addresses her feelings as an entertainer and performing, highlighted in the lines "All eyes on me in the centre of the ring just like a circus / When I crack that whip everybody gonna trip just like a circus". Its electronic dance elements were compared to those of Spears's earlier single "Break the Ice". The ballad "Out from Under" incorporates acoustic guitar backings, and has gathered comparisons to her track "I'm Not a Girl, Not Yet a Woman". "Kill the Lights" is a dance-pop song that talks about Spears's conflict with paparazzi. Critics noted similarities to the works of Madonna as well as Spears's own "Piece of Me". "Shattered Glass" utilizes dark electronic beats and details a non-repairable relationship.

"If U Seek Amy" integrates "glam-rave" elements with traditional pop styles; it gained controversy for its double entendre, where the title sounds phonetically like "F-U-C-K me". The electropop track "Unusual You" deals with a woman finding unexpected love. It has been compared to musical themes from the 1980s and 1990s, and has been noted as a "pulsating ballad", with the song also drawing comparisons to the "shimmering waterfall mood first popularized by Janet Jackson". "Blur", which features Spears singing in a lower register, sees the inclusion of urban influences, and lyrically recalls the morning after a party with lyrics "Can't remember what I did last night/I gotta get my head right, where the hell am I? Who are you? What'd we do last night?"; it drew similarities to Spears' song "Early Mornin" from "In the Zone". "Mmm Papi" draws elements from a 1960s go-go rock guitar and Latin-pop dance hall themes. Despite its "fun" nature, it was criticized for appearing to "revisit the Lolita persona of ""…Baby One More Time"". It has been suggested that its lyrics deal with either Spears's father Jamie or paparazzo Adnan Ghalib. "Mannequin" is a dance-pop song with a trip hop influence; while being noted for its "risky" and "futuristic" nature, it has also been suggested that Spears's vocals sounded "lifeless". "Lace and Leather" gained comparisons to ""Control" era Janet Jackson", Prince, and Vanity 6's works from the 1980s and featured a then-unknown Kesha as a backing vocalist. "My Baby", described as having a "faux-Janet Jackson vocal", was written by Spears about her two sons Sean Preston and Jayden James Federline.

"Circus" was initially scheduled to be released worldwide on December 2, 2008, Spears's twenty-seventh birthday. However, after unauthorized online leaks, imeem began streaming the album from their website on November 25. The album shared a release date with the similarly titled album "The Circus" by British group Take That. Both standard and deluxe editions of the album were released in Europe on November 28, 2008 and in the United States on December 2, 2008.

To promote the album, Jive Records set up a hotline where fans could leave a message for Spears, some of which received a return phone call from her. Some songs were previewed through the website of the New York radio station WKTU and Amazon.com. MTV aired a ninety-minute long documentary "" on November 30, 2008, documenting her return to her career. In May 2009, Jive's official website held a Britney Spears Global Fan-Fiction Contest, which required a fan to submit a two-hundred-word story based on one of the songs from "Circus". The public were allowed to vote for their favorite short story which would be produced into an animated music video. The winning story was based on the song "Kill the Lights"; the video premiered on July 27, 2009.

Spears's live comeback began on November 6, 2008 with a cameo appearance at the Dodger Stadium show of Madonna's Sticky & Sweet Tour (2008–09). Midway through the performance of "Human Nature", Spears joined Madonna on stage. The week prior to the album's release, Spears performed in several countries as a part of the Circus Promo Tour. On November 27, 2008, Spears performed "Womanizer" live at the 2008 Bambi Awards in Offenburg, Germany, where she received an award for Best International Pop Star. In addition, she performed the song on "Star Academy" in France the following day and on "The X Factor" in the United Kingdom on November 29. Her performance on "The X Factor" was watched by an average of 11,880,000 citizens in the United Kingdom. Spears premiered her second single "Circus" on the Big Apple Circus at the "Good Morning America" in New York City, and also performed "Womanizer" on December 2, 2008 which coincided with her twenty-seventh birthday and the release of "Circus". On December 16, 2008, she performed on NTV Japan's-3000 "Best Artist of 2008".

While performing on "Good Morning America" on December 2, 2008, Spears announced her fifth worldwide concert tour, titled The Circus Starring Britney Spears. She first revealed the first leg of twenty-five dates in the United States and two in the United Kingdom. Her longtime manager Larry Rudolph stated that the tour would "blow people's minds and promises to show Britney's fans something they will never forget", later adding, "she goes full-speed the whole show — about an hour and a half. It's pretty intense. This is a full-blown, full-out Britney Spears show, It is everything everybody expects from her — and more!" Spears also expressed excitement in including songs from "Blackout" into the setlist, as she didn't tour to promote it. The tour began on March 3, 2009 in New Orleans' New Orleans Arena and finished on November 29, 2009 in Adelaide's Adelaide Entertainment Centre. There were four legs of the tour, visiting North America twice, and others being Europe and Australia. The stage was composed of three rings and set in-the-round to resemble an actual circus. Fashion designers Dean and Dan Caten created the costumes. A giant cylinder screen was set above the stage to showcase videos and backdrops. Effects were provided by Solotech. The setlist was composed generally from her albums "In the Zone", "Blackout" and "Circus". In June 2009, Britney announced she would tour Australia for the first time; she was also rumored to tour South America, though her manager Adam Leber denied this despite their efforts to do so.

Controversy arose during the Australian leg of the tour after several fans walked out of the performances due to Spears's alleged lip-synching; such claims were later denied by Spears's management and promoters. The tour was ranked as the fourth highest-grossing tour of the year in North America, becoming the highest-grossing tour of the year by a solo artist. In February 2010, Pollstar released their Top 50 Worldwide Concert Tours of 2009; "The Circus Starring Britney Spears" was ranked as the fifth highest-grossing tour worldwide of the year, with a gross of $131.8 million. In May 2010, "Hollyscoop" ranked the tour at the fifth position in their 15 Most Profitable Female Tours Ever list.

"Womanizer" was released on September 26, 2008 as the album's lead single. The song was met with positive response from critics, who complimented its hook and empowering lyrics and deemed it as a return of form and a "comeback" single for Spears. Womanizer debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100 at number ninety-six before jumping to number one the next week. The song broke the record for the largest leap to any position. The record was later broken by Kelly Clarkson's "My Life Would Suck Without You". The song is considered one of Spears's biggest songs and has been covered by several other artists. "Womanizer" has sold over 3,200,000 digital downloads in the United States. The music video premiered on October 18, 2008 as a spiritual sequel to "Toxic" (2004). It portrays Spears as a woman who disguises herself in different costumes and follows her boyfriend through his daily activities to expose him in the end.

"Circus" was released on December 4, 2008 as the album's second single, a day earlier than planned due to unauthorized leaks. It debuted and peaked at number three on the US "Billboard" Hot 100. "Circus" has sold over 2,763,000 digital downloads in the United States. The accompanying music video portrays Spears as a ringleader of a circus accompanied by different performers, and features scenes of Spears in different circus settings. The video received positive reviews from critics, but was criticized for featuring "cruelly trained animals", however claims were dismissed. It won a Best Video award on Fuse TV.

"If U Seek Amy" was released on March 10, 2009 as the album's third single. Sharon Dastur of Z100 stated that Spears had recorded a new version of the song and the new edit would be provided by Jive Records. The Parents Television Council (PTC) threatened to file indecency complaints with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) against any station that played the song between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. The song peaked at number nineteen on the US "Billboard" Hot 100. The music video was released on March 12, 2009, and depicts Spears poking fun at American culture.

"Radar" was originally included on "Blackout" and to be released as its fourth and final single. However, its release was cancelled when Spears began work on "Circus", and was instead released as a promotional single in 2008. "Radar" was included as a bonus track on "Circus" and was released as the album's fourth single on June 23, 2009. The music video portrays Spears as an aristocrat at a polo mansion involved in a love triangle with two men who are polo players. "Radar" originally entered the US Digital Songs at number fifty-two due to digital downloads from "Blackout" and after being confirmed as a single entered the US "Billboard" Hot 100 at number ninety and then peaked at number eighty-eight the following week.

Upon its release, "Circus" received generally favorable reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of hundred to reviews from mainstream critics, "Circus" received an average score of sixty-four, based on 22 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Stephen Thomas Erlewine provided a favorable review, describing it as a "friendly remake of the hedonistic "Blackout"", but preferred its predecessor for being more "sleek or addictive" than "Circus". Genevieve Koski of "The A.V. Club" appreciated that Spears appeared to "put some real effort into her "Circus" performances", rather than seeming "flat-sounding" as she felt "Blackout" had. Writing for Digital Spy, Nick Levine opined that Spears "sounds more confident" than she had on "Blackout". While Chris Willman from "Entertainment Weekly" appreciated the overall production of "Circus", he was critical of Spears' recently established pattern of "putting out albums with titles that promise more self-revelation than she's ultimately able to provide."

Robert Christgau gave "Circus" a two-star honorable mention, stating that it was "still fun more often than not". Jon Pareles of "The New York Times" expressed his enjoyment of the "crisp" material that incorporated "catchy melodic interludes". Caryn Ganz from "Rolling Stone" opined that the "clubby, adventurous pop" included on the album could have been a satisfactory successor to her fourth studio album "In the Zone" (2003). Writing for "USA Today", Steve Jones applauded Spears for being "resilient" and "[knowing] who she is as a singer" and not "[wasting] time searching for artistic direction or overthinking her appeal." "The Village Voice" considered it "no better or worse than Janet Jackson's dominatrix-lite "Discipline"."

Alexis Petridis of "The Guardian" gave a more mixed review, suggesting that Spears "frequently sounds disconnected, even a bit bored" throughout the record, whereas "Blackout" was a "relentless, risky album made by a woman whose obituary was apparently being prepared by Associated Press." A writer for "The Independent" gave a negative review, opining that Spears' vocal delivery sounded emotionless in mid-tempo and ballad-paced tracks. Slant Magazine's Eric Henderson shared a similar sentiment, suggesting that the album's "self-actualization" gave off a "hollow" feel through the majority of the record. Ann Powers from "Los Angeles Times" felt that "Circus" served as a "bang-up job" of stating that "Spears is still a young woman trying to manage an impossible situation." Writing for "NME", Hamish MacBain was disappointed that "Spears is quite simply rubbish at being sexy", adding that "Circus" is the "umpteenth attempt to turn the perceived chaos of Britney's transition to adulthood – she's 27 next week! – into sleazy, raunchy, dirrty adult-pop product."

"Circus" debuted at number one on the US "Billboard" 200, with first-week sales of over 505,000 copies. It was the second biggest debut week sales by a female artist of 2008, only behind Taylor Swift's "Fearless". The album spent nine weeks in the top ten, making it Spears's longest-running top-ten album since "Oops!... I Did It Again", which spent twenty-three weeks in the top ten in 2000. "Circus" was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on January 29, 2009. According to Nielsen SoundScan, as of March 2015, the album has sold 1.7 million copies in the United States. With over 51,000 units sold, the album opened at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart, her best first-week sales in the country since "Oops!... I Did It Again", which sold 95,000 copies in May 2000. In less than a month, "Circus" became the ninth best-selling album of 2008, with 143,000 copies, and one of the top ten selling digital albums of the year with over 10,100 downloads. In March 2009, "Circus" was certified triple platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association (CRIA), denoting 240,000 shipped copies to retailers. In Mexico, the album debuted atop the international chart and at number three on Top 100 Mexico, selling over 46,000 copies and being certified gold by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas (AMPROFON) in its first week.

In Oceania, the album was a top-ten success, peaking at number three in Australia and number six in New Zealand, and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) after three weeks for shipments of 70,000 units. It has since gone on to be certified double platinum for shipments of 140,000 units. In the United Kingdom, the album debuted and peaked at number four on the UK Albums Chart, spending thirty-one weeks on the chart. The album was certified Platinum in the United Kingdom. In France, the album sold 18,319 copies in its first two days of release, debuting at number five on the French Albums Chart. In Japan, the album peaked at number five on the Oricon Albums Chart and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ).

Despite not being released as singles, several songs from "Circus" appeared on "Billboard"s component charts after the album's release. "Shattered Glass", peaked at number seventy on the US "Billboard" Hot 100, higher than the album's fourth single "Radar". It peaked at number twenty-nine on the US Hot Digital Songs, while peaking at number thirty-six on Canadian Hot Digital Songs. The song also entered the Pop 100 chart, peaking at number fifty-seven. "Unusual You", "Lace and Leather" and "Mmm Papi" peaked at numbers eighty, eighty-four and ninety-four on the US Pop 100, respectively. "Out from Under" debuted at number forty on Swedish Singles Chart on the week of August 14, 2009, reaching number thirty-two following week. It stayed on the chart for five weeks.

Notes

Credits adapted from AllMusic.



</doc>
<doc id="19383199" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19383199" title="Hjúki and Bil">
Hjúki and Bil

In Norse mythology, Hjúki (Old Norse, possibly meaning "the one returning to health") and Bil (Old Norse, literally "instant") are a brother and sister pair of children who follow the personified moon, Máni, across the heavens. Both Hjúki and Bil are solely attested in the "Prose Edda", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson. Scholarly theories that surround the two concern their nature, their role as potential personifications of the craters on the moon or its phases, and their relation to later folklore in Germanic Europe. Bil has been identified with the Bilwis, an agriculture-associated figure that is frequently attested in the folklore of German-speaking areas of Europe.

In chapter 11 of the "Prose Edda" book "Gylfaginning", the enthroned figure of High states that two children by the names of Hjúki and Bil were fathered by Viðfinnr. Once while the two were walking from the well Byrgir (Old Norse "Hider of Something") — both of them carrying on their shoulders the pole Simul (Old Norse, possibly meaning "eternal") that held the pail Sæg between them — Máni took them from the earth, and they now follow Máni in the heavens, "as can be seen from the earth".

Hjúki is otherwise unmentioned, but Bil receives recognition. In chapter 35 of "Gylfaginning", at the end of a listing of numerous other goddesses in Norse mythology, both Sól (the personified sun) and Bil are listed together as goddesses "whose nature has already been described". Bil appears twice more in the "Prose Edda" book "Skáldskaparmál". In chapter 75, Bil appears within another list of goddesses, and her name appears in chapter 47 in a kenning for "woman".

As the two are otherwise unattested outside of Snorri's "Prose Edda", suggestions have been made that Hjúki and Bil may have been of minor mythic significance, or that they were made up outright by Snorri, while Anne Holtsmark (1945) posits that Snorri may have known or had access to a now lost verse source wherein Hjúki and Bil personified the waxing and waning moon. Holtsmark further theorizes that Bil may have been a dís (a type of female deity).

Scholars have theorized that Hjúki and Bil may represent lunar activity, including that they may represent the phases of the moon or may represent the craters of the moon. 19th century scholar Jacob Grimm rejects the suggestion that Hjúki and Bil represent the phases of the moon, and states that Hjúki and Bil rather represent the craters on the moon seen from the earth. Grimm says that the evidence for this "is plain from the figure itself. No "change" of the moon could suggest the image of "two children" with a "pail slung over their shoulders". Moreover, to this day the Swedish people see in the "spots" of the moon two persons carrying a big "bucket on a pole"." Grimm adds that:

Grimm gives further examples from Germanic folklore until the time of his writing (the 19th century) and notes a potential connection between the German word "wadel" (meaning the full moon) and the dialectal employment of the word for "brushwood, twigs tied up in a bundle, esp[ecially] fir-twigs, "wadeln" to tie up brushwood", and the practice of cutting wood out in the full moon. Benjamin Thorpe agrees with the theory of Hjúki and Bil as the personified shapes of moon craters.

Rudolf Simek states that the obscurity of the names of the objects in the tale of Hjúki and Bil may indicate that Snorri derived them from a folktale, and that the form of the tale of the Man in the Moon (featuring a man with a pole and a woman with a bushel) is also found in modern folklore in Scandinavia, England, and Northern Germany.

In both the story Hjúki and Bil found in the Icelandic "Prose Edda" and the English nursery rhyme "Jack and Jill", two children, one male and one female, fetch a pail of water, and the pairs have names that have been perceived as phonetically similar. These elements have resulted in theories connecting the two, and the notion has had some influence, appearing in school books for children from the 19th century and into the 20th century. A traditional form of the rhyme reads:

A figure by the name of "Bilwis" is attested in various parts of German-speaking Europe starting in the 13th century. Scholar Leander Petzoldt writes that the figure seems to stem from the goddess and over time saw many changes, later developing "an elfin, dwarfish aspect and the ability to cripple people or cattle with the shot of an arrow" (such as in Wolfram von Eschenbach's 13th century poem "Willehalm"). Petzoldt further surveys the development of the figure:

During the course of the thirteenth century, the Bilwis is less and less frequently treated as the personification of a supernatural power but becomes increasingly identified as a malevolent human being, a witch. Still later, with the rise of the witch persecution at the end of the Middle Ages, the Bilwis was demonized; she becomes an incarnation of the devil for the witch and sorcerer. A final development has taken place since the sixteenth century, especially in northeast Germany, the Bilwis has been conceived of as a grain spirit bringing wealth; yet this latest manifestation of the Bilwis has its harmful side, the Bilwis-cutter, who is blamed for the unexplained patterns that are formed among the rows of standing grain. The cutter is a sorcerer or witch that cuts down the corn with sickles that are fastened to its feet. He is classified as an essentially malevolent Corn Spirit. Thus, the Bilwis is exceedingly polymorphous, taking on many appearances and meaning in all German-speaking areas throughout the Middle Ages. The Bilwis is one of the strangest and most mysterious beings in all folklore; its varying forms reflect the concerns of a farm culture, and it serves to explain the eerie appearance of turned-down rows of plants in cornfields.
The village of Bilsby in Lincolnshire, England (from which the English surname "Billing" derives) has been proposed as having been named after Bil.




</doc>
<doc id="19436570" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19436570" title="Kauhajoki school shooting">
Kauhajoki school shooting

The Kauhajoki school shooting occurred on 23 September 2008, at the Seinäjoki University of Applied Sciences in the former province of Western Finland. The gunman, 22-year-old student Matti Juhani Saari, shot and killed ten people with a Walther P22 semi-automatic pistol, before shooting himself in the head. He died a few hours later in . One woman was injured but was in a stable condition.

The shooting took place at the Kauhajoki School of Hospitality, owned by the Seinäjoki Municipal Federation of Education. The facilities and campus were shared between the Seinäjoki University of Applied Sciences and the Seinäjoki Vocational Education Centre – Sedu. Saari was a second-year student in a Bachelor of Hospitality Management degree programme. The incident was the second school shooting in less than a year in Finland, the other being the Jokela school shooting in November 2007, in which nine people including the gunman died. Before that, only one other school shooting had taken place in the country's history, in Rauma in 1989, leaving two people dead.

Saari entered through the school buildings via the basement. The shooting began at around 10:40 (UTC+3), when roughly 200 people were assembled inside the college. The emergency services received their first call at 10:46. Saari was armed with a .22 LR calibre Walther P22 Target semi-automatic firearm and homemade Molotov cocktails. He wore dark clothing and a balaclava (ski mask). The school's caretaker Jukka Forsberg, who had several shots directed at him but survived, said "[The gunman] was very well prepared. He walked calmly."

Saari initially opened fire on a group of students taking a business studies exam, and entered at least one other classroom. According to the three students who were able to escape from the exam room (there were roughly 20 students taking the exam), Saari had approached his victims individually before shooting them. It was also said that he was revelling in the situation and was acting very aggressively. Saari encountered little resistance, and the massacre was concluded relatively quickly. He then covered the classroom in a flammable liquid, believed to be petrol, and set the room alight.
A student in an adjacent classroom, Sanna Orpana, said that her class had heard "shooting and a kind of a rumble like tables falling down." Orpana believed at the time that the noise may have been coming from a toy gun, and two other students went to investigate the noise. Saari shot at them, and the remaining students in Orpana's classroom hid under a table before running upstairs. At some point between 10:45–11:00 Saari ran down a corridor and threw a petrol bomb into a language laboratory. He then shot out all of the windows in the school's main corridor, that extended through the building. It was during this time that he also took aim at Forsberg.
A police van with two officers arrived a short time after the shootings began, at around 11:00. They entered the yard of the college where they were shot at by Saari, and forced to retreat. From around 11:45 to 12:00 further police units, bolstered by a number of armoured vehicles, began to arrive on the scene. They attempted to enter the building through the main corridor, but this assault was aborted due to the black smoke that was emanating from within the building.

Having escaped the buildings in a variety of ways (including through doors and out of windows), some students found themselves impeded by a river that adjoined the school. However, some were able to use rowing boats as a means of escape. Saari started fires at several other locations within the school buildings, and the fire in the exam room damaged some of the bodies so badly that they had to be identified from DNA and dental records. Nine of the victims were found in the exam room, and one in a nearby corridor. It was later ascertained that this student had fled the burning classroom and then died in the corridor. Eight of the victims were female students, one a male student, and one a male member of staff. All of the students killed were in their 20s, and the teacher was in his 50s. A 21-year-old woman was shot in the head but had two operations in the days after sustaining her injury, and was reported as being in a satisfactory condition. A further ten students were treated for minor injuries including sprains and cuts from broken glass. All the victims were classmates of Saari's. Saari was originally from Pohjois-Pohjanmaa, but lived in Kauhajoki where he was enrolled on his catering course at the college. It was later revealed that the male student was probably a close friend of Saari's. The pair had spent an evening out together in February 2008 when they were threatened with a starter pistol. A photo of them together had been circulating on the Internet, in which Saari jokingly points at his friend's head with his forefinger. The names of the other victims were withheld by police.

Firefighters extinguished the fires without any major damage to the school. Saari remained at large for some time in the school grounds after they had been evacuated. Two days after the killings, a friend of Saari's, named Rauno, told "7 päivää" that at 11:53 he received a call from Saari in which he confessed to having killed ten people. Saari is claimed to have spoken to Rauno in a calm manner, telling him that he wanted to say goodbye. He was found alive by the police at 12:30, having shot himself in the head. He was taken to Tampere University Hospital, where he was treated for his gunshot wound. He died a short time later at 17:40.

With a total of ten people killed, it was the deadliest peacetime attack in Finnish history, surpassing the previous highest count of eight in the Jokela school shooting. It was the deadliest attack on a school campus since April 2007, when Seung-Hui Cho killed 32 people during the Virginia Tech shooting. Saari had fired a total of nearly 200 shots, including shots into the air. The highest number of shots inflicted to a single victim was twenty.

Matti Juhani Saari (20 May 1986 – 23 September 2008) was identified as the gunman responsible for the shooting. Saari, a hospitality management student at the school, was thrown out of the Finnish Army in 2006, after being a member for only a month for opening fire in a woodland exercise, against orders. Saari had been the victim of bullying in secondary school and dropped out of his classes for this reason. A friend of Saari also reported that he had been seeing a psychologist in the months before the shooting, and had been obsessed with guns.

Saari left behind two handwritten notes in his school dormitory indicating that he had been planning the massacre for six years. A police spokesperson commented: "Saari left notes saying he had a hatred for mankind, for the whole of the human race, and that he had been thinking about what he was going to do for years. The notes show he was very troubled and he hated everything." Police said that although most of the victims were female, the motive did not seem to be a hatred of women. One of Saari's friends noticed a change in his behaviour two years before the shootings, when Saari began expressing a fondness for guns and an admiration of the school shootings in the United States. He said that around 18 months previously Saari had sent him a message saying that he would carry out a school shooting the next day. Saari reportedly denied being serious about carrying out his threat.

Police were also investigating whether a copycat element was involved after it emerged that both Saari and Pekka-Eric Auvinen, the gunman in the Jokela school shooting, had bought their guns from the same store. Both gunmen had taken photographs of themselves in similar poses, and both exchanged videos related to school shootings on YouTube and Finnish social networking site IRC-Galleria. In March 2009, Police ruled out contact with Pekka-Eric Auvinen, and said that he had committed his crimes alone: 200 people were interviewed during the investigation, none of whom said they knew of Saari's plans.

Saari had a YouTube account where he uploaded videos of him firing a handgun at a local shooting range. Among the user's YouTube account favourites was footage of the Columbine High School massacre. Finnish police had been informed about the YouTube videos in an anonymous tip-off on the Friday before the shooting. The police talked to Saari and searched his home on the day before the incident, Monday 22 September. They found no reason to arrest him as he held a temporary weapons permit. In August 2008, Saari had obtained a licence for a .22-calibre (5.6 mm) pistol. The police said that Saari did not have a criminal record. However, a police inspector was subsequently charged with dereliction of duty, and his court case began in September 2009.

Saari also posted another video on a Finnish social networking site, in which he pointed a gun at the camera and said in English "You will die next", followed by firing four shots in the direction of the camera. This video was not available to the police when Saari was questioned. A police spokesperson commented: "The only video we saw was where he was shooting at the range. It was only afterwards that much more information came out." Police said that Saari would have been detained if they had known about this video at the time of the questioning. Police said that they believed Saari's videos were shot by someone else, and that they were trying to identify who this person was. The Chief Investigator of the case, Jari Neulaniemi, speculated that the cameraman may have been the friend of Saari's who was murdered.

Interior Minister Anne Holmlund announced that the actions of the police would be investigated. Police Commissioner Mikko Paatero said that Finnish police would increase their monitoring of YouTube and other social networking sites, and when asked whether similar attacks could take place in the future, he replied: "I badly fear it's possible."

On the day of the incident, a crisis meeting was held, with government ministers, chairs of the parliamentary groups, and police officials all in attendance. The Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen described it as a "tragic day" and appealed for unity in the hope "that events like these will not happen again." A national day of mourning was declared for the following day, and Vanhanen travelled to Kauhajoki to meet with students.

Within days of the shooting, the police said they had received a sizeable number of tip-offs alerting them to suspicious photographs, videos, and comments on chat rooms. Finnish media reported that several bomb threats and other threatening messages were circulating among students nationwide in the few days after the shootings as well.




</doc>
