<doc id="1857797" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1857797" title="Kimmie Meissner">
Kimmie Meissner

Kimberly Claire "Kimmie" Meissner (born October 4, 1989) is an American former competitive figure skater. She is the 2006 World champion, the 2007 Four Continents champion, and the 2007 U.S. national champion. She is the first American and the first woman to simultaneously hold the World, Four Continents, and national titles.

In 2005, Meissner became the second American woman to land the triple Axel jump in national competition. She was a member of the 2006 Olympic team and was the youngest American athlete to compete at those Games. She finished 6th at the Olympics in February 2006 and won the World Championships the following month.

Kimberly Meissner, nicknamed "Kimmie", was born in Towson, Maryland, to Judy (Roth) and Paul Meissner. She is the youngest of four children and the only girl. She is Catholic. Her maternal great-grandparents Paulina and Emmanuel Novo had emigrated separately from Spain during the 1920s. The latter was a fisherman from Galicia.

Meissner was a full-time student at Fallston High School, a public high school and graduated from there in May 2007. She entered the University of Delaware as a part-time student in the fall semester of that year. Until February 2008, she lived in Maryland with her family, and lived at home while attending college. Following her coaching change after the 2008 U.S. Championships, she moved to Fort Lauderdale, Florida.

In the fall of 2009, Meissner moved back to Maryland. During 2010-2012, she attended the University of Delaware as a full-time student. She transferred to Towson University for the spring semester of 2013 and changed her major to English. She graduated in December 2014. She became engaged to Josh Heyne in October 2018.

Kimmie Meissner began figure skating at age six after watching her older brothers playing ice hockey. She landed her first triple, a salchow jump, six years later.

In the 1999–2000 season, Meissner qualified for the U.S. Junior Figure Skating Championships on the juvenile level, where she placed 16th. The following season, she repeated that placement, but on the intermediate level. In the United States, juvenile and intermediate-level skaters competed at the U.S. Junior Championships, while novice, junior, and senior-level skaters compete at the U.S. Championships.

Meissner placed second at her regional competition and won her sectional competition to qualify for the 2003 U.S. Championships on the novice level. At age thirteen, Meissner won the U.S. novice national title, after landing a triple lutz jump in her free skate. Following the 2003 U.S. Championships, Meissner was named to the team for the 2003 Triglav Trophy, where she won the bronze medal on the novice level.

From 2003, Meissner was coached by Pam Gregory in Newark, Delaware at the University of Delaware Figure Skating Club, the club she represented in competition. She moved up to the junior level in the 2003–2004 season. She won the silver medal at the first event of the 2003–04 ISU Junior Grand Prix series, in Sofia, Bulgaria. She went on to win the Junior Grand Prix event in Bled, Slovenia, which qualified her for the Junior Grand Prix Final, where she placed 5th. At the 2004 U.S. Championships, Meissner was second behind Katy Taylor after the short program, but won the free skate, after landing two triple lutzes, to win the Junior national title. At Nationals, Meissner was named to the U.S. team to the 2004 World Junior Championships, where she landed her first 3Lz-3T combination in competition and won the silver medal behind Miki Ando.

In the summer of 2004, Meissner began working on a triple Axel jump but stopped practicing the jump for two months due to a slight back injury. She moved up to the senior level nationally but remained a junior internationally. She was practicing four to five hours on most days. On the 2004–05 ISU Junior Grand Prix series, the first season the ISU Judging System was being used in junior competition, she won silver medals at the event in Courchevel, France and a second silver medal at the event in Long Beach, California. Meissner's two silver medals qualified her for the Junior Grand Prix Final in Helsinki, Finland, where she won the bronze medal, after placing seventh in the short program and second in the free skate.

On January 15, 2005, at the 2005 U.S. Championships, Meissner landed a triple axel jump, becoming only the second American lady to land the jump in competition, fourteen years after Tonya Harding became the first American lady to land the jump. Meissner won the bronze medal.

She was not age-eligible for the senior World Championships and so was named in the U.S. team for the 2005 World Junior Championships. Meissner placed third in the short program and fourth in the free, placing fourth overall. Afterwards, she attended Worlds as a guest of ESPN and watched from the sidelines.

Meissner moved to the senior level internationally beginning in the 2005–2006 Olympic season. She made her Grand Prix debut at the 2005 Trophée Eric Bompard, where she placed sixth in the short program, fourth in the free skate, and fifth overall. She repeated that overall placement at her second event, the 2005 NHK Trophy, where she placed third in the short program and fifth in the free skate. At the 2006 U.S. Championships, Meissner won the silver medal and was named to the U.S. team to the 2006 Winter Olympics.

Meissner was the youngest athlete on the United States Olympic team. She spent the first week of the Games training in Courmayeur, moving to Torino proper a few days before the ladies event began. Meissner skated second in the short program and landed a triple lutz-triple toe loop combination to place fifth in that segment of the competition. Skating second-to-last in the final flight of the free skate, Meissner placed sixth in the free skate and overall.

Following the Olympics, Meissner returned to Baltimore. On the return flight, she partially ruptured one of her eardrums and fully ruptured the other. This affected her hearing as she trained for the 2006 World Championships, her first senior ISU Championship. At Worlds, Meissner placed second in her qualifying group and fifth in the short program, putting her in third place overall going into the free skate. During the free skate, Meissner completed seven triple jumps, including two triple-triple combinations, to win the title. This win made her the first woman since Kristi Yamaguchi to win a world title before a national title. Meissner is also the first woman to win Worlds on her first appearance since Oksana Baiul in 1993. She is the seventh-youngest ladies World Champion in history. Meissner has described this win as changing her career from being the underdog to being expected to win every competition she entered.

Meissner began her season at the 2006 Skate America, where she won the silver medal, the highest finish of her career until then at a Grand Prix event. At her second Grand Prix event, the 2006 Trophée Eric Bompard, she fell on a triple Axel attempt and placed third overall. At the 2007 U.S. Championships, Meissner went in as the favorite. She won the title, after winning the short program and placing third in the free skate. This made her the first ladies skater since Barbara Roles to win the national title on the Novice, Junior, and Senior levels.

After Nationals, Meissner went to the Four Continents Championships, a competition for senior-level skaters who are not from Europe, for the first time in her career. She fell on her triple-triple combination in the short program and was in sixth place going into the free skate. She won the free skate and the competition overall, becoming the first U.S. ladies champion to become the Four Continents Champion.

After Four Continents, Meissner competed at the 2007 World Championships. She achieved a new personal best for her short program where she placed fourth. She did not complete either of her triple-triple combinations in the free skating and placed third in that segment of the competition and fourth overall.

Meissner began the 2007–2008 season by beating reigning World champion Miki Ando at the 2007 Skate America. This was Meissner's first win the Grand Prix series. She then placed second at the 2007 Trophée Eric Bompard, qualifying her for the Grand Prix Final, where she placed sixth. At the time, she was skating on a sprained right ankle, an injury she sustained during a show.

Before the 2008 U.S. Championships, Meissner worked on her spins with Todd Eldredge. She placed 4th in the short program and 7th in the free after falling three times. She placed 7th overall and was selected for the U.S. team to the 2008 World Championships. After Nationals, Eldredge called her with more input on her spins and recommended his long-time coach Richard Callaghan. Meissner made the choice to switch coaches from long-time coach Pam Gregory to a temporary arrangement with Richard Callaghan in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida. She trained with Callaghan for the six weeks between Nationals and the 2008 World Championships.

At the 2008 World Championships, Meissner placed 9th in the short program and 12th in the long. She placed 7th overall and was the highest placed American in the competition. In the off-season, she toured with Stars on Ice and trained with both Callaghan and Eldredge.

Both Callaghan and Eldredge coached Meissner during the 2008–2009 season. She began the season at the 2008 Skate America, where she placed 8th. She also placed 8th at the 2008 Cup of Russia. On January 19, 2009, Meissner announced her withdrawal from the 2009 U.S. Championships due to injury.

In the fall of 2009, Meissner moved back to Maryland. Chris Conte became her coach and also choreographed ice show programs for her. Meissner had been assigned to the 2009 Rostelecom Cup and the 2009 NHK Trophy for the Grand Prix season. She announced her withdrawal from both events on October 8, 2009 due to an injury to her right knee. Due to this, she did not receive a bye to the 2010 U.S. Championships and was too late to register to compete at the regional championships, thereby ending her season. She did not return to amateur competition. Commenting in July 2016, she said, "The injury wasn't devastating, but things in my personal life all happened at the same time."

Meissner continued to appear in ice shows and pro-am events. During the 2014–15 season, she performed as a full-time member for the US Stars on Ice tour.

When Meissner returned from the 2006 Olympic Games, a parade was held in her honor in her hometown of Bel Air. Following her win at the 2006 Worlds, the town gave one of its main roads, Pennsylvania Avenue, the honorary title of Kimmie Way. She threw out the ceremonial first pitch for the Phillies opening day game, and a week later for her hometown team, the Baltimore Orioles, on April 14, 2006.

Following Meissner's win at the 2007 U.S. Championships, she signed endorsement deals with Subway, Under Armour, and Visa. She has appeared in Subway commercials, including a regional-Baltimore one following the 2006 Olympics, and a national one with Jared Fogle. She appeared in the Under Armour commercial shown during Super Bowl XLII. Meissner appeared in the music video for "Speed Feels Better" by Michael Tolcher wearing an Under Armour sweatshirt.

Following the 2006 World Championships, Meissner became a spokesperson for the Cool Kids Campaign, an organization for children with cancer. She designed gel bracelets for the organization as a fundraiser. On August 25, 2007, she put on a benefit show in Baltimore called "Kimmie's Angels on Ice" to benefit the charity. Meissner also co-edits the newsletter for the charity.

During the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, Meissner worked as a figure skating researcher for NBC Olympics.

"GP: Grand Prix; JGP: Junior Grand Prix"



</doc>
<doc id="1861667" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1861667" title="Cal Ripken Sr.">
Cal Ripken Sr.

Calvin Edwin Ripken (December 17, 1935 – March 25, 1999) was a coach and manager in Major League Baseball who spent 36 years in the Baltimore Orioles organization, also as a player and scout. He played in the Orioles' farm system beginning in 1957, and later served as manager of the parent club, on which his sons Cal Jr. and Billy played.

Born near Aberdeen, Maryland, which he called home throughout his life, Ripken joined the Baltimore Orioles in 1957 as a minor league player. He would spend the next 36 years in the organization, mainly as a coach, with only one season and seven games coming as a manager. As a manager in the minor leagues for 13 years, Ripken won 964 games, and later compiled a 68-101 record managing the Orioles. Several of his students, including Jim Palmer, Eddie Murray, and most prominently his son Cal Jr., went on to Hall of Fame careers. He was credited for helping sculpt his team's tradition of excellence known as "The Oriole Way."

Ripken was born December 17, 1935, near Aberdeen, Maryland, in a general store his parents, Clara Amelia (Oliver) and Arend Fredrick Ripken, owned three miles south of Aberdeen. He became involved in baseball as early as 1946, when he served as the batboy for a semipro team his older brother Oliver played for. He attended Aberdeen High School, where he helped the baseball team win three county championships and go undefeated in 1952. As a player, he was a catcher. In the late 1950s, he also played and coached soccer, once helping his team win 17 straight games. However, as former teammate J. Robert Hooper recalled, "We couldn't win the championship because Rip was in spring training."

The Baltimore Orioles signed Ripken in 1957. The scout who signed him to his first minor league contract, which was for $150 a month, did not have a pen and had to borrow one from a spectator. He began his 36-year tenure in the organization as the starting catcher for the Phoenix Stars of the Class C Arizona–Mexico League. Ripken recalled, "At Phoenix, my manager was Bob Hooper, who also pitched. He was a great teacher and threw the best stiff-wrist slider I ever saw. Bob used so much resin that after a game when I'd congratulate him, our hands would stick together." Next year, he was promoted to the Wilson Tobs of the Class B Carolina League, where he played 118 games. In 1959, he split the season between the Pensacola Dons of the Class D Alabama–Florida League and the Amarillo Gold Sox of the Texas League. Most of his playing time came in 61 games with Pensecola; he only appeared in 30 games for Amarillo.

Ripken spent 1960 with the Fox Cities Foxes of the Class B Illinois–Indiana–Iowa League, known as the Three-I League. He had his best season that year, batting a career-high .281 with 100 hits, nine home runs, and 74 RBI. Earl Weaver, eventually a Hall of Fame manager for the Orioles but manager of Fox Cities in 1960, recalled, "He was hitting over .300 until our team bus driver quit and Cal started doing his job, too. The 15-hour bus trips were strenuous work, but Rip always was hard as nails -- toughness personified." During spring training in 1961, he suffered an injury after several foul tips went off his shoulder. Initial X-rays showed nothing, but three months into the season it was discovered that Ripken had a dislocated shoulder, an atrophied deltoid muscle, and a tendon problem. He continued to play, but the injury was one which would take years to fully recover from, and his son, Cal Jr., wrote, "Practically speaking, if my father wanted to stay in the game he'd have to shift his sights from playing to coaching and managing." He played with three teams in 1961: the Class D Leesburg Orioles of the Florida State League, the Double-A Little Rock Travelers of the Southern Association, and the Triple-A Rochester Red Wings of the International League. The stint with Rochester came because the Red Wings were in desperate need of a catcher; although Ripken could catch and handle pitchers, the injury had robbed him of the ability to throw well. He appeared in 58 games with the Class D Appleton Foxes in 1962, and played his final games in 1964, when made two appearances for the Class A Aberdeen Pheasants of the Northern League.

As Ripken's playing career wound down, his coaching career began. His first experience as manager came in 1961, when he succeeded Billy DeMars (who had been promoted) as Leesburg's manager in June. Leesburg folded after the 1961 season. In 1963, at the age of 27, he became a full-time manager with Fox Cities. From 1963 through 1974, he managed Fox Cities, Abderdeen (1963–64,66), the Tri-City Atoms (1965), the Miami Marlins (1967), the Elmira Pioneers (1968), Rochester (1969–70), the Dallas-Fort Worth Spurs (1971), and the Asheville Orioles (1972–74). As a manager in the minor leagues, Ripken oversaw the development of Jim Palmer, Eddie Murray, and Rich Dauer, among other Orioles. In addition to normal coaching duties, he would also at times be responsible for driving the team bus, or even fixing it. During 1969–70, managing a Triple-A team, he would conduct baseball clinics for the Red Wings players. Cal Jr. would always listen to these; he found them "boring" but did learn some useful baseball skills in them. Although Ripken always considered Aberdeen, Maryland, his home during this period, he and his family lived all over the country as he moved from city to city. In 1975, Ripken served as a scout for the Orioles.

In 1976, Ripken finally reached the major leagues when the Orioles named him their bullpen coach. Halfway through 1977, he became the third base coach for the Orioles when Billy Hunter was hired to be the manager of the Texas Rangers. Ripken served in this role through the 1986 season. During this time, and even later when he became a manager, he would pitch batting practice and hit fungoes before games. He would be one of the last members of the team to leave after games. Ripken could be tough on the players he coached, enjoying using the term "lunkhead" when talking to them, but he would always make time to answer any questions they had about the game. Doug DeCinces, who played under him through the 1981 season, recalled, "He was the dictator of that regimen, instructing us on everything down to how to wear our socks. He said, `Take pride in your appearance and you'll take pride in your game.'" The Orioles experienced great success during this time, reaching the World Series in 1979, which they lost to the Pittsburgh Pirates in seven games. Four years later, Ripken earned a World Series ring as the Orioles won the 1983 World Series in five games over the Philadelphia Phillies.

In 1981, Ripken got to coach his own son as Cal Jr. reached the major leagues. He always downplayed the father-son relationship, saying in 1981 spring training, "There isn't any father-son relationship here. I managed 14 years in the minors, including 1967 right in Miami, and saw hundreds of kids. They're all my sons, more or less. On this field or on this club, my son is just another ballplayer to me. I have a job and a life and so does he."

After 1982, Weaver retired, and Ripken hoped to be a candidate for the managerial position. The Orioles announced they wanted someone with many years of experience for the job, but they went with Joe Altobelli instead. After Altobelli was fired in 1985, Ripken finally got his chance to manage, but it was only for one game in the absence of Weaver, who came out of retirement. On June 14, 1985, Ripken managed his son for the first time. The Orioles defeated the Milwaukee Brewers 8–3 that day, and Melody Simmons of the "Baltimore Evening Sun" wrote that Ripken had "a Christmas-morning look on his face ... the evening's purist, a Cinderella in spikes." Ripken showed no disappointment over getting passed over each of those times, although he "thought he was the choice" in 1985.

Immediately following the 1986 season, Weaver retired for good, and Ripken was named manager of the Orioles. The Orioles were coming off their first last-place finish in Baltimore, but Ripken expressed confidence in the team at the beginning of the 1987 season, saying, "I know these guys can get the job done. I may be hardheaded, but that's what I believe. We'll be a competitive team." The Orioles got off to a slow start in April 1987, going 9-12 while losing seven of nine games in ones stretch. However, the ballclub would improve in May, moving over .500 while setting a May record with 56 home runs. In June, the team fell out of contention, dropping to 28-36, their worst start since 1955. Pitching plagued the club; Harvey Rosenfeld wrote it was "the root cause of the Orioles' problems. In 1987, Ripken became the first—and only—father to manage two sons simultaneously in the majors, as his son Billy was called up at the All-Star break. Ripken managed Cal Jr. and Billy for the first time on July 11, in a 2–1 loss to the Minnesota Twins. "The Havre de Grace Record" wrote, "The Ripkens of Aberdeen became the first family of sports." On September 14, during a 17–3 loss to the Toronto Blue Jays, Ripken substituted Cal Jr. with Ron Washington after the eighth inning, ending Cal Jr.'s major-league record streak of 8,243 consecutive innings played. Senior said after the game, "I've been thinking about it for a long time. I wanted to take the monkey off his back. It was my decision, not his." The Orioles finished sixth in the American League East at 67–95, setting a team record with 51 home losses.

Ripken stressed "patience" to begin the 1988 season, saying, "We can't just go from the bottom to the top in the snap of a finger ... Have patience and stick with the Birds and root for the Birds." After the Orioles lost six consecutive games to begin the 1988 season, Ripken was fired. Several years later, he said, "It was very difficult to accept. I had been in the organization. I had worked my way up to the big leagues. I spent my life with the Orioles." The move "hurt" and "bothered" Cal Jr., but he worked through it and remained with the team for 13 more seasons, the rest of his career. Billy switched his number from 3 to 7, saying, "I just didn't want to see anybody else wear it." After Hall of Famer Frank Robinson replaced Ripken, the Orioles proceeded to lose 15 more consecutive games to set the record for the longest losing streak to start a season. He finished his managerial record with a record of 68 wins and 101 losses.

Following the 1988 season, the Orioles again named Ripken their third-base coach. Speaking at the Annual Ripken Fan Club Banquet, general manager Roland Hemond said, "[1988] was a tough year for the Orioles, a tough year for me, and a tough year for the Ripken family. There was a lot of trauma, and I respected them for the way they handled it. I will never forget it." Brady Anderson, who would play for the Orioles from 1988 through 2001 and hit 50 home runs in 1996, credited Ripken for helping him make it with the Orioles: "I'll never forget earlier in my career how Cal Sr. stayed with me, trying to help me become a better player when it might not have been the fashionable thing to do within the organization." Ripken remained with the team until after the 1992 season, when he was removed from third-base coach duties as the Orioles wished to give younger coaches opportunities. The Orioles offered him the brand new position of coordinator of minor league field operations, but he declined, disappointed at being removed from third base. Ripken maintained that he was not retired, but he would never coach professionally again.

In 1996, Ripken was inducted into the Orioles Hall of Fame, along with Jerry Hoffberger and Billy Hunter, all three of whom were greatly admired by Orioles' fans. A heavy smoker who once refuted a claim that he sat in back of team buses to be alone by saying he did so to "smoke cigarettes", Ripken died on March 25, 1999, at the age of 63 from lung cancer. He was buried five days later, at Baker Cemetery in Aberdeen. The Orioles wore a number 7 patch on their sleeves all through the 1999 season to commemorate Ripken's contributions to the team. A plaque hangs in the Orioles dugout at Oriole Park at Camden Yards to honor his long and distinguished career, and the Cal Ripken Collegiate Baseball League is named in his honor.

Altogether, Ripken spent 36 years in the Baltimore Orioles organization, serving as a player, a scout, a coach, and a manager. He is remembered for helping bring about "The Oriole Way", Baltimore's tradition of excellence. "The Baltimore Sun" wrote, "Most Baltimore fans couldn't define the term exactly, but they liked that it implied reverence for the sport and the skills needed to play it well." Elrod Hendricks, another longtime Oriole coach who kept in touch with Ripken throughout the years, said "He was baseball and baseball was him." Sam Perlozzo, who like Ripken spent many years as a third base coach, said "When you were around him, you didn't say much. One reason was out of respect. The other was because you could learn from him, no matter how long you had been in the game." Despite his 36 years with the organization, only a little more than one of them were as manager of the team, causing Thomas Boswell to write, "The idea that a person could find deep satisfaction through fulfilling difficult responsibilities – while never focusing on personal rewards – seems antique these days. Yet Ripken's example makes you wonder if the century, not Senior, has lost its way." Since his death, no Oriole has worn Cal Sr.'s number 7, although the number has not been officially retired.

Ripken was married to Violet ("Vi"), whom he met in high school. They had three sons, Cal Jr., Fred, and Billy; and a daughter, Ellen. They lived in a split-level house on Clover Street in Aberdeen, Maryland. Two of his sons went on to play in the major leagues. Cal Jr. most notably broke Lou Gehrig's record for consecutive games played and had over 3,000 hits in his Hall of Fame career. Billy, while not quite as successful as his brother, went on to play 12 years in the major leagues. Cal Sr. also had two older brothers, Oliver and Bill.

Violet Ripken was kidnapped at gunpoint and safely returned on July 24, 2012. On October 15, 2013, a man with a handgun attempted to steal her car, but she scared him away. Lt. Frederick Bundick, spokesman for the Aberdeen Police, said the two incidents appeared unrelated. Cal Jr. offered a $100,000 reward for information leading to the kidnapper on August 1, 2013.

Ripken supported J. Robert Hooper back when Hooper was running for Harford County Council by letting Hooper use his name as honorary campaign chairman. Hooper grew up with Ripken and was a soccer teammate of his during the 1950s. Hooper said of Ripken, "He had a heart bigger than he was."





</doc>
<doc id="1866664" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1866664" title="Joe Darling">
Joe Darling

Joseph Darling (21 November 1870 – 2 January 1946) was an Australian cricketer who played 34 Test matches as a specialist batsman between 1894 and 1905. As captain, he led Australia in a total of 21 Tests, winning seven and losing four. In Test cricket, he scored 1657 runs at an average of 28.56 per innings, including three centuries. Darling toured England four times with the Australian team—in 1896, 1899, 1902 and 1905; the last three tours as captain. He was captain of the Australian cricket team in England in 1902, widely recognised as one of the best teams in Australian cricket history.

He was a stocky, compact man and a strong driver of the ball, playing most of his cricket as an opening batsman. He was a patient batsman and was known for his solid defence, but he was able to score quickly when required. In Sydney in 1897–98, he scored 160 in 165 minutes, including 30 boundaries to assist his team in defeating the English. He was the first man to score 500 runs in a Test series and was also the first to score three centuries in a series. His captaincy was disciplinarian in nature but his teammates respected his broad cricket knowledge. Even tempered with a strong personality, he was a stickler for fair play on the field. His teammates gave him the nickname "Paddy" due to a supposed resemblance to the Australian boxer, Frank "Paddy" Slavin.

His cricket career was interrupted several times due to his obligations as a farmer, first growing wheat in South Australia, and later as a wool-grower in Tasmania. He was a member of several bodies dedicated to agriculture in Tasmania, including the responsible authority for the Royal Hobart Show. He was a pioneer in activities such as rabbit eradication and pasture improvement. He entered politics in 1921, standing as an independent in the Tasmanian Legislative Council, where he was a forceful speaker. He retained his seat in the Tasmanian Parliament until his death following a gall bladder operation in 1946.

Darling was born on 21 November 1870 in Glen Osmond, South Australia, the sixth son of John Darling, a grain merchant and his wife Isabella, née Ferguson. He was educated at Prince Alfred College, where he took an interest in cricket. At the age of 15, he scored a record 252 runs in the "inter-collegiate" match, the annual fixture against fierce rival St Peter's College. His future Test team mate, Clem Hill, would later beat this record, scoring 360. Not long after, he was included in a combined South Australian/Victoria XV that played the Australian XI in 1886. He made only 16 runs, but the manner in which he made them saw senior players hail him as a future champion.

His father, disapproving of Darling's fondness for sport, sent him away from his cricket and Australian rules football teams to spend twelve months at Roseworthy Agricultural School. Later, Darling worked in a bank for a time and before his father appointed him manager of one of a wheat farm. Working on the farm added size and strength to an already stocky and athletic frame. He was selected for the South Australian team at age 19, but his father would not allow him time off the farm to play.

After two years in the bush, Darling returned to Adelaide and cricket. He opened a sports store on Rundle Street, Adelaide and was soon selected to represent South Australia in inter-colonial cricket. He made his first-class cricket debut against New South Wales at the Adelaide Oval; scoring 5 and 32 as South Australia won the match by 237 runs. The next season, against the touring England team captained by Andrew Stoddart, Darling made 115, his maiden first-class century.

The First Test of 1894–95 against England, at the Sydney Cricket Ground, saw Darling make his Test debut. In an innings where Australia make 586 runs, including centuries for George Giffen and Syd Gregory, Darling was dismissed for a golden duck, bowled first ball by Tom Richardson. He played in all five Tests in the series, scoring 258 runs at an average of 28.66 per innings. He was included in the Australian team to tour England in 1896, where he topped the scoring aggregates for the tour with 1555 runs at an average of 29.90, including three centuries. "Wisden Cricketers' Almanack" stated that Darling "proved himself perhaps the best of present-day left-handed batsmen" during the tour. England won the series two Tests to one.

Andrew Stoddart brought another team to Australia to contest "The Ashes" in 1897–98. Australia won the series comfortably, four Tests to one. Darling started the season poorly, scoring a duck and one against the tourists for South Australia in a match in which team mate Clem Hill scored a double century. Darling went on, however, to dominate the series with the bat. His maiden Test century, 101 in the First Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground after Australia was made to follow-on, was the first made by a left-hander in Tests. It was not enough to prevent England winning by nine wickets.

In the Third Test in his home town of Adelaide, Darling scored 178 runs and Australia won the match by an innings and 13 runs. He reached his century by hitting Johnny Briggs over the eastern gate and into the nearby park. This is the only time in Ashes Tests where a player has reached 100 with a hit out of the ground. During this innings, he also became the first player to hit a six in a Test in Australia (prior to 1910, a six was awarded only if the ball was hit out of the ground). He later also hit the first six in a Test in England. Returning to Sydney for the Fifth and final Test, Darling scored 160 runs from 253 scored in total. He batted for 165 minutes, hitting 30 boundaries as Australia successfully chased 273 in the fourth innings. His first 100 came in 91 minutes; at the time, the fastest Test century scored. By the end of the season, Darling became the first player to score 500 runs in a series and the first player to score three centuries in a series.

Darling was chosen by his team mates as captain for the 1899 Australian team touring England. The team was one of the strongest seen in England to that time, with the cricket reference book "Wisden" stating, "By common consent the [1899 Australians] formed the strongest combination that had come from the Colonies since the great side captained by Mr. W. L. Murdoch in 1882." and that "Darling proved himself one of the very best captains that ever took a team into the field." The Australians lost only three of the 35 matches they played on the tour, winning 16 and another 16 finishing in draws. The only Test to reach a decisive result was the Second Test at Lord's, where Australia won by ten wickets due in part to centuries by Hill and Victor Trumper and a ten wicket haul by fast bowler Ernie Jones. Aside from Hill, Darling was seen by "Wisden" as the best batsman among the Australians. "Wisden" claimed, "Up to a certain point the responsibilities of captaincy seemed to tell against Darling, but during the last weeks of the tour he played marvellous cricket." Over the tour, he scored 1941 runs at an average of 41.29, topping both the averages and the aggregate for his team, and was named as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year.

Darling's deeds as a cricketer had reconciled his father to his sporting endeavours, but not to his sports store operation. In 1900, his father purchased "Stonehenge", a sheep station covering in central Tasmania and ordered Darling to run the property on pain of exclusion from his will. Darling complied with his father's wishes and moved his family to the remote station, along a dirt track from the nearest town, tiny Oatlands. Darling stood out of first-class cricket for nearly two years.

It was not until December 1901 that Darling was convinced to return by the Melbourne Cricket Club to captain the Australians against the touring English for the first three Tests only. The English, captained by Archie MacLaren, won the First Test in Sydney convincingly by an innings and 124 runs. The Second Test in Melbourne was played on a rain-affected pitch. MacLaren won the toss and sent Australia in to bat on the "sticky wicket". Within three hours, both teams had been dismissed; Australia holding a lead on the first innings of 51 runs. Realising the danger the pitch held to his leading batsmen, Darling re-ordered the batting line-up and opened the batting himself alongside Hugh Trumble. The pair held out the English for 90 minutes; Darling considered his 32 runs one of his best innings. Nevertheless, Barnes managed to grab five wickets in the final half-hour to leave the Australians 5/48 when stumps was called. Twenty five wickets fell in the day's play. Importantly, Australia had a 99-run lead and batsmen of the calibre of Hill, Trumper, Reggie Duff and Warwick Armstrong still to bat. The next day, on a perfect pitch, the Australian batsmen established a match-winning lead, eventually winning the Test by 229 runs. In the Third Test in Adelaide, Australia became the first team to score over 300 runs to win the fourth innings of a Test match. Darling, along with Hill and Trumble, led the record making run chase; Darling scored 62 runs. Hugh Trumble captained the final two Tests as Darling returned to his farm. Australia won both Tests and the series to retain "The Ashes".

Darling agreed to once again lead the Australian cricket team in England in 1902. In what was a very cold and wet summer, the Australian team won a close fought series against the strong English team two Tests to one. Given the strength of the opposition, this Australian team is often referred to as one of the best Australian teams ever assembled. The team included players of the calibre of Trumper, Hill, Armstrong, Trumble and Monty Noble; all of whom would be later included in the Australian Cricket Hall of Fame. The team lost only two matches during the tour, with "Wisden" saying, "No travelling team ever strove harder for victory or more completely subordinated all personal considerations to the prime object of winning matches. They formed a splendid all-round combination".

The First Test at Edgbaston finished in a draw. Rain saved the Australians after they were dismissed for only 36 in their first innings; Wilfred Rhodes took seven wickets for only 17 runs. Rain again ruined the Second Test at Lord's when the final two days were washed out. The Third Test, the only Test match played at Bramall Lane, saw Australia win by 143 runs due in part to a century by Hill and Noble taking 5/51. Darling was dismissed twice by Barnes without scoring, the first Test captain to make a "pair". Australia won the Fourth Test at Old Trafford by three runs; Trumble took ten wickets for the match. The last batsman, Fred Tate, came in with England needing eight runs to secure victory. Darling brought the field in and Trumble prevented Rhodes scoring from the last three balls of his over. This left Tate to face Jack Saunders, who dismissed him with the fourth ball of his over to win the match for Australia. England won the Fifth and final Test at the Oval by one wicket. Chasing 263, England were 5/48 when Gilbert Jessop scored a century in 75 minutes to help England to victory.

The star for the Australians was Trumper who scored 2,570 runs, easily beating Darling's own record for a colonial batsman in an English season set in 1899. So important was Trumper to the Australian team that Darling, who had previously checked that all the Australians were on board the carriage to the ground, was later simply to ask "Is Vic aboard?" before giving the driver the go-ahead. Darling himself had a mixed tour with the bat. 

On the return trip to Australia, the touring team stopped to play three Tests against South Africa, the first between the two nations. Australia won the series two Tests to nil, but Darling's own form was poor. In successive innings, Darling made 0, 14, 6, 4 and 1. After the tour, he returned to Stonehenge and took a two-year break from first-class cricket. In his absence, Monty Noble captained the Australian team against the touring English in 1903–04.

Before the Australian team to tour England in 1905 was selected, Darling returned to first-class cricket for South Australia. He won selection in the touring squad and was named as captain. A weaker Australian bowling attack saw Darling resort to defensive measures throughout the tour. These measures included directing Armstrong to bowl his leg breaks down the leg side, where Darling had placed up to seven fielders. These measures, unpopular with the English public, saw 19 matches on the tour finish in draws, three more than the 16 matches won by Australia. "Wisden" said, "Leaving aside Duff's long score at the Oval, Darling was the finest batsman on the side in the Test games, playing superb cricket under very trying conditions." At Old Trafford in the Fourth Test, he made 73 out of 105 in less than ninety minutes. His innings included thirteen boundaries, all but one of them being drives. Despite his efforts, England still won the Test by an innings and 80 runs.

After losing six tosses against his English opposite number Stanley Jackson during the summer, Darling decided on a different approach before the Scarborough Festival match late in the tour. At the toss, he approached Jackson stripped to the waist and suggested, in fun, a wrestle for choice of innings.

The 1905 tour was Darling's last Test cricket foray, as he claimed that continuing to tour was unfair to his wife. He retired from first-class cricket during the 1907–08 season. In his first-class career, Darling made 10635 runs, including 19 centuries at an average of 34.52. In club cricket in Adelaide, Joe scored heavily. He averaged 144 for East Torrens Cricket Club in 1899–1900, 98.66 for Adelaide Cricket Club in 1896–97 and 86.20 for Sturt Cricket Club in 1904–05. He continued to make runs in Tasmanian club cricket right through middle age. In 1921, he made 100 runs in an hour, including 29 in one eight-ball over playing for Claremont Cricket Club. At age 52, he made 133 not out during a successful run chase where his team, Break-o'-Day, made 6/219 in 90 minutes.

He was contemptuous of the newly formed Australian Board of Control for International Cricket Matches (now known as Cricket Australia), who he saw as attempting to remove control of international cricket tours from the players. He would often refer to cricket administrators as "Dead Heads". He later represented the Tasmanian Cricket Association as a delegate to the Board of Control.

Following his retirement from big cricket, Darling returned to his Tasmanian sheep station, where he was involved in a range of agricultural activities. He pioneered measures to eradicate rabbits, an introduced pest then in plague proportions throughout Australia. He was an active member of organisations such as the Tasmanian Stock Holders and Orchardists' Association and the Royal Agricultural Society of Tasmania, the organising body of the Royal Hobart Show. Darling imported South Australian merino rams to improve his flock, and his wool topped the Hobart sales on several occasions. He also introduced subterranean clover to Tasmania.

In 1919, Darling moved from Stonehenge to Claremont House, around which the Hobart suburb of Claremont later formed. He was elected to the Cambridge electorate in the Tasmanian Legislative Council in 1921 as an independent. He retained his position in the Parliament until his death in 1946. In Parliament, one of his colleagues was Charles Eady, his teammate from the 1896 tour of England. Darling was recognised by his colleagues as a forceful, no-nonsense speaker. In the 1930s, he won an exemption from land tax for small farmers, and toward the end of his parliamentary career, a Royal Commission was appointed to investigate charges Darling had made regarding maladministration. The findings of the commission, released after his death, saw a government Minister and two others found guilty of accepting bribes. Darling was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1938 New Year Honours in recognition of his work as a member of the Legislative Assembly.

Darling married Alice Minna Blanche Francis, a wheat farmer's daughter from Mundoora, South Australia in 1893. Together they raised 15 children: ten sons and five daughters. After surgery for a ruptured gall bladder, Darling died in Hobart on 2 January 1946. He was buried at Cornelian Bay cemetery after a Congregationalist ceremony and was survived by his wife and twelve of his children.

Darling had a stocky, compact build, standing and weighing . His teammates thought his dark hair, blue eyes and moustache were similar to the boxer, Frank "Paddy" Slavin, and he answered to the nickname "Paddy" during his time in cricket. His time working on his father's farm had developed his strength. During his first game for South Australia, he was challenged to a naked wrestle by the fast bowler and ex-miner Ernie Jones, an informal initiation into the team. To his team mates' surprise, Darling managed to defeat the much larger Jones.

The left-handed Darling was a strong driver of the ball who showed the batsman the full face of the bat. When necessary, he was a dour defender of his wicket. His fellow players thought that was sometimes unnecessarily defensive in his approach to batting and that he was at his best when driving hard. His South Australian and Australian team mate George Giffen thought that no Australian's cut shots travelled faster past point.
Darling holds the record for the most innings in a complete Test Match career (60), without being dismissed lbw.

Darling had a strong personality and an independent outlook. Those who knew him well thought him destined to be a leader in whatever he undertook. He shunned strong drink and tobacco and found it difficult to tolerate overindulgence in alcohol. Normally even-tempered, he did show displeasure at the heckling from the crowd at Lord's at his obstinate defensive effort in the face of an Australian batting collapse. He was a stickler for fair play, but his actions against the English batsman KS Ranjitsinhji would today be seen as gamesmanship. During the bowler's approach and after the bowler had looked at the field, the Australian fielders moved behind Ranjitsinhji's back. This worried the Indian prince when playing his leg glance and eventually saw him left out of the English team.

The journalist Ray Robinson wrote that "of all Australian captains he came closest to being a disciplinarian". Regardless, his team mates continued to select him as captain, trusting in his knowledge and understanding of the game. On a wet day during the 1899 tour, a delay in play saw some of the Australians accept an invitation to the Player's tobacco factory in Nottingham. While away, the weather cleared and play began with Darling leading a team of five Australians and five substitutes onto the field. Darling later called a team meeting that saw the culprits fined ₤5 for breaching team rules. His approach to the hard-drinking Ernie Jones was similarly tough. To ensure that the fast bowler would not drink to excess, he selected Jones as twelfth man in a match against an English county team. When Jones refused to play, a team meeting saw him facing expulsion from the team. Darling spoke to him privately and made it clear that without an apology to his team mates and a promise to curb his drinking, he would be on the next boat bound for Australia. The firm and prompt action had a lasting effect on team discipline during his time as Australian captain. "Wisden" noted that "as a captain he inspired his men to reveal their best form." As a captain he was a reformer, suggesting rule changes that included making six runs the reward for clearing the boundary rather than the entire ground, and using of sawdust to fill holes in bowler's run-ups.





</doc>
<doc id="1890010" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1890010" title="Alone Again, Natura-Diddily">
Alone Again, Natura-Diddily

"Alone Again, Natura-Diddily" is the fourteenth episode of the eleventh season of "The Simpsons", and marks the final regular appearance of the character Maude Flanders. In the episode, she is killed in an accident while watching a speedway race, devastating Ned Flanders and prompting Homer to find a new woman for his grieving neighbor. After a series of unsuccessful dates, Ned begins to question his faith in God. However, his faith is restored after hearing the female lead singer of a Christian rock band, played by guest star Shawn Colvin, sing in church. The episode’s title is a parody based upon the song "Alone Again (Naturally)" by Gilbert O'Sullivan.

The episode was written by Ian Maxtone-Graham and directed by Jim Reardon. Maude was voiced by Marcia Mitzman Gaven while regular voice actor Maggie Roswell had left the show over a pay dispute, but the producers decided to kill off the character to open up for new storylines. Another reason for her death was to increase ratings. The episode was viewed in 10.8 million households during its original broadcast on February 13, 2000, and became the highest-rated show on the Fox network the week it aired.

A commercial for "Alone Again, Natura-Diddily" that aired before the episode was broadcast attracted criticism from many viewers because it appeared the episode would be parodying an incident at Lowe's Motor Speedway in Charlotte, North Carolina that left three spectators dead. Then-Fox affiliate WCCB in Charlotte, North Carolina refused to show the commercial, but after viewing the episode they came to the conclusion that it was not making fun of the incident. Reviews of "Alone Again, Natura-Diddily" from television critics have been mixed.

On a trip to the bird sanctuary, the Simpson family discovers that a speedway raceway built around the sanctuary is opening that day, to Lisa's dismay. The family watches from the stand and sees Ned Flanders and his family, who claims to enjoy the high levels of safety the drivers use. Later, a squad of cheerleaders fires free T-shirts from air cannons into the crowd, and Homer rudely demands one. Irritated, Maude leaves to buy hot dogs. Homer bullseye on his stomach using a bottle of ketchup, and the cheerleaders send a full salvo of T-shirts in Homer's direction, but he bends down at the last second to pick up a bobby pin on the ground. Maude returns at that exact moment, gets hit by the T-shirts and falls over the edge of the bleachers to her death on the parking lot, leaving Ned devastated.

Everyone offers their condolences to Ned, and Bart reluctantly plays a Christian video game with Rod and Todd. Homer accompanies Ned back home after the funeral and talks with him later that night when Ned is unable to sleep due to his loneliness and now having to raise his sons alone. To help him get on with his life, Homer secretly makes a videotape of Ned to show to single girls across Springfield. Ned gets to date several women thanks to the tape, including Lindsey Naegle and Edna Krabappel, but none of them are successful.

On a Saturday night, Ned prays to God, but becomes angry when he feels he is not getting any response. The next morning, Ned is still angry and tells his sons he will not be going to church, scaring them. Guilt-ridden, he later rushes to church and upon entering, sees a Christian rock band, Kovenant, performing. He is attracted to the singer, Rachel Jordan, who sings about not losing faith in God because he is always there for people. Inspired by the song, Ned later assists Rachel in loading some equipment onto her truck and confides in her of his loss, with which she sympathizes. He and Rachel become acquainted, but she has to leave for the next stop on the band's tour, promising to come back and meet up with him afterward.

"Alone Again, Natura-Diddily" was written by Ian Maxtone-Graham and directed by Jim Reardon as part of the eleventh season of the show (1999–2000). When the writing staff conceived the idea for the speedway parts, they were thinking that it would be a great opportunity for them to get several NASCAR drivers to make guest appearances in the episode. However, according to Scully, they could not get a single one because "they were all concerned about the way we were portraying NASCAR". Speedway racing is depicted in a negative light in the episode, with an overemphasis on crashes.

The episode features the death of the character Maude Flanders, who had previously been voiced by cast member Maggie Roswell. This kill-off was the result of Roswell leaving "The Simpsons" in spring 1999 after a pay dispute with the Fox Broadcasting Company, which airs the show. Since 1994, she had been flying between her Denver home and Los Angeles twice a week to record episodes of "The Simpsons". She eventually grew tired of this, and the price of plane tickets was constantly increasing. As a result, she asked Fox for a pay raise from $2,000 per episode to $6,000 per episode. However, Fox only offered her a $150 raise, which did not cover the travel costs, so she decided to quit.

Voice actress Marcia Mitzman Gaven was hired to fill in for Roswell's characters, including Maude in this episode and the earlier episodes of the eleventh season, although the producers decided to kill her off to open up new storylines for the show. Executive producer Mike Scully said it "was a chance for one of our regular characters [Ned Flanders] to face a challenge and grow in a new direction. The idea came up quickly, we all latched on to it, and it just felt right. We didn't want to kill a character for the sake of killing. We wanted it to have consequences for surviving characters to deal with in future episodes." Roswell returned to "The Simpsons" in 2002 after reaching a deal with Fox to record her lines from her home in Denver. Since returning, she has voiced Maude in flashbacks and as a ghost. When asked by "The Denver Post" on how she thought Ned was doing without Maude, she replied: "OK. But Maude was such a vulnerable character. Maude and Lisa and Marge were the only vulnerable characters, really, everybody else has an edge. So they [the staff] discovered that arc was lost, and now there are a lot of flashbacks with Maude."

Scully has noted that "there was a lot of discussion about making sure we [the staff] did deal with some of the emotional ramifications of death [in the episode] and not just make it all joke, joke, joke. But at the same time, we're a comedy, they're animated, they're not real." In one of the first scripts for the episode there was a scene in which Rod and Todd discuss their mother's death. However, according to Maxtone-Graham, the writing staff decided to cut it because "it just never played anything but sad." He added that the writers "really wanted to address how [the children] would feel" but they "could never pull it off without it just being sad." Scully has commented that it was a "very sweet scene" but it was too difficult to "get out of it comedically to the next scene."
American musician Shawn Colvin guest starred in the episode as Rachel Jordan, a character that she would later return to voice in the episode "I'm Goin' to Praiseland" (2001) from season twelve. In that episode, she stays at the Flanders' house with Ned, and leaves briefly after he attempted to mold her in the image of his deceased wife. At the end of the episode, however, she returns and has a date with him. Colvin told the "Seattle Post-Intelligencer" that being raised in Carbondale, Illinois meant she did not have to do much research for the guest appearance: "It's just very isolated [in Carbondale]. There was church music and that was about it. [...] I didn't have to dig too deep for the role. I suppose the whole 'Simpsons' thing is kind of like a hick town." Colvin has shown a segment of her guest role on "The Simpsons" during some of her concerts, including one at Cape Cod Melody Tent in 2007. She has also performed the song that she sings in "Alone Again, Natura-Diddily" in concert. The "Wisconsin State Journal" reported that during her 2001 concert at Barrymore Theatre, the "loudest audience response came after she sang a ditty that she performed as a character on "The Simpsons"." The song, called "He's the Man", later appeared on the 2007 soundtrack album "".

The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 13, 2000. It tied "Dateline NBC" for the 17th place (compared the season average of 37) in the ratings for the week of February 7–13, 2000, with a Nielsen rating of 10.7. The episode was the highest-rated show on Fox that week, and was viewed in approximately 10.8 million households.

Scully has admitted that another reason for killing off Maude was to increase ratings for "The Simpsons" during the February sweeps. To bring in even more viewers for the broadcast, the "Simpsons" producers chose not to reveal beforehand who the character that would be killed off was to create speculation. Fox also decided not to send out screener tapes to television critics to keep it a secret. However, according to an article in the "Contra Costa Times" that was published on the day the episode aired, "all the advance rumors suggest that Ned Flanders' wife, Maude, should watch her back." The revelation of the episode's title, "Alone Again, Natura-Diddly", was one of the reasons that the media and many people suspected Maude. As "The Post-Standard"s William LaRue writes, "diddly" is the "familiar greeting of Maude's husband, Ned Flanders." Roswell's announced departure strengthened this suspicion.

The episode has received mixed reviews from television critics. Gregory Hardy of the "Orlando Sentinel" placed it at number eleven on his list of the show's fifteen best episodes that target the world of sports. Writing for IGN, Robert Canning gave the episode a 7 out of 10 rating, commenting that he thought the three acts felt disconnected. He wrote: "First Maude dies, then Ned dates and now Ned questions his faith. To me, these three storylines would have been better served had they been the focus of their own individual episodes." Canning added that he felt "the episode made a poor choice by rushing through the mourning period and moving right into Ned dating," but that "the dating stuff, while, again, feeling hurried, was quite funny, especially Ned's date with Edna Krabappel."

DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson commented on the episode in a negative way, writing that it was "a harsh and cynical move [to kill off Maude because of Roswell's departure], though I could forgive the decision if it produced a more satisfying episode. Perhaps the writers made this one super-sincere to counteract the inherent cynicism behind its origins, but the show just seems sappy and lame." "Winnipeg Free Press" columnist Randall King wrote in his review of the eleventh season of "The Simpsons" that there is "something undeniably funny about having Maude Flanders die by a barrage of T-shirts fired by air cannons at a speedway. But the episode Alone Again Natura-Diddily was proof that the dependably brilliant series could – and did – go seriously wrong when it turned 11. Killing off Maude was a sin [...]".

Before "Alone Again, Natura-Diddily" was broadcast, a promotional commercial aired on television that featured, among other things, the announcement that "one of Springfield's most beloved will die" and a snippet of a scene from the episode with the character Lenny, sitting in the speedway spectator stand, being hit by a car tire, giving the impression that he would be the one who would die. Many viewers of the commercial, including Speedway Motorsports, Inc. owned Lowe's Motor Speedway president and public address announcer Jerry Gappens, expressed their concern as it appeared the episode was parodying an actual incident that happened during a speedway race at Lowe's Motor Speedway in May 1999, in Charlotte, North Carolina, when flying debris in a crash killed three spectators. Gappens said that doing a parody of that was "a real insensitive thing to do, pretty irresponsible. Obviously what might appear funny in L.A. or New York isn't funny here in Charlotte." Lowe's Motor Speedway announced to WSOC-TV's "Channel 9 Eyewitness News" on February 7, 2000 that they were thinking of placing a complaint to the Fox Broadcasting Company. WCCB, the then-Fox affiliate in Charlotte, refused to continue showing the commercial for the episode. As a result, Fox distributed a new commercial to the affiliate on February 9 that did not contain the scene with Lenny.

Antonia Coffman, a spokeswoman for "The Simpsons", told "The Charlotte Observer" that "the Lowe's incident didn't inspire the scene" and that the episode was not meant to offend anyone. After WCCB had gotten the opportunity to actually see the episode they decided that they would air it, realizing that the original commercial was misleading and that they did not think the episode was making fun of the incident. In the episode, the viewers can see that Lenny tries to get the attention of the cheerleaders by raising his hand so that they aim a T-shirt with the cannon at him. However, he is hit by a car tire instead. Unlike what the commercial implied, Lenny is not killed and is soon back in his seat. WCCB told the Associated Press that their interpretation of the scene was that someone threw the tire to Lenny because he was raising his hand, and that the tire did not actually come from a car crash on the track. Despite this, the affiliate announced that they would start the broadcast of the episode with a message warning viewers of the scene anyway.



</doc>
<doc id="1898966" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1898966" title="Loveppears">
Loveppears

Loveppears is the second studio album by Japanese recording artist Ayumi Hamasaki. It was released in Japan, Hong Kong and China on November 10, 1999 through Avex Trax and the China Record Corporation, and distributed worldwide on April 10, 2001 by Avex Entertainment Inc. It was entirely written by Hamasaki herself, while the production was handled by Japanese musician Max Matsuura. Musically, "Loveppears" is a dance album and lyrically focuses on themes of love, frustration of life, loneliness, and individualism.

Upon its release, "Loveppears" received favorable reviews from music critics. Many of those highlighted the singles as some of her best work, and complimented the transition from Hamasaki's previous pop rock-inspired music to dance. Commercially, the album was a success in Japan, reaching the top of the Oricon Albums Chart and eventually sold over 2.5 million units there, making it the 40th best selling album in that region. It was certified twice Million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) for physical shipments of two million units, and is Hamasaki's third highest selling album based on Oricon Style's database.

To promote the album, Hamasaki released 11 singles. One of the singles, "Love (Destiny)", became her first single to top the Oricon Singles Chart, other singles were able to reach the top ten). "Boys & Girls" and the extended play "A" sold over one million units, a first for Hamasaki. Majority of the album's material were promoted through Japanese commercials, which later became a staple for Hamasaki's future work, and some songs appeared on various remix albums conducted by Hamasaki. She performed most of the songs on her 2000 Japan concert tour.

After the success of Hamasaki's January 1999 studio album "A Song for ××", she began writing songs for her next studio album. However, her record label Avex Trax decided to release a remix album titled "Ayu-mi-x". The record marked the beginning of the incorporation of music elements outside of her pop rock sound, including trance, house and electronic music. This transition into mainstream dance music made Hamasaki recruit new composers and producers for the then-upcoming studio album, including Japanese dance band HΛL, Do As Infinity member and composer Dai Nagao, and Kazuhito Kikuchi, amongst others.

Avex Trax hired Japanese musician Max Matsuura to produce the entire record, alongside with Hamasaki and Japanese musician Naoto Suzuki's help, while Hamasaki wrote every song on the album. Recording sessions were handled at Prime Sound Studio, Studio Sound Dali, and Onkio Haus in Tokyo, Japan, and at Soundtrack Studios in New York City, United States; the final material was then mixed at Studio Sound Dali and Conway Studios in Los Angeles, California, and mastered by Eddy Schreyer at Oasis Masterings.

"Loveppears" was noted by critics as Hamasaki's first transition from her "cautious" pop rock style in "A Song for ××". The album includes two instrumental tracks: "Introduction", which was composed by HΛL, and the "Interlude" song that was composed by Naoto Suzuki. Some of the singles on "Loveppears" had been remixed and re-composed, including "Fly High"; extended versions of "Whatever", "Too Late", "Appears"; and a revised version of "Love (Destiny)", which was re-written and titled "Love: Refrain". The album also includes a hidden track on the song "Who...", which is the album version of "Kanariya". Lyrically, the material on the album focuses on themes of love, frustration of life, loneliness, and individualism.

"Loveppears" was released in Japan, Hong Kong and China on November 10, 1999 through Avex Trax and the China Record Corporation. The album included the seventeen tracks and, apart from the Chinese release, included a bonus Enhanced CD that features commercial files, small audio samples of all her recordings, internet links, images of magazine appearances, files of Hamasaki's voice, and images of Hamasaki being photographed in New York City, New York. The enhanced CD also includes five remixes; two non-stop mega mixes of Eurodance and house inspired music, the Millennium mix of "A Song for ××", an acoustic mix of "Powder Snow", and the Make Me Mad remix of "Friend II". On April 10, 2001, the album was re-released worldwide by Avex Entertainment Inc. through digital outlets.

The artwork for "Loveppears" was shot by Toru Kumazawa in New York City and Los Angeles, California. The cover features Hamasaki topless with a light brown wig covering her breasts. Hamasaki believed that the material on the album influenced her decision in calling the album "Loveappears", stating "While working on "A Song for ××", during the sad times that I couldn't shake, I'd always be saying 'I'm very sad, I can't shake this.' Quietly crying, quietly wounded, quietly mourning. But with "Loveppears", I express it with furious sounds, shouting out, screaming." During an interview with Japanese magazine "Beatfreak" in November 1999, Hamasaki explained that the title represented the visual aspects of a relationship (appears) and how people see love; she explained in full detail;

11 singles were released to promote "Loveppears", including one extended play and three limited edition releases. The first single was "Whatever", which was released on February 10, 1999 on physical and digital formats. In Japan, it became her highest charting single on the Oricon Singles Chart at the time, reaching number five. The following single, "Love (Destiny)", was released on April 14, 1999 on physical and digital formats. It became Hamasaki's first single to reach the top of the Oricon Single Chart. "To Be" was released as the album's third single on May 12, 1999, and reached the top five on the Oricon Singles Chart. The next two singles; "Boys & Girls" and the extended play "A" (included the songs "Trauma", "End Roll", "Monochrome", "Too Late"), managed to sell over one million units each, with the latter release becoming Hamasaki best selling single according to the data base at Oricon Style. Each individual track from "A" were promoted through commercial endorsements in Japan.

The next three singles; "Appears", "Kanariya", and "Fly High", had a limited availability of 300,000 copies. "Appears" was released on November 10, 1999 in physical and digital formats. The single was also Hamasaki's first release outside of Japan, having been remixed by Junior Vasquez and Armin Van Buuren, and distributed in 2001–2002 throughout North America and Europe. "Kanariya" was released on December 8, 1999, and was her only limited edition single from the album to peak at number one on the Oricon Singles Chart. It was her second single to have been released in North America, having been remixed by Jonathan Peters. The album's final single was "Fly High", which was released in Japan on February 9, 2000, her first single inside of the 2000s decade.

Avex Trax USA and Europe decided to release promotional 12 inch vinyls of various tracks from "Loveppears". "Monochrome" was remixed by Keith Litman, and released in North America, while Eurofen and Bonus Kaos remixed the track and released it in the United Kingdom. American duo Thunderpuss remixed the track "Trauma" and released it in North America through Avex Trax USA. "Too Late" was remixed by Soul Solution and was released in North America, while the original mix of the album track "Immature" was released as a double A-side single with "Appears" in Japan, as part of a promotion for her 2000 concert tour.

Upon its release, "Loveppears" received positive reviews from most music critics. A staff member working for "CD Journal" enjoyed the album and labeled it "bold". The review also stated that the music on "Loveppears" was at "high quality", and praised the producers and composers work on the material. The album brought Hamasaki several nominations and accolades, including a win at the Japan Gold Disc Awards for Best Pop Album of the Year, marking her second win after "A Song for xx". Alongside this, her single "A" won the award for Song of the Year.

Commercially, "Loveppears" was a success in Japan. The album debuted at number one on the Oricon Albums Chart, selling over 1.2 million units in its first week of sales. The record became the 34th album with the highest first week sales, and is Hamasaki's third feat. By the end of 1999, the album was ranked at number 14 on the Oricon Yearly Albums Chart with over 1,443,490 units sold; this made it the fourth highest selling album by a female artist, just behind Mariah Carey, Ami Suzuki and Utada Hikaru. The album continued to chart in 2000, and effectively sold an additional 1,077,960 units by the end of that year, reaching number 14 on the annual chart. The album stayed in the Oricon Top 200 chart for 64 weeks, becoming Hamasaki's longest spanning entry to date.

It was certified double Million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) for physical shipments of two million units, and is Hamasaki's third highest selling album based on Oricon Style's database. As of July 2016, "Loveppears" has sold over 2.5 million units in Japan, and is the 40th best selling album in Japan of all time; this marks it Hamasaki's second highest studio album behind "Duty", and the 10th highest selling album by a female artist.

Hamasaki promoted the album with extensive commercial deals in Japan; according to Alexey Eremenko from AllMusic, he commented in his biography of Hamasaki, "its success boosted by ad contracts that Hamasaki has raked in ever since as a spokesman, beginning with the Asian cosmetics juggernaut Kose (later she also worked for the likes of Honda and Panasonic)." She went onto promote several other products within Asia, including various food snacks, vehicles, and technology. In retrospect of the commercial deals, although Hamasaki initially supported the exploitation of her popularity for commercial purposes, saying that it was "necessary that [she is] viewed as a product", she eventually opposed Avex's decision to market her as a "product rather than a person".

Several tracks from "Loveppears" were featured on remix compilations during 1999 and 2000. The first was her February 2000 Eurobeat compilation "Super Eurobeat Presents Ayu-ro Mix". A four album series were then released to support "Loveppears"; the first three were the Japanese remix album "Ayu-mi-x II Version JPN", the American and European remix album "ayu-mi-x II Version US+EU" and the acoustic "Ayu-mi-x II Version Acoustic Orchestra", all released on March 8, 2000. The final album, "Ayu-mi-x II Version Non-Stop Mega Mix", reached number six and was certified platinum by RIAJ.

Hamasaki then performed several tracks from "Loveppears" on concert tours, including "Ayumi Hamasaki Concert Tour 2000 Vol. 1", "Ayumi Hamasaki Concert Tour 2000 Vol. 2", "Ayumi Hamasaki Stadium Tour 2002 A" and "Ayumi Hamasaki Arena Tour 2003–2004 A". The music videos to "Whatever", "Love (Destiny)", "To Be", "Boys & Girls", "Appears", "Kanariya", "Fly High" and other album promotional footage were featured on her 2004 video box set "Ayumi Hamasaki Complete Clip Box A".


Credits adapted from the CD liner notes of "Loveppears".





</doc>
<doc id="1913944" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1913944" title="Knut Arild Hareide">
Knut Arild Hareide

Knut Arild Hareide (born 23 November 1972) is a Norwegian politician who serves as a member of parliament from Hordaland and as the leader of the Christian Democratic Party from 2011 to 2019. Hareide served as Minister of the Environment from 2004 to 2005 in the second Bondevik cabinet. In 2007 he announced he would step down from the national political scene for the time being, but he returned when he was nominated as the top candidate for the Christian Democratic Party ticket in Akershus in the 2009 election where he won the county's leveling seat. After Dagfinn Høybråten stepped down as party leader, Hareide was unanimously elected to take his place at the 2011 party convention. In the 2013 election, Hareide was reelected to parliament, this time from his home county of Hordaland.

Before his tenure as government minister, Hareide had sat through one term in the municipal council of his native Bømlo, served as a deputy representative to the national parliament as well as working two years as a State Secretary. He was also second deputy leader of his party from 2003 to 2007, having come through the ranks of the party's youth organization.

Outside politics Hareide is an economist by education, and he has worked for the media conglomerate Schibsted.

Hareide was born in the village Rubbestadneset in Bømlo, Hordaland. He started his higher education in 1992, the same year he graduated from upper secondary school. Enrolled at the Norwegian School of Economics (NHH), he graduated in 1997 with a siv.øk. degree. During his time at NHH, he also minored in sociology (1995) at the University of Bergen.

Hareide was active in student politics. His involvement included terms as a member of the student parliament at the University of Bergen, as the leader of the Student Union of the Norwegian School of Economics 1994–1995, and as a board member of the national student union 1993–1994. During the period in student politics, Hareide held a Christian democratic middle ground between radical (such as later socialist politician Aslak Sira Myhre) and conservative representatives, an experience he has described as educational.

Hareide was active in the Youth of the Christian People's Party, being a member of the national board 1999–2001 before joining the national board of the Christian Democratic Party. He worked as a political advisor in the Ministry of Church Affairs, Education and Research from 1998 to 2000, during the first cabinet Bondevik. He later became State Secretary in the Ministry of Finance from 2001 to 2003 during the second cabinet Bondevik. In 2003 he became second deputy leader of the Christian Democratic Party nationwide.

He then joined the cabinet during a 2004 reshuffle, serving as the Norwegian Minister of the Environment from summer 2004 to fall 2005. He was the youngest ever cabinet member from the Christian Democratic Party, and the first Christian Democratic to hold the post. The second cabinet Bondevik did not survive the 2005 elections, and as such Hareide had to step down from office that year. His successor was Helen Bjørnøy. Until 2009, Hareide had never been elected to the Norwegian Parliament, but served as a deputy representative during the terms 1997–2001, 2001–2005 and 2005–2009. On the local level of politics he was a member of Bømlo municipality council from 1991 to 1995.

In 2007 Hareide announced that he had left politics for the time being to pursue a career in the national media conglomerate Schibsted, as an organizational director. His career in the company started with the position of trainee in 1997. Outside politics, his only paid full-time appointments have been in Schibsted. He still works behind the scenes for his party, occasionally commenting on issues in the national media. He did not rule out a return to national politics in the future, and in late 2008 he was selected by his party as the top candidate on the party's ticket in Akershus county. The Christian Democratic Party formerly held a seat in this county, but lost it in 2005. Hareide has never lived in Akershus. Party leader Dagfinn Høybråten hails from Akershus, but he runs on the Rogaland ticket to secure a safe seat.

Prior to the 2009 election, Hareide announced that he would leave national politics if he failed to win a parliament seat. Although the Christian Democrats suffered nationwide setbacks in 2009, Hareide managed to win Akershus' levelling seat after a close race against Dagfinn Sundsbø of the Centre Party. In parliament, Hareide became the chair of the Standing Committee on Transport and Communications.

After Høybråten announced that he would not seek reelection as party leader of KrF, Hareide quickly emerged as the leading candidate to succeed Høybråten, after the two other apparent candidates, Dagrun Eriksen and Hans Olav Syversen, announced they would not run. Hareide is considered to belong to the socially liberal wing of the party, and conservative members of the party have demanded that at least one of the deputy leaders be from the party's conservative wing if they are to support Hareide. Hareide supported the efforts to eliminate the rule which requires Christian Democratic party representatives to declare a Christian faith, and a vote gave a clear majority to abolish that rule two years later. Hareide was unanimously voted in as new party leader at the 2011 convention on 30 April 2011. Hareide declined the nomination as parliamentary leader, and Hans Olav Syversen was elected to this position.

On 18 November 2011 Hareide was appointed to lead the parliamentary committee that is investigating the 2011 Norway Attacks. His nomination to that position was proposed by the red-green parties. On 23 January 2012 Hareide denounced a speech at KrF's local chapter in Sarpsborg that had suggested that the terrorist attacks and the Alexander Kielland disaster were divine warnings or punishments for Norway's policy towards Israel; Hareide said that this was far beyond normal thinking and completely out of line with the party's values.

Following the 11th United Nations Climate Change Convention in Buenos Aires in December 2004, Hareide spoke out against the United States and China, whom he saw as "problems" in the international work against climate change. Hareide gained a fair level of praise for his role in the convention, from both his own party as well as political opponents.

Hareide received heavy criticism for the policy on large carnivores. A decision in early 2005, to uphold the ongoing wolf hunt even though a certain alpha she-wolf "Gråfjellstispa" had mistakenly been shot in January that year, was met with protests from the national World Wildlife Fund chapter and other environment organizations, as well as the Swedish Minister of the Environment Lena Sommestad and representatives from the European Union. Hareide described the event as "regrettable", but "not against the law". The case made headlines in "BBC" and "New Scientist". A few weeks before, Hareide had been criticized in a parliamentary hearing session for being too wolf-friendly. The environmental organizations went as far as to press charges against the Ministry of the Environment. The Ministry was acquitted when the case was finally brought up in late 2006, some time after Hareide left office.

In July the same year, Hareide received further criticism as the number of licenses to kill large carnivores allegedly was not only at a record high (12 brown bears, 10 grey wolves, 22 wolverines and 13 lynx), but also contradictory to the parliamentary policy on the matter. According to Hareide, the actions were in line with the parliamentary stance on the issue.

In April 2005 he was criticized for an issue connected to monetary support of environmental projects and organizations. The Ministry approved a $90,000 project support for the Church of Norway, while the pressure group Bellona faced a cut of the same amount. Hareide, being a devout Christian and a member of the Church of Norway, was accused of putting his own religious interests ahead of environmental considerations. The case became a curiosity in the Norwegian media as some of the money was channelled into the church internet site, which, among other things, contained a set of prayers for earthworms – described in such odd terms as "the blind subterranean workers", "small sisters and brothers in the compost" and "members of the subterranean congregation". Hareide responded to the criticism by describing the overall project as "exciting".

One of Hareide's last actions in office was to approve the construction of a hydroelectric power plant in the Hatteberg watershed in Kvinnherad, a protected natural area. Most of the criticism went to his successor, Helen Bjørnøy, who neglected to roll back the decision when assuming office. She eventually resigned halfway into her term.

During his time as Minister of the Environment, Hareide was parodied in the television comedy program "Tre brødre som ikke er brødre". The character Knut Arild Hareide, played by Harald Eia, was portrayed in several sketches as a physically weak person. These parodies were criticized by the authors in a 2005 book about different forms of mobbing; this stirred a minor debate in the Norwegian media. Nonetheless, Hareide himself showed a video clip of one of the parodies when publicly announcing his stepdown from national politics at the 2007 party congress.

In a poll taken in December 2013, Hareide received a 99 percent approval rating among Christian Democratic voters.

Hareide comes from a middle-class background, his father being a transportation manager and his mother a consultant.

Although reluctant to comment on the issue, Hareide was likely single during his first tenure in national politics. He has been confronted with rumours of homosexuality by segments of the media, but these have been dismissed. In 2008 he was reported as having a relationship with Solveig Engevik from Kolbotn, which ended in 2010. In the spring of 2011 he was confirmed in a relationship with school teacher Lisa Marie Larsen.


</doc>
<doc id="1922440" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1922440" title="Wallace Wilkinson">
Wallace Wilkinson

Wallace Glenn Wilkinson (December 12, 1941 – July 5, 2002) was an American businessman and politician from the Commonwealth of Kentucky. From 1987 to 1991, he served as the state's 57th governor. Wilkinson dropped out of college at the University of Kentucky in 1962 to attend to a book retail business he started. The business rapidly became a national success, and Wilkinson re-invested his profits in real estate, farming, transportation, banking, coal, and construction ventures, becoming extremely wealthy. In 1987, he joined a crowded field in the Democratic gubernatorial primary. After running behind two former governors and the sitting lieutenant governor for most of the race, Wilkinson began to climb in the polls after hiring then-unknown campaign consultant James Carville. Wilkinson campaigned on a promise of no new taxes and advocated a state lottery as an alternative means of raising money for the state. Wilkinson surprised most political observers by winning the primary and going on to defeat his Republican challenger in the general election.

Wilkinson was able to secure passage of a constitutional amendment allowing a state lottery. He also helped craft a significant education reform bill in response to a ruling by the Kentucky Supreme Court that declared the state's entire public school system unconstitutional. Wilkinson's term was plagued by political scandal and an uneasy relationship with the state legislature. He advocated an amendment to the state constitution that would allow him to seek a second consecutive term as governor, but the amendment was defeated in the General Assembly. His wife Martha attempted to succeed him, but withdrew from the campaign amid weak support for her candidacy. Following his term as governor, Wilkinson encountered difficult financial times. In 2001, he was sued by a group of creditors, and during the proceedings, it was revealed that he was operating a Ponzi scheme to keep his businesses afloat. Both he and his wife Martha filed for bankruptcy later that year. In 2002, Wilkinson was hospitalized with arterial blockages. His condition was complicated by a recurrence of Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. He suffered a stroke on July 4, 2002, and his family withdrew his life support the following day in accordance with his previously-expressed wishes.

Wallace Wilkinson was born on a farm in Casey County, Kentucky, about southwest of the city of Liberty, on December 12, 1941. The son of Hershel and Cleo (Lay) Wilkinson, he had two older brothers and a younger sister. His parents were farmers and also operated a small general store. When Wilkinson was four years old, the family moved to Liberty, and the family opened Wilkinson's Grocery. During his childhood, he delivered newspapers, sold popcorn from a street stand, and co-owned a shoe shine parlor with a boyhood friend. He also accompanied his father to sell produce from the back of a truck. It was during one such trip that he met Martha Carol Stafford, whose parents owned a grocery store about away. The two dated throughout high school and were married in 1960. They had two children: Wallace Glenn Wilkinson, Jr. (b. 1970) and Andrew Stafford Wilkinson (b. 1972).

Wilkinson was a member of the freshman basketball team at Liberty High School. Using profits from his early business ventures, he purchased a business wardrobe that earned him the title of best dressed member of his senior class. He graduated from high school in 1959, but the poor curriculum there left him without the credits he needed to gain admission to the University of Kentucky's engineering program. He began selling livestock feed in Scottsville, Kentucky, and also worked at a venetian blind factory while taking classes at Campbellsville College to earn the credits he needed. In 1962, he moved to Lexington, Kentucky, and enrolled at the University of Kentucky. While in college, he worked at Kennedy Book Store in Lexington. Later, he and two friends borrowed money to open the Kentucky Paperback Gallery in Lexington; Wilkinson left school later that year to attend to the business full-time. At the time, Kentucky high school students were required to purchase their own textbooks, but there was no marketplace for buying and selling used books; Wilkinson's business catered to this market and was highly successful.

Wilkinson opened Wallace's Book Store in June 1965 after a local stockbroker helped him raise the initial capital needed through a public stock offering. By this time, Kentucky had adopted free textbook legislation at the behest of Governor Julian Carroll, so Wilkinson transitioned to selling college textbooks to students at the University of Kentucky. Throughout the 1960s, Wilkinson refused to pay the state sales tax on his transactions; he and Joe Kennedy, the owner of Kennedy Book Store, both claimed that paying the tax put them at a competitive disadvantage with the university's book store, which did not pay state taxes because it was operated by the university, a tax exempt entity. In 1977, the state Board of Tax Appeals ruled that all three bookstores should have been paying the tax, but by this time, the statute of limitations had expired, and none of the three were required to pay any back taxes. Wallace's Book Store continued to expand rapidly, opening retail stores in twenty-eight states and becoming one of the country's largest book firms. In January 1971, he considered issuing more stock to raise capital to buy Providence, Rhode Island-based Barnes & Noble, but the executive committee of Wallace's was averse to purchasing a company so far away and blocked the move. In April 1977, Wilkinson was cited for false and misleading advertisement in conjunction with claims made in radio ads for Wallace's Book Store claiming they were offering the first discounts in history on new college textbooks. In a court filing, Wilkinson admitted the claims were untrue, promised to stop airing the ads, and agreed to refund any money overpaid by customers.

With the success of his chain of bookstores, Wilkinson pursued other business ventures in the fields of real estate development, farming, transportation, banking, coal interests, and construction. He purchased several private aircraft to help him tend to his diverse interests throughout the state, and in 1973, created Wilkinson Flying Service to keep the planes busy when he wasn't using them. After investing in the unfinished Bluegrass Commerce Center in Lexington in early 1977, he purchased one-third interest in the Purcell building on Lexington's Vine Street later that year. The building was only partially occupied, but had become more valuable because of the opening of nearby Rupp Arena in October 1976 and a new Hyatt hotel in May 1977. Developers Donald and Dudley Webb developed plans to construct the Vine Center on the block; by May 1979, they had options to buy every property on the block except Wilkinson's interest in the Purcell building. Unwilling to meet Wilkinson's asking price, they instead formed a partnership with him to co-develop the Vine Center. When Wilkinson eventually sold his interest in the venture at the end of 1981, he turned a profit of at least $1.3 million on his investment. Next, he formed a public-private partnership with the city of Lexington to construct the Capital Plaza Hotel in 1983. The city provided $3 million in capital and another $8.5 million in guaranteed loans to supplement Wilkinson's $1.15 million investment. Wallace's Book Stores was given 95% ownership in the hotel, allowing the company to shield $2 million in assets from federal income taxes and claim over $400,000 in tax credits.

Despite playing a major role in the Lexington real estate market, Wilkinson was fiercely protective of his privacy; for a time, he even refused to allow newspapers to publish pictures of him. His public profile began to rise when he announced plans to construct the 50-story World Coal Center on the corner of Main and Limestone streets in Lexington. When completed, it would be the largest office complex between Atlanta and Chicago. Wilkinson hoped that all the major coal companies in the state would relocate their offices to the center, making it a hub for the international coal market. Shortly after Wilkinson demolished the historic Phoenix Hotel to make way for the building, the coal market experienced a pronounced lull, and the empty lot where the proposed coal center would have stood was derided as "Wally's Folly" and "Lake Wilkinson". In 1984, the Lexington-Fayette Urban County Government secured a lease from Wilkinson to develop a temporary municipal park on the site. Wilkinson conceded that he would not be able to develop the proposed World Coal Center in the near-term, and Lexington mayor Scotty Baesler wanted to improve the property before the city hosted the finals of the 1985 NCAA men's basketball tournament at Rupp Arena. In early 1985, Wilkinson struck a deal with the state and urban county governments to retain the park and build a public library and parking garage while allowing Wilkinson to construct and operate a 21-story apartment complex above the garage. Critics claimed that the city-county government bailed Wilkinson out of a bad investment by purchasing the property from him and by giving him a government-subsidized, low interest rate on his $12 million mortgage for the apartment building.

On April 10, 1984, Wilkinson was allegedly kidnapped by a man named Jerome Jernigan. In 1977, Wilkinson had provided Jernigan with start-up money for Jernigan Export Timber, Inc., a company that manufactured and exported wood veneers internationally. The company went defunct around the time of Jernigan's divorce from his wife, the secretary-treasurer of the company, in December 1980. Jernigan's son, Victor, continued to work for Wilkinson in another capacity until 1982.

According to Wilkinson, in the months leading up to the alleged kidnapping, Jernigan had come to Wilkinson's office several times demanding money he claimed he was owed from his prior business dealings with Wilkinson. Wilkinson said he had been making the requested payments, but that when he refused Jernigan's request on April 10, Jernigan presented him with a four-page suicide note, then produced a pistol and told Wilkinson, "I'm going to kill you first." Wilkinson further alleged that Jernigan forced him to drive to the Crowne Plaza Hotel in Frankfort, a hotel Wilkinson owned, at gunpoint. The two spent the night at the hotel, and sometime during the night, Wilkinson contacted James Aldridge, president of New Farmers National Bank in Glasgow, Kentucky. Wilkinson, who owned an interest in New Farmers National Bank, told Aldridge he needed $500,000 as soon as possible. The next day, Wilkinson and Jernigan flew to Glasgow aboard a plane operated by Wilkinson Flying Service, another company owned by Wilkinson. Wilkinson said Jernigan threatened to kill employees at the company if Wilkinson attempted to alert them. Aldridge met Wilkinson and Jernigan with the money Wilkinson had requested at the Glasgow Municipal Airport. Upon their arrival, Wilkinson paid Jernigan $500,000 and was released unharmed.

After his release, Wilkinson alerted the FBI, and Jernigan was arrested the same day in Lexington. Upon his arrest, he was in possession of two pistols, six sets of handcuffs, and $400,000 in cash. Jernigan told authorities that he and Wilkinson had spent the previous night at the Crowne Plaza negotiating a settlement to their differences stemming from their earlier business relationship. The terms of the settlement, Jernigan maintained, included a $500,000 cash payment from Wilkinson, part of which would finance a new business venture similar to Jernigan's previous veneer export business. Wilkinson would also furnish Jernigan with a car, a furnished apartment in Lexington, and a salary of $5,000 a month. Jernigan stated that after the $500,000 was paid, Wilkinson decided to back out of the settlement and portray the encounter as a crime. Wilkinson denied Jernigan's allegations and maintained that the money – which was later recovered – was demanded by Jernigan as a ransom for his release.

Weeks later, Jernigan filed a counter-suit against Wilkinson in Fayette County circuit court. He asked the court to award him $50 million in punitive damages and to determine the profits made by his and Wilkinson's veneer company, of which he would receive half. A judge ordered the case moved to Louisville because the alleged crime was committed in Glasgow, in the state's western district. State charges against Jernigan, which included kidnapping and carrying a concealed deadly weapon, were dropped so that the federal extortion charges could take precedence. Over the objection of his legal counsel, the court ordered Jernigan to undergo a psychiatric evaluation to determine whether he was insane or mentally incompetent for his own defense. The court-appointed psychiatrist found Jernigan competent to stand trial, and he was released in late May on a $25,000 bond.

After his release on bond, Jernigan returned to the room at the Continental Inn in Lexington where he had been living prior to his arrest. On July 18, 1984, Jernigan's son Randy found him dead in the room. An autopsy showed that Jernigan suffered from coronary atherosclerosis, and heart disease was officially listed as the cause of death. Lexington police determined that there was no evidence to suggest foul play. Jernigan's ex-wife continued to pursue Jernigan's case against Wilkinson, but a Fayette County Circuit Court Judge awarded Wilkinson a summary judgment to dismiss the case in 1986.

After announcing his plans for the World Coal Center, Wilkinson began attending meetings of the Lexington Urban City Council, where he advocated his fiscally conservative political views. He was an admirer of Ronald Reagan, although he said he wished Reagan was a Democrat like himself. In 1979, Wilkinson became involved with Terry McBrayer's campaign against John Y. Brown, Jr. in the Democratic gubernatorial primary. He held a critical fundraiser for Scotty Baesler's 1981 Lexington mayoral campaign, although most of the businessmen in Lexington favored Baesler's opponent. In the 1983 Democratic gubernatorial primary, he served as finance chairman for Harvey Sloane's campaign. When Sloane lost a close race to Lieutenant Governor Martha Layne Collins, Republican nominee Jim Bunning tried to enlist the support of Sloane and his supporters, including Wilkinson. After a month of consideration, however, Wilkinson endorsed the entire Democratic ticket. The following year, he managed former governor Brown's brief senatorial campaign. Already considering running for governor in 1987, Wilkinson had hoped to remove Brown as a potential competitor for that office by helping him get elected to the Senate, but Brown ended his campaign early for health reasons. Through his work in various the campaigns, Wilkinson found that he enjoyed the challenges of competing in the political arena. He lobbied the General Assembly to pass a multi-bank holding company bill allowing banking companies to own more than one Kentucky bank. The bill passed in 1984.

In April 1985, Wilkinson formed a campaign committee in advance of the 1987 gubernatorial election. Relatively unknown statewide, Wilkinson was the first candidate to enter the race. The Democratic primary field eventually grew to include two previous Kentucky governors, John Y. Brown, Jr. and Julian Carroll; sitting Lieutenant Governor Steve Beshear, who would later win two terms as governor in 2007 and 2011; and Grady Stumbo, cabinet secretary for Governor Martha Layne Collins. Early in the race, Brown was the clear-cut favorite, while Wilkinson was picked to finish fifth. Wilkinson financed his own campaign and campaign manager Danny Briscoe suggested that he hire a campaign consultant to reach out to the state's large concentration of undecided voters. After a few interviews, Wilkinson hired a then-unknown political consultant named James Carville; Carville later went on to chair Bill Clinton's successful presidential campaign in 1992.
Beshear, considered the second strongest candidate in the primary race, spent much of the campaign attacking Brown, and Brown spent time and resources responding to Beshear's attacks. Meanwhile, Wilkinson attacked all of his opponents in the race as political insiders while touting his own rise from poverty to financial success. He called the incentive package that sitting governor Martha Layne Collins had offered to lure a Toyota manufacturing plant to the state "a massive mistake and terrible deal" that had made Kentucky "an international laughingstock". He also claimed that both Brown and Beshear would raise taxes and proposed a state lottery, which he claimed would generate $70 million annually for the state's coffers, as an alternative to higher taxes. The proposal proved particularly popular in Northern Kentucky, where residents routinely traveled to neighboring Ohio to play that state's lottery. Wilkinson also advocated for wholesale education reform, stating that Kentucky's children "don't have a learning problem; they've got a schooling problem." Two-time former governor A. B. "Happy" Chandler gave Wilkinson's campaign further credibility with his endorsement.

In late April, Brown still held a 20 percentage point lead in public opinion polling. However, as Beshear began to slip in the polls, Wilkinson moved up. By Memorial Day weekend, he was polling second among the candidates. Brown largely ignored Wilkinson until a week before the election, when he began running ads questioning the amount of money Wilkinson claimed would be generated by a state lottery. Wilkinson won the primary, garnering 36 percent of the vote to 26 percent for Brown, 18 percent for Beshear, 12 percent for Stumbo, and 6 percent for Carroll. In total, Wilkinson spent a record $4 million during the primary campaign. Kentucky historian Thomas D. Clark opined that Wilkinson's lavish spending during the campaign prompted the legislature to adopt campaign finance reform measures.

Democrats enjoyed a 3-to-1 voter registration advantage in Kentucky, and while he had been the underdog in the primary campaign, Wilkinson became the heavy favorite against the Republican nominee, State Representative John Harper of Shepherdsville. Larry Forgy, who had been groomed for the Republican nomination, unexpectedly dropped out of the race before the primary, leaving the party at a significant disadvantage with a largely unknown and underfunded candidate. While Harper began his general election campaign immediately, Wilkinson made few public appearances – except for fundraisers – until the second week in September. He also refused to endorse the $125 million education reform measure that sitting governor Martha Layne Collins had guided through the legislature in 1985, which cost him the endorsement of the Kentucky Education Association. The association endorsed Harper, marking the first time in its history it had endorsed a Republican gubernatorial candidate, but endorsed Brereton Jones, the Democratic candidate for lieutenant governor.

Harper attacked Wilkinson's lottery proposal as "Alice in Wonderland" economics. In addition, Harper's campaign raised a number of ethical issues with regard to Wilkinson's business dealings. Gary Stafford, Wilkinson's brother-in-law who was serving as president of Wallace's Book Store, pleaded guilty to illegal wiretapping and rolling back the odometers on company vehicles. The company was also forced to pay $44,641 in back taxes. Further, Republican state chairman Bob Gable questioned whether Wilkinson had helped Italian businessmen circumvent laws that made it difficult to export Italian currency by disguising real estate ventures as legitimate business transactions with Jernigan Export Timber. Gable also hired a private investigator who determined that there was "substantial reason" to suspect that foul play was involved in the death of Wilkinson's business partner, Jerome Jernigan. Despite Gable's allegations and the investigator's findings, Lexington police officials said they saw no reason to re-open the investigation. Harper was at a substantial fundraising disadvantage, raising only $225,000 for the entire campaign compared to Wilkinson's $8 million. This left him unable to purchase enough media time to solidify any of the ethical questions about Wilkinson in the voters' minds. Wilkinson's campaign also delved into Harper's personal life, admitting that it tipped off the media about Harper's son, who had been shot to death in an attempted burglary.

In the general election, Wilkinson defeated Harper by a vote of 504,674 to 273,141. By capturing 65% of the vote, he broke Julian Carroll's record of 62.8%. Low voter turnout prohibited him from setting the record for most votes received by a candidate in a Kentucky gubernatorial election, and he received several thousand fewer votes than Brereton Jones, the victorious Democratic candidate for lieutenant governor. He carried 115 of Kentucky's 120 counties – besting Carroll's old record of 99 – but lost in Fayette, his county of residence. A poll conducted by a Louisville television station after the election showed that 76% of voters wished they had another candidate to vote for.

Even before he officially took office, some of Wilkinson's public comments set up an adversarial relationship with the General Assembly. Just two days after his election, he told reporters that he would exert the "full power" of his office toward getting his agenda approved by the legislature and that he "conceive of a situation" where he would use his political action committee (PAC), Kentuckians for a Better Future, to help defeat legislators who opposed him. Under governors Brown and Collins, the legislature had become increasingly independent of the governor, and "Lexington Herald-Leader" reporters opined that House Speaker Don Blandford and Senate President Pro Tem John "Eck" Rose would be reluctant to cede power back to the chief executive. During the 1988 legislative session, Rose introduced a bill setting a limit of $4,000 on the amount PACs could contribute to an individual's campaigns during a single election and a limit of $2,000 on the amount any individual could contribute to a single PAC in a given election. A month later, Wilkinson recanted, saying he "misspoke" and only intended to use his PAC to promote passage of the lottery amendment. Despite the governor's promise, the legislature passed Rose's bill.

Tensions also developed between Wilkinson and Lieutenant Governor-Elect Jones soon after the election. During the campaign, Jones was quoted as saying that he had talked with Wilkinson about being more open with the press and said that, if elected, he would not be a "yes man" for Wilkinson. At a press conference shortly after the election, Wilkinson said he did not know what role Jones would play in his administration and that much of it would depend on what Jones had meant when he said he did not agree with all of Wilkinson's positions. In late November 1987, Wilkinson announced that Jones would spearhead the promotion of the administration's agricultural agenda. The "Lexington Herald-Leader" reported that this would not be Jones' primary role in the administration but that no other specifics had been provided.

Although amendments removing Kentucky's constitutional prohibition on a state lottery had been introduced in every legislative session since the mid-1970s, Wilkinson's election provided the issue with fresh momentum, and the General Assembly passed the amendment by the required majorities in the 1988 session. Another amendment passed during Wilkinson's term required landowner approval before strip mining could occur on a piece of property. This amendment essentially overturned a 1956 court ruling and negated the practice of issuing broad form deeds which allowed property owners to sell their mineral rights while retaining ownership of structures and other improvements above-ground. A third amendment for which Wilkinson advocated would have allowed elected state officials to succeed themselves in office. During his gubernatorial campaign, he insisted that he would not seek to have such an amendment apply to himself, but shortly after his election, he reversed course and insisted on an amendment that did not exclude present incumbents. The amendment became one of Wilkinson's top priorities in the 1988 legislative session, and he threatened to work against legislators who opposed it. Legislators proposed that a succession amendment include provisions to lengthen the terms of state legislators in order to maintain a balance of power between the executive and legislative branches; Wilkinson insisted that the General Assembly pass a "clean" succession amendment, free from any other provisions that might diminish the amendment's chances of being approved by the state's voters. The Kentucky House of Representatives passed such an amendment, but the state Senate continued to press for legislative concessions, proposing annual legislative sessions and mandatory runoffs in gubernatorial primaries when one candidate did not receive a majority of the votes cast. When Wilkinson rejected both proposals, Senate leaders refused to bring the amendment to the floor for a vote. Wilkinson's reversal on his campaign promise not to seek succession for present incumbents damaged his reputation.

Wilkinson's advocacy for the amendment further damaged his relationship with Lieutenant Governor Jones because Jones had already announced his intention to run for governor in 1991. After the session, Jones told a crowd in Owensboro that if Wilkinson called a special session to insist that legislators pass his educational agenda, that the General Assembly would probably "throw it back in his face". In response, Wilkinson said that Jones should "be involved in improving the process, not be so negative about everything" and "pay attention to his own business". A "Lexington Herald-Leader" story noted that a promised news conference to elaborate on Jones' role in the administration had not yet happened and that "[m]ost observers expect it never will". The two men's relationship continued to be strained throughout their terms; Jones later described it as "terrible".

Leaders of the Southern Baptists and United Methodists led opposition to the amendment during Wilkinson's administration, activating the Coalition Against a State Lottery. Despite the opposition, Kentucky voters approved the lottery amendment by a vote of 694,577 to 446,937 in the November 1988 elections. Days after the election, Wilkinson signed a proclamation calling a special legislative session to begin November 28 to pass legislation to implement the lottery. The call instructed the legislature to consider a bill based on the recommendations of Wilkinson's lottery commission. The recommendations included the establishment of a lottery board whose president and members would be appointed by the governor and could only be removed by the governor, and earmarked the first year's proceeds to be split evenly between early childhood education programs, programs for the elderly, and a one-time bonus to veterans of the Vietnam War. Legislators insisted on more legislative control of the lottery and did not favor explicit earmarks for the proceeds, preferring to allocate them in the 1990 legislative session. They also objected to the lottery board's exemption from open records and open meetings laws.

Immediately after the session convened, Democratic leadership in both houses of the General Assembly announced they would not support earmarking lottery funds, but would let them accumulate in escrow until the 1990 legislative session. On December 14, legislators adjourned the session after passing a bill that created an eight-member lottery board, headed by a president appointed by the governor and confirmed by the other seven members. The other seven members of the board would serve staggered terms, would be appointed by the governor, and be confirmed by the Senate. The legislation also escrowed proceeds until the 1990 General Assembly and specified that the first expenditures from those proceeds would fund a one-time bonus to veterans of the Vietnam War. The vote on the legislation was 32–5 in the Senate and 92–6 in the House. Several Republican amendments, including one by Senator David L. Williams to implement a local option for counties to decide whether or not to sell lottery tickets, were defeated on party-line votes. While the legislation did not implement all of Wilkinson's proposals for the lottery, he nonetheless praised it as a "very good" bill.

On May 31, 1988, Franklin County circuit court judge Ray Corns issued a ruling in the case of "Council for Better Education v. Collins, et al." stating that Kentucky's system of school financing was unconstitutional. The suit was brought against Wilkinson's predecessor, Martha Layne Collins, and several members of the state government by a group of poor school districts as a means to equalize funding for all the state's school districts. An advocate for education, Wilkinson dropped the governor's office's defense in the suit and joined the plaintiffs when Corns' decision was appealed to the Kentucky Supreme Court. On appeal, the Supreme Court declared Kentucky's entire public school system unconstitutional and mandated that the legislature reform it.

Although state legislators maintained that reforming the public school system was too large an issue to tackle during the 60-day legislative session of 1990 and requested that Wilkinson call a special legislative session in June 1990 to consider the issue, the governor insisted that the issue be resolved during the regular session and said that he would not allow consideration of tax increases to fund improvements in the system if he had to call a special session. Wilkinson presented a budget proposal to the General Assembly that contained measures increasing taxes on cigarettes and corporations and eliminating sales tax exemptions on legal, engineering, and advertising services. Legislators favored raising the sales tax to six percent instead. For much of the legislative session, Wilkinson remained steadfastly opposed to an increased sales tax, repeatedly calling it a "dead issue" and threatening to veto it. Then on March 9, 1990, Wilkinson announced that he would drop his opposition to the tax in exchange for the Assembly's approval of a $600 million bond issue to finance road improvements he had promised during the campaign. The "Lexington Herald-Leader" called the move "a stunning reversal" and noted that Wilkinson would not comment on why he changed his mind. With the impasse between the legislature and Wilkinson resolved, House Speaker Don Blandford announced that the remainder of the session would focus only on approving the state budget and passing the court-mandated education reforms; any bills still in committees would not be brought to a vote, he said. On April 11, 1990, the Assembly passed the Kentucky Education Reform Act (KERA) to comply with the Supreme Court's decision. Besides increasing funding for schools, it mandated high performance measures and held schools accountable for meeting them. Educators hailed the legislation as being among the nation's best education reform plans.

Even after KERA was passed, disagreements between Wilkinson and the legislature continued. The $600 million bond issue for road construction that had been the price for Wilkinson's support of the sales tax was modified to include language that allowed the legislature to determine where the roads were constructed. Wilkinson threatened to veto the measure, claiming he did not need the General Assembly's approval to issue the bonds, but ultimately, he chose to allow it to become law without his signature. Wilkinson vetoed 21 bills passed by the legislature, but 13 of those vetoes were overridden; it was the most gubernatorial vetoes overridden in a single session in modern times. Most of the overridden vetoes were on bills strengthening the legislative branch relative to the executive branch. The General Assembly also voted to send two proposed constitutional amendments that strengthened the legislative branch relative to the executive to voters for ratification. One allowed the legislature to call itself into session – a power constitutionally reserved for the governor – if two-thirds of its members signed a petition to do so. The other allowed a committee of legislators to suspend regulations enacted by the executive branch between legislative sessions until the full legislature re-convened. Through his political action committee, Wilkinson opposed both measures, and both were rejected by the state's voters in the November 1990 elections.

The political debates and posturing leading up to the passing of KERA also permanently breached the relationship between Wilkinson and Lieutenant Governor Jones. During a teachers' rally in Frankfort, Jones was sympathetic to their demands for more money for education than Wilkinson was supporting. Jones wanted to speak to the crowd that had gathered outside the Capitol. While in the governor's office, Wilkinson told Jones that if he spoke to the crowd, he should never " in this office again." Jones defied Wilkinson by speaking to the teachers and, according to Penny Miller, editor of Jones' public papers, never again entered Wilkinson's office.

Wilkinson also advanced economic development in the state. During his tenure, Delta Air Lines nearly doubled the number of people it employed at the Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport; Wilkinson secured Delta's expansion by agreeing to limit the company's sales tax liability on jet fuel to $4 million annually. Additionally, Scott Paper Company opened a plant near Owensboro and North American Stainless, a Spanish-owned steel company, located a plant near Carrollton. During his term in office, Wilkinson served on the Education Commission of the States, the Southern Growth Policies Board, and the Council of the State Governments and the Southern States Energy Board. He was elected chair of the Southern Governors Association in 1990 and served on the Education Commission of the States' Policy and Priorities Committee.

The Wilkinson administration was dogged by ethical questions that eventually resulted in prosecution of some members. Before being elected governor, Wilkinson asked the Kentucky attorney general to rule on his ownership of the Holiday Inn Capital Plaza Hotel in Frankfort. The ruling stated that he should sell the hotel, and in November 1987, Kentucky Central Life Insurance, a state-regulated company, purchased the property for $12 million, which included $8.2 million of debt. Kentucky Central became insolvent in 1994 and was ordered into liquidation. The following year, Kentucky Insurance Commissioner George Nichols III assumed the liquidation and brought suit against Wilkinson stating that the property was only worth $6 million. Franklin County Circuit Judge Earl O'Bannon dismissed the lawsuit on the grounds that Wilkinson had not knowingly participated in Kentucky Central's breach of financial responsibility, even though it had, in his words, an "odor of politics." 

Further, an FBI (Operation Boptrot) investigation of the Kentucky General Assembly led to Wilkinson's nephew, Bruce N. Wilkinson, who served as his appointment secretary. Bruce Wilkinson was convicted of extortion, fined $20,000, and sentenced to three years in prison. Wallace Wilkinson was investigated by a grand jury but never indicted. He vehemently denied any wrongdoing.

In 1990, Wilkinson's wife, Martha, announced that she would seek the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 1991. The move was widely seen as a surrogate candidacy so that her husband could continue his administration for a second consecutive term. Her challengers included Lieutenant Governor Jones, Lexington mayor Scotty Baesler, and Dr. Floyd G. Poore, the former Kentucky highway director. With polls consistently showing little support for her candidacy, Mrs. Wilkinson dropped out of the race in May 1991. Earlier in the year, Wallace Wilkinson was diagnosed with limited-stage Non-Hodgkin lymphoma. This diagnosis was also a factor in Ms. Wilkinson's withdrawal from the race. Wallace underwent surgery at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, then received radiation therapy at the University of Kentucky. These treatments eliminated all signs of the disease by 1993, and doctors gave Wilkinson an excellent chance of recovery.

As Wilkinson's term ended, he appointed himself to a six-year term on the University of Kentucky's board of regents. The move was unprecedented, and was particularly controversial because of Wilkinson's open feuds with Charles T. Wethington, Jr., the university president. An incensed legislature passed a law shortly thereafter that dissolved the existing boards of trustees at all Kentucky public colleges and universities and mandated that they be reconstituted by allowing the governor to select each member from a list of three candidates recommended by an independent review board. Jones, who succeeded Wilkinson as governor, used the provisions of the law to remove Wilkinson and several of his appointees from the university boards.

After his service as governor, Wilkinson returned to his business pursuits. In the early 1990s, he began borrowing money to keep his bookstore business solvent and to support his lavish lifestyle. His interest in running for another non-consecutive term as governor appeared to be dampened by the system of public financing that Kentucky had in place at that time for gubernatorial elections. In 1995, he published his memoir entitled "You Can't Do That, Governor!"; a major theme of the book was his disdain for conventional wisdom and political norms. In 1999, he launched ECampus.com, an Internet book retailer. Among the investors in the company were Wendy's founder Dave Thomas, Long John Silver's founder James Patterson, and Ohio State University president William English Kirwan.

On February 5, 2001, a group of Wilkinson's creditors filed suit to have his companies seized. During the ensuing bankruptcy proceedings, Wilkinson admitted that his liabilities exceeded his assets by $300 million. During the proceedings, it was revealed that Wilkinson had been financially insolvent since 1992 and was operating a Ponzi scheme, paying his creditors with money borrowed from others rather than his own profits. He had paid no federal income taxes since 1991. At his deposition in June 2001, Wilkinson invoked his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination over 140 times. Wallace's Bookstore was liquidated for just over $31 million, and ecampus.com was sold for $2.5 million. Wilkinson's wife, Martha, also filed for bankruptcy; his sons were forced to sell their homes to repay loans made to them by their father. During the bankruptcy proceedings, the Wilkinsons moved from Lexington to Naples, Florida.

While in Lexington for a deposition on May 26, 2002, Wilkinson began to experience chest pains and was admitted to St. Joseph's Hospital. Doctors diagnosed him with arterial blockages and scheduled him for arterial bypass surgery. Before the surgery could be performed, however, doctors discovered another lymphatic mass. Wilkinson began taking chemotherapy, and doctors removed the mass on June 4, 2002. Wilkinson was placed on life support on June 26, 2002. He suffered a stroke on July 4, 2002. Wilkinson had previously instructed his family not to continue life support after all hope of recovery was gone; accordingly, they decided to withdraw life support, and Wilkinson died on July 5, 2002. He was originally buried at Blue Grass Memorial Gardens in Nicholasville, Kentucky. In August 2002, his coffin was moved to a locked mausoleum at Sarasota Memorial Park in Sarasota, Florida; the family chose July 4, 2002 as the date of death for his marker. The city of Liberty dubbed the stretch of the U.S. 127 bypass that runs through the city Wallace Wilkinson Boulevard in 1987.





</doc>
<doc id="1930989" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1930989" title="1904 Tour de France">
1904 Tour de France

The 1904 Tour de France was the second Tour de France, held from 2 to 24 July. With a route similar to its previous edition, 1903 Tour de France winner Maurice Garin seemed to have repeated his win by a small margin over Lucien Pothier, while Hippolyte Aucouturier won four of the six stages. But the race became a victim of its own success, plagued by scandals; cyclists were accused of having taken trains during the race. Twelve cyclists, including the first four of the final classification and all stage winners, were disqualified by the Union Vélocipédique Française (UVF). Henri Cornet, originally the fifth-place finisher, was awarded the victory four months after the race. The problems caused the Tour de France to be provisionally cancelled, and subsequently the 1905 Tour de France was run with different rules from the 1903 and 1904 edition.

The initial Tour de France of 1903 had been a large success, and it was quickly decided to organize it again in 1904. The route was identical, with the same six stages. The rules were the same as in 1903, with one exception: cyclists could not enter in just one stage, but had to join for the entire race. The favourites for the victory were Garin, Pothier and Aucouturier, who had performed well in the 1903 Tour de France. Among the competitors was Henri Paret who, at 50 years old, still holds the record of oldest Tour de France cyclist.

In the 1903 Tour de France, the organisation guaranteed that the first 50 cyclists in the final general classification would earn at least 5 francs per day. In 1904, if not more than 50 cyclists would finish, also cyclists who dropped out during the race would still get 5 francs for the days they had been in the race. This rule was added to attract cyclists who otherwise would not enter, because the Tour needed enough competitors to remain credible.

In the first stage, the riders fell after only a few kilometres. Lipman broke a finger, and became the first rider to abandon this Tour. Around 100 km in the race, Lucien Pothier lost ten minutes to the main group, led by Maurice Garin, because of a broken bicycle. In Cosne, at 174 km, Pothier had reached the leading group. Aucouturier had lost more than one hour at that point. Just before the next control post in Nevers, Aucouturier fell on his face, and continued the race covered in blood. In the last part of the race, Maurice Garin and Lucien Pothier rode away from the others. They were attacked by four masked men in a car, but still finished as the first two, with Garin beating Pothier by 50 m. The many flat tires and crashes of Aucouturier, seemingly the results of sabotage, gave him a time loss of several hours.
After the stage, three cyclists were punished: Aucouturier and Samson received fines of 500 and 250 francs, Aucouturier for having a cyclist not in the race following him, Samson for riding in the slipstream of a car. Chevallier, who had finished third, was disqualified for resting in a car for 45 minutes.
During the stage, Ferdinand Payan had been disqualified. Some sources indicate he was helped by a motor, other that he was helped by riders not in the race.
In that first stage, Garin had asked the race official Lefèvre for food, which was illegal. Lefèvre, who knew that Garin was the star of the race, broke the rules and gave him the food, because he did not want to be responsible for Garin leaving the race because of hunger.
The news that Garin had received illegal help quickly spread, and caused the fanatical crowd to take action.

For the second stage, the organisers had made the option to postpone the start by two hours, in case the mistral wind was making cycling difficult. This was not necessary, so the riders started at midnight as planned.
During this stage, Antoine Fauré lead close to his hometown, and 200 fans tried to stop the rest of the cyclists from following him. Garin hurt his hand during the incident, and Giovanni Gerbi was knocked unconscious, and had to give up with broken fingers. The situation was only solved after race officials fired shots in the air. Further on, nails and broken glass had been spread along the road, which caused many flat tires. Because of this help, Fauré was the first on top of the Col de la République, but was taken over by the favourites later. Aucouturier won the sprint. When the riders reached Marseille, they complained that there had been too many incidents in this stage, and the stage results should be cancelled. In the last part, they had been stopped by a large group of cyclists. Maurice Garin had been attacked, and his arm had been injured: he finished the stage steering with only one hand. There was so much confusion at the last controle post, that the exact arrival times of the cyclists were not recorded.

In the third stage, the Tour reached Nîmes, near the home town of Payan, whose fans were angry because of his disqualification. They threw rocks at the riders, and barricaded the road. The cyclists had troubles passing through Nîmes, and several were injured. The most important event for the general classification was when César Garin's bicycle was broken by attackers; he had to find a new bicycle, which took him 15 minutes. Further on, nails and broken glass were spread along the road. Many riders punctured, but there were no serious falls. The cyclists passed this part walking. After Nîmes, a leading group of five cyclists was formed: Maurice Garin, Pothier, Aucouturier, Cornet and Beaugendre. Aucouturier and Cornet escaped, and Aucouturier won, beating Cornet in the sprint.

The fourth stage was run without the incidents that plagued the first three stages. Pothier, Maurice and César Garin and Beaugendre reached Bordeaux together, and the stage was decided by the final kilometre in the velodrome, where Pothier recorded the fastest time.

In the fifth stage, nails on the road again causing punctures. As mechanical assistance was not allowed, Cornet had to ride the last 40 km on two flat tires. Aucouturier won this stage, his third one, but was way behind in the general classification, which Garin lead, with only 28 seconds margin to Pothier.

In the sixth stage, Aucouturier, Garin and Dortignac escaped in the last kilometres. Aucouturier signed first at the control post in Ville-d'Avray. From that point, the race was neutralised until the velodrome Parc-des-Princes, where the riders would ride the final kilometre. At the moment that the riders arrived in Paris, it started to rain. The organisers decided together with the cyclists to exclude the final kilometre from the race, and make the control post in Ville-d'Avray the end of the race. This made Aucouturier the winner of the stage. Maurice Garin finished second, which made him the overall winner.

Initially, Maurice Garin was the winner, having led the race from start to end. Hippolyte Aucouturier won four stages. In total, 27 cyclists finished.
For each cyclist, the times they had needed in each stage was added up for the general classification. The cyclist with the least accumulated time after the last stage was the winner.

During the race, nine riders were excluded because of, among other actions, illegal use of cars or trains. The Tour organizers were happy with the result, but the Union Vélocipédique Française (UVF) started an investigation after complaints from other cyclists. Their investigative committee heard testimony from dozens of competitors and witnesses, and, in December 1904, disqualified all the stage winners and the first four finishers (Maurice Garin, Pothier, César Garin, and Aucouturier). Ten of those disqualified were banned for one year, Maurice Garin for two years and the remaining two for life. In total, 29 riders were punished.
The reasons for the disqualification were never made public.

Fifth-placed Henri Cornet, aged 19, then became the youngest ever winner of the Tour. Cornet had also been warned after he had received a lift by a car. Only 15 cyclists from the original 27 that finished were not disqualified.

Following the disqualifications, the Tour de France came nearest in history to being permanently cancelled. The race organiser Henri Desgrange, said he would never run the race again because it had been overtaken by the "blind emotions" of those who attacked or helped riders as they passed. Desgrange was also upset that the UVF had imposed judgement on his race when he had already disciplined riders as he saw fit.

An angry exchange ensued between Desgrange and the UVF but the letters and the detailed complaints that led to the UVF's actions were lost when the Tour de France archives were transported south in 1940 to avoid the German invasion and were never seen again.

Until the end of his life, Garin always said that he was the rightful winner of the 1904 Tour de France, but according to Les Woodland, Garin confessed to a friend that he had cheated.

After the disqualifications, the first four cyclists of the initial classification were disqualified. In the new classification, only 15 cyclists had finished:

Because of the scandals associated with this Tour, Desgrange wanted to stop the race. He however changed his mind, and the rules were changed to prevent cyclists from cheating: the 1905 Tour de France would be decided with a points system. Tour de France 1904 winner Cornet would enter the Tour de France for seven more times, but would never again play an important role.


</doc>
<doc id="1937543" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1937543" title="Demons (Star Trek: Enterprise)">
Demons (Star Trek: Enterprise)

"Demons" is the twentieth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series "", and originally aired on May 6, 2005 on UPN. The episode was written by showrunner Manny Coto and directed by LeVar Burton. "Demons" is the first part of a two part story, concluding with "Terra Prime".

Set in the 22nd century, the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship "Enterprise", registration NX-01. In this episode, the crew returns to Earth to participate in a conference to set up a trade coalition of alien races. While there they discover a plot involving a xenophobic human organisation called "Terra Prime".

Peter Weller, who later appeared in "Star Trek Into Darkness" (2013), guest-starred as John Frederick Paxton, and other guest stars included Harry Groener, who had previously appeared in episodes of both "The Next Generation" and "". Filming of the episode overlapped with that of several other episodes, and sets included both the standing sets and an alleyway on the Paramount lot which was previously used in the "" episode "". The critical response to the episode was mostly positive with one reviewer stating that the two-parter posed similar ideological questions to those seen in "".

"Enterprise" returns to Earth in order to attend the formation of a "Coalition of Planets". Nathan Samuels, a United Earth government minister, gives a speech, but he fails to mention the contribution they made to get the aliens to work collaboratively. A woman, later identified as Susan Khouri, staggers over to T'Pol and produces a vial containing a hair follicle, before collapsing and dying from a phaser wound. Back on board "Enterprise", Doctor Phlox examines the hair's DNA, learning it is from the child of Commander T'Pol and Commander Tucker, but T'Pol denies ever being pregnant.

Captain Archer meets with Samuels, who is concerned that news of the child will stir xenophobic sentiment. Lieutenant Reed is ordered by Archer to liaise with Harris of Section 31. He is informed that Khouri was a member of Terra Prime, an anti-alien movement. Meanwhile, in the Terra Prime headquarters on the Moon, John Frederick Paxton and Doctor Mercer discuss the child. After Mercer leaves, Paxton sends for Daniel Greaves and tells him to deal with Mercer. On Earth, Archer tells Samuels that he knows that the minister was a former member of Terra Prime and convinces him to provide a case file on Khouri. Meanwhile, Ensign Mayweather gives his reporter ex-girlfriend, Gannet Brooks, a tour of the ship.

On the Moon, Paxton watches footage of Colonel Phillip Green ("The Savage Curtain"). Greaves enters and updates Paxton on the status of the child, and Paxton injects himself in the neck with an unknown substance. Phlox then reports that Khouri's body contained traces of a substance used in a zero-gravity mining facility. T'Pol and Tucker volunteer for an away mission to the Moon. Disguised as miners, they are quickly detained after Brooks apparently leaks details of the mission. Paxton reveals that the entire complex is a warp capable ship, and the vessel travels to Mars where it takes control of the verteron array, which normally protects the Earth from comets. He uses the array to fire a warning shot and issue an ultimatum — that all non-humans must immediately leave Earth.

Showrunner and writer Manny Coto explained that the "demons" in the episode refers to the demons of intolerance that humanity must defeat before they can form the United Federation of Planets. Colonel Philip Green (the leading villain of World War III in the "Star Trek" universe) was originally intended to appear earlier in the season in the episode "" but the episode was instead re-written to feature Arik Soong after "The Next Generation" actor Brent Spiner became available; Green's appearance was one of several included in season four which linked "Enterprise" to "The Original Series", which included the Mirror Universe and Gorn in "In a Mirror, Darkly", Organians in "Observer Effect" and the Orions in "Borderland" and "".

Peter Weller was cast in the role of John Frederick Paxton. Weller had previously appeared in other science fiction productions, including as the main character in the film "RoboCop" (1987). He also played Chuck Taggart in the television series "Odyssey 5", which had been created by Manny Coto. Weller said of the plot of the episode, "The great thing about the whole "Star Trek" legacy is that they... metaphorize, they allegorize and they narrate what's going on the planet today". He would later go on to gain a role in the film "Star Trek Into Darkness" (2013). This was the third "Star Trek" appearance of Harry Groener, who played Nathan Samuels. He had previously portrayed Tam Elbrum in "The Next Generation" episode "" and the Magistrate in the "" episode "". Eric Pierpoint returned as Harris, whom he had previously played earlier in the season in the episode "". Game show host Tom Bergeron made a cameo in the episode as a Coridan Ambassador. He had previously appeared as D'Marr in the first-season episode "".

The episode was directed by former "Star Trek: The Next Generation" actor LeVar Burton, his second of the season, and his ninth and final for the series. Filming began on February 4, 2005 and completed on February 14. The first day of shooting overlapped with the filming for the previous episode, "In a Mirror, Darkly". The first day was spent filming scenes involving Mayweather and Brooks, while the second day overlapped with a re-shoot of the conclusion of the episode "" and inserts for "Affliction" and "". The following three days were spent on the standing sets such as the bridge and sickbay, before moving onto the standing cave sets on stage 9. These had previously been painted white for use in "The Aenar", and were repainted grey to represent the tunnels on the Moon for "Demons".

The only exterior location used was an alleyway on the Paramount lot near the soundstages. The alley had previously been used as a location in the "" episode "". Production moved to the Paramount Theatre on the final day of filming, which hosted the season premieres. It was used to portray the Assembly Hall of Starfleet Command. The footage of Colonel Green was shot later, with a greenscreen placed on the monitor during the filming with Weller.

"Demons" was first aired in the United States on UPN on May 6, 2005. It received a 2/4% share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49. This means that it was seen by 2 percent of all households, and 4 percent of all of those watching television at the time of the broadcast. This was an increase of the overall audience share compared to the previous episode aired.

Michelle Erica Green at TrekNation described the episode as a "riveting hour of television". She thought that the episode posed the same types of ideological questions that "The Original Series" did on occasion and caused her to look forward to the following episode. Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website "Jammer's Reviews" gave the episode a score of three out of four, saying that it was a "pretty good story [told] in an exceptionally average way". Jay Garmon, whilst compiling a list of the best episodes of "Enterprise" for TechRepublic, listed "Demons" and "Terra Prime" as the third best. He thought that Peter Weller "stole the show", and that it created a "solid conclusion" to the show despite the following episode, "These Are the Voyages..."

"Demons" was released on home media in the United States on November 1, 2005, as part of the season four DVD box set of "Enterprise". The Blu-ray edition was released on April 1, 2014.



</doc>
<doc id="1944832" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1944832" title="Heinrich event">
Heinrich event

A Heinrich event is a natural phenomenon in which large armadas of icebergs break off from glaciers and traverse the North Atlantic. First described by marine geologist Hartmut Heinrich (Heinrich, H., 1988), they occurred during five of the last seven glacial periods or "ice ages" over the past 640,000 years (Hodell, et al., 2008). Heinrich events are particularly well documented for the last glacial period but notably absent from the penultimate glaciation (Obrochta et al., 2014). The icebergs contained rock mass, eroded by the glaciers, and as they melted, this material was dropped to the sea floor as ice rafted debris (abbreviated to "IRD").

The icebergs' melting caused extensive amounts of fresh water to be added to the North Atlantic. Such inputs of cold and fresh water may well have altered the density-driven, thermohaline circulation patterns of the ocean, and often coincide with indications of global climate fluctuations.

Various mechanisms have been proposed to explain the cause of Heinrich events, most of which imply instability of the massive Laurentide ice sheet, a continental glacier covering north eastern North America during the last glacial period. Other northern hemisphere ice sheets were potentially involved as well (Fennoscandic, Iceland/Greenland). However, the initial cause of this instability is still debated.

The strict definition of Heinrich events is the climatic event causing the IRD layer observed in marine sediment cores from the North Atlantic: a massive collapse of northern hemisphere ice shelves and the consequent release of a prodigious volume of icebergs. By extension, the name "Heinrich event" can also refer to the associated climatic anomalies registered at other places around the globe, at approximately the same time periods. The events are rapid: they last probably less than a millennium, a duration varying from one event to the next, and their abrupt onset may occur in mere years (Maslin "et al". 2001). Heinrich events are clearly observed in many North Atlantic marine sediment cores covering the last glacial period; the lower resolution of the sedimentary record before this point makes it more difficult to deduce whether they occurred during other glacial periods in the Earth's history. Some (Broecker 1994, Bond & Lotti 1995) identify the Younger Dryas event as a Heinrich event, which would make it event H0 ("table, right").

Heinrich events appear related to some, but not all, of the cold periods preceding the rapid warming events known as Dansgaard-Oeschger (D-O) events, which are best recorded in the NGRIP Greenland ice core. However, difficulties in synchronising marine sediment cores and Greenland ice cores to the same time scale cast aspersions on the accuracy of that statement.

Heinrich's original observations were of six layers in ocean sediment cores with extremely high proportions of rocks of continental origin, "lithic fragments", in the 180 μm to size range (Heinrich 1988). The larger size fractions cannot be transported by ocean currents, and are thus interpreted as having been carried by icebergs or sea ice which broke off glaciers or ice shelves, and dumped debris onto the sea floor as the icebergs melted. Geochemical analyses of the IRD can provide information about the origin of these debris: mostly the large Laurentide ice sheet then covering North America for Heinrich events 1, 2, 4 and 5, and on the contrary, European ice sheets for the minor events 3 and 6. The signature of the events in sediment cores varies considerably with distance from the source region. For events of Laurentide origin, there is a belt of IRD at around 50° N, known as the Ruddiman belt, expanding some 3,000 km (1,865 mi) from its North American source towards Europe, and thinning by an order of magnitude from the Labrador Sea to the European end of the present iceberg route (Grousset "et al"., 1993). During Heinrich events, huge volumes of fresh water flow into the ocean. For Heinrich event 4, based on a model study reproducing the isotopic anomaly of oceanic oxygen 18, the fresh water flux has been estimated to 0.29±0.05 Sverdrup with a duration of 250±150 years (Roche "et al"., 2004), equivalent to a fresh water volume of about or a sea-level rise.

Several geological indicators fluctuate approximately in time with these Heinrich events, but difficulties in precise dating and correlation make it difficult to tell whether the indicators precede or lag Heinrich events, or in some cases whether they are related at all. Heinrich events are often marked by the following changes:


The global extent of these records illustrates the dramatic impact of Heinrich events.

H3 and H6 do not share such a convincing suite of Heinrich event symptoms as events H1, H2, H4, and H5, which has led some researchers to suggest that they are not true Heinrich events. That would make Gerard C. Bond's suggestion of Heinrich events fitting into a 7,000-year cycle ("Bond events") suspect.

Several lines of evidence suggest that H3 and H6 were somehow different from the other events.

As with so many climate related issues, the system is far too complex to be confidently assigned to a single cause. There are several possible drivers, which fall into two categories.

This model suggests that factors internal to ice sheets cause the periodic disintegration of major ice volumes, responsible for Heinrich events.

The gradual accumulation of ice on the Laurentide ice sheet led to a gradual increase in its mass, as the "binge phase". Once the sheet reached a critical mass, the soft, unconsolidated sub-glacial sediment formed a "slippery lubricant" over which the ice sheet slid, in the "purge phase", lasting around 750 years. The original model (MacAyeal, 1993) proposed that geothermal heat caused the sub-glacial sediment to thaw once the ice volume was large enough to prevent the escape of heat into the atmosphere. The mathematics of the system are consistent with a 7,000-year periodicity, similar to that observed if H3 and H6 are indeed Heinrich events (Sarnthein "et al". 2001). However, if H3 and H6 are not Heinrich events, the Binge-Purge model loses credibility, as the predicted periodicity is key to its assumptions.
It may also appear suspect because similar events are not observed in other ice ages (Hemming 2004), although this may be due to the lack of high-resolution sediments.
In addition, the model predicts that the reduced size of ice sheets during the Pleistocene should reduce the size, impact and frequency of Heinrich events, which is not reflected by the evidence.

Several factors external to ice sheets may cause Heinrich events, but such factors would have to be large to overcome attenuation by the huge volumes of ice involved (MacAyeal 1993).

Gerard Bond suggests that changes in the flux of solar energy on a 1,500-year scale may be correlated to the Dansgaard-Oeschger cycles, and in turn the Heinrich events; however the small magnitude of the change in energy makes such an exo-terrestrial factor unlikely to have the required large effects, at least without huge positive feedback processes acting within the Earth system. However, rather than the warming itself melting the ice, it is possible that sea-level change associated with the warming destabilised ice shelves. A rise in sea level could begin to corrode the bottom of an ice sheet, undercutting it; when one ice sheet failed and surged, the ice released would further raise sea levels, and further destabilizing other ice sheets. In favour of this theory is the non-simultaneity of ice sheet break-up in H1, H2, H4, and H5, where European breakup preceded European melting by up to 1,500 years (Maslin "et al." 2001).

The Atlantic Heat Piracy model suggests that changes in oceanic circulation cause one hemisphere's oceans to become warmer at the other's expense (Seidov and Maslin 2001). Currently, the Gulf Stream redirects warm, equatorial waters towards the northern Nordic Seas. The addition of fresh water to northern oceans may reduce the strength of the Gulf stream, and allow a southwards current to develop instead. This would cause the cooling of the northern hemisphere, and the warming of the southern, causing changes in ice accumulation and melting rates and possibly triggering shelf destruction and Heinrich events (Stocker 1998).

Rohling's 2004 Bipolar model suggests that sea level rise lifted buoyant ice shelves, causing their destabilisation and destruction. Without a floating ice shelf to support them, continental ice sheets would flow out towards the oceans and disintegrate into icebergs and sea ice.

Freshwater addition has been implicated by coupled ocean and atmosphere climate modeling (Ganopolski and Rahmstorf 2001), showing that both Heinrich and Dansgaard-Oeschger events may show hysteresis behaviour. This means that relatively minor changes in freshwater loading into the Nordic Seas, such as a 0.15 Sv increase or 0.03 Sv decrease, would suffice to cause profound shifts in global circulation (Rahmstorf "et al." 2005). The results show that a Heinrich event does not cause a cooling around Greenland but further south, mostly in the subtropical Atlantic, a finding supported by most available paleoclimatic data. This idea was connected to D-O events by Maslin "et al". (2001). They suggested that each ice sheet had its own conditions of stability, but that on melting, the influx of freshwater was enough to reconfigure ocean currents, and cause melting elsewhere. More specifically, D-O cold events, and their associated influx of meltwater, reduce the strength of the North Atlantic Deep Water current (NADW), weakening the northern-hemisphere circulation and therefore resulting in an increased transfer of heat polewards in the southern hemisphere. This warmer water results in melting of Antarctic ice, thereby reducing density stratification and the strength of the Antarctic Bottom Water current (AABW). This allows the NADW to return to its previous strength, driving northern hemisphere melting and another D-O cold event. Eventually, the accumulation of melting reaches a threshold, whereby it raises sea level enough to undercut the Laurentide ice sheet, thereby causing a Heinrich event and resetting the cycle.

Hunt & Malin (1998) proposed that Heinrich events are caused by earthquakes triggered near the ice margin by rapid deglaciation.






</doc>
<doc id="1946322" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1946322" title="Katipo">
Katipo

The katipo ("Latrodectus katipo") is an endangered species of spider native to New Zealand. It is one of many species in the genus "Latrodectus", such as the Australian redback ("L. hasseltii"), and the North American black widows. The species is venomous to humans, capable of delivering a potentially dangerous bite. The name katipo (plural: katipo) is from the Māori "katipō," meaning "night-stinger". It is a small to medium-sized spider, with the female having a round black or brown pea-sized body. Red katipo females, found in the South Island and the lower half of the North Island, are always black, and their abdomen has a distinctive red stripe bordered in white. In black katipo females, found in the upper half of the North Island, this stripe is absent, pale, yellow, or replaced with cream-coloured blotches. These two forms were previously thought to be separate species. The male is much smaller than the female and quite different in appearance: white with black stripes and red diamond-shaped markings. Katipo are mainly found living in sand dunes close to the seashore. They are found throughout most of coastal New Zealand except the far south and west. Katipo feed mainly on ground dwelling insects, caught in an irregular tangled web spun amongst dune plants or other debris,

After mating in August or September, the female katipo produces five or six egg sacs in November or December. The spiderlings hatch during January and February and disperse into surrounding plants. Due to habitat loss and colonisation of their natural habitat by other exotic spiders, the katipo is threatened with extinction.

A katipo bite produces the toxic syndrome latrodectism; symptoms include extreme pain and, potentially, hypertension, seizure, or coma. Bites are rare, an antivenom is available, and no deaths have been reported since 1901. The katipo is particularly notable in New Zealand as the nation is almost entirely devoid of dangerous native wildlife; this unique status means the spider is well known, despite being rarely seen.

Although the 'kātĕpo' was reported to the Linnean Society as early as 1855, the spider was formally described as "Latrodectus katipo" by L. Powell in 1870. Spiders of the genus "Latrodectus" have a worldwide distribution and include all of the commonly known widow spiders: the North American black widow spider ("Latrodectus mactans"), the brown widow ("Latrodectus geometricus"), and the European black widow ("Latrodectus tredecimguttatus"). The katipo's closest relative is the Australian redback spider ("Latrodectus hasseltii") "Latrodectus katipo" and "L. atritus" (black katipo) were previously thought to be two separate species, but research has shown that they are a single species, "L. katipo", with colour variation that is clinal over latitude and correlated with mean annual temperature. The katipo is so closely related to the redback that it was at one stage thought to be a subspecies, with the proposed name "Latrodectus hasseltii katipo". Further research has shown that the katipo is distinct from the redback, having slight structural differences and striking differences in habitat preference, and it remains its own species. The katipo's family Theridiidae has a large number of species both in New Zealand and worldwide and are commonly known as tangle-web spiders, cobweb spiders or comb-footed spiders.

The common name, katipo, is Māori for "night stinger", derived from the words "kakati" (to sting) and "pō" (the night). This name was apparently given to the spider due to the Māori belief that the spiders bite at night. Other common names include "red katipo", "black katipo" and "New Zealand's redback".

The katipo is a small to medium-sized spider. The mature female has a body size of about with a leg span of up to . The red katipo female, found in the South Island and the lower North Island, has a large black globular abdomen, about the size of a garden pea, with slender legs and a white-bordered orange or red stripe on its back that runs from the uppermost surface of the abdomen back to the spinnerets. The dark velvet-black abdomen is described as satin or silky in appearance, rather than being shiny. The underside of the abdomen is black and has a red patch or partial red hourglass-shaped marking. It has mainly black legs with the extremities changing to brown. The black katipo female, found in the upper North Island, does not have a red stripe on the top of her body, and the abdominal colouration is usually lighter, but is otherwise very similar in appearance to the red katipo. The hourglass pattern on the underside of the abdomen may also be less distinct, losing the middle section, and may even be absent. Variations also exist whose abdomen, cephalothorax, or entire body is brown, sometimes with a dull red or yellow stripe, or cream-coloured spots on its upper side. These different forms were at one point thought to be different species, but a 2008 study demonstrated they were different morphs of the same species.

Adult males and juveniles are quite different in appearance to the female. They are smaller in size, being about one sixth the size of an adult female. Juveniles have a brown carapace, with a predominantly white abdomen which has a series of red-orange diamonds running along the dorsal region bordered on either side by irregular black lines. Males retain this coloration into adulthood. Due to its much smaller size, Urquhart (1886) believed the male to be a separate species and named it "Theridion melanozantha". This was not rectified until 1933 when it was correctly identified as the male "Latrodectus katipo".

The katipo is restricted to a highly specialised habitat and is only found near the seashore living among sand dunes. They generally reside on the landward side of dunes closest to the coast where they are most sheltered from storms and sand movement. They can sometimes be associated with dunes several kilometres from the sea when these dunes extend inland for long distances.

Webs are typically established in low-growing dune plants and other vegetation such as the native Pingao ("Desmoschoenus spiralis") or the introduced marram grass ("Ammophila arenaria"). They may also build their webs under driftwood, stones, or other debris such as empty tin cans or bottles. Webs are almost always constructed over open sand and near the ground so as to catch crawling insects for food. Spiders inhabiting dune grasses construct their webs in open spaces between the grass tufts, while spiders inhabiting areas of shrubbery do so on the underside of a plant overhanging open sand. It has been found that these patches of open sand are necessary for katipo to build their webs as plants that envelop sand dunes in dense cover, such as exotic plants like kikuyu or buffalo grass, create an environment unsuitable for web construction. The katipo therefore prefers to spin its web amongst pingao plants as this plants growth pattern leaves patches of sand between each plant. The wind can then blow insects and other prey through these gaps and into the web. Marram grass has been extensively planted in New Zealand to help stabilise sand dunes and has largely replaced pingao in many areas. Because marram grass grows in a very tight formation only leaving small gaps between tuffs, this makes it difficult for the katipo to construct a suitable web for capturing prey.

Like other theridiid spiders, the web is a disorganised, irregular tangle of fine textured silk. It is hammock-shaped and is made up of opaque yellowish-white silk. The web consists of a broad base with many supporting threads above and below, including a number of sticky guy lines anchored to debris in the sand. A cone-shaped retreat is built in the lower part of the web, although the katipo can normally be found near the main body of the web. The plants it builds its web in provide support and shelter for the nest.

The katipo is endemic to New Zealand. In the North Island it is found along the West Coast from Wellington to North Cape. On the east coast of the North Island it occurs irregularly, however, it is abundant on Great Barrier Island. In the South Island it is found in coastal regions south to Dunedin on the east coast and south to Greymouth on the west coast. This southern limit is due to the katipo needing temperatures higher than about to be maintained during the development of their eggs – in the southern areas of New Zealand it is typically colder than this.

The red katipo is found south of approximately 39°15′ S (the western tip of Taranaki on the west coast, and just north of Waipatiki Beach in Hawke's Bay on the east coast). The black katipo is found north of approximately 38° S (Aotea Harbour, just north of Kawhia on the west coast, and Waipiro Bay and just south of the Bay of Plenty on the east coast). Both forms are found in the area in-between these latitudes.

The katipo typically catches wandering ground invertebrates such as beetles (e.g. "Cecyropa modesta") or amphipods (e.g. "Bellorchestia quoyana"), but it may occasionally catch moths, flies, and other spiders. Katipo can catch insects much larger than themselves. These larger insects often become entangled in the web and in the ensuing struggle, the web's ground anchor line breaks. Due to the silk's elasticity, this causes the prey to become suspended a few centimetres off the ground. The katipo then moves to the prey, turns so that the spinnerets are facing the insect and spins silk over it. Like most theridiids, the tarsi of the hind legs have a row of strong curved bristles which are arranged as a comb. The katipo uses these to scoop sticky silk from her spinnerets and throws it over the insect with a series of rapid movements. After the insect is firmly immobilised, she bites it several times, usually at the joints, before spinning more silk to strengthen the web, and then administering a last long bite which ultimately kills the insect. The spider then moves the prey up into the web until it is ready to eat. If food is readily available then it is common to see five or six insects hanging in the web waiting to be ingested. The male's hunting behaviour is similar to the female's, although may not be as vigorous due to its smaller size.

The male wanders as an adult and in August or September goes looking for the females' webs to mate. The male will enter the female's web and vibrate the silk as he approaches her. The female is usually aggressive at first and will chase the male from the web. The Courtship process consists of the male bobbing, plucking and tweaking the web along with periods of cautious approach and being chased by the female. Eventually, when she becomes docile and allows him to approach, the male will then approach the female as she hangs quietly upside down in the web. The male moves onto her ventral abdomen, tapping her rapidly until she moves to align his abdomen above hers. He then inserts his palps one at a time, leaving the female between each insertion. Copulation occurs over 10 to 30 minutes. After mating, the male retreats to groom, which is performed by running his palps and legs through his fangs and wiping them over his body. The male is not eaten by the female unlike some other widow spiders.

The females lay their eggs in November or December. The eggs are round, about the size of a mustard seed, and are a transparent, purply red. They are held together in a cream-coloured, round, ball shaped egg sac which is about in diameter. The female constructs five or six egg sacs over the next three to four weeks. Each egg sac contains about 70 to 90 fertilised eggs. The egg sacs are hung in the centre of the spiders web and the female spins more silk over them. Over time the exterior of the egg sac may become covered with sand. After six weeks of incubation, during January and February, the spiderlings hatch. The young spiders then disperse from the web. At present, little is known about the dispersal mechanism that the spiderlings use to move away from the nest. In one study, observing spiders over 24 hours, 28% used a ballooning method, which is where the young spiders use heat currents to carry themselves away from the nest suspended by a single web strand. While the majority, 61%, used a bridging method where the spiderling uses its silk to move to nearby plants, and 11% still remained in the nest. The young spiderlings reach full maturity the following spring.

The close relationship between the katipo and redback is shown when mating, The male redback is able to successfully mate with a female katipo producing hybrid offspring. However, the male katipo can not mate with the female redback as the male katipo is heavier than the male redback and when it approaches the web it triggers a predatory response in the female leading to the katipo being eaten before mating occurs. There is evidence of interbreeding between katipo and redbacks in the wild.

The katipo has only one known direct predator: a small, undescribed native wasp from the family Ichneumonidae has been observed feeding on katipo eggs.

The katipo is an endangered species and has recently become threatened with extinction. It is estimated that there are only a few thousand katipo left in about 50 areas in the North Island and eight in the South Island, making it rarer than some species of kiwi. A number of reasons have contributed to its decline; the major factors appear to be loss of habitat and declining quality of the remaining habitat. Human interference with their natural habitat has been occurring for over a century following European settlement. Coastal dune modification resulting from agriculture, forestry, or urban development along with recreational activities like the use of beach buggies, off-road vehicles, beach horse riding and driftwood collection have destroyed or changed areas where katipo lives. The introduction of many invasive exotic plants has also contributed to the decline of suitable habitat.
Foreign spiders have colonised areas where suitable habitat remains. The major coloniser is the South African spider "Steatoda capensis". It was first reported in the 1990s and may have displaced the katipo along the west coast of the North Island from Wellington to Wanganui. Although both the katipo and "S. capensis" have been found sharing the same dune systems or even co-existing under the same piece of driftwood suggesting that the two species can co-exist in similar habitats. It is possible that the displacement of the katipo by "S. capensis" is due to its ability to recolonise areas from which the katipo had been displaced after storms or other dune modifications. Furthermore, "S. capensis" breeds year-round, produces more offspring and lives in a greater range of habitats which leads to greater pressure on the katipo. "S. capensis" also belongs to the family Theridiidae and shares many of the katipo's features. It is of similar size, shape, general coloration, it lacks the red stripe on its back, but may have some red, orange or yellow on its abdomen, as well as the general location where katipos are found. Due to these similarities it is commonly known in New Zealand as the ‘false katipo’.

In 2010 the katipo was one of a dozen species of previously-unprotected invertebrate given full protection under the 1953 Wildlife Act, noted as "iconic, vulnerable to harm, and in serious decline". Under the Act, killing an absolutely-protected species such as a katipo is punishable by a fine or even imprisonment.

The katipo has medically significant venom in humans, although bites are rare. The incidence of bites is low as it is a shy, non-aggressive spider. Their narrow range, diminishing population, and human awareness of where they live means interaction between humans and the spider is minimal. The katipo will only bite as a last resort; if molested, the spider will usually fold up into a ball and drop to the ground or retreat to the nearest cover. If the threat continues, the spider may throw out silk against the interference. When restrained in any way or held against skin, such as if tangled up in clothing, the spider will then bite defensively. However, if the female is with an egg sac it will remain close by it and sometimes move offensively to bite any threat.

Bites from Katipo spiders produce a syndrome known as latrodectism. The venoms of all "Latrodectus" spiders are thought to contain similar components with the neurotoxin α-latrotoxin the main agent responsible. Most bites are caused by female spiders; the male katipo was considered too small to cause systemic envenoming in humans. However, bites from male redback spiders have been reported suggesting male "Latrodectus" spiders can cause envenoming in humans. Although bites by male spiders are much rarer than those by females, perhaps due to their smaller jaws rather than lacking venom of similar potency to females or being unable to administer an effective bite. Māori legends recall many deaths, the last of which appears to have been a Māori girl who – according to the missionary Thomas Chapman – died in approximately 1849. While there were reports of severe katipo bites in 19th or early 20th century records, no other fatalities from spider bites have since been reported in New Zealand. The most recent fatality seems to have been in 1901, as reported in the Evening Post on 25 September of that year: "AUCKLAND, This Day. Mr. George Twidle, aged 47, son of Mr. George Twidle of Pukekohe, was bitten by a katipo spider on. September 16. His arm swelled, and he suffered great pain till Saturday last, when he died. He leaves a widow and several children." The most recent reported katipo bites () were to a Canadian tourist in 2010 and a kayaker in 2012.

The clinical features of latrodectism are similar for all species of "Latrodectus" spiders and is generally characterised by extreme pain. Initially, the bite may be painful, but sometimes only feels like a pin prick or mild burning sensation. Within an hour victims generally develop more severe local pain with local sweating and sometimes piloerection (goosebumps). Pain, swelling and redness spread proximally from the site. Less commonly, systemic envenoming is heralded by swollen or tender regional lymph nodes; associated features include malaise, nausea, vomiting, abdominal or chest pain, generalised sweating, headache, fever, hypertension and tremor. Rare complications include seizure, coma, pulmonary edema, respiratory failure or localised skin infection. The duration of effects can range from a few hours to days, with severe pain persisting for over 24 hours after being bitten in some cases.<ref name="isbister/gray"></ref>

Treatment is based on the severity of the bite; the majority of cases do not require medical care and patients with localised pain, swelling and redness usually only require local application of ice and routine analgesics. Hospital assessment is recommended if simple analgesia does not resolve local pain or clinical features of systemic envenoming occur. In more severe bites, Redback antivenom can be given. Redback antivenom can also cross-neutralise katipo venom, and it is used to treat envenoming from "Latrodectus katipo" in New Zealand. It is available from most major New Zealand hospitals. Antivenom will usually relieve symptoms of systemic envenoming and is indicated in anyone suffering symptoms consistent with "Latrodectus" envenoming. Unlike some other antivenoms, it is not limited to patients with signs of severe, systemic envenoming. Particular indications for using antivenom are local then generalised pain, sweating or hypertension. However, good evidence to support the effectiveness of widow spider antivenoms is lacking and studies have cast some doubt on antivenoms efficacy in latrodectism. Pain relief agents, such as parenteral opiates, or benzodiazepines may be required as adjunct agents.



</doc>
<doc id="1947513" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1947513" title="Bill Mosienko">
Bill Mosienko

William Mosienko (November 2, 1921 – July 9, 1994) was a Ukrainian Canadian professional ice hockey right winger who played 14 seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL) for the Chicago Black Hawks. He is best noted for recording the fastest hat trick in NHL history. In a 1952 game against the New York Rangers, Mosienko scored three goals in 21 seconds.

In the NHL, Mosienko won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy in 1945 as the most gentlemanly player in the league, played in five All-Star Games and was twice named to the second All-Star Team. He left the league in 1955 to help bring professional hockey to his hometown of Winnipeg. He helped create the Winnipeg Warriors of the Western Hockey League and was a three-time All-Star in his four years of play in the league. He won the league championship in 1956.

Mosienko was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1965 and into the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum in 1980.

Mosienko was born on November 2, 1921 in Winnipeg, Manitoba. He was one of 14 children, having nine brothers and four sisters. His father was a Ukrainian immigrant and worked as a boilermaker with the Canadian Pacific Railway. Mosienko grew up in Winnipeg's north end.

He developed a passion for hockey and began playing at the age of 10 with the Tobans and later Sherburn athletic clubs. At 17, he sought to try out with the St. James Canadians junior team in 1939 and after being told he was too young, instead joined the Winnipeg Monarchs.

Chicago Blackhawks player Joe Cooper discovered Mosienko playing on outdoor rinks in Winnipeg and recommended that Hawks management sign him. Mosienko signed with Chicago at the age of 18 and was assigned to their minor league team, the Kansas City Americans. In his first two seasons, he split time between the Americans, the Providence Reds and the Blackhawks. The Blackhawks first recalled Mosienko in 1942, replacing players who had left to fight World War II. He scored his first two NHL goals on February 9, 1942, 21 seconds apart.

Exempted from military service for medical reasons likely related to his small size, Mosienko was unable to cross into the United States as a result of travel restrictions and played the 1942–43 season primarily with the Quebec Aces of the Quebec Senior Hockey League. He appeared in two games when the Hawks traveled to Toronto. He finally established himself as an NHL regular in 1943–44 and scored a career high 70 points. Mosienko and his linemates Clint Smith and Doug Bentley combined to score 219 points, at that time an NHL record. His 70 points set a team rookie record that stood for 37 years until broken by Denis Savard in 1980–81.

In 1944–45, Mosienko finished sixth in league scoring with 54 points and did not record a single penalty minute throughout the course of the season. He was awarded the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy as the NHL's most gentlemanly player and named a Second-Team All-Star. He was also voted the most popular player on the team by its fans.

The following season, Chicago coach Johnny Gottselig paired Mosienko with the Bentley brothers: Max and Doug. The trio formed what came to be known as the "Pony Line" due to their speed and small size and emerged as one of the top scoring trios in the NHL. Max Bentley led the league in scoring in 1945–46, and despite missing time with a knee injury, Mosienko finished sixth. He was again named a Second-Team All-Star. He played in the first National Hockey League All-Star Game prior to the start of the 1947–48 season, during which he suffered a broken leg and was initially feared lost for the year. He ultimately missed the first two months of play, while the Pony Line was broken up for good shortly after his injury when Max Bentley was traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs.

Mosienko remained a key contributor to the Blackhawks offence, appearing in five All-Star Games during his career. His most famous moment came on March 23, 1952, in a game against the New York Rangers on the final night of the regular season. He scored three goals in a 21-second span of the third period against New York's Lorne Anderson to set a new record for the fastest hat-trick by one player. Linemate Gus Bodnar assisted on all three goals, and he nearly had a fourth goal 45 seconds later on a shot that deflected off the goalpost. Mosienko's feat remains an NHL record.

Due to his small size, Mosienko was a frequent target of physical abuse from larger opponents, and suffered numerous injuries as a result. Despite this, he refrained from retaliation and was well regarded across the league for his gentlemanly conduct. In 14 NHL seasons, he totaled only 121 penalty minutes and had just one fight.

Mosienko left the NHL in 1955 and joined fellow player Alf Pike in bringing professional hockey back to Winnipeg. They established the Winnipeg Warriors of the Western Hockey League. He led the Warriors to the President's Cup championship in the team's first year of 1955–56 and helped the Warriors defeat the Quebec Hockey League's Quebec Aces for the Edinburgh Cup, Canada's minor professional championship. He scored two goals in the deciding sixth game of a 3–1 victory to capture the trophy. He was named to the WHL All-Star Team three times: 1957, 1958 and 1959. Though he scored 88 points in the 1958–59 season, Mosienko announced his retirement after 18 seasons of professional hockey. He coached the team for one season in 1959–60.

At the time of his retirement from the NHL, Mosienko was seventh all-time in league scoring with 540 points. He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1965, and to the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum in 1980. Additionally, Mosienko is honoured by the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame and in 2000 was named to its provincial All-Century First All-Star Team.

Following his retirement, Mosienko and Joe Cooper operated a string of bowling alleys in Winnipeg, one of which continues to be operated by his family. He was a supporter of Winnipeg minor hockey and Manitoba oldtimers associations. There is an arena named in Mosienko's honor in his hometown of Winnipeg.

Mosienko died of cancer in Winnipeg in 1994 at the age of 72. He had a wife, Wanda, two sons and one daughter. His grandson, Tyler, is also a professional hockey player. The younger Mosienko remembers his grandfather as a humble man who would join him on the family's backyard rink when he was learning to skate as a child.



</doc>
<doc id="1955720" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1955720" title="Silent Hill 2">
Silent Hill 2

Silent Hill 2 is a survival horror video game published by Konami for the PlayStation 2 and developed by Team Silent, part of Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo. It was released in September 2001 as the second installment in the "Silent Hill" series. An extended version containing an extra bonus scenario and other additions was published for Xbox in December of the same year. In 2002 it was ported to Windows. A remastered high-definition version was released for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 in 2012 as part of the "Silent Hill HD Collection".

While set in the series' eponymous fictional American town, "Silent Hill 2" is not a direct sequel to the first "Silent Hill" game. Instead, it centers on James Sunderland, who enters the town after receiving a letter apparently written by his deceased wife, saying she is waiting for him in Silent Hill. Joined by Maria, who strongly resembles her, he searches for her and discovers the truth about her death. Additional material in rereleases and ports included "Born from a Wish", which focuses on Maria before she and James meet.

"Silent Hill 2" uses a third-person view and places a greater emphasis on finding items and solving riddles than combat. It includes psychological aspects such as the gradual disappearance of Mary's letter, and references to history, films and literature. More humanoid than their counterparts in the preceding game, some of the monsters were designed to reflect James' subconscious.

"Silent Hill 2" received critical acclaim. Within the month of its release in North America, Japan, and Europe, over one million copies were sold, with the greatest number of sales in North America. English-language critics praised the atmosphere, graphics, story and monster designs of "Silent Hill 2", but criticized the controls as difficult to use although much improved over its predecessor. It is often considered the greatest horror game and among the greatest video games of all time, praised for its story and use of metaphors, psychological horror and taboo topics, soundtrack and sound design. The game was followed by "Silent Hill 3" in 2003.

The object of "Silent Hill 2" is to guide player character, James Sunderland, through the monster-filled town of Silent Hill as he searches for his deceased wife. The game features a third-person view, with various camera angles. The default control for "Silent Hill 2" has James moving in the direction that he is facing when the player tilts the analog stick upwards. "Silent Hill 2" does not use a heads-up display; to check James' health, location, and items, the player must enter the pause-game menu to review his status. Throughout the game, James collects maps, which can only be read if there is sufficient light or when his flashlight is on. He also updates relevant maps to reflect locked doors, clues, and obstructions, and writes down the content of all documents for future reference.

Much of the gameplay consists of navigating the town and finding keys or other items to bypass doors or other obstructions, with less focus on killing enemies. Occasionally puzzles will be presented, often with riddles left for the player to interpret. The difficulty levels of the enemies and the puzzles are determined independently by the player before starting the game. James keeps a radio with him, which alerts him to the presence of creatures by emitting static, allowing him to detect them even through the thick fog. He also tilts his head in the direction of a nearby item or monster. For combat, he finds three melee weapons and three firearms over the course of the game, with another two melee weapons unlocked during replays. "Health" restoratives and ammunition can be found throughout the game. 

While not a direct sequel to the events and characters of the first "Silent Hill" game, "Silent Hill 2" takes place in the series' namesake town, located in the northeastern United States. "Silent Hill 2" is set in another area of the town, and explores some of Silent Hill's backstory. The town draws upon the psyche of its visitors and ultimately forms alternative versions of the town, which differ depending on the character. The concept behind the town was "a small, rural town in America"; to make the setting more realistic, some buildings and rooms lack furnishings.

James Sunderland (Guy Cihi) comes to Silent Hill after apparently receiving a letter from his wife Mary (Monica Taylor Horgan), who died of an illness three years before. While exploring the town, he encounters Angela Orosco (Donna Burke), a teenage runaway searching for her mother; Eddie Dombrowski (David Schaufele), another teenage runaway; and Laura (Jacquelyn Brekenridge), an eight-year-old who befriended Mary and accuses James of not truly loving her. James searches a local park, where he meets Maria (Horgan), who strongly resembles Mary but has a much more aggressive personality. Maria claims that she has never met or seen Mary, and because she is frightened by the monsters, James allows her to follow him.

Following Laura to a hospital and searching for her there at Maria's insistence, James and Maria are ambushed by the monster Pyramid Head, and Maria is killed while James escapes. James resolves to search the hotel that he and Mary stayed at during their vacation. On the way, James finds Maria alive and unharmed in a locked room. She claims ignorance of their previous encounter and discusses elements of James' and Mary's past that only Mary would know. James sets off to find a way to free Maria but returns to find her dead again. Later on, he rescues Angela from a monster; she confesses that her father sexually abused her, and a newspaper clipping implies she killed him in self-defense before coming to Silent Hill. He also confronts Eddie, who admits to maiming a bully, and killing a dog, before fleeing to Silent Hill. When Eddie attacks him, James kills him in self-defense.

At the hotel, James locates a videotape which depicts him euthanizing his dying wife, and Mary's letter becomes a blank piece of paper. In another room, a final meeting with Angela sees her giving up on life, unable to cope with her trauma. She walks into a fire and is not seen again. Afterwards, James encounters two Pyramid Heads, along with Maria, who is killed again. James realizes that Pyramid Head was created because he needed someone to punish him, and all the monsters are manifestations of his psyche. The envelope from Mary disappears and both Pyramid Heads commit suicide. James heads to the hotel's rooftop; depending on choices made by the player throughout the game, he encounters either Mary or Maria disguised as her.

"Silent Hill 2" features six endings; Konami has kept their canonicity ambiguous. In "Leave", James has one last meeting with Mary, reads her letter, and leaves the town with Laura. "In Water" sees James commit suicide by driving his car off a cliff. The "Maria" ending sees Mary as the woman on the rooftop, who has not forgiven James for killing her; after her defeat, James dismisses her as a hallucination and then leaves the town with an alive Maria, who briefly coughs, suggesting she will become sick just as Mary did, and the cycle will repeat. The other three endings are only available in replay games, including "Rebirth", in which James plans to resurrect Mary using arcane objects collected throughout the game, and two joke endings: "Dog", where James discovers that a dog has been controlling all the events of the game, and "UFO", where James is abducted by extraterrestrials with the help of the first game's protagonist, Harry Mason.

"Born from a Wish" is a side-story scenario in the special editions and re-releases of the game in which the player takes control of Maria shortly before she and James meet at Silent Hill. After waking up in the town with a gun and contemplating suicide, she resolves to find someone. She eventually encounters a local mansion, where she hears the voice of its owner, Ernest Baldwin. Ernest refuses to let Maria into the room he is in and will only talk to her through its closed door. After Maria completes tasks for him, Ernest warns her about James, whom he describes as a "bad man". After Maria opens the door to Ernest's room and finds it empty, she leaves the mansion. At the conclusion of the scenario, Maria contemplates suicide once more, but ultimately resolves to find James.

Development of "Silent Hill 2" began in June 1999, directly after the completion of its predecessor. The game was created by Team Silent, a production group within Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo. The story was conceived by CGI director Takayoshi Sato, who based it on Russian author Fyodor Dostoyevsky's novel "Crime and Punishment" (1866), with individual members of the team collaborating on the actual scenario. The main writing was done by Hiroyuki Owaku and Sato who provided the dialog for the female characters. "Silent Hill 2"s budget has been estimated at US$7–10 million by Sato, an increase from the previous installment's estimated cost of US$3–5 million. The decision to produce a sequel to "Silent Hill" was partly a financial one, as it had been commercially successful, and partly a creative one, as the team had faced difficulties while working on the original game. The team was given a small window to settle on a platform. As it was unable to gather information on the then-unannounced GameCube and Xbox consoles, they began production of the game for the PlayStation 2. Producer Akihiro Imamura stated that the decision was also influenced by "a wish from the business section that we move rapidly on the PS2. You know, it is currently the market focus". Imamura read all comments about the original game and kept them in mind while working on "Silent Hill 2". He estimated that a total of fifty people worked on the game: while the creative team from the first game remained, they had to bring in thirty people from Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo. Developed at the same time, the PlayStation 2 version of "Silent Hill 2" and its Xbox port debuted at the March 2001 Tokyo Game Show to positive reactions.

"Silent Hill 2" shared the same atmosphere of psychological horror as the first "Silent Hill" game. As the developers already had a rough sense of the game's environment, they focused on its plot first, in contrast to the process used with the first game. The PlayStation 2 hardware allowed the developers to create improved fog and shadow special effects. For example, as a monster approaches the player character, its shadow cast on the wall by the flashlight grows. When dealing with the game's camera angles, the team struggled with a balance between those that stayed true to the creative vision and those that did not hamper gameplay. Psychological elements, such as the gradual disappearance of Mary's letter and symbolic holes, were incorporated into the game. The team wanted "Silent Hill 2"s protagonist to "reflect [the] evil," against which the protagonist of the first game battles.

For the game's artistic style, the team drew on a variety of influences: the work of film directors David Cronenberg, David Fincher, David Lynch and Alfred Hitchcock, along with films similar to the 1990 psychological thriller/horror film "Jacob's Ladder", and painters such as Francis Bacon, Rembrandt and Andrew Wyeth. Early in the project, they studied the 1996 video game "Tomb Raider"s creation of 3D environments. Other influences on the game included the 1992 survival horror video game "Alone in the Dark", the first "Silent Hill" game, and the Japanese comic "Whirr" by Morohashi. While working on the character designs, Sato and his team sketched human faces and various expressions. To gain a better sense of the characters' facial structures, they drew the characters' profiles from various angles, before creating wire-frame models, each consisting of six thousand polygons; they then completed the model with textures. Data for the character animation was taken through motion capture, and using Softimage, they animated the characters. Masahiro Ito designed the monsters in "Silent Hill 2"; "soured flesh" was the concept behind their appearance. The monsters were also to incorporate "an element of humanity". For the most part, the monsters reflect the protagonist's subconscious. For example, the monster Pyramid Head was based on the executioners of the town's fictional history and is intended to be a punisher for James. Two exceptions to this theme are the "Abstract Daddy", a reflection of Angela's subconscious and memories, and the "Creepers", which are also seen in the first game.

"Silent Hill 2" also incorporates some references to real-life events. In the original scenario, the developers designed Maria and James with dual personalities: Maria's other personality was "Mary", a reference to Mary Jane Kelly, Jack the Ripper's last victim, while James' was "Joseph", a reference to one of the Jack the Ripper suspects. Eddie Dombrowski's name was taken from actor Eddie Murphy during the beginning phases of production when Eddie was originally designed with a pleasantly optimistic personality. The name of Angela Orosco was derived from Angela Bennett, the name of the protagonist in the 1995 film "The Net", and Laura's from the 1970 novel "No Language But a Cry" by Richard D'Ambrosio. The developers satirized guns in American society by allowing James to find a handgun in a shopping cart. There are also indications that the layout of Silent Hill was based to a certain extent on the town of San Bruno, California.

Akira Yamaoka composed the music for "Silent Hill 2". At his home, Yamaoka took three days to write the music for "Theme of Laura", "Silent Hill 2"s main theme, by combining "a sad melody" and "a strong beat", although he does not consider the melody to be the "most important" element of a musical piece. He wanted the music to evoke emotions in the player. "Silent Hill 2" makes extensive use of sound effects ranging from screams to footsteps on broken glass. In charge of the game's fifty sound effects, Yamaoka wanted to surprise the player with different sounds and create an unsettling environment. He also incorporated occasional silence, commenting that "selecting moments of silence is another way of producing sound".

Konami published "Silent Hill 2 Original Soundtrack" in Japan on October 3, 2001. Eight tracks ("Theme of Laura", "Null Moon", "Love Psalm", "True", "Promise", "Fermata in Mistic Air", "Laura Plays the Piano" and "Overdose Delusion") appeared in the 2006 PlayStation Portable release "The Silent Hill Experience". At the 2006 Play! A Video Game Symphony concert in Chicago, Illinois, Yamaoka performed music from the series, including "Theme of Laura", with a full-size orchestra.

"Silent Hill 2" was first released for the PlayStation 2 in North America on September 24, 2001, in Japan on September 27, 2001, and in Europe on November 23, 2001. The original European edition also included a second disc: a "Making-of" DVD video featuring trailers, an artwork gallery and a documentary on the game's development.

An extended version of the game was published for Xbox in North America on December 20, 2001, Japan on February 22, 2002, and Europe on October 14, 2002. Each region had a different subtitles for the game: in Japan, "Restless Dreams" in North America, and "Inner Fears" in Europe. This edition contained the short bonus scenario, "Born from a Wish" and other minor enhancements. This revised version was ported back to the PlayStation 2 and subtitled "Director's Cut" in Europe, but was not subtitled in North America, and was simply released under the "Greatest Hits" banner. Creature Labs ported this edition to Windows, which Konami released in December 2002. Added features in the PC version include the ability to quicksave and watch trailers for "Silent Hill 3".

In 2006, Konami re-released the extended version of "Silent Hill 2" with its indirect PS2 sequels, "Silent Hill 3" and "", in a bundle entitled "The Silent Hill Collection" in Europe and Japan. "Silent Hill HD Collection", a compilation of remastered high-definition editions of "Silent Hill 2" and "3", was released for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 on March 20, 2012. It contains new voice actors for the characters of both games, along with the option in "Silent Hill 2" to listen to the original ones. It had multiple bugs and technical issues upon launch; these were barely ironed out following the release of online patches.

"Silent Hill 2" received critical acclaim, selling over one million copies in the month of its release in North America, Japan and Europe, with the most units sold in North America. Rating aggregation site Metacritic shows an average rating of 89 out of 100 for the PS2 version, 84 out of 100 for the Xbox version, and 70 out of 100 for the PC version.

"Silent Hill 2" received praise from video game journalists at the time of its release and in retrospect. Andy Greenwald of "Spin" magazine praised it as a frightening but "restrained" game. Jon Thompson of AllGame stated: ""Silent Hill 2" feels a bit rushed, and although it might not live up to the dizzying horror of the first game, it packs enough of its own punch to make it a worthy sequel." IGN's Doug Perry wrote: "It's frightening, deep, clever, and tries to improve the genre, if just a little, and in the end, that's all I really want in a survival horror game." Joe Fielder of GameSpot concluded, ""Silent Hill 2" is a much prettier, somewhat smarter but less a compelling game than the original." In "" (2010), Tristian Donovan described "Silent Hill 2" as the "high point" of the series. In a retrospective article on the survival horror genre, IGN writer Jim Sterling praised the game's plot as "one of the finest examples of narrative construction in gaming to this day". In another retrospective article on survival horror, fellow IGN writer Travis Fahs credited the game as a factor in the "short-lived period of renewed interest in horror games". Online game critic for "The Escapist Magazine" Ben "Yahtzee" Croshaw lists this game as among his top five favourite games of all time, praising it for its thick and unsettling atmosphere creating tension and fear for players. In his review of the game he commented, "Silent Hill 2 is the game I replay every now and again to remind myself that for all the shiny brown, quick-time event, RPG element space marines, gaming is still worth defending," and that "It's a fascinating voyage of pain and despair that leaves you emotionally drained and satisfied."

The graphics and atmosphere of "Silent Hill 2" were praised by reviewers, who highlighted the smooth transitions from computer-generated (CG) to in-game cutscenes and the sense of claustrophobia caused by the fog. On the other hand, Thompson felt that the grainy image effects and dense fog hid the details of the environment, while Fielder wrote that the exterior environments "rarely push the PlayStation 2's graphical capabilities". Character animation was considered realistic by reviewers, though James' animation in the CG sometimes appeared "marionette"-like, according to Perry. The voice acting garnered mixed responses from reviewers divided over whether it was well done with an improved script, or hampered by the script. Reviewers enjoyed the monster designs, although some found the monsters less frightening due to the abundance of ammunition, and being easily avoided. Reviewers found the camera, though improved, still difficult when battling monsters which hung from the ceiling—concerns echoed by reviewers of the PC version. The soundtrack and sound effects were considered by reviewers to be effective in creating suspense, though Thompson considered them sometimes "a bit forced and contrived". The puzzles were generally seen as not overly challenging by reviewers, though Thompson found them generally easy and GameSpy's David Hodgeson wrote that they were sometimes illogical. Less well-received was the combat, criticized for its lack of challenge and easily defeated monsters and bosses.

Reactions to the Xbox port were also positive. Reviewers have written that the PlayStation 2 and Xbox versions were mostly similar, except for the "Born from a Wish" side-scenario found in the Xbox version. "Eurogamer"s Kristan Reed called "Born from a Wish" "more like a demo than anything", while Fielder described it as "a commendable extra". Both felt that it could be completed in around an hour and did not add much to the game. The PC port, in contrast, received mixed reaction. Allen Rausch of GameSpy considered the PC port overall to be "[a] fantastic translation of Konami's stylish and scary survival-horror game". IGN's Ivan Sulic advised against playing the game with the keyboard, and rated the game "great". Conversely, Ron Dulin, another reviewer for GameSpot, wrote: "Not even the game's foggy atmosphere is thick enough to hide "Silent Hill 2"s problems."

Today, "Silent Hill 2" is considered by many to be the greatest horror game of all time because of its story and use of metaphors, psychological horror, and taboo topics. It ranked first on X-Play's list of the scariest games of all time in 2006. In 2009, IGN listed it as one of the five best horror video games created after 2000, and one of the twelve greatest PlayStation 2 games of all time. As well, in 2010, IGN ranked it as 54th in its top 100 PS2 games. In a retrospective by "GamePro", it was the 26th best game for the PS2. In 2008, GamesRadar placed it on its list of the 15 best "videogame stories" ever, describing it as "a punishing tale not easily matched". In 2009, "Wired News" listed it as the 11th most influential game of the decade for its emphasis on psychological horror and exploration of taboo topics such as incest and domestic abuse, rather than gore. In 2012, a top video games of all-time list by G4 television network ranked the game in 85th place. That same year, the game's narrative was ranked first on GamesRadar's list of The Best Videogame Stories Ever. More recently, "Silent Hill 2" was listed as the number two top horror game of all time in the October 2014 issue of "Game Informer", and number eight on GameTrailers's Top Ten Twos list of the best second franchise games in 2015.


</doc>
<doc id="1955961" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1955961" title="Smells Like Nirvana">
Smells Like Nirvana

"Smells Like Nirvana" is a parody of Nirvana's song "Smells Like Teen Spirit", written and performed by "Weird Al" Yankovic; it was released both as a single and as part of Yankovic's "Off the Deep End" album in April 1992. "Smells Like Nirvana" was written during a three-year career low for Yankovic after the financial failure of his film "UHF", but captured the quickly-rising popularity of grunge and Nirvana's success. The song was written to poke fun at the fact that many people had a hard time understanding Nirvana singer Kurt Cobain's lyrics in the original song. After being unable to contact Nirvana by conventional means, Yankovic called Cobain while the band was on the set of "Saturday Night Live", where Cobain quickly gave permission to record the parody.

Recording the song was a change for Yankovic and his band. Usually, the group were forced to record several overdubs. "Smells Like Nirvana", however, was relatively straightforward in its musical composition. To promote the single, Yankovic created an associated video for the song that parodied the "Smells like Teen Spirit" video. The parody video closely mirrored the original; Yankovic even went so far as to hire several of the same actors and use the same set.

"Smells Like Nirvana" was met with critical praise and helped to re-energize Yankovic's career. Cobain considered the parody as a sign that they had "made it" as a band. The song is one of Yankovic's most successful singles, reaching number 35 on both the "Billboard" Hot 100 and the U.S. Mainstream Rock Tracks. The song's video was nominated for a 1992 MTV Video Music Award for Best Male Video.

Prior to writing "Smells Like Nirvana", Yankovic's music career had suffered from the poor financial performance of his 1989 feature film, "UHF" and the associated soundtrack. Yankovic called that "the beginning of three years where it was kind of hard for me to recover". He started work on a new studio album around 1990. To revitalize his career, he considered creating a parody of a Michael Jackson song, which had proven successful twice before with "Eat It" and "Fat". He had composed a parody of Jackson's "Black or White", titled "Snack All Night", but Jackson said he was uncomfortable with the parody, given that the original song was intended to be a political statement. Yankovic would later believe that Jackson's refusal was, in retrospect, a blessing; he felt that "Snack All Night" was not one of his better works. While he had compiled other original songs for a new album he feared the lack of a good parody song would doom the album to failure and held off from releasing anything until an idea presented itself.

The band Nirvana started to become a name in the music scene at the time, creating "big, seismic shifts in pop culture" according to Yankovic. Yankovic felt that the band's 1991 album "Nevermind", which featured "Smells Like Teen Spirit", was "really great", but feared that at its release the band was not popular enough to warrant a parody. By early 1992, "Nevermind" had reached platinum certification and led the "Billboard" charts, which led Yankovic to start working on a parody. Yankovic noted that much of the publicity around "Nevermind" dealt with the inability to comprehend the songs' lyrics, both in their phrasing and the manner in which they were sung by the lead vocalist Kurt Cobain. Yankovic decided to use this as the basis for his parody. Yankovic noted, "I try not to go the obvious route all the time, but sometimes the most obvious is actually the best." Yankovic had initial difficulty getting permission for the parody, as his manager claimed he was unable to get through to the group numerous times. When Yankovic learned that Nirvana would be performing on the January 11, 1992 show of "Saturday Night Live", he called his "UHF" co-star, Victoria Jackson, at the time a regular cast member of the show. Jackson managed to give the phone to Cobain so that Yankovic could make his request. Cobain agreed, though initially he inquired if the song would be about food, a common theme in many of Yankovic's songs. Yankovic explained that the song would be about Cobain's incomprehensible lyrics, to which Cobain replied, according to Yankovic, "Oh, sure, of course, that's funny."

The song was recorded around January 27, 1992 at Santa Monica Sound Records, in Santa Monica, California. It was the final song recorded for the album, as Yankovic generally records the songs that will be released as singles last. Recording took between three and four days. The band worked to match the same fluctuating tempos that were in the original song; Jon Schwartz, Yankovic's drummer, noted that "the [drum] part was pretty loose. [...] Tempos were up and down. We adjusted the tempos on our song to meet the Nirvana version. It's by no means steady." Compared to previous parodies, where upwards of 20-some instruments had to be mixed together, the simpler composition of "Teen Spirit" made it much easier for the band to complete the song.

Yankovic later noted that recording the song's vocals was particularly difficult, because he was singing "for eight to 12 hours a day", which caused strain on his vocal cords. For the verse where Yankovic mumbles the lyrics to the song, he placed several cookies in his mouth to achieve the garbled effect. During the parody's musical interlude, Yankovic gargled water to the tune of the original's guitar solo. The solo also features kazoos and a tuba, with the latter being played by Tommy Johnson.

Lyrically, "Smells Like Nirvana" pokes fun at the original song's difficult-to-understand words. The opening verse begins "What is this song/All about?/Can't figure any lyrics out". At one point, Yankovic purposely garbles the lyrics: "It's hard to "bargle nawdle zouss"/With all these marbles in my mouth". He admitted in an interview that he woke up "in the middle of the night" and wrote down the phrase "bargle nawdle zouss", thinking that it would "be important someday."

The music video, directed by Yankovic's manager Jay Levey, is a near shot-for-shot parody of the original video for "Smells Like Teen Spirit", which depicts the band playing at a high school concert while it descends into riot. Yankovic is present on guitar and vocals as Kurt Cobain, with Steve Jay on bass as Krist Novoselic, and Jon "Bermuda" Schwartz on drums as Dave Grohl. All three wear clothing and long-haired wigs to imitate the look of Nirvana in "Smells Like Teen Spirit". Yankovic's video uses many of the same props, actors and camera angles; in particular, the video was shot in the same Culver City, California sound stage as Nirvana's video, several of the cheerleaders and audience members were from the original video, and Tony De La Rosa reprises his role as the janitor. Levey stated that they were able to recreate much of the same setting with help of the producers of the original Nirvana video once they were aware that the song had Cobain's blessing. Yankovic had a brief conversation with Samuel Bayer, the original director of "Smells Like Teen Spirit" in preparation for the video shoot. Although Yankovic noted that "he was certainly going along with it", he felt that Bayer was "the least enthused" because "he was a true artiste" and was reluctant to see his work parodied.

The video includes actor Dick Van Patten in a guest role. Van Patten, being one of the few celebrities that could be reached through immediate contacts, was a last-minute addition by Yankovic. Professional skateboarder Tony Hawk also appears as one of the many extras as a result of the Birdhouse Skateboards team providing "skater/punks" for the video, although Yankovic was not aware of this until a 2009 Twitter post by Hawk. Schwartz attempted to recreate Grohl's wild headbanging during filming, leaving him with a stiff neck several days afterward.

The single for "Smells Like Nirvana" was released on April 2, 1992, while the album containing it, "Off the Deep End", saw its release on April 14, 1992. The single charted on several "Billboard" charts, making it Yankovic's most successful single since his single "Eat It", which charted in 1984. The song debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100 on April 25, 1992. It peaked at number 35 and remained on the chart for two weeks. The single also charted on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks, also peaking at number 35 and remaining for two weeks. The single was also popular in the other countries. In Canada, the single charted at number 48. In the United Kingdom, the single entered the charts on April 7, 1992, and peaked at number 58, spending only one week on the charts. In Australia, "Smells Like Nirvana" was released on June 14, 1992, and spent six weeks on the charts. It peaked at number 24.

After its release, "Smells Like Nirvana" was considered, at the time, the largest comeback in Yankovic's career. The song was well-received by the media. AllMusic reviewer Barry Weber wrote that the song illustrated "the kind of brilliant writing Yankovic was still capable of doing". Anthony Violanti, a reporter for "The Buffalo News", called the song "the high point" of one of Yankovic's concerts. Nirvana famously enjoyed the parody. Cobain is claimed to have considered that Nirvana had "made it" with the success of Yankovic's parody. In his personal journals that were later published, he calls Yankovic "America's modern pop-rock genious ". Grohl is also reported to have realized his band was truly successful when Yankovic asked for permission to record the parody. According to an executive for Nirvana's label, DGC Records, "Smells Like Nirvana" was responsible for selling an additional million copies of Nirvana's album "Nevermind". The video was nominated for the 1992 MTV Video Awards for "Best Male Video", although it did not win. At the awards ceremony, Nirvana was initially asked to perform, but they declined. The offer was then extended to Yankovic, before Nirvana relented. Yankovic later joked that "I might've been a bargaining chip".

After Cobain committed suicide in 1994, Yankovic and his band were hesitant to play the extremely popular "Smells Like Nirvana" during live shows. For several months after Cobain's death, Yankovic would first perform a somber tribute to Cobain prior to playing the song itself. Shortly after Cobain's death, Yankovic was scheduled to play a show in Seattle, where Nirvana first became famous. Due to this connection, Yankovic was hesitant to perform the spoof, as he worried about how the audience might react to the parody. However, Yankovic was urged by journalists to go through with the performance, as they said that the song would be "cathartic" for the area. Ultimately, the performance "went over extremely well". Yankovic continues to play "Smells Like Nirvana" live, stating that "Kurt was a fan of the song" and "he would have wanted it that way."

In "The Simpsons" episode "That '90s Show", set primarily in flashback to the 1990s, Homer Simpson is shown creating one of the first grunge bands while trying to cope with Marge's infidelity; the band, called "Sadgasm", becomes highly popular. At one point, Homer writes a new song called "Shave Me"—itself a loose parody of Nirvana's real single "Rape Me". Homer's song is then parodied as "Brainfreeze" in both song and video by "Weird Al" Yankovic, who voices himself. Homer takes Yankovic's parody as a sign that his band has become successful, but his depressed state after breaking up with Marge leaves him unable to enjoy the song's humor; he gloomily bemoans, "He who is tired of Weird Al, is tired of life". The sequence of events was written to parallel much of the history of "Smells Like Nirvana", including Kurt Cobain's reaction to the parody.

During live performances, Yankovic dons clothing similar to what Cobain wore in the video for "Smells Like Teen Spirit". This includes an electric left-handed guitar, a shirt similar to Cobain's, and a blonde wig. The costuming for the performance is critical; Schwartz explained that "if anything's missing, Al won't do it". The rest of Al's band also participates. Steve Jay, who plays bass, uses two bass straps to emulate and exaggerate "Novoselic's low-hanging bass". He explained that he positions his instrument "to where I can just barely touch the strings". The members of the band also mock-mosh. Jim West, the band's guitarist, noted that moshing is usually tame, but that there "were a few collisions where people got hurt, but not the audience, just the band." Sometimes during the third verse, after Yankovic sings "And I forgot the next verse," he drops out for the next few lines, pretending to actually forget the lyrics.







</doc>
<doc id="1957284" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1957284" title="Toxic (song)">
Toxic (song)

"Toxic" is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her fourth studio album "In the Zone" (2003). It was written and produced by Pontus Winnberg (known collectively as Bloodshy & Avant), with additional writing from Cathy Dennis and Henrik Jonback. The song was released on January 13, 2004, by Jive Records, as the second single from "In the Zone". The song was originally offered to Kylie Minogue for her ninth studio album "Body Language" (2003), but she rejected it. After trying to choose between "(I Got That) Boom Boom" and "Outrageous" to be the second single from "In the Zone", Spears selected "Toxic" instead. A dance song with elements of bhangra music, "Toxic" features varied instrumentation, such as drums, synthesizers and surf guitar. It is accompanied by high-pitched Bollywood strings, sampled from Lata Mangeshkar and S. P. Balasubrahmanyam's "Tere Mere Beech Mein" (1981), and breathy vocals. Its lyrics draw an extended metaphor of a lover as a dangerous yet addictive drug.

The song has received acclaim from music critics, deeming it the strongest track of "In the Zone", and praised its hook and chorus. "Toxic" won Spears her first and only Grammy Award at the 2005 ceremony in the category of Best Dance Recording. "Toxic" attained worldwide success, reaching the top-five in 15 countries, while topping the charts in Australia, Canada, Hungary, Ireland, Norway and the United Kingdom. In the United States, it became her fourth top-ten single, peaking at number 9. The accompanying music video for the song was directed by Joseph Kahn and features references to "Blade Runner", "The Seven Year Itch" and the films of John Woo. It portrays Spears as a secret agent in the search of a vial of green liquid. After she steals it, she enters an apartment and poisons her unfaithful boyfriend. The video also includes interspersed scenes of Spears naked with diamonds on her body. After Janet Jackson's Super Bowl incident, the video was considered too racy for MTV and was moved to late-night programming.

Spears has performed "Toxic" in a number of live appearances, including the 2004 NRJ Music Awards and in three of her concert tours. It was the opening number of The Onyx Hotel Tour (2004), where she sang atop of a bus wearing a black catsuit; Spears also performed remixed versions of the song at The Circus Starring Britney Spears (2009), the Femme Fatale Tour (2011) and (2013). "Toxic" has been covered by artists such as Mark Ronson, A Static Lullaby, Reece Mastin and Ingrid Michaelson, and in television series "Glee". The song has also appeared in feature films such as "Knocked Up", "You Again" and television series "Doctor Who". The song has been included in lists by Pitchfork, "NME" and "Rolling Stone" as one of the best songs of the decade. In June 2017, a demo for "Toxic", containing Spears' unedited vocals was leaked to YouTube.

"Toxic" was written by Cathy Dennis, Henrik Jonback, Christian Karlsson, Pontus Winnberg, and Sameer Chhabra from production team Bloodshy & Avant, while produced by the latter two. The song was originally offered to Kylie Minogue for her ninth studio album "Body Language" (2003), but she rejected it. Minogue later commented, "I wasn't at all angry when it worked for her. It's like the fish that got away. You just have to accept it." "Toxic" was recorded at Murlyn Studios in Stockholm, Sweden and Record Plant in Hollywood, California. The song was later mixed by Niklas Flyckt at Khabang Studios in Stockholm. In December 2003, it was announced by MTV News that after trying to choose between "(I Got That) Boom Boom" and "Outrageous" to be the second single from "In the Zone", Spears had selected "Toxic" instead. She described it as "an upbeat song. It's really different, that's why I like it so much."

On June 5, 2017, Spears' demo for "Toxic" was leaked to YouTube. The demo contains the instrumental track, combined with Spears' original unedited vocals. Despite anticipation that the leak would confirm suspicion of Spears' natural vocals being sub-par, it received generally positive criticism.

"Toxic" is a classical dance song, featuring elements of bhangra music. It features varied instrumentation, such as drums, synthesizers, violins and high-pitched strings. It also contains surf guitar, that according to Caryn Ganz of "Spin", "warps and struts like it's been fed into the Matrix." The music was also compared to the soundtracks of the "James Bond" film series. The hook of "Toxic" samples a portion of "Tere Mere Beech Mein", from the soundtrack of the 1981 Hindi film "Ek Duuje Ke Liye". However, it is not lifted verbatim from the score and mixes two different sections of the piece. Spears sings the song with breathy vocals. Some of the refrains were inspired by pieces of classical music, such as "Flight of the Bumblebee", "Eine Kleine Nachtmusik", and "Dumky Trio".

According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing, "Toxic" is composed in the key of C minor, with a tempo of 143 beats per minute. Spears's vocal range spans from the low note of F to the high note of G. Lyrically, "Toxic" talks about being addicted to a lover. Spears refers to her addiction in the lyrics, and sings lines such as "Too high / Can't come down / Losing my head / Spinning round and round" in a falsetto. A reviewer from Popdust called the verse "The most representative lyric of the song's delirious, disorienting charm." "Toxic" ends with an outro in which Spears sings the lines, "Intoxicate me now / With your lovin' now / I think I'm ready now." Nick Southall of "Stylus Magazine" said the lyrics made Spears sound afraid of sex.

The song received widespread critical acclaim upon release. Heather Richels of "The Paly Voice" complimented its hook and catchiness, while deeming it the most appealing song of the album. While reviewing The Onyx Hotel Tour, Pamela Sitt of "The Seattle Times" called it the album's strongest single. Eric Olsen of msnbc.com said the song could be the biggest hit of "In the Zone", while calling it "powerfully addicting." Caryn Ganz of "Spin" commented that, "Spears hits pay dirt on 'Toxic'". Christy Lemire of Associated Press said it was one of Spears' greatest hits and deemed it as "insanely catchy", saying that the chorus alone "makes you want to forgive the "Alias" wannabe video that accompanies the song." Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic called it along with "Showdown", "irresistible ear candy in what is surely Britney's most ambitious, adventurous album to date". In a separate review of Spears' greatest hits album "" (2004), Erlewine selected it as one of the "track picks" and described it as "a delirious, intoxicating rush". Jeffrey Epstein of "Out" compared the innovative sound of "Toxic" to Madonna's "Vogue".

Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said that "Toxic" and "(I Got That) Boom Boom", "find Britney dabbling in hip-hop, but it's clear her heart lies in the clubs." Jamie Gill of Yahoo! Music Radio commented that, "In the name of fairness, it will be noted that 'Toxic' and 'Showdown' could well have been good pop songs in the hands of any other singer than Spears." Joan Anderman of "The Boston Globe" named it "a well-titled cascade of frantic, mechanized glissandos and dreadful canned strings that buries the album's coolest (only?) chorus under a joyless mass". The song was ranked at number five in the 2004 Pazz & Jop poll by "The Village Voice". "Toxic" was nominated for Best Song at the 2004 MTV Europe Music Awards, but lost to Outkast's "Hey Ya!". However, it won Best Dance Pop Record at the 2004 Grammy Awards, making it her first ever won Grammy. It won Best Single at the 2004 Teen Choice Awards. Pitchfork listed the song at number three on their Top 50 Singles of 2004 list. Rob Mitchum commented that Spears "finally, she just acted like an adult, rather than constantly reminding us she wasn't a girl anymore."

"Toxic" entered at number 53 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, on the issue dated January 31, 2004. It became the week's "Highest Debut". On March 27, 2004, it peaked at number nine; it was her fourth single to reach the top-ten and became her first single to reach the top ten since "Oops!... I Did It Again" in 2000. "Toxic" also topped both the Pop Songs and Hot Dance Club Songs charts. On October 25, 2004, the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), for sales of 500,000 copies. As of March 2015, "Toxic" has sold 2.2 million digital downloads in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan. It is her fifth best-selling digital single in the country. The song also topped the Canadian Singles Chart. "Toxic" debuted at the top of the Australian charts on March 15, 2004, and stayed in the position for two weeks. The song received a gold certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for shipments over 35,000 units.

In New Zealand, "Toxic" debuted at number 38 on the issue dated February 16, 2004, and peaked at number two on March 29, 2004. It stayed at the position the following week, held off from the top spot by Eamon's "Fuck It (I Don't Want You Back)". On March 7, 2004, "Toxic" debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart for the week ending date March 13, 2004, becoming her fourth number-one hit in the United Kingdom. In April 2004, it was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), with sales over 200,000 copies. According to The Official Charts Company, the song has sold 426,000 copies there. "Toxic" also peaked inside the top-ten in every country it charted. The song topped the charts in Hungary and Norway; reached the top five in Austria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Portugal, Italy, France, Sweden and Switzerland; and the top ten in Belgium (Flanders and Wallonia), Finland and the Netherlands.

The music video for "Toxic" was filmed over three days in December 2003, on a sound-stage in Los Angeles, California. It was directed by Joseph Kahn, who previously worked with Spears on the music video for her 2000 single "Stronger". The editor of the video was David Blackburn, who also edited "Womanizer" and "Do Somethin'". Brad Rushing was the cinematographer. Spears first approached Kahn with a story sketch of a secret agent out for revenge against an ex-lover, to which Kahn created a treatment for. Her concept was almost fully formed and detailed, exemplifying the scene in which she drops water on the passenger's lap. Spears said she wanted to join the mile high club and be a stewardess that kissed a man in the bathroom. Kahn suggested making him a fat man, so the "common man" would feel represented. Spears also told him about a scene in which she would be naked and covered in diamonds. Kahn stated he was "not sure what I was thinking about when she told me about that scene, maybe those intros to James Bond movies, but every video needs an iconic image to remember, and that's it". The choreography was a collaboration between Brian Friedman and Spears, and every scene had a completely different strictly structured routine. After the treatment was finished, Kahn proceeded to cast his friends and acquaintances, as in most of his projects. The plane passenger in which Spears drops water on was played by his long-time casting director, while the fat man in the bathroom was played by the casting director's assistant. Spears's boyfriend is played by Martin Henderson, who starred in Kahn's directorial debut "Torque".

For the naked scenes, Spears cleared the set, leaving only Kahn, Blackburn and Rushing with her to shoot the sequence. Spears also shot scenes in which she had to dance through a hallway of imaginary lasers in front of a green screen, something that Kahn deemed as "incredible to watch". The last few scenes of the video in which Spears murders her boyfriend, concerned Kahn, who thought they would be censored. He explained "the trick was to make it look pop at the same time" and told Henderson "'Would you like to be kissed by Britney Spears?'". According to Kahn, the hint of a smile that appears on Henderson's face before Spears pours the poison into his mouth was what managed to get the shot past censors. Although Spears was at first going to be involved in the editing process with Blackburn, she did not contact Kahn after the media scandal over her wedding in Las Vegas. "Toxic" is Spears's most expensive music video to date, at a cost of $1 million. 
The music video premiered exclusively on MTV's "Making the Video" on January 13, 2004. The following day, Spears appeared on "TRL" to premiere it on regular rotation. The video was first released on the "In the Zone" DVD. An alternate karaoke version featuring the diamonds scene was released on the .

The music video begins with an open shot of an airplane flying surrounded by many doves, referencing the works of Hong Kong director John Woo. Spears appears with blond hair dressed as a flight attendant, receiving a phone call. After serving some of the passengers, she leads a middle aged overweight man to the bathroom and seduces him. She peels off the man's mask to reveal an attractive man (Matthew Felker) hiding underneath it and steals a black pass from his pocket when they resume kissing. Spears is then dropped into the back of a Ducati 999, driven by a shirtless male (Tyson Beckford) in a futuristic Paris, that was compared to the 1982 film "Blade Runner". She wears a tight black catsuit and sports red hair, inspired by the character of Sydney Bristow from television series "Alias". They pass a woman and lift up her dress, a homage to the iconic Marilyn Monroe scene in the 1955 film "The Seven Year Itch". They also pass two women frolicking in a store window.

Throughout the video, there are scenes of Spears nude covered in diamonds. The look was compared to that of Kate Bush in the music video for her 1978 single, "The Man with the Child in His Eyes". Spears then enters Toxic Industries, and gains access to a vault from which she steals a vial of green poison. She accidentally triggers a laser trap when she leaves that she evades with elaborate dance moves, including a back handspring. This is followed by scenes of Spears wearing a black superheroine outfit and black hair. She scales a building and enters an apartment, where her unfaithful boyfriend (Henderson) is waiting. She kisses him just before pouring the poison into his mouth, killing him. Spears kisses him again and jumps out of the window. She lands back on the plane sporting her flight attendant outfit, and winks at the camera. The video closes with a shot of the airplane flying surrounded by doves like the beginning.

Jennifer Vineyard of MTV compared the video to Justin Timberlake's "Cry Me a River", saying that "Where her real-life ex just stalked his cheating lover in his clip, [...] Spears takes a more lethal approach." On February 10, 2004, MTV announced that due to the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy in which Janet Jackson's breast was exposed on live television, "Toxic" along with other five music videos would be moved from daytime to late-night programming from 10 p.m. until 6 a.m. A spokeswoman for MTV announced that "given the particular sensitivity in the culture right now, we're erring on the side of caution for the immediate future." The video was nominated at the 2004 MuchMusic Video Awards in the category of Best International Artist Video, but lost to Beyoncé's "Crazy in Love". It was also nominated for four VMAs at the 2004 awards in the categories of Best Female Video, Best Dance Video, Best Pop Video and Video of the Year, but lost all of them (Rumors spread on internet forums claiming the other winners were rigged due to her non-presence that year). Corey Moss of MTV said that Spears "remains the Susan Lucci of the VMAs." Visual effects supervisors Chris Watts and Bert Yukich won the category of Outstanding Visual Effects in a Music Video at the 3rd Annual Visual Effects Society Awards.

In September 2009, the music video for "Toxic" was voted by users of the music video website MUZU TV as the sexiest music video of all time. The video was also used on "Life is Pornography", a 2005 video art by Jubal Brown. Amy Schriefer of NPR noted that in the video, Spears was no longer trying to break away from her 90s teen pop image and style; she was comfortable and having fun, not trying to generate any type of calculated controversy. The anime music video for Spears's single "Break the Ice" (2008) was based on the secret agent character of "Toxic". The video for "Womanizer" (2008) was created by Spears as a sequel to "Toxic". The diamond encrusted look of Lady Gaga in the music video for "LoveGame" (2009) was compared to that of "Toxic". In the 2010 "Glee" episode "Britney/Brittany", the character of Brittany Pierce danced in a diamond suit during a cover of "I'm a Slave 4 U". In a 2011 poll by "Billboard", the song's music video was voted the second best music video of the 2000s, behind only Lady Gaga's "Bad Romance" (2009). Jillian Mapes of "Billboard" wrote that Spears "proved that she comes in every flavor [...] But the one role that stays constant through the dance-heavy clip: Sultry maneater." Taylor Swift's "Bad Blood" music video pays homage to the red-haired look Spears sports in the "Toxic" music video. Many comparisons were made about the similarities.

"Toxic" was performed by Spears at "Britney Spears: In the Zone", a concert special that aired in ABC on November 17, 2003. She also performed "Toxic" as the headliner of the Jingle Ball on December 8, 2003, at Staples Center. It was the opening number of her set, and Spears appeared wearing a black top and a white fur cape. While the choreography was deemed as "erotic", Corey Moss of MTV commented that some of the effect was lost due to Spears's lip synching and a stagehand fixing a prop during the song. On January 24, 2004, Spears opened the 2004 NRJ Music Awards with a performance of "Toxic". During the ceremony, she also presented the NRJ Award of Honor for the Career to Madonna. Spears performed "Toxic" as the opening number of 2004's The Onyx Hotel Tour. Previous to the beginning of the tour, she deemed it as the song she was most excited to perform, along with "Everytime". After an introduction in which she briefly appeared on a large video screen, Spears took the stage standing on top of a hotel bus, wearing a tight black catsuit. She was surrounded by dancers dressed as employees and columns of LED lighting, suggesting the façade of a glitzy hotel on the Vegas Strip. MTV UK commented, "OK, so she doesn't so much sing than mime along with Toxic, [...] But what do you expect when she's simultaneously performing a vigorous dance routine, ascending moving staircases and descending fireman poles?".

"Toxic" was also performed as the last song of the concert during The M+M's Tour. After "Do Somethin'", in which Spears wore a hot pink bra, a white fur coat and a jean skirt, she ended the set with "Toxic", with four female dancers in a Shakira-like style. Following the performance, she thanked the audience and introduced her dancers. "Toxic" was also performed at 2009's The Circus Starring Britney Spears. Following an interlude in which the dancers showcased their individual moves, the stage was lit with green sci-fi effects and Spears appeared over moving jungle gyms. Jerry Shriver of "USA Today" said that "fan-favorite Toxic [...] succeeded because the focus was solely on the star." Jane Stevenson of the "Toronto Sun" named it one of the standout performances of the show, along with "...Baby One More Time" and "Womanizer". "Screen" commented, "The high point of the show was the back to back performance of two of Britney's biggest hits, 'Toxic' and 'Baby One More Time' ["sic"], which had the crowd break out in wild applause."

The song was performed at 2011's Femme Fatale Tour. After a video intermission in which Spears finds and captures the stalker that follows her, the show continues with a martial arts-inspired remix of "Toxic", in which Spears wears a kimono and battles dancing ninjas. Keith Caufield of "Billboard" felt the performance was comparable to Madonna's "Sky Fits Heaven" at 2001's Drowned World Tour. Shirley Halperin of "The Hollywood Reporter" stated that "[the] mid-tempo numbers [...] seemed to stall out quickly, where faster offerings like 'Womanizer,' 'I Wanna Go' and 'Toxic' had the sold out crowd jumping in place and pumping their number twos in the air." August Brown of the "Los Angeles Times" said "The set's only weak spots were sonic revisions of catalog staples – the Bollywood spy-flick vamp of 'Toxic' remains utterly groundbreaking and didn’t need an Ibiza-inspired revision.". Spears performed the song during the last act from her 2013-17 Las Vegas residency . The number begins with a ballad version of "Toxic" and Spears is seen over a giant tree. Before the chorus begins Spears jumps from the tree in a kind of bungee jump under a water curtain. As Spears lands in the stage, the first chords from the song starts and the performance keeps going on. In the 2016 Billboard Music Awards, it was performed as the closing song of a greatest hits medley by Spears, with brand new choreography. The song was also included in Spears's setlist for the iHeartRadio Music Festival on September 24, 2016. Spears performed the song as part of her Apple Music Festival performance in London on September 27, 2016. The song was also streamed live along with Work Bitch from Spears' final "" show date on December 31, 2017 on ABC's "Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve" to a record audience of 25.6 million. 

"Toxic" earned Spears her first Grammy at the 2005 ceremony in the category of Best Dance Recording and gained her credibility amongst critics. The song also won Most Performed Work at the 2004 Ivor Novello Awards. "Toxic" was ranked at number fourteen on "Stylus Magazine"s Top 50 Singles between 2000 and 2005. 
In a 2005 poll conducted by Sony Ericsson, "Toxic" was ranked as the world's second favorite song, only behind "We Are the Champions" by Queen. Over 700,000 people in 60 different countries cast their votes. The song was also included on The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born list by "Blender". Pitchfork listed the song on The Top 500 Tracks of the 2000s. Jess Harvell commented that Spears had great pop instincts and that "Toxic" showed how "Britney always had more individualist pep than her peers, important when you're dealing with steamroller productions from the mind of Max Martin."

In 2009, NPR included "Toxic" on their Most Important Recordings of the Decade list. Amy Schriefer noted that the song's synths defined the sound of dance-pop for the rest of the decade, while adding that it "still sound[s] fresh and futuristic." "Toxic" was listed on several others end of the decade lists; at number forty-seven by "NME", forty-four by "Rolling Stone" and seventeen on "The Daily Telegraph". "NME" called it the soundtrack to all of the fun of the decade, from "little girls at discos" to "gay clubs and hen nights". In addition, the song was voted in "Rolling Stone"'s end of the decade readers poll as the fourth best single of the decade. Pitchfork listed the song at number three on their Top 50 Singles of 2000 list. Bill Lamb of About.com listed the song at number twenty-seven on the Top 40 Pop Songs of All Time. Evan Sawdey of PopMatters commented that "Toxic" is a rare kind of song that transcends genre boundaries, and added that Spears delivered the track that defined her legacy. In May 2010, Spears revealed through her Twitter account that "Toxic" is her favorite song from her catalogue.

The song was covered on the 2010 American series "Glee" episode "Britney/Brittany" by New Directions, in a Bob Fosse-inspired performance led by the character of Will Schuester. In the United States, their version debuted at number sixteen on the Hot 100 and sold 109,000 copies on its first week, according to Nielsen SoundScan. It also charted at number thirty-seven in Australia, fifteen in Canada and seventeen in Ireland. The song was covered again in "Glee" episode "100" by Dianna Agron, Heather Morris and Naya Rivera. Northern Irish singer-songwriter Juliet Turner covered "Toxic" for the 2004 covers compilation, "Even Better Than the Real Thing Vol. 2". In 2005, American folk group Chapin Sisters recorded an acoustic cover of "Toxic", which was featured on PerezHilton.com and became one of the most requested songs of the year in KCRW. German country-rock band The BossHoss recorded a cover of "Toxic" for their debut album, "Internashville Urban Hymns" (2005). American rock duo Local H covered the song for their first live album, "Alive '05" (2005). An instrumental rendition of the song was released by American surf rock band Monsters from Mars. Norwegian alternative rock band Hurra Torpedo covered "Toxic" in their fourth release, "Kollossus of Makedonia" (2006). English producer Mark Ronson recorded a hip hop cover of the song, featuring American singer-songwriter Tiggers and a verse from American rapper Ol' Dirty Bastard. It was included in his second studio album, "Version" (2007).

English indie rock band Hard-Fi covered the song for the compilation album "Radio 1 Established 1967" (2007). The song was fused with The Clash's cover of "Brand New Cadillac". American musician Shawn Lee covered the song in the album "Shawn Lee's Ping Pong Orchestra" (2007). French-Israeli singer-songwriter Yael Naïm released a piano-driven version of the song in her eponymous debut album (2007). British electronic music group Metronomy's cover was described as "something out of a "Weird Al" Yankovic polka medley, only not kidding". Israeli pop singer Shiri Maimon recorded a version of "Toxic" in Hebrew. American comedy singer Richard Cheese recorded a cover for his eight album, "Viva la Vodka" (2009). American post-hardcore band A Static Lullaby released a cover in the compilation album, "Punk Goes Pop 2" (2009). A music video was released, which featured different Spears look-alikes wearing iconic outfits from various music videos, such as "...Baby One More Time" and "Womanizer".

A cover of the song by American singer-songwriter Christopher Dallman was included in an EP titled "Sad Britney", released on November 9, 2009, along with covers of "...Baby One More Time", "Gimme More" and "Radar". American acoustic trio Nickel Creek covered "Toxic" at the 2006 Bonnaroo Music Festival. Australian singer-songwriter Kate Miller-Heidke did an opera-pop version of "Toxic" during a mobile phone launch in Sydney in August 2007. She dedicated it to Spears, adding, "She's going through a bit of a hard time at the moment. [...] This one's for you, mate."
American singer-songwriter Ingrid Michaelson covered "Toxic" regularly on her 2010 Everybody Tour. Michaelson's version ends with her and the band doing a dance break set to Spears's original song. American pop band Selena Gomez & the Scene performed a tribute to Spears during their 2011 We Own the Night Tour. The medley of hits included "...Baby One More Time", "(You Drive Me) Crazy", "Oops!... I Did It Again", "I'm a Slave 4 U" and "Toxic", mixed similar to the Chris Cox Megamix included in "Greatest Hits: My Prerogative". They also performed a cover of "Hold It Against Me". During her debut on U.S. TV singing show "The Voice", American singer Melanie Martinez sang "Toxic" playing an acoustic guitar and a tambourine with her foot. Three of the judges, Adam Levine, Cee Lo Green and Blake Shelton, hit the "I Want You" button for her. In 2014 David J covered Toxic featuring Sasha Grey. On December 2, 2016, Madonna covered the song during a live concert broadcast through Facebook Live..

MTV produced a mash-up of "Toxic" with "Faint" by nu metal band Linkin Park. "Toxic" was sampled in American rapper Tony Yayo's "Love My Style" (2005) and British rapper Example's "Toxic Breath" (2006). A cover version of the song by French/Israeli Singer Yael Naim was also sampled by the Chicago rapper Mick Jenkins on the song "Jazz", produced by OnGaud.

In the 2005 episode "The End of the World" of the TV show "Doctor Who", the character of Cassandra unveils an ancient jukebox that reproduced "Toxic" as an example of "a traditional ballad" from 5 billion years prior. "NME" stated that the inclusion of the song marked its cultural impact. In the 2007 film "Knocked Up", the song is played when Seth Rogen and Paul Rudd are driving to Las Vegas. Director Judd Apatow explained that he originally tried to use "Toxic" in the 2005 film "The 40-Year-Old Virgin" in the scene where Leslie Mann is drunk driving. "Toxic" was also featured in the 2010 film "You Again".







Credits adapted from the liner notes of "In the Zone".

Recording and management

Personnel

Footnotes
Bibliography


</doc>
<doc id="1966127" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1966127" title="Do Somethin'">
Do Somethin'

"Do Somethin" is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her first greatest hits album, "" (2004). It was written and produced by Christian Karlsson and Pontus Winnberg (known collectively as Bloodshy & Avant), with additional writing by Henrik Jonback and Angela Hunte. Before the song was given to Spears, it was originally offered to girl group Melodi Brown, although they never released the song or indeed any material. The song was never intended to be released as a single. Spears, however, wanted to shoot a music video for it, and had to convince her record company. It was then released on February 14, 2005 by Jive Records as the second single from the album worldwide except North America. The dance-pop song features usage of electric guitars, and its lyrics allude to having a good time and not caring about other people's judgement.

"Do Somethin'" received generally favorable reviews from critics, and received comparisons to Gwen Stefani's 2004 single "What You Waiting For?". Although the single was not released in the United States, it charted on many of "Billboard"s component charts due to digital downloads, managing to reach number 100 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. It was also successful worldwide, reaching top ten positions in countries such as Australia, Denmark, Sweden and the United Kingdom. By the end of 2005, "Do Somethin'" was one of the best-selling singles in Australia and Belgium that year.

An accompanying music video, co-directed by Billie Woodruff and Spears, who is credited as her alter ego "Mona Lisa", portrays the singer and four female friends dancing and performing in a nightclub. The usage of a Louis Vuitton dashboard in the video resulted in a lawsuit against Jive Records, which ended with Louis Vuitton winning €80,000 in damages. The video was also banned in all European TV channels. Spears performed "Do Somethin'" during The M+M's Tour in 2007, The Circus Starring Britney Spears in 2009 and in 2013–17.

On August 13, 2004, Spears announced through Jive Records the release of her first greatest hits compilation titled "", due November 16, 2004. The title was chosen after the album's lead single, Spears's cover version of Bobby Brown's 1988 single "My Prerogative". The cover was produced by Swedish production team Bloodshy & Avant, who produced her single "Toxic" from her fourth studio album, "In the Zone" (2003). A DVD was also released the same day, containing Spears's music videos. The track list was officially revealed on September 13, 2004. "Greatest Hits: My Prerogative" included three new tracks: "My Prerogative", "I've Just Begun (Having My Fun)" and "Do Somethin'", all of them produced by Bloodshy & Avant. The producers recorded and arranged the main instrumentation of "Do Somethin'" at Murlyn Studios, in Stockholm, Sweden. Spears recorded her vocals at Battery Studios in New York City during the first leg of her tour "The Onyx Hotel Tour" in 2004. Background vocals were provided by Spears, Angela Hunte, BlackCell and Emma Holmgren. The song was never planned to be released as a single. However, Spears wanted to shoot a music video for the song and had to fight with her record label to do it. She explained she was "a little disappointed" that she had to convince them "that making this video was the right thing to do at th[e] time". "Do Somethin'" was released as the second single from "Greatest Hits: My Prerogative" on February 14, 2005.

"Do Somethin'" is a dance-pop song with usage of electric guitars and a "bump beat", as described by Spence D. of IGN. He also noted the song is "filled with faux string bursts and mock-'70s synth gurgle (think Zapp/Gap Band era) and plenty of treated guitar and bass". According to the sheetmusic published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing, it is set at a moderately fast tempo with 130 beats per minute. The song is written in the key of E minor, and Spears' vocal range spans from the low note of E to the high note of C. Lyrically, "Do Somethin'" refers to having fun while being watched by other people, which is perceived in lines such as "Somebody pass my guitar/So I can look like a star." Tim Lee of musicOMH compared the song's style to Gwen Stefani's "What You Waiting For?" (2004).

"Do Somethin'" received positive reviews from contemporary critics. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said that along with "I've Just Begun (Having My Fun)", they are "two very good previously unreleased tunes". Annabel Leathes of BBC Online commented, "two robust, unreleased tracks [that] suggest, however, that she may still be churning out a few more No.1s before taking time out to sing lullabies to her brood", while Christy Lemire of the Associated Press noted that both songs "provide Britney with further opportunities to proclaim her need to have fun and be herself, which have been running themes throughout her last two albums". Ann Powers of "Blender" called "Do Somethin'" "a decent bit of crunk where she raps in a cutesy-poo drawl that suggests she could have nabbed the "Dukes of Hazzard" sexpot role from Jessica Simpson". Spence D. of IGN considered the song "interesting for its many interpretations, no less".

Although "Do Somethin'" was never physically released in the United States, the song peaked at number 100 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 due to digital downloads on April 26, 2005. The song also charted on "Billboard"s Pop 100 and Hot Digital Songs at number 63 and 49, respectively. As of August 2010, "Do Somethin'" has sold 363,000 paid digital downloads in the United States. In Australia, the song debuted at number 8 on the week of March 7, 2005. It has since been certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) with sales of over 35,000 copies. On the same week, it debuted in the UK Singles Chart at number 6. "Do Somethin'" was also successful in Europe, inside the Top 10 in Belgium (Flanders), Hungary, Sweden, Denmark and Ireland, and inside the Top 20 in Belgium (Wallonia), Czech Republic, Germany, Norway, Switzerland and the Netherlands.

The music video for "Do Somethin'" was filmed in December 2004 in Los Angeles, California. It was co-directed by Spears and Billie Woodruff, who previously worked with her in "Born to Make You Happy" and in "Overprotected". Spears described the shoot as "hectic", adding it was filmed "in a record-breaking five hours". She also commented about co-directing with Woodruff, saying that "he had no ego whatsoever, and the whole process was just so much fun". Spears is credited as "Mona Lisa" in the video, as she said "I kinda think she's like my alter ego whenever I feel like being mean or possibly like bustin' people around to get stuff right ... It's kinda easier to be called 'Mona Lisa' instead of Britney". The video was also choreographed and styled entirely by Spears, with clothing from Juicy Couture. Spears ultimately added that working behind the camera inspired her to become a director in the future, explaining, "After doing about 20 videos, it gets kind of boring playing the same role. I feel like being behind the camera is sometimes more satisfying than being in front of it".

In the music video, Spears wears a pink midriff T-shirt reading "Love Boat" and a pin capelet going to a club named Hole in the Wall with four blond bandmates. During the first verse, they fly in a pink Hummer and move their heads to the beat on the song, while Spears puts the truck on autopilot. The Hummer's dashboard has a Louis Vuitton pattern. They finally arrive to the club and dance in the dancefloor while being stared at by other people. Near the end of the video, Spears and her bandmates start performing on a stage. The video also includes intercut scenes of Spears in a separate room, wearing black underwear and a white mini fur coat, that was compared to the black-and-white scenes in the music video for "My Prerogative".

Jennifer Vineyard of MTV described Spears's attitude in the video as "[going] back and forth between trying to look sexy and then goofy". Since the music video was not going to be serviced in the United States, it was set to premiere in MTV UK on January 21, 2005. However, it was leaked online on January 18, 2005.

On November 18, 2007, it was reported by "Forbes" that LVMH's Louis Vuitton won a lawsuit on 80,000 EUR (approximately $94,000 in USD) in damages for the close-up shots of the truck's dashboard, which featured the brand's logo without authorization. The tribunal found the director of the video had clearly emphasized the logo. The tribunal ruled that responsibility for the unauthorized use lay with Sony BMG, its subsidiary Zomba Group of Companies as well as MTV Online, and not Spears herself. The music video was also banned in all European TV channels. The edited video was re-released through Vevo on July 19, 2015.

Spears performed "Do Somethin'" during The M+M's Tour in May 2007. After a performance of "Breathe on Me" from "In the Zone", in which Spears and her four female dancers picked a man from the audience and danced seductively around him, the stage went dark for a few seconds. Shortly after, Spears took the stage again wearing a hot pink bra, a white fur coat and a jean skirt to perform the song. The choreography was a mimicry of the music video. The song was also performed at her 2009 tour, The Circus Starring Britney Spears. It was the second song of the fourth and last act, titled "Electro Circ". In some parts of the performance, Spears and her dancers carried giant guns that shot sparks. During the first shows of the first North American leg, she wore a gold metal bodysuit. However, on March 8, 2009, at the Tampa show, Spears suffered a wardrobe malfunction after her performance of "I'm a Slave 4 U", which caused the outfit being changed to a sparkly black bodysuit. The song was later performed in Spears' Las Vegas residency from 2013 to 2017. She was seen wearing a bodysuit and doing a routine with black chairs.







</doc>
<doc id="1983262" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1983262" title="IB Diploma Programme">
IB Diploma Programme

The International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (IBDP) is a two-year educational programme primarily aimed at 16 to 18 year olds. The programme provides an internationally accepted qualification for entry into higher education and is recognized by many universities worldwide. It was developed in the early to mid-1960s in Geneva, Switzerland, by a group of international educators. After a six-year pilot programme that ended in 1975, a bilingual diploma was established.

Administered by the International Baccalaureate (IB), the IBDP is taught in schools in over 140 countries, in one of three languages: English, French, or Spanish. In order to participate, students must attend an IB school. IBDP students complete assessments in six subjects, one from each subject group, and three core requirements. Students are evaluated using both internal and external assessments, and courses finish with an externally assessed series of examinations, usually consisting of two or three timed written tests. Internal assessment varies by subject: there may be oral presentations, practical work, or written work. In most cases, these are initially graded by the classroom teacher, whose grades are then verified or modified, as necessary, by an appointed external moderator.

Generally, the IBDP has been well received. It has been commended for introducing interdisciplinary thinking to students. In the United Kingdom, "The Guardian" newspaper claims that the IBDP is "more academically challenging and broader than three or four A-levels". A pledge to allow children in all areas to participate in the programme, however, was shelved amid concerns that a "two-tier" education system was emerging, because the growth in IB was driven by private schools and sixth form colleges. British students who take the IB with its six subjects, Extended Essay (EE), Theory of Knowledge (TOK), and Creativity, Action and Service (CAS) receive differently structured university offers to those who sit three A-levels, with universities working to carefully construct appropriate equivalent offer conditions.

In 1945 the "Conference of Internationally-minded Schools" asked the International School of Geneva (Ecolint) to create an international schools programme. When he became director of Ecolint's English division, Desmond Cole-Baker began to develop the idea, and in 1962, his colleague Robert Leach organised a conference in Geneva, at which the term "International Baccalaureate" was first mentioned. An American social studies teacher, Leach organized the conference—with a $2500 grant from UNESCO—which was attended by observers from European schools and UNESCO. Writing about the genesis of the International Baccalaureate in "Schools Across Frontiers", Alec Peterson credits Leach as "the original promoter of the International Baccalaureate." At the end of the conference, Unesco funded the International School Association with an additional $10,000, which was inadequate to do more than produce a few papers, or bring teachers together for meetings.
By 1964, international educators such as Alec Peterson (director of the Department of Education at Oxford University), Harlan Hanson (director of the College Board Advanced Placement Program), Desmond Cole (director of United Nations International School in New York) and Desmond Cole-Baker (head of the International School of Geneva) founded the International Schools Examination Syndicate (ISES). Cole and Hanson brought experience with college entrance examinations in the United States, and Hanson, in particular, brought his experience from a long relationship with the College Board. According to Peterson, "the breakthrough in the history of the IB" came in 1965 with a grant from the Twentieth Century Fund, which commissioned Martin Mayer, author of "The Schools", to produce a report on the feasibility of establishing a common curriculum and examination for international schools that would be acceptable for entry to universities worldwide. This led to conferences involving Ecolint, United World College of the Atlantic (UWC Atlantic College), and others in the spring and fall of 1965, at which details about the curriculum for the Diploma Programme were discussed and agreed upon.

The Ford Foundation grant, secured in 1966, funded Peterson's study at Oxford University, which focused on three issues: a comparative analysis of "secondary educational programmes in European countries...in cooperation with the Council of Europe"; university expectations for secondary students intending to enter university; and a "statistical comparison of IB pilot examination results with...national school leaving examinations such as British A Levels and US College Board (AP) Tests". As a result of the study and the curriculum model developed at UWC Atlantic College, Peterson initiated the pattern of combining "general education with specialization", which melded with the curricula of the United States and Canada, and became the "curriculum framework" proposed at the UNESCO conference in Geneva in 1967. Late in 1967, ISES was restructured and renamed the IB Council of Foundation, and John Goormaghtigh became the first president in January 1968. In 1967, the group, which by then also included Ralph Tyler, identified eight schools to be used for the experimentation of the curriculum.

In 1968, the IB headquarters were officially established in Geneva for the development and maintenance of the IBDP. Alec Peterson became IBO's first director general, and in 1968, twelve schools in twelve countries participated in the IBDP, including UWC Atlantic College and UNIS of New York. The aim was to "provide an internationally acceptable university admissions qualification suitable for the growing mobile population of young people whose parents were part of the world of diplomacy, international and multi-national organizations."

The first six years of the IB Diploma Programme, with a limited number of students, are referred to as the "experimental period". Each school was to be inspected by ISES or IBO and had to be approved by their government. The experimental period ended in 1975, and in that year, the International Baccalaureate North America (IBNA) was established as a separate entity, allowing the funding for implementation of the IBDP to remain in the country rather than being sent to Geneva. The first official guide to the programme containing its syllabus and official assessment information was published in 1970 and included the theory of knowledge course. The extended essay was introduced in 1978, but creativity, action, service (CAS), although mentioned in guides beforehand, was not specifically identified in the guide until 1989.

In 1980, responding to criticism that the "internationalism" was Eurocentric, the IB hosted a seminar in Singapore with the goal of incorporating Asian culture and education into the IB curriculum. In 1982, the Standing Conference of Heads of IB Schools took steps to modify the Eurocentrism in the curriculum. The same year, the Japanese government hosted a science conference for IBO "as a token of Japanese interest in the various dimensions of the IB".

From the start, all subjects of the IB Diploma Programme were available in English and French, and it was mandatory for all students to study both a first and a second language. In 1974, bilingual diplomas were introduced that allowed students to take one or more of their humanities or science subjects in a language other than their first. The IB Diploma Programme subjects became available in Spanish in 1983.

To be awarded an IB diploma, a candidate must fulfill three core requirements, in addition to passing his or her subject examinations:


Students who pursue the IB diploma must take six subjects: one each from Groups 1–5, and either one from Group 6 or a permitted substitute from one of the other groups, as described below. Three or four subjects must be taken at Higher level (HL) and the rest at Standard level (SL). The IB recommends a minimum of 240 hours of instructional time for HL courses and 150 hours for SL courses.

While the IB encourages students to pursue the full IB diploma, the "substantial workload require[s] a great deal of commitment, organization, and initiative". Students may instead choose to register for one or more individual IB subjects, without the core requirements. Such students will not receive the full diploma.

The six IBDP subject groups and course offerings are summarised below. More information about the subject groups and individual courses can be found at the respective subject group articles:


Environmental Systems and Societies SL is an interdisciplinary course designed to meet the diploma requirements for groups 3 and 4, while Literature and Performance SL meets the requirements of Groups 1 and 6.

The IB is developing a pilot online version of the IBDP and currently offers several online courses to IBDP students. Eventually, it expects to offer online courses to any student who wishes to register. Additionally, the IB has developed pilot courses that include World Religions; Sports, Exercise and Health Sciences, Dance, and a transdisciplinary pilot course, Literature and Performance, Global Politics. These pilot courses have now become part of the mainstream courses.

All subjects (with the exception of CAS) are evaluated using both internal and external assessors. The externally assessed examinations are given worldwide in May (usually for Northern Hemisphere schools) and in November (usually for Southern Hemisphere schools). Each exam usually consists of two or three papers, generally written on the same or successive weekdays. The different papers may have different forms of questions, or they may focus on different areas of the subject syllabus. For example, in Chemistry SL, paper 1 has multiple choice questions, paper 2 has extended response questions. Paper 3 focuses on the "Option(s)" selected by the teacher and data analysis questions. The grading of all external assessments is done by independent examiners appointed by the IB.

The nature of the internal assessment (IA) varies by subject. There may be oral presentations (used in languages), practical work (in experimental sciences and performing arts), or written work. Internal assessment accounts for 20 to 50 percent of the mark awarded for each subject and is marked by a teacher in the school. A sample of at least five per subject at each level from a school will also be graded by a moderator appointed by the IB, in a process called external moderation of internal assessment. Based on this moderation, the grades of the whole subject from that school will change.

Points are awarded from 1 to 7, with 7 being equal to A*, 6 equal to A, and so on. Up to three additional points are awarded depending on the grades achieved in the extended essay and theory of knowledge, so the maximum possible point total in the IBDP is 45. The global pass rate for the IB diploma is approximately 80%. In order to receive an IB diploma, candidates must receive a minimum of 24 points or an average of four (or C) out of a possible seven points for six subjects. Candidates must also receive a minimum of 12 points from their Higher Level subjects and a minimum of 9 points from their Standard Level subjects. Additionally, candidates must complete all of the requirements for the EE, CAS and TOK. Failing conditions that will prevent a student from being awarded a diploma, regardless of points received, are non-completion of CAS, more than three scores of 3 or below, not meeting the specific points required for Higher Level or Standard Level subjects, or plagiarism in addition to scoring higher than a score of 1 in any subject/level.

Candidates who successfully complete all the requirements of the IB Diploma Programme and one or more of the following combinations are eligible to receive a bilingual diploma: two Group 1 subjects (of different languages), a Group 3 or 4 subject taken in a language other than the candidate's Group 1 language, or an Extended Essay in a Group 3 or Group 4 subject written in a language other than the candidate's Group 1 language. IB certificates are issued to indicate completion of diploma courses and exams for non-diploma candidate students.

Where standard assessment conditions could put a student with special educational needs at a disadvantage, special arrangements may be allowed. The "Candidates with Special Assessment Needs "publication contains information regarding procedures and arrangements for students with special needs.

To offer the IB Diploma Programme, an institution must go through an application process, and during that period the teachers are trained in the IB. At the end of the application process, IB conducts an authorisation visit.
Once a school is authorised to offer the programme, an annual fee ensures ongoing support from the IB, legal authorisation to display the IB logo, and access to the Online Curriculum Centre (OCC) and the IB Information System (IBIS). The OCC provides information, resources, and support for IB teachers and coordinators. IBIS is a database employed by IB coordinators. Other IB fees also include student registration and individual diploma subject examination fees.

The IB diploma is accepted in 75 countries at over 2,000 universities, and the IB has a search directory on its website, although it advises students to check recognition policies directly with each university. The IB also maintains a list of universities offering scholarships to IBDP graduates under conditions specified by each institution, including 58 colleges and universities in the United States. The following is an overview of university recognition policies in various countries.
The IBDP was described as "a rigorous, off-the-shelf curriculum recognized by universities around the world" in the 10 December 2006, edition of "Time" magazine, in an article titled "How to bring our schools out of the 20th century". It was also featured in the summer 2002 edition of "American Educator," where Robert Rothman described it as "a good example of an effective, instructionally sound, exam-based system". Howard Gardner, a professor of educational psychology at Harvard University, said that the IBDP curriculum is "less parochial than most American efforts" and helps students "think critically, synthesize knowledge, reflect on their own thought processes and get their feet wet in interdisciplinary thinking". An admissions officer at Brown University claims the IBDP garners widespread respect.

In the United Kingdom, the IBDP is "regarded as more academically challenging but broader than three or four A-levels", according to an article in the "Guardian". In 2006, government ministers provided funding so that "every local authority in England could have at least one centre offering sixth-formers the chance to do the IB". In 2008, Children's Secretary Ed Balls abandoned a "flagship Tony Blair pledge to allow children in all areas to study IB". Fears of a "two-tier" education system further dividing education between the rich and the poor emerged as the growth in IB is driven by private schools and sixth-form colleges.

In the United States, criticism of the IBDP has centered on the vague claim that it is anti-American, according to parents anonymously quoted in "The New York Times", who objected to the program's funding from UNESCO in its early years. The base cost is considered to be higher than other programs. In 2012, the school board in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, voted to eliminate all IB programmes in the district because of low participation and high costs. 




</doc>
<doc id="1995338" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1995338" title="Hughie Lehman">
Hughie Lehman

Frederick Hugh "Old Eagle Eyes" Lehman (October 27, 1885 – April 12, 1961) was a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender. He started his ice hockey career playing for the Pembroke Lumber Kings and the Berlin Dutchmen. In 1911, Lehman joined the New Westminster Royals, playing for the Royals for three seasons, before joining the Vancouver Millionaires in 1914. Lehman played half of his 22-year professional career with Vancouver, winning his only Stanley Cup; he would be unsuccessful in seven other attempts. In 1926, he joined the Chicago Black Hawks of the National Hockey League (NHL), playing a full season and splitting the second one as player and head coach. Although some ice hockey historians credit Jacques Plante for originating the practice, Lehman was the first goaltender to regularly pass the puck to his fellow forwards and defensemen; he even scored a goal by shooting the puck in the opponent's net while playing for the Professionals. He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1958.

Lehman began his playing career in 1903–04, playing for the Pembroke Lumber Kings of the Ottawa Valley Hockey League (OVHL) for the first three seasons of his career. In the 1906–07 season, Lehman was signed as a free agent by the Canadian Soo of the International Professional Hockey League (IPHL); the IPHL was the first fully professional ice hockey league. Lehman returned to Pembroke for the 1907–08 season, appearing in four games. For the 1908–09 season, Lehman joined the Berlin Dutchmen of the Ontario Professional Hockey League (OPHL). In the 1909–10 season, Lehman was in two different Stanley Cup playoff series, with two different teams, the Berlin Dutchmen and the Galt Professionals, but he lost both times. During those playoff series, he appeared in three games, giving up 22 goals. Lehman played with the Berlin Dutchmen until 1911.

In 1911–12, Lehman played for the New Westminster Royals of the newly founded Pacific Coast Hockey Association (PCHA). He played three seasons for New Westminster, winning the league championship in his first season. In 1914–15, Lehman joined the Vancouver Millionaires of the PCHA. In his first season with the Millionaires, Lehman posted a 14–3 record, with a 4.08 goals-against average, which was a very good average in an era when goaltenders were not allowed to drop on their knees to make a save. In the Stanley Cup playoffs, Lehman helped the Millionaires become the first PCHA team to win the Stanley Cup, with a 3–0 record and 2.67 goals against average. This would be the only Stanley Cup victory of Lehman's career, as he was on the losing side in seven other attempts. The Millionaires squad consisted of seven future members of the Hockey Hall of Fame when they won the Cup: Lehman, Frank Nighbor, Cyclone Taylor, Si Griffis, Barney Stanley, Frank Patrick, and Mickey MacKay.

Lehman played with the Millionaires until the 1925–26 season. During that time, Lehman and some of his teammates were involved in a humorous incident when going back to Canada after an exhibition game against the Montreal Wanderers in New York City. In New York, Lehman's wife bought numerous women's designer outfits, after being treated to a shopping spree by him. When going back to Canada, Lehman, on the advice of Cyclone Taylor, who was both a professional ice hockey player and a Canadian immigration officer, split up all outfits among his teammates to avoid paying additional taxes he would have had to pay if he had brought all the clothing by himself at once; this puzzled the Customs officers. In 1922–23, the Millionaires were renamed the Maroons, and joined the Western Canada Hockey League (WCHL). The WCHL was renamed to the Western Hockey League in 1925–26; however, the league disbanded at the conclusion of that season. While playing for the Millionaires, Lehman appeared in six Stanley Cup finals, losing every time, except in his first season, in 1914–15.

Following the collapse of the WHL, Lehman joined the Chicago Black Hawks for the 1926–27 season. While in Chicago, Lehman mentored future Chicago goaltender and captain Charlie Gardiner. Lehman played one full season, and another four games the next one. During the 1926 season, Lehman became the oldest goaltender to win his first NHL game.

During the 1927–28 season, Black Hawks owner and manager Frederic McLaughlin was sketching some plays for his team; after Lehman was shown the plays by McLaughlin, Lehman responded by calling it "the craziest bunch of junk [he's] ever seen". Expecting to be fired after that outburst, Lehman was later told to go to McLaughlin's office. It was how Lehman's playing career ended: McLaughlin appointed Lehman to be Chicago's new head coach. Lehman coached Chicago for part of one season, finishing with a 3–17–1 record over 21 games. He was replaced by Herb Gardiner the following season.

As a goaltender, Lehman was a strong skater and good puckhandler. He chased down loose pucks, and was able to pass the puck to his forwards, surprising the other team's defenders. Playing in the OPHL, Lehman scored a goal by shooting the puck in the opponent's net. The first NHL goaltender to duplicate such a feat was Ron Hextall, who did it in 1987.

After retiring from ice hockey, Lehman worked in the road construction business, eventually becoming the president of a paving company. Lehman was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1958.


</doc>
<doc id="2023296" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2023296" title="And Maggie Makes Three">
And Maggie Makes Three

"And Maggie Makes Three" is the thirteenth episode of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> sixth season. It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 22, 1995. In the episode, Homer recounts the story of Maggie's birth when the kids ask why there are no photos of her in the family album.

The episode was written by Jennifer Crittenden, and directed by Swinton O. Scott III. This was both Crittenden and Scott's first episode on "The Simpsons". It features cultural references to television series such as "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" and "Knight Rider". Since airing, the episode has received many positive reviews from fans and television critics, and has been called "a touching look at fatherhood" by Kevin Wong of PopMatters. It acquired a Nielsen rating of 10.3, and was the fourth highest rated show on the Fox network the week it aired.

While browsing through the family photo album, Lisa notices that there are no baby pictures of Maggie. Homer explains by recounting the story of Maggie's birth. In 1993, Homer hated working at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant, and had a dream of working at a bowling alley. After he received a paycheck that cleared him of all his debts, he quit his job at the power plant and humiliated Mr. Burns during his departure. Homer got a new job at Barney's Uncle Al's local bowling alley, although this resulted in Barney getting fired.

When Homer and Marge "snuggled" to celebrate this development, she became pregnant, ruining Homer's financial plans. Homer, who is unaware of Marge's pregnancy, is the happiest he has been in his life working at the bowling alley. Although Marge made Patty and Selma promise not to tell him, they told two people known for gossiping, and by the next day the entire city of Springfield knew. Homer nevertheless remained oblivious to the obvious hints, including Moe directly congratulating him for getting Marge pregnant and coming home to a baby shower. When Maude nondescriptly congratulated him on his new job, however, Homer suddenly realized the truth and became extremely agitated over the impending birth. 

At Marge's suggestion, Homer asked Al for a raise; although Al explained that the alley was not making enough of a profit for this, he agreed if Homer could find a way to increase business threefold. After unsuccessfully studying marketing, Homer tried to draw attention to the bowling alley by running outside and firing a shotgun in front of a crowd, causing a massive panic and a large police response. Unable to follow through with his promise, Homer sacrificed his job and returns to the power plant. However, Mr. Burns made Homer beg for his job back, and placed a large plaque in front of Homer's desk reading: "Don't forget: you're here forever". Homer was once again unhappy at his work, but Maggie was born, Homer instantly fell in love with her. Back in the present, Bart and Lisa still do not understand what that has to do with Maggie's photos. Homer merely mentions that they are in the place where he needs them the most. The scene then cuts to his workplace where all of the photos of Maggie are positioned on the plaque on the wall, which now reads: "Do it for her".

The episode was written by Jennifer Crittenden, and directed by Swinton O. Scott III. This was the first episode Scott directed for the show. Crittenden also made her debut as a writer for "The Simpsons" in this episode. Crittenden was taking a beginners' writing program at 20th Century Fox when former "The Simpsons" showrunner David Mirkin hired her on the show. Crittenden's only writing experience before that had been as an intern on the "Late Show with David Letterman". 20th Century Fox introduced Crittenden to Mirkin, and Mirkin read a script of hers that he liked. When Mirkin first talked to Crittenden, he thought she was a really nice woman who was very mature. Crittenden was only 23 years old at the time, but Mirkin liked her and he hired her.

After Homer quits his job at the power plant, he violently tosses his old boss Mr. Burns out of the cart he is driving. Homer then drives across a wooden bridge and tosses a match onto it; the whole bridge is instantly engulfed in flames. Mirkin came up with the joke, and said that "the thing with animation is that you can stage almost anything and time it perfectly, something you would not be able to do in live action". As a live-action director, Mirkin said he enjoys the amount of control they have in animation.

In the episode, Mr. Burns places a "de-motivational plaque" in Homer's station that reads "Don't forget: you're here forever". Homer then places photos of Maggie around the plaque to alter it into saying "Do it for her". "The Simpsons" writer George Meyer, who enjoys writing jokes that involve anagrams or any other forms of word play, came up with the idea for this particular joke. The joke is also an homage to Al Jaffee's Fold-in features in the "Mad" magazine.

On September 4, 2018, 23 years after the episode's original broadcast, Simpsons producer Matt Selman posted a tweet saying that he had noticed a continuity error in the episode. When Marge announces to Homer that she is pregnant with Maggie, a photo of the baby can be seen in the background. 

The couch gag is a reference to the James Bond gun barrel sequence. Dr. Hibbert's flashback hairstyle is modeled after Arsenio Hall's. The family watches "Knight Boat", a parody of "Knight Rider". Homer spinning around with a bowling ball in his hand before throwing it into the air and exclaiming "I'm gonna make it after all" is reminiscent of the opening of "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" where Mary throws her hat into the air.

In its original broadcast, "And Maggie Makes Three" finished 47th in the ratings for the week of January 16 to January 22, 1995, with a Nielsen rating of 10.3. The episode was the fourth highest rated show on the Fox network that week, beaten only by "Melrose Place", "Beverly Hills, 90210", and the "Rock 'n' Roll Skating Championship".

Since airing, the episode has received many positive reviews from fans and television critics. One-time "The Simpsons" writer and comedian Ricky Gervais named it his second favorite episode, and said: "Mr. Burns gives [Homer] this terrible plaque above his desk that says, 'Don't forget: You're here forever.' It's about how sometimes things don't go the way you planned, which is pretty amazing in a cartoon. Homer then puts up all the pictures of Maggie he's ever taken to strategically cover this horrible thing so it now reads, 'Do it for her.' It gives me a lump in the throat thinking about it." Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the authors of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", said: "A surprisingly traditional episode. The flashback to 1993 seems a bit odd, but this is a good example of a story that doesn't overly rely on set pieces and confounded expectations for its success." In a review of the sixth season, Joshua Klein of the "Chicago Tribune" cited "And Maggie Makes Three", "Treehouse of Horror V", "Homer Badman", and "Lisa's Rival" among his favorite episodes of the season.

TV Squad's Adam Finley said the episode "manages to be both incredibly funny and incredibly touching, both signs of a great "Simpsons" episode". He added that "the episode has some great gags in it, but the emotion is very real, too. Homer is not thrilled with the idea of having a baby, and the episode does a wonderful job of showing the dark side of having another mouth to feed." Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review of the sixth season DVD: "Flashback episodes of "The Simpsons" usually work well, and [this episode] is no exception to that rule. Actually, at this point it’s one of my favorites, but that’s partially because of overexposure to some of the other episodes. In any case, this one has many hilarious moments – such as the scene that explains Homer's hair loss." Kevin Wong at PopMatters said the episode is "a touching look at fatherhood".



</doc>
<doc id="2025667" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2025667" title="Congress Hall">
Congress Hall

Congress Hall, located in Philadelphia at the intersection of Chestnut and 6th Streets, served as the seat of the United States Congress from December 6, 1790 to May 14, 1800. During Congress Hall's duration as the capitol of the United States, the country admitted three new states, Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee; ratified the Bill of Rights of the United States Constitution; and oversaw the Presidential inaugurations of both George Washington (his second) and John Adams.

Congress Hall was restored in the 20th century to its original appearance in 1796. The building is now managed by the National Park Service within the Independence National Historical Park and is open for public tours. Congress Hall is conjoined with Independence Hall, which is adjacent to the east.

Philadelphia served as the capital of the United States both during and immediately after the American Revolutionary War. Independence Hall, located next door, served as the meeting place of the Continental Congress until the Pennsylvania Mutiny in June 1783. The failure of the Pennsylvania government to protect Congress from a mob of angry mutineers caused the representatives to withdraw to Princeton, New Jersey. The national capital then moved to Annapolis, Maryland in November 1783, then to Trenton, New Jersey in November 1784 before finally moving to New York City in January 1785. State delegates did not return to Independence Hall in Philadelphia until the United States Constitutional Convention in 1787; however, remained the official capital even during the convention. Designed by architect Samuel Lewis, Congress Hall was originally built to serve as the Philadelphia County Courthouse; construction began in 1787 and was completed two years later.

Article One, Section Eight, of the United States Constitution granted Congress the authority to create a federal district to serve as the national capital. Following the ratification of the Constitution, the Congress, while meeting in New York, passed the Residence Act on July 9, 1790. The Act established the District of Columbia on the banks of the Potomac River between the states of Maryland and Virginia to serve as the new federal capital. However, Robert Morris, a Senator from Pennsylvania, convinced Congress to return to Philadelphia while the new permanent capital was being built. As a result, the Residence Act also declared Philadelphia to be the temporary capital for a period of ten years.

In an attempt to convince Congress to keep the capital in Philadelphia, the city began construction on a massive new Presidential palace on 9th Street as well as an expansion to the County Courthouse into what would become Congress Hall. Upon the return of Congress to Philadelphia on December 6, 1790, the first level of Congress Hall had been transformed into the chamber for the House of Representatives and the second floor had been converted into a chamber for the United States Senate. Despite their efforts to construct new buildings for use by the federal government, the city's residents failed to convince Congress to modify the Residence Act and make Philadelphia the permanent capital. Congress Hall served as the capitol building until May 14, 1800, when the offices of the national government moved to Washington, D.C.

The House chamber on the first floor is rather simple and featured mahogany desks and leather chairs. The room eventually accommodated 106 representatives from 16 states: the 13 original states as well as the representatives from the new states of Vermont in 1791, Kentucky in 1792, and Tennessee in 1796. The room has been restored to its original appearance in 1796.

The second floor, reserved as the chamber for the Senate, was more ornate and adorned with heavy red drapes. By 1796, the room featured 32 secretary desks very similar to the desks that are still used in the current Senate chamber in the United States Capitol; 28 of the desks at Congress Hall are original. Portraits of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette, presented as gifts from the French monarch following the American Revolution, hang in adjoining committee rooms. A fresco of an American bald eagle is painted on the ceiling, holding the traditional olive branch to symbolize peace. Also on the ceiling, a plaster medallion in the form of a sunburst features 13 stars to represent the original colonies. The design mirrors a similar pattern on the floor, where a carpet made by William Sprague, a local weaver, features the shields of each of the 13 original states. The carpet seen today is a reproduction of the original.

During the almost ten years it served as the capitol, Congress Hall witnessed many historic events including the admittance of three new states. The United States Bill of Rights was ratified at Congress Hall in 1791. The second Presidential inauguration of George Washington took place in the House chamber in 1793, as did inauguration of John Adams in 1797. Congress also used the time to establish the First Bank of the United States, the Federal Mint, and the United States Department of the Navy. The Jay Treaty, which secured a temporary peace with Great Britain, was also ratified at Congress Hall in 1796. After the capital moved to Washington, Congress Hall returned to its original function as the Philadelphia County Courthouse and served as the location of both state and federal courts during the early 19th century. Also designed by Samuel Lewis, the Burlington County Courthouse in Mount Holly Township, New Jersey was built in 1796 and modeled after Congress Hall.

After its use as a courthouse in the early 19th century, Congress Hall, like other buildings in the area, had fallen into disrepair. In 1870, the Pennsylvania General Assembly ordered the demolition of all the buildings surrounding Independence Hall. However, the law was never enforced and was officially repealed in 1895. Under the leadership of a civic organization known as The Colonial Dames of America, the architect George Champlin Mason, Jr. began restoring Congress Hall in 1895-96, though this work was mostly limited to the Senate chamber. In 1900, the Philadelphia chapter of the American Institute of Architects (AIA) began a study of Congress Hall and initiated a funding drive for the building's complete restoration. After funds were secured, the City of Philadelphia approved the restoration project in 1912 under the supervision of the AIA. Work on Congress Hall was completed the following year when President Woodrow Wilson rededicated the building. Additional work to refurbish the House chamber was completed in 1934. In 1942, over 50 civic and patriotic groups met at the American Philosophical Society and joined to create the Independence Hall Association. The association lobbied for the creation of Independence National Historical Park, which was initially approved by Congress in 1948 and formally established on July 4, 1956.

Congress Hall is now maintained by the National Park Service, which operates guided tours of the building throughout the year on a first-come, first-served basis.

On December 2, 2008, the building hosted President-elect Barack Obama's meeting with the National Governors Association where they discussed the economic crisis then facing the country.




</doc>
<doc id="2026181" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2026181" title="1910 Atlantic hurricane season">
1910 Atlantic hurricane season

The 1910 Atlantic hurricane season was the period during the summer and fall of 1910 in which tropical cyclones formed in the North Atlantic Ocean. The season was fairly inactive, with only five storms; however, three grew into hurricanes and one became a major hurricane. The season got off to a late start with the formation of a tropical storm in the Caribbean Sea on August 23. September saw two storms, and the final tropical cyclone—Hurricane Five—existed during October. All but one of the storms made landfall, and the only cyclone which remained at sea had some effects on the island of Bermuda.

The season's first storm had limited reported impacts on land, and the subsequent system caused more severe damage in southern Texas and northern Mexico. Hurricane Three dropped torrential rainfall on Puerto Rico before striking the same region as the previous cyclone. Hurricane Four bypassed Bermuda to the east, where some property damage was reported. Hurricane Five was the most catastrophic storm of the season, buffeting western Cuba for an extended period of time as it slowly executed a counterclockwise loop. Death tolls from the hurricane are estimated in the hundreds.

In addition to the five official tropical cyclones, a disturbance in the middle of September that tracked from east of the Lesser Antilles to off the coast of Canada was studied for potential classification. Despite producing gale-force winds, the system was likely extratropical in nature, and any time it may have spent as a tropical storm was brief.

The first tropical cyclone of the season developed on August 23, in the eastern Caribbean Sea. Not believed to have strengthened further, the storm tracked west-northwestward and struck southwestern Hispaniola. It quickly weakened to a tropical depression as it turned more toward the northwest and crossed northern Cuba. On August 26, the depression passed through the Bahamas, east of the Florida Peninsula. Heading due north, the storm had transitioned into an extratropical cyclone by the next day. An area of high pressure to the north and east of the storm was said to have prevented it from recurving out to sea, and the cyclone skirted the eastern coast of North Carolina before being listed as dissipated east of the Delmarva Peninsula. The storm reportedly caused heavy precipitation on August 29 and 30 in Georgia and the Carolinas, while ships at sea reported high winds, rough seas and heavy rainfall.

On August 26, a tropical depression formed in the central Gulf of Mexico. It drifted westward for several days, and by August 30 it intensified into a tropical storm while turning more southwestward. The storm peaked in intensity as a weak tropical storm shortly thereafter. On August 31 the storm moved inland near the mouth of the Rio Grande, and weakened as it swept inland. Advisories were issued for coastal areas before which strong winds and high tides affected the Texas coast. The cyclone inflicted some property damage in the Brownsville area. Winds unroofed houses at Port Isabel and destroyed some Mexican huts. The storm also blew fishing craft aground. No initial reports of fatalities were received, but two towns were left cut off from communication with Brownsville.

Hurricane San Zacarias of 1910 <br>
A tropical storm developed east of the Leeward Islands on September 5 and quickly became the season's first hurricane. It continued westward through the islands and is estimated to have attained winds corresponding to Category 2 status on the modern-day Saffir–Simpson Hurricane Scale. On the night of September 6, San Zacarias Hurricane passed south of Puerto Rico; winds blew up to at San Juan. The hurricane weakened somewhat on September 7 as it skirted the southern coast of Hispaniola, and curving northwestward, it passed along northern Jamaica. On September 10, it moved through the Yucatán Channel, restrengthening upon emerging into the Gulf of Mexico. Now on a northwesterly course, the storm reached its peak windspeeds on September 12. Two days later, it made landfall along the Texas coast.

The storm dropped torrential rainfall on Puerto Rico, amounting to in a period of 12 hours at one location. Rivers swelled to "unprecedented" levels, and the hurricane resulted in "great havoc" to telephone and telegraph wires on the island. The United States Weather Bureau issued extensive warnings in association with the storm. High tides occurred along the coasts of Texas and Louisiana, accompanied by heavy rainfall. A large storm surge raised the water level at Corpus Christi to its highest in years and completely inundated Padre Island, where barometers recorded pressures as low as on the southern half of the island.

In the Atlantic hurricane database, the fourth hurricane of the season is listed as having formed on September 24, several hundred miles southeast of Bermuda. Strengthening, the storm moved northwestward and is estimated to have peaked with maximum sustained winds of 100 mph (155 km/h). It gradually turned toward the northeast as it bypassed Bermuda to the east. On September 27, it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and turned eastward. It dissipated several days later. The storm caused some damage to property on the island, and blew a barque aground.

The Great Cuba Hurricane of 1910 <br>

The final storm of the season formed in the extreme southern Caribbean on October 9, and steadily intensified as it moved northwestward. Shortly after making landfall on the western tip of Cuba, the storm peaked as a severe hurricane corresponding to Category 4 on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale and completed a counterclockwise loop. During its loop, the pressure in its eye dropped to with an unofficial reading of aboard the steamship "Brazos". The cyclone began weakening and tracking toward the United States, and moved ashore near Fort Myers, Florida, with winds of corresponding to those of a strong Category 2 hurricane. After moving through the state, it hugged the coast of the Southeastern United States on its way out to sea. Due to the storm's tight and poorly documented loop, initial reports suggested that it was actually two separate cyclones that developed and affected land in rapid succession. Its track was subject to much debate at the time, and eventually it was identified as a single storm. Additionally, observations on the event resulted in a greater understanding of other weather features that took similar paths.

In Cuba, the storm was considered one of the most severe natural disasters in the island's history. Damage was extensive, and thousands of peasants were reportedly left homeless. Throughout Florida, the storm also had widespread, yet more moderate, impacts, including damage to houses and the flooding of low-lying land. The pressure at Fort Myers dropped to during the storm. Although total monetary damage from the storm is unknown, estimates of losses in Havana, Cuba, exceed $1 million and in the Florida Keys, $250,000 (1910 USD). At least 100 deaths occurred in Cuba alone.




</doc>
<doc id="2027955" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2027955" title="Radek Zelenka">
Radek Zelenka

Dr. Radek Zelenka is a fictional character of a scientist in the television series "Stargate Atlantis," portrayed by David Nykl. He is a member of the original expedition from Earth to the Ancient city of Atlantis in the Pegasus galaxy, which he joined after turning down a job at Masaryk University in his home country Czech Republic. His expertise on Ancient technology is only surpassed by Dr. Rodney McKay, with whom he shares a friendly rivalry. Zelenka's planned one-time appearance in the season 1 episode "Thirty-Eight Minutes" was followed by a recurring role for expository scenes with McKay and the leader of the expedition. Zelenka has since appeared in approximately half of each season's episodes and also appeared in the crossover episode "The Pegasus Project" of "Stargate SG-1". The series finale of "Atlantis", "Enemy at the Gate", marks his last appearance. For his portrayal of Radek Zelenka, David Nykl was nominated for a 2005 Leo Award in the category "Dramatic Series: Best Supporting Performance by a Male".

Dr. Radek Zelenka is a careful and precise scientist of the original Atlantis Expedition who often supplements the scientific decisions of the "equally brainy" Dr. Rodney McKay, with whom he has a friendly rivalry. He frequently appears in the control room with McKay and the leader of the Atlantis expedition for expository scenes to lay out an episode's premise to the audience, and is "a key player in helping the Atlantis team stay one step ahead of the bad guys as well as solving some of its most perplexing scientific conundrums". GateWorld's David Read felt that while Zelenka may "play second fiddle to Rodney", he is also "the only one who even has the potential to put McKay down." Actor David Nykl explained that Zelenka has "reasonably well honed social skills" and "can put up with a lot of stress [...] and a lot of pressure, particularly from McKay and the situations that he can get into", but he may be too focused and determined to get one thing done.

Zelenka recurs in all five seasons of "Stargate Atlantis" and is also among the "Atlantis" characters to appear in the "Stargate SG-1" crossover episode "The Pegasus Project". In his first appearance in the early "Atlantis" season 1 episode "Thirty-Eight Minutes", Zelenka helps devise a plan to free Major Sheppard's team including Dr. McKay from a potentially lethal technical problem. After a first short collaboration in "Suspicion", Zelenka and McKay are the driving forces in finding a solution to protect the city of Atlantis from a massive hurricane in "The Storm".

"Hot Zone" reveals that Zelenka has been given the ATA gene therapy to enable him to operate Ancient technology, but the therapy had no effect on him. Season 2's "Duet" shows Zelenka off-world for the first time, where he needs to save McKay and a soldier from being captured in a Wraith dart. Following a major dispute about an experimental Ancient power generator in "Trinity", McKay apologizes to Zelenka when the experiment causes the death of a scientist. McKay saves Zelenka from certain death in "Tao of Rodney" and later apologizes for so often putting him down, admitting that Zelenka is "a brilliant scientist and a decent human being". Zelenka last appears in the series finale of "Atlantis", "Enemy at the Gate", where he implements a wormhole drive that sends the city of Atlantis from the Pegasus Galaxy to Earth within seconds.

From the beginning of "Stargate Atlantis", the producers were looking for actors to play non-Americans to present the cooperation between different nations and other groups of people in an alien environment. In fact, although in the series it is possible to see soldiers and technicians wearing in their uniforms flags that identify them as Russians, Japanese, South Africans, Belgians, Germans, Britons, Spaniards, etc, all main and secondary characters of earthly origin, except Zelenka, are Anglo-Saxons: Americans, a Canadian and a Scotsman. 

When actor David Nykl mentioned his Czech Canadian background during his audition for a Russian character for the season 1 episode "Thirty-Eight Minutes", the producers changed the character's nationality to Czech and cast him. Nykl made such an impression that producer Brad Wright wrote Zelenka into the Rodney McKay (David Hewlett) scenes of the next episode, "Suspicion".

Zelenka was re-introduced in the mid-season-1 finale "The Storm", Martin Gero's second "Atlantis" episode. Gero had had difficulty with laying out the dangers of the storm and its solution in a quick and entertaining manner with just the McKay character, and Brad Wright was not opposed to introducing another expository character. Zelenka has since frequently appeared for expository scenes in the control room with McKay and the leader of the Atlantis expedition. Zelenka's given name is first mentioned by McKay in the season 1 finale "The Siege"; McKay had previously been unable to remember Zelenka's name. The producers chose "Radek", a fairly common Czech given name, without input from Nykl. When Colonel Samantha Carter (Amanda Tapping) replaced Dr. Elizabeth Weir (Torri Higginson) as the leader of the Atlantis expedition in season 4, the producers shifted the emphasis of Zelenka's collaboration with McKay to his interaction with Carter. By the end of the show's run, the interactions between Zelenka and McKay become more subtle to the point where they finish each other's sentences and need fewer words and expressions to get by.

Portraying a recurring character, David Nykl was not under contract and neither knew his number of episodes nor his character's story arc in advance. Nevertheless, he appeared in approximately half of each season's episodes. No scenes with Zelenka were cut in the first two seasons of "Atlantis", and extra scenes involving Zelenka were shot in the first episodes of the season 3 to fill time. However, all of David Nykl's scenes were cut from the season 5 episode "The Shrine" due to time constraints, although Nykl's credits appear in the finished episode.

Since Zelenka's first appearance, David Nykl's fluent Czech was worked into "Stargate Atlantis" as part of Zelenka. Approximately half of Zelenka's Czech lines were scripted (in English), which Nykl then translated verbatim. The other half was ad-libbed and usually included swearing. His usual Czech exclamations include Ty vole and Do prdele. Nykl normally speaks with a Canadian accent, but Zelenka had a thick Czech accent; Nykl found it increasingly hard to remember to put on the accent as the show went on. The late season 1 episode "Letters from Pegasus" features a minute-long non-subtitled monologue in which Zelenka describes the city of Atlantis in his mothertongue. Nykl translated the scripted monologue at home and performed it in Czech the next day. A version in English was initially planned to be filmed but was dropped after Nykl's successful first take. The end of Zelenka's video message ("drž se miláčku" – "take care, darling") was ad-libbed, but Nykl left it to the writers to create Zelenka's backstory. But during the show's run, Zelenka only ever mentions having a brother, a sister, and a nephew, and is never shown to be or have been in a romantic relationship.

Often informing his superiors of critical situations, Zelenka earned the nickname "Mr. Bad News" among fans. In an interview with David Nykl, TheScifiWorld's Gilles Nuytens referred to Zelenka as a "popular" and "interesting" character, and compared Zelenka's apparitions in "Atlantis" to those of the "Stargate SG-1" character Walter Harriman, "a bit like the icing on the cake". Another interviewer mentioned that, following a "warm reception", the "fans have really taken [Zelenka] to heart". When "GateWorld" hypothesized that viewers were looking forward to an episode where the "underdog" Zelenka saves the day instead of McKay, Nykl replied that the set-up dynamic earns the character more sympathy from the audience. For his portrayal of Radek Zelenka, David Nykl was nominated for a 2005 Leo Award in the category "Dramatic Series: Best Supporting Performance by a Male".


</doc>
<doc id="2032527" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2032527" title="Eriophorum angustifolium">
Eriophorum angustifolium

Eriophorum angustifolium, commonly known as common cottongrass or common cottonsedge, is a species of flowering plant in the sedge family Cyperaceae. Native to North America, North Asia, and Northern Europe, it grows on peat or acidic soils, in open wetland, heath or moorland. It begins to flower in April or May and, after fertilisation in early summer, the small, unremarkable brown and green flowers develop distinctive white bristle-like seed-heads that resemble tufts of cotton; combined with its ecological suitability to bog, these characteristics give rise to the plant's alternative name, bog cotton.

"Eriophorum angustifolium" is a hardy, herbaceous, rhizomatous, perennial sedge, able to endure in a variety of environments in the temperate, subarctic and arctic regions of Earth. Unlike "Gossypium", the genus from which cotton is derived, the bristles which grow on "E. angustifolium" are unsuited to textile manufacturing. Nevertheless, in Northern Europe, they were used as a substitute in the production of paper, pillows, candle-wicks, and wound-dressings. The indigenous peoples of North America use the plant in cooking and in the treatment of digestive problems. Following a vote in 2002, Plantlife International designated "E. angustifolium" the County Flower of Greater Manchester, as part of its British County Flowers campaign.

In the wild, "Eriophorum angustifolium" is a creeping rhizomatous perennial sedge, with an abundance of unbranched, translucent pink roots. Fully grown, it has a tall, erect stem shaped like a narrow cylinder or triangular prism; it is smooth in texture and green in colour. Reports of the plant's height vary; estimates include up to , , and up to . "E. angustifolium" has "stiff grass-like foliage" consisting of long, narrow solidly dark green leaves, which have a single central groove, and narrow from their wide base to a triangular tip. Up to seven green and brown aerial peduncles and chaffs, roughly in size, protrude from umbels at the top of the stem from which achenes are produced after fertilisation, each with a single pappus; these combine to form a distinctive white perianth around long.

"Eriophorum angustifolium" is described as "a rather dull plant" in winter and spring, but "simply breathtaking" in summer and autumn, when 1–7 conspicuous inflorescences – composed of hundreds of white pappi comparable to cotton, hair, tassels, and/or bristles – stand out against naturally drab surroundings.

"Eriophorum angustifolium" differs from other species within the genus "Eriophorum" in its habitat and morphology. Its multiple flower heads and growth from rhizomes distinguish it from "E. vaginatum", which has a single flower head and grows from dense tussocks. Although "E. latifolium" has 2–12 flower heads, it has laxly caespitose (tufted) growth, and its pappi are forked. The smooth peduncles and preference for acidic soil pH distinguishes "E. angustifolium" from "E. gracile", which grows in swamp with a neutral pH and has scabrid (rough) peduncles.

"Eriophorum angustifolium" is native to the Northern Hemisphere, and distributed across Eurasia, North America and the British Isles, where there is open bog, heath, wetland and moorland, with standing water and calcareous peat or acidic soil. It can survive in the Subarctic and Arctic, and is found in Alaska, Finland and Greenland as far north as 83° N. The British botanist William Turner Thiselton-Dyer recorded "E. angustifolium" in the South African Republic in 1898.

In North America, "Eriophorum angustifolium" is found in the north from Alaska through Manitoba and the Canadian Prairies to Newfoundland and Labrador, down the Pacific Northwest and the state of Washington, across the Midwestern United States through Michigan and Iowa, down the Eastern Seaboard as far south-east as New York and New Jersey, and reaching as far south-west as New Mexico. In Eurasia, "E. angustifolium" is distributed throughout the Caucasus, European Russia and North Asia, including Siberia and the Kamchatka Peninsula, and south-east to Manchuria and Korea. It grows throughout continental Europe, with the exception of those parts within the Mediterranean Basin, growing in Scandinavia in the north, and as far south as the Norte Region of Portugal and the Pierian Mountains of Greece.

"Eriophorum angustifolium" is the most common of the four native species of "Eriophorum" in the British Isles, and has been recorded as having existed in all vice-counties, thriving particularly well in Ireland and northern and western regions of Great Britain, but less so in southern and eastern areas. In the mires of Northern Ireland and the South Pennines, it considered a ruderal, pioneer and keystone species, because it can quickly colonise and repair damaged or eroded peat, encourage the re-vegetation of its surroundings, and retain sediment and its landscape to serve as a carbon sink. In central and southern counties of England, the species is rare or absent, and was "completely destroyed" in Cambridgeshire, The Broads, The Fens and other parts of the East of England by human activities such as land reclamation. Within the British Isles, "E. angustifolium" thrives at a range of altitudes from sea-level fens and lowland meadows, to exposed upland moors when provided with a habitat of acid bog or waterlogged heath. It has an altitudinal limit of above sea level, reaching in the Wicklow Mountains of Ireland, and in the Scottish Highlands.

"Eriophorum angustifolium" is a hardy, herbaceous, rhizomatous, perennial plant, meaning that it is resilient to cold and freezing climatic conditions, dies back at the end of its growing season, has creeping rootstalks, and lives for over two years. It grows vigorously from seed over a period of 2–5 years, and thrives particularly well in freshly disturbed, cut or eroded peat. "E. angustifolium" is protogynous.

Sexual reproduction in "Eriophorum angustifolium" begins with flowering in spring or early summer (in or around May), when groups of 3–5 brown flowers are produced. Fertilisation usually takes place in May or June, via anemophily (wind-pollination), and the white bristle-like perianth, composed of achenes with pappi (seeds with hairs) then grows outwards to appear like short tufts of cotton thread. These pappi endure well into summer, lasting from around June to September. Like the pappus of "Taraxacum" (dandelions), this aids in wind-dispersal, and also serves as thermal insulation, conserving the temperature of the plant's reproductive organs by trapping solar radiation.

"Eriophorum angustifolium" has a NatureServe conservation status of G5, meaning that the species is considered to be ecologically secure by NatureServe, lacking any threats to its global abundance.

"Eriophorum angustifolium" seeds and stems are edible and are used in traditional Native American cuisine by Alaska Natives, Inuit and Inupiat people. The leaves and roots of "E. angustifolium" are also edible and, because of their astringent properties, used by the Yupik peoples for medicinal purposes, through a process of decoction, infusion or poultice, to treat aliments of the human gastrointestinal tract, and in the Old World for the treatment of diarrhoea. In abundance, "E. angustifolium" can grow with enough density to disguise wetland and bog. Consequently, it may be used as a natural indicator of areas which are hazardous and to avoid travelling through. Attempts to make a cotton-like thread from the hairs of the plant's seed-heads have been thwarted by its brittleness, but it has been used in the production of paper and candle wicks in Germany, and was used as a feather substitute in pillow stuffing in Sweden and Sussex, England. In Scotland, during World War I, it was used to dress wounds.

In 2002, the County Flowers campaign of Plantlife International, which asked members of the public to nominate and vote for a wildflower emblem for each of the counties and metropolitan areas of the United Kingdom, resulted in "Eriophorum angustifolium" being announced as the County Flower of Greater Manchester.

The species was named "Eriophorum angustifolium" in 1782 by the German botanist Gerhard August Honckeny. The German botanist Albrecht Wilhelm Roth published this name in 1788, referring to Honckeny's work, and is sometimes erroneously considered the author of the species name. The genus name "Eriophorum" consists of two Ancient Greek roots – (', "wool") and (', "-bearing") – referring to the fibrous seed-heads of the genus, which resemble tufts of thread. The specific epithet ' is composed of the Latin words ' ("narrow") and ' ("leaf"). The Linnaean name "Eriophorum polystachion" is a ', being based on a mixed batch of specimens. "Scirpus angustifolius" is a later combination published by the Japanese botanist Tetsuo Koyama in 1958, but this generic assignment is not widely accepted.

Two subspecies are recognised within "E. angustifolium". The autonymous subspecies, "E. angustifolium" subsp. "angustifolium", is found in more southerly sites, while "E. angustifolium" subsp. "triste" has an overlapping distribution centred further north. The two also differ in height and the roughness of the peduncles, with "E. a." subsp. "angustifolium" being up to tall and having smooth-surfaced peduncles, while "E. a." subsp. "triste" has rough peduncles and only reaches tall.

In English, "E. angustifolium" is known by a variety of common names (with various spellings), including "common cottongrass", "common cotton-grass", "common cottonsedge", "tassel cotton grass", "many-headed cotton-grass", "thin-scale cotton-grass", "tall cotton-grass", "downy ling" and "bog cotton".

Although "difficult to grow under cultivation", The Royal Horticultural Society states "Eriophorum angustifolium" can be cultivated as a low-maintenance wildflower, suitable for meadows, ponds margins or bog gardens. This may be done in sheltered or exposed terrain, but best accomplished with full sun at a south- or west-facing aspect, in water up to deep. Poorly-drained peat, sand, clay or loam with an acidic soil pH is required. Division in spring is the recommended form of propagation for the species, and regular deadheading is the recommended method of pruning. "Narthecium ossifragum" and "Myrica gale" are suitable for companion planting with "E. angustifolium". "Eriophorum angustifolium" is "generally pest free". As a seedling and young plant it is eaten by sheep and cattle, and a variety of goose species. It is tolerant to chalybeate (iron-enriched) water, but may succumb to powdery mildews.



</doc>
<doc id="2038672" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2038672" title="You Are Not Alone">
You Are Not Alone

"You Are Not Alone" is a song by American singer Michael Jackson from his ninth studio album "" (1995). It was released on August 15, 1995 as the second single from the album. The song was re-released in 2006, as part of Jackson's "" collection box set, where it re-entered at number 30 in the UK Singles Chart in 2006. The R&B ballad was written by American R&B singer R. Kelly in response to difficult times in his personal life. He then forwarded a bare demo tape to Jackson, who liked the song and decided to produce it with Kelly. Jackson's interest in the song was also linked to recent events in his personal life.

The song's corresponding music video, which featured Jackson and his then-wife Lisa Marie Presley, featured scenes of semi-nudity. "You Are Not Alone" received a generally positive critical reception and was the recipient of Grammy and American Music Award nominations. The song was a commercially success. It holds a "Guinness World Record" as the first song in the 37-year history of the "Billboard" Hot 100 to debut at number one, and was later certified platinum by the RIAA. The track also topped the charts in Austria, Belgium, France, Ireland, New Zealand, Poland, Romania, Scotland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. "You Are Not Alone" was Michael Jackson's 13th and last number one single in the United States during his lifetime.

Kelly included a version of the song on his studio album "Love Letter" (2010), paying tribute to Jackson after his death in June 2009. In 2011, a clip of the song was remixed with the song "I Just Can't Stop Loving You"; the final "Immortal Version" was released on the "Immortal" album.

"You Are Not Alone" is an R&B ballad about love and isolation. The song was written by R. Kelly and produced by Kelly and Jackson. Kelly wrote the song after losing close people in his life. Kelly was delighted to be able to work with his idol, explaining "I was psyched ... I feel I could have done his whole album. Not being selfish. I was just that geeked about it. It was an experience out of this world ... It's amazing to know that five years ago I was writing songs in a basement in the ghetto and now I'm writing for Michael Jackson ... I'd be a fool not to say it's a dream come true." Jackson contacted Kelly to see if he had any material available. Kelly forwarded a tape recording of the song and Jackson then agreed to work with Kelly on the piece. On the tape sent to Jackson, Kelly sung "You Are Not Alone" mimicking Jackson's vocal style, explaining, "I think I am him. I become him. I want him to feel that as well." Jackson found the interpretation amusing. They spent the last week of November 1994 together in the studio working on the track.

Jackson explained that he instantly liked the song, but listened to it twice before making his final decision. Although the song was written by Kelly, Jackson was adamant that the production should be a collaborative effort among the two musicians. The tape sent to him had no harmony or modulations, so Jackson added a choir in the final portion and added a sense of climax and structure to the final piece. The song is written in the key of B major. The song has a tempo of 60 beats per minute, making it one of Jackson's slowest songs.

In 2007, a Belgian court ruled that Kelly had plagiarized the 1993 composition "If We Can Start All Over" by Eddy and Danny Van Passel. The court transferred rights track to the Van Passels, though the judgment is only recognized in Belgium.

'You Are Not Alone' received positive views from music critics. James Hunter of "Rolling Stone" noted that, "the excellent current single 'Scream' or the first-rate R&B ballad 'You Are Not Alone' – manage to link the incidents of Jackson's infamous recent past to universal concepts, like injustice or isolation. When he bases his music in the bluntness of hip-hop, Jackson sketches funky scenarios denouncing greed, blanket unreliability and false accusation". Jon Pareles of "The New York Times" said that it was the only conventional love song on the new material on "HIStory". He compared it to Mariah Carey's song "Hero" and said it "sounds like a surefire hit". In more recent years, Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic expressed the opinion that "You Are Not Alone" was amongst some of the best songs Jackson ever released, calling the song seductive. The R&B critic and journalist Nelson George described the song as lovely and supple.

Writer and journalist J. Randy Taraborrelli wrote of the song in 2004, "[it] remains among Michael's best songs ... On listening to 'You Are Not Alone', one wonders how many times Michael tried to tell himself, during his most desperate and anguished times, that he "did" have support in his life, from a higher power, or even friends and family, whether he actually believed it or not". Fred Shuster of the "Daily News of Los Angeles" described it as the best song on the album. Conversely, while Steve Holsey of "Michigan Chronicle" gave the album a positive review, he described the song as the worst on the album, calling the Kelly penned lyrics "trite" and below the standard set by Jackson's own lyrical skills. "You Are Not Alone" received an American Music Award nomination and a Grammy nomination both for "Best Pop Vocal Performance".

Commercially, "You Are Not Alone" remains one of Jackson's best selling singles and it is also his 13th number one song. It holds the "Guinness World Record" for the first song ever to debut at number one on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. First week sales were 120,000 copies; it was certified platinum by the RIAA and sold one million copies domestically. It broke the record set by his previous single "Scream/Childhood," which was the first song in the 37-year history of "Billboard" to debut at number five—where it peaked. It peaked at number one in the UK after a debut at number three in the prior week. The song also reached number one in Wallonia, France, New Zealand, Spain and Switzerland. In Canada it peaked at number 2. With the exception of Italy, it became a top ten hit in every major market.

The music video was directed by Wayne Isham on July 12, 1995 and begins with a large number of paparazzi taking photographs of Jackson. The plot then centers around two locations: a temple where Jackson appears in an affectionate semi-nude scene with his then-wife, Lisa Marie Presley, and a theater where Jackson performs the song to an empty hall. Jackson also appears alone in other locations such as deserts and along tide pools. The slightly extended version that appeared on "HIStory on Film, Volume II" was notable for scenes where special effects were used to give Jackson white, feathery, almost angelic wings. Several of these scenes included Michael's side having been pierced by an arrow. The other version of the video is included on "Number Ones" and "Michael Jackson's Vision". The temple scenes were a homage to Maxfield Parrish's 1922 painting "Daybreak". The theater scenes were filmed at the Pantages Theatre, in Los Angeles.

Michael first performed "You Are Not Alone" at the 1995 Soul Train Music Awards, then at the 1995 BET Awards and also at the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards. At the latter awards ceremony, the song was performed without the second verse. Jackson then performed the song at the Royal Brunei concert in 1996 where it was performed as a complete song. Jackson also performed it during the HIStory World Tour as a complete song, during which one lucky girl was allowed to dance with him on stage, similar to the Soul Train Music Awards performance. Michael's next performance of "You Are Not Alone" was at the MJ & Friends concert in Seoul on June 25, 1999; this also turned out to be the song's last performance by Jackson himself, occurring ten years to the day of his death. The song was performed without the second verse, similar to the "1995 MTV Awards" performance. The song was also due to be performed at the This Is It concert series, however the shows were cancelled due to his untimely death.

Diana Ross recorded a version of this song on her international-only released album, "Voice of Love" produced by Nick Martinelli. Diana would also close her successful 2010-12 "" with this song as a tribute to Jackson.


The final twelve acts from the sixth series of TV talent show "The X Factor" in the United Kingdom released a cover version of the song on November 15, 2009 in aid of Great Ormond Street Hospital. The finalists premiered the song live on the November 15 edition of the programme; the single was available for digital download that day and a physical release followed the day after. The release of the song follows a similar occurrence a year earlier, when the final twelve acts from the fifth series released a cover version of Mariah Carey's "Hero" in aid of Help for Heroes and raised over £1 million. It has been confirmed to have sold over 400,000 copies, therefore achieving a Gold single certification.

The video is very similar to the video of the cover version of the charity single of the year before. It shows various contestants performing their part in front of a plain black background, then shows the 12 finalists together performing the song in front of a screen of photos. Photos and video footage of the finalists at the Great Ormond Street Hospital are shown throughout the video.

R. Kelly recorded his own version of the song and put it on his critically acclaimed 2010 album "Love Letter", he recorded it as a tribute to Jackson following his death. The song was a hidden bonus song on the album, shown as the final song on the album's track list. The song starts with Kelly paying tribute to Jackson, saying "In loving memories of my hero... MJ".




</doc>
<doc id="2038854" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2038854" title="Exhale (Shoop Shoop)">
Exhale (Shoop Shoop)

"Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" is a song by American recording artist Whitney Houston, featured on for the film "Waiting to Exhale". It was released as the lead single from the soundtrack on November 7, 1995, by Arista Records. The song was written and produced by Babyface. A mid-tempo R&B ballad, composed in the key of C major, the song's lyrics speak about growing up and learning to let go. The song garnered mostly positive reviews from critics, many of whom noted Houston's vocal maturity in the song.

In the United States, it became the third single to debut on top of the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart in "Billboard"s history, and Houston's eleventh (and final) number one single. It was later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), for shipments of one million copies. The song also reached number one in Canada and Spain, and the top 10 in Finland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, and Sweden. Additionally, it peaked within the top 20 in Australia, Austria, Belgium, Ireland, Norway, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. At the 39th Annual Grammy Awards, held on February 26, 1997, "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" received four nominations, including the Grammy Award for the Song of the Year, and won in the category of Best R&B Song. The song also won four other awards, including a Soul Train Music Award.

The music video for the song, directed by Forest Whitaker, shows close-up scenes of Houston inter-cut with scenes from the film "Waiting to Exhale". Houston performed the song at the 39th Grammy Awards ceremony, and on the HBO special "Classic Whitney Live from Washington, D.C." in October 1997. It was included in the set-list of Houston's three tours and select dates of various concerts.

In 1994, Houston signed with 20th Century Fox to play the role of Savannah Jackson in the film "Waiting to Exhale", which was adapted from the novel of the same name by Terry McMillan. Initially, she had no interest in recording songs for the film's soundtrack, as she wanted to concentrate on her acting. The film's director, Forest Whitaker, hired Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds to compose the film score and the accompanying soundtrack. Though Babyface visited the set of the film and tried to convince her, Houston was determined not to record songs for the soundtrack. She finally agreed after hearing Babyface play one of the songs she liked. In an interview with Fred Bronson, Babyface explained the development of the song:

"When Whitney first heard the song, she figured I'd lost it—I couldn't come up with words anymore. And, actually she's right. I couldn't think of anything for that particular part. It felt like it should groove there. But I knew it couldn't groove without any vocals, so I started humming along with it and that's what happened. The 'shoops' came. But they felt so good, I thought 'Why not?' It doesn't have to mean anything."
Babyface produced the song, and it was released as the lead single from "Waiting to Exhale" soundtrack on November 7, 1995, through Arista Records. The b-side of the single includes four songs: "Dancin' on the Smooth Edge", which was initially included as the B-side to "All the Man That I Need" (1991), "Moment of Truth", "Do You Hear What I Hear", which Houston recorded for the compilation "A Very Special Christmas" (1987), and her duet with Aretha Franklin, "It Isn't, It Wasn't, It Ain't Never Gonna Be" (1989). "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" is also featured on Houston's compilation albums "" (2000), "Love, Whitney" (2001), "The Ultimate Collection" (2007), "The Essential Whitney Houston" (2011), and "" (2012).

"Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" is an R&B ballad written in the key of C major. The song is set in common time with a tempo of 80 beats per minute. It has the sequence of F–C/E–Dm–C as its chord progression throughout the track, and Houston's vocals span an octave and a perfect fifth, from G to D. The song's instrumentation includes quiet bells and strings, and the whole arrangement is mellow. According to Steve Knopper of "Newsday", the bells resemble electronic Christmas bells, and Houston ad-libs "shoo-pay" over the chorus. The chorus repeats the phrase "shoop de shoop".

According to Bronson, the song summarizes the movie's philosophy. His opinion was somewhat echoed by Ted Cox, author of the book "Whitney Houston", who noted that the soothing quality of the song fitted perfectly with the mood and texture of the movie. He described that the song has a "slow groove" that features the most relaxed singing of Houston's career. "The Miami Herald" described the song as a model of "refined, easy-going soul", and Kyle Anderson of MTV described it as a "smooth jam" with a "crazy-catchy groove". Describing the instrumentation as "silky", Larry Flick of "Billboard" wrote that Houston's performance was more soulful than before, with far more "vocal colors". Stephen Holden of "The New York Times" commented that the song is reminiscent of 1960s girl group records, and the verses speak about growing up and learning to let go.

"Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" received mostly positive reviews from music critics; most of which were positive about Houston's 'soulful' performance and vocal maturity. Jean Rosenbluth of "Los Angeles Times" praised the song, saying "Houston's elegant 'Exhale (Shoop Shoop)' [...] exude[s] maturity without resorting to the relentlessly big vocals that characterize so many R&B records aiming for adult audiences." Geoffrey Himes of "The Washington Post" wrote, "Sounding like someone who has just emptied her lungs after holding her breath a long time, Houston brings a surprisingly mature, world-weary tone to the song." Robert Hilburn, pop music critic of "Los Angeles Times", noted Babyface's achievement in the song, saying "he [Babyface] brings Houston down to earth, trading her normal vocal exuberance for convincing warmth." Larry Flick of "Billboard" called the song "a surprisingly understated shuffle-ballad with soul and far more interesting vocal colors than all the shrieking can provide." "Rome News-Tribune" wrote that "Exhale' has an easygoing, infectious charm", and that Houston "delivers a soulfully relaxed vocal." Anthony Violenti of "The Buffalo News" gave the song a positive review, commenting that Houston's vocals were intoxicating. "The Atlanta Journal-Constitution", in their review of the soundtrack, viewed the song as "easy and understated". Steve Knopper of "Newsday" wrote that the song was "irresistibly catchy" and irritating at the same time. However, Patricia Smith of "The Boston Globe" wrote that the "Shoop Shoop"s were "annoying". While reviewing Houston's compilation "Whitney: The Greatest Hits" (2000), Christine Galera of "Orlando Sentinel" also expressed her dislike for the song, stating the songs from "Waiting to Exhale", including "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" and "Why Does It Hurt So Bad", were too mellow.

"Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" was voted number twenty-three on "The Village Voice"s 1996 Pazz & Jop critics' poll, tied with five other songs, Eels' "Novocaine for the Soul", Everything but the Girl's "Missing", Garbage's "Only Happy When It Rains", Rage Against the Machine's "Bulls on Parade", and Underworld's "Born Slippy".

"Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" won Best R&B/Soul Single, Female award and was nominated for Best R&B/Soul or Rap Song of the Year at the 10th Annual Soul Train Music Awards on March 29, 1996. Houston won two National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Image Awards for Outstanding Song and Outstanding Female Artist at the 27th annual ceremony, broadcast live on April 23, 1996. The song was nominated for Best Song from a Movie at the 5th MTV Movie Awards on June 8, and for Best R&B/Soul Single – Solo at the Second Annual Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards on September 9, 1996. The song received four Grammy nominations―Song of the Year (Babyface), Best R&B Song (Babyface), Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media (Babyface), and Best Female R&B Vocal Performance (Houston), and won in the category of Best R&B Song, at the 39th Grammy Awards, held on February 26, 1997. Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds won a Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI) Pop Music Award for the song at the 45th annual ceremony, held on May 13, 1997.

In the United States, "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" debuted at number one on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and the Hot R&B Singles chart, the issue dated November 25, 1995, with 125,000 copies sold in its first week. It became the third number-one single to do so in "Billboard"s history, following Michael Jackson's "You Are Not Alone" (1995) and Mariah Carey's "Fantasy" (1995). In addition, it became Houston's 11th and seventh number one single on the Hot 100 and the Hot R&B Singles charts respectively, and was Houston's last number one hit on the Hot 100 chart. The single stayed at the top of the Hot 100 for just one week, and was replaced by "One Sweet Day" by Mariah Carey and Boyz II Men. It descended to the number two position and spent 11 consecutive weeks there, from December 2, 1995, to February 10, 1996, setting the record for the longest stay in the runner-up position. However, it had as few as 21 weeks in the Top 50. On the Hot R&B Singles chart, the single remained at the summit for eight consecutive weeks from its debut week, making it Houston's second-longest stay on the top position since "I Will Always Love You" (1992), which remained atop the chart for 11 weeks. The song peaked at number five on the "Billboard" Adult Contemporary chart, spending a total of 26 weeks on the chart. The song placed at number 14 and number 18 on the 1996 "Billboard" year-end Hot 100 and Hot R&B Singles charts respectively. It has sold over 1,500,000 copies in the US and was certified platinum for shipments exceeding 1,000,000 copies by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on January 3, 1996. In Canada, the single entered the "RPM" 100 Hit Tracks chart at number 90, on November 13, 1995. Eight weeks later it topped the chart and spent two weeks at the top spot, becoming Houston's eighth number-one single in Canada. The song was ranked at number 20 on the "RPM" Year-end Top 100 Hit Tracks chart for 1996.

In other countries, the single performed moderately on the chart. In the United Kingdom, it debuted at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart for the week dated November 18, 1995. The next week it dropped to number sixteen before descending the charts steadily. According to MTV, the single has sold about 100,000 copies in the UK. In the Netherlands, "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" peaked at number seven and stayed on the chart for a total of 11 weeks. It made number 79 on the Dutch Singles year-end charts. In Australia, the song entered the ARIA Charts at number 30, the week dated December 10, 1995. The following week, it ascended to its peak position of number 18, before descending the charts. In Switzerland, "Exhale" debuted at number 16, the week dated December 10, 1995. Three weeks later, it peaked at number 13. The song fell to number 16 the next week, and exited the chart at number 49, the week dated March 24, 1996. The song also reached number six in Finland and number four in New Zealand, and number 10 in Sweden. It peaked within the top 20 of the singles charts in a few other countries: number 15 in Austria, 16 in Belgium (Wallonia) and Ireland, 14 in Norway, and 13 in Switzerland. However, in few other countries, the song managed to reach only the top 40; it peaked at number 22 in Belgium (Flanders), 23 in France, and 26 in Germany.

The music video for "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" was directed by Forest Whitaker, who also directed "Waiting to Exhale". The video focuses mainly on close-ups of Houston, sporting a short and mature coif, as she sings. Scenes of the movie are inter-cut between her scenes. In a "Making of the Video" segment of "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)", which aired on Japanese satellite television channel NHK-BS2, Houston explained:

"I wanted him [Whitaker] to do it. And he said 'yeah'. I said 'are you sure you can? Because you've got so much to do.' He said 'I think I can do this.' I kinda got afraid because I knew he was working so hard."
According to Houston, the song was direct, so she wanted the video to be direct and concentrate on her face and on the lyrics. Whitaker also expressed a same opinion of the song. He said, "I've seen the video [...] It's like a thing she has, you know, that I guess people would say is like a charisma kinda thing that it zooms, you know, comes up. It's beautiful [...] It's magic, it's spirit." The video aired on MTV on October 10, 1995. According to Marla Shelton, a writer for "Camera Obscura", a journal of feminism and film theory, "the video concept's originality stops with Houston's hair style as its stark simplicity underscores the 'straight and narrow' politics of the film." When the film was released, the video was shown as a trailer prior to the beginning of films on 450 General Cinema screens in some major US media markets.

Houston performed "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" live a number of times, between 1996 and 2009. In February 1997, Houston performed it as the third song of her 'Waiting to Exhale Medley'―"Sittin' Up in My Room" by Brandy, "Not Gon' Cry" by Mary J. Blige, "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" by Houston, and "Count On Me" by Houston, CeCe Winans, Brandy, Blige, Chaka Khan, and Aretha Franklin―at the 39th Grammy Awards. Houston sang the song live on the HBO special "Classic Whitney Live from Washington, D.C." on both October 3 and 5, 1997. Houston's solo performance was followed by ad-libs of its chorus. She was joined by BeBe Winans, Monica, and Shirley Caesar, who was seated in the audience and invited onstage by Houston. Houston used the song throughout the entire run of her The Pacific Rim Tour (1997). She performed it again during the entire run of her My Love Is Your Love World Tour (1999), as a part of the promotion for her fourth studio album, "My Love Is Your Love" (1998). In April 2000, Houston performed the song on the 25th Anniversary Celebration of Arista Records. She was backed by a seven-piece band, a 14-piece string section and four background singers. Houston started by saying "We all need to exhale sometimes", and proceeded to sing the song. The song was included in the set list of her Nothing but Love World Tour (2010) promoting her seventh studio album, "I Look to You" (2009).

Babyface performed the song with Beverly Crowder on "MTV Unplugged" on October 18, 1997. The performance was released on CD in November 1997, and on DVD and VHS in August 2001, titled "Babyface MTV Unplugged NYC 1997". In April 2012, possibly as a tribute to Houston following her death, R&B singer Robin Thicke covered the song and released his rendition as a single.




Credits adapted from "Exhale (Shoop Shoop)" single liner notes.
"Exhale (Shoop Shoop)"

"Dancin' on the Smooth Edge"

"Moment of Truth"
"Do You Hear What I Hear"

"It Isn't, It Wasn't, It Ain't Never Gonna Be"





</doc>
<doc id="2048565" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2048565" title="J. Proctor Knott">
J. Proctor Knott

James Proctor Knott (August 29, 1830 – June 18, 1911) was a U.S. Representative from Kentucky and served as the 29th Governor of Kentucky from 1883 to 1887. Born in Kentucky, he moved to Missouri in 1850 and began his political career there. He served as Missouri Attorney General from 1859 to 1861, when he resigned rather than swear an oath of allegiance to the federal government just prior to the outbreak of the Civil War.

Knott was disbarred and briefly imprisoned for his refusal to take the oath of allegiance. He returned to Kentucky in 1863 and was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. In 1871, he made a notable speech ridiculing a bill to subsidize westward expansion of railroads. In the speech, he lampooned the remote town of Duluth, Minnesota. The Duluth speech was eventually reprinted in several publications and brought Knott national acclaim. He did not stand for re-election in 1870, instead making a failed run for the office of governor. In 1875, he returned to the House and served as chair of the judiciary committee.

In 1883, Knott left Congress and made a successful run for governor. He secured major reforms in education, but was stymied in his pursuit of tax reform. After his term as governor, he was a delegate to the state's constitutional convention in 1891. In 1892, he became a professor at Centre College in Danville, Kentucky and helped organized the college's law school in 1894. He served as dean of the law school until an illness forced him to retire in 1902. He died at his home in Lebanon, Kentucky on June 18, 1911.

J. Proctor Knott was born in Raywick, Marion County, Kentucky on August 29, 1830. He was the son of Joseph Percy and Maria Irvine (McElroy) Knott. He was tutored by his father from an early age, and later attended public school in Marion and Shelby counties. In 1846, he began to study law. In May 1850, he relocated to Memphis, Missouri, where he was admitted to the bar and commenced practice in 1851. He also served in the offices of the circuit court and county clerks.

Knott married Mary E. Forman on November 17, 1852. Forman died during the birth of the couple's first child in August 1853. On January 14, 1858, Knott married his cousin, Sarah R. McElroy.

Knott's political career began in 1857 when he was elected to represent Scotland County in the Missouri House of Representatives. He served as chair of the judiciary committee and conducted the impeachment hearings against Judge Albert Jackson. Knott resigned his seat in the legislature in August 1858 to accept Governor Robert M. Stewart's appointment to fill the unexpired term of Missouri's attorney general, Ephraim B. Ewing. In 1860, he was elected to a full term as attorney general.

In January 1861, Missouri called a convention to determine whether it would follow the lead of other pro-slavery states and secede from the Union. Knott was sympathetic to the southern cause, but opposed the methods of the secessionists. The Unionist position carried the convention by an 80,000-vote majority. Knott resigned his position as attorney general rather than take an oath of allegiance required by the federal government. As a result of his refusal, he was disbarred from practice in the state of Missouri and imprisoned for a short time.

In 1863, Knott returned to Kentucky and re-opened his legal practice in Lebanon. He was elected as a Democrat to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1867. As a legislator, he opposed the Reconstruction agenda of the Radical Republicans and ratification of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments. He was re-elected to a second term, but did not stand for re-election in 1870.

Knott's most notable action as a legislator occurred near the end of his first stint in Congress. On January 27, 1871, he delivered a satirical speech ridiculing a bill that would have provided fifty-seven land grants and financial concessions to railroads to further their westward expansion. In the speech, Knott singled out the Bayfield and St. Croix Railroad's proposed line from the St. Croix River to Duluth, Minnesota to make his point. He derided the remoteness of the town and the need for a railroad to it by repeatedly referring to a map and asking where Duluth was located. Following the speech, the railroad bill was killed and Congress adjourned for the day.

Knott's speech, known as "Duluth!" or "The Untold Delights of Duluth", brought him national acclaim and copies of the speech were reprinted and sold. Residents of Duluth apparently were not offended by the speech, extending an offer for Knott to visit the city; Knott accepted the offer in 1891. In 1894, a city near Duluth was incorporated as "Proctorknott"; in 1904, it adopted its present name of Proctor, Minnesota.

In 1871, Knott made an unsuccessful bid to become governor of Kentucky, losing the Democratic nomination to Preston Leslie. He was re-elected to the House of Representatives in 1875, serving four consecutive terms. He chaired the House Judiciary Committee for the first three of these terms. In 1876, he was named one of the managers of impeachment proceedings against ex-Secretary of War William W. Belknap.

Knott was one of several candidates seeking the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 1883. Other prominent candidates included Congressman Thomas Laurens Jones, former Confederate general Simon Bolivar Buckner, Judge John S. Owsley, and Louisville mayor Charles Donald Jacob. Balloting began on May 16, 1883, with Jones as the leading vote-getter but unable to secure a majority. After four ballots, Jacob withdrew his name, and Knott moved into the lead. The following day, Owsley dropped out of the balloting, and Knott extended his lead. Though Buckner remained on the ballot, the race came down to Jones and Knott. Delegates from Owen County switched to Knott, and other counties soon followed suit. Jones withdrew, and Knott was nominated unanimously.

In the general election, Knott defeated Republican Thomas Z. Morrow by a margin of nearly 45,000 votes. During his term in office, he asked the legislature to conduct a thorough reform of the state's tax system, but the legislators' only response was to create a board of equalization charged with making equitable tax assessments. The legislature also refused to grant the Railroad Commission all the powers Knott had requested.

Knott's most successful initiatives were in the area of education. Under his leadership, the state established a normal school for blacks in Frankfort and created a state teacher's organization. New legislation spelled out, often for the first time in the state's history, the duties and responsibilities of educators, administrators, and school boards.

Knott's major shortcomings were in deterring crime. Despite the feuds that continued to rage in the state, including one that lasted several years in Rowan County, Knott refused to acknowledge lawlessness as a problem. Overcrowding of prisons prompted Knott to employ his pardon power liberally. The legislature approved the construction of the Kentucky State Penitentiary at Eddyville, but it was Knott's predecessor, Luke P. Blackburn, who laid most of the groundwork for this project.

Following his term as governor, Knott continued his legal practice in Frankfort. He declined two separate appointments offered to him by President Grover Cleveland. The first was to become Territorial Governor of Hawaii; the other was an appointment to the Interstate Commerce Commission. Knott served as a special assistant to Kentucky's attorney general in 1887 and 1888, and in 1891, he was chosen as a delegate to the state constitutional convention.

Knott became a professor of civics and economics at Centre College in Danville, Kentucky in 1892. In 1894, Knott and Centre president William C. Young organized a law department at the college; Knott became the department's first dean. An illness forced him to retire in 1902. He died in Lebanon on June 18, 1911, and was buried at the Ryder Cemetery in Lebanon. Knott County, Kentucky was formed in 1884 and named in his honor.




</doc>
<doc id="2055321" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2055321" title="Paul Bako">
Paul Bako

Gabor Paul Bako II (; born June 20, 1972) is an American former catcher in Major League Baseball. Bako is an example of a baseball "journeyman", having played for 11 different major league teams during his 12-year career. He is officially listed at and .

Bako attended high school and college in his home state of Louisiana, winning two conference championships at the University of Southwest Louisiana. After reaching the majors with the American League's Detroit Tigers in 1998, Bako spent seven seasons in the National League, playing with six different teams. He returned to the American League with the Baltimore Orioles and the Kansas City Royals, then played for the Cincinnati Reds and the Philadelphia Phillies for one season each.

In 1990, Bako was drafted out of Lafayette High School—who later retired his number 6—with the ninth pick of the sixth round by the Cleveland Indians. He chose not to sign, and attended the University of Southwest Louisiana. In his college career, Bako caught for the Ragin' Cajuns during two consecutive conference championship seasons: 1991 in the American South Conference, when they finished with a 49–20 record, 14th-best among Division I squads; and 1992 in the Sun Belt Conference, when Southwestern Louisiana's pitching staff amassed a 3.50 earned run average, 29th-best in Division I. In 1993, he was named to the second team of the all-Sun Belt Conference baseball team, and was selected by the Cincinnati Reds in the fifth round of the 1993 June draft.

Bako began his professional career with the Pioneer Baseball League's Billings Mustangs, a rookie-league farm team of the Reds located in Montana. During the 1993 season, Bako amassed a .314 batting average, second-highest on the team that season behind Chris Sexton. Bako walked 22 times, stole 5 bases, and batted in 30 runs, while excelling defensively compared to the other catcher on the team. His fielding percentage was .988, and he posted only four errors that season. He was also named a Pioneer League All-Star.

Bako moved on to the high-A Winston-Salem Spirits in the Carolina League for the 1994 and 1995 seasons. He struggled during the 1994 season, batting only .204 with three home runs and 26 runs batted in (RBIs). 1995 was more successful, with an 81-point boost in batting average (.285), seven home runs and 11 doubles. After the season, Baseball America rated him the top-ranked catching prospect in the Reds farm system.

Bako's 1995 performance earned him a promotion to the Southern League's Chattanooga Lookouts, the Reds AA-level affiliate, for 1996, where he was named a Southern League All-Star. He was second on the team in strikeouts (93) and fifth among regulars with a .294 batting average. He hit a career-high eight home runs during that season, adding 27 doubles and 48 RBIs in 360 at bats. In 1997, playing for the Indianapolis Indians, Bako was a teammate of brothers Aaron and Bret Boone. That year, he batted .243 and matched his previous year's career-high home run total. He had 78 hits in 321 at-bats. Bako's game management earned him a reputation, even in the minor leagues. Brett Tomko, who played with Bako in the minors in 1996 as a member of the Lookouts and in 1997 with Indianapolis, recalled one of their mound conversations:

"Bako:" Are you really trying out here?<br>
"Tomko:" What do you mean?<br>
"Bako:" Because your stuff is horrible today and if you don't try a little harder, you're not going to make it out of this inning.
On November 11, 1997, Bako was traded by the Reds to the Detroit Tigers in an offseason deal that included Donne Wall. After playing 13 games with the Tigers AAA-level affiliate—the Toledo Mud Hens—in 1998, Bako was called up to the Major League club.

Bako made his major league debut with the Tigers on April 30, 1998, going 0-for-4 with three strikeouts. His first Major League hit, a bases loaded double, came the next day off Bill Swift, when he went 2-for-5 against the Seattle Mariners in a 17–3 Tigers win. He hit his first major league home run on May 15 against the Oakland Athletics; it came off Mike Mohler in the bottom of the sixth inning with two runners (Damion Easley, Joe Randa) on base. He also went 4-for-4 against the New York Yankees on July 21. Bako's rookie season was arguably his most successful: he posted a .272 batting average, hit three home runs, batted in 30 runs, and collected 106 total bases. After the season, the Tigers traded Bako to the Houston Astros in a seven-player deal that included Brad Ausmus.

Because of his last name, Bako gained temporary distinction as one of the Astros' "Killer B's", which included first baseman Jeff Bagwell and second baseman Craig Biggio, two formidable veteran players who helped established the Astros as perennial playoff contenders in the 1990s and 2000s. In fact, journalist Dayn Perry jocosely noted the 1999 Astros, "in pursuit of arcane history, used eight players whose last names began with 'B.'" The eight included Bagwell, Bako, Glen Barker, Derek Bell, Sean Bergman, Lance Berkman, Biggio, and Tim Bogar.

Bako appeared in 73 games for the 1999 Astros; he got at least one hit in his first six games with Houston after beginning the season in the minor leagues, highlighted by a 3-for-4 performance on April 30, the anniversary of his debut. He added another 4-for-4 game to his résumé on July 29 against the Colorado Rockies. Bako hit .256 with two home runs, 17 RBIs, and 16 runs scored in the 1999 season; he was part of Houston's roster for the 1999 National League Division Series, but did not play. After one game for the Astros in 2000, Houston traded Bako to the Florida Marlins. He played his first game for Florida on April 13, going 0-for-4 with a strikeout. Bako played for the Marlins until July 20, batting .242 with 14 RBIs. He was waived on July 21 and claimed by the Atlanta Braves, one of the Marlins' division rivals. He batted .190 with the Braves and played in his first career game at first base in the last two months of the 2000 season.

Bako remained with the Braves for the 2001 season, where he was the backup to Javy López. He batted .212, amassing the third-highest (20) walk total among Atlanta's bench players and batting in 15 runs. His top performances of the season were a 3-for-4 game against the Montréal Expos in August and a 2-for-3 night—with 2 walks—in October against Florida. Bako appeared in three games during the 2001 National League Division Series (NLDS), his first playoff appearances, and three more during the National League Championship Series (NLCS). In Game 3 of the NLDS, Bako went 2-for-2 with a two-run home run in the second inning; he also batted in a third run on a squeeze bunt in the fourth.

In a trade of catchers, the Braves acquired Henry Blanco from the Milwaukee Brewers in exchange for Bako and José Cabrera. Bako played in 87 games for the Brewers in 2002, his most extensive playing time since his rookie season; behind him, the team used four additional catchers. Bako batted .235 with four home runs for the season. His top performance of the year was against the Minnesota Twins in interleague play; Bako went 3-for-5 with a two-run home run in the top of the fourth inning and a bases-loaded single to drive in a third run.

After the 2002 season, Milwaukee traded Bako to the Chicago Cubs, where he spent two complete seasons; 2003 and 2004 were the only consecutive seasons that Bako spent with the same organization. Over his two years, he backed up Damian Miller and Michael Barrett, and was reunited with former Braves teammate Greg Maddux in 2004. In his first Chicago season, Bako batted .229 with 22 walks and 13 doubles; a 4-for-5 performance in his second game of the year was his best of the season. In that game, he batted three times against the Reds with the bases loaded, notching a triple, two singles and six RBIs. Bako batted only .203 for the Cubs in 2004. He hit one home run and eight doubles, displaying his defense with a .989 fielding percentage. His top performance that year was in the second game of a doubleheader against Florida, when he went 3-for-3 and batted in two runs.

As a free agent, Bako signed with the Los Angeles Dodgers for the 2005 season. He batted .250 for the Dodgers in 13 games with two doubles and four RBIs. He backed up both Jason Phillips and Dioner Navarro in 2005, but underwent season-ending surgery on his anterior cruciate ligament in June of that season. The Dodgers granted Bako free agency after the season, and he signed with the Kansas City Royals in December 2005. After beginning the 2006 season in the minor leagues, Bako returned to the majors with the Royals, where he batted .209 backing up John Buck. He played in 60 games with the Baltimore Orioles in 2007, amassing five extra-base hits and batting .205. He tied for the highest total of walks off the Orioles bench and batted in eight runs for the season.

On February 1, 2008, Bako signed a minor league contract with an invitation to spring training with the Cincinnati Reds. At the end of spring training, he was added to the 40-man roster. Though he batted only .217, Bako appeared in a career-high 99 games in 2008, hitting six home runs and notching 35 RBIs. On January 30, 2009, the Chicago Cubs signed Bako to a one-year contract. However, he was unconditionally released near the end of spring training. On May 18, Bako signed a minor league deal with the Philadelphia Phillies, and was called up from the Reading Phillies to the Major League roster on June 9. He became the Phillies only backup catcher when the Phillies waived "folk hero" Chris Coste on July 10; Coste had broken into the big leagues for the first time with Philadelphia at age 33. The next day, Bako came to the plate in the bottom of the ninth inning against Pittsburgh Pirates closer Matt Capps with the score tied, 7–7; the Phillies had been behind by four runs before home runs by Matt Stairs and Ryan Howard tied the game. With the bases loaded, Bako hit a single through the left side of the infield, driving in the winning run (Raúl Ibañez) and sealing the Phillies fourth consecutive victory in a season-high ten-game winning streak. After the acquisition of starting pitcher Cliff Lee, Bako caught all of his first five starts with the Phillies, when Lee posted a 5–0 record and an 0.68 earned run average. Bako said, "With as many strikes as he throws and as many weapons as he has, it's a lot of fun to catch him." Manager Charlie Manuel, however, denied that Bako was scheduled to be Lee's personal catcher, as he had done for Maddux in 2001. "[Bako]'s not his personal catcher... Of course you guys will write whatever you want to write. If you want him to be his personal catcher, go right ahead. But I'll handle it anyway, so it doesn't matter."

As the 2009 season wore on, regular catcher Carlos Ruiz spent some time recuperating from an injury, allowing Bako expanded playing time near the end of the season. From September 18 to 29, Bako played in all but one of the team's games; his best stretch was from September 24 through September 27, when he went 6-for-13 with two RBId over three games. He finished the year with a .224 batting average. After winning the National League East for the third consecutive year, the Phillies faced the Colorado Rockies in the National League Division Series, the Los Angeles Dodgers in the National League Championship Series, and the New York Yankees in the World Series; Bako did not appear in any games during the postseason. After the 2009 season, Bako filed for free agency; considered retirement, according to teammate Scott Eyre; and did not play during the 2010 season.

, Bako is currently an equipment representative for the Marucci Bat Company, based in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. He and former Orioles first baseman David Segui are part-owners of the company.

Bako lives in his hometown of Lafayette, Louisiana, during the offseason. He has a wife, Laurie, and two children: a son named Will and a daughter, Abbey.


</doc>
<doc id="2056346" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2056346" title="The Principal and the Pauper">
The Principal and the Pauper

"The Principal and the Pauper" is the second episode of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> ninth season. It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 28, 1997. In the episode, Seymour Skinner begins to celebrate his twentieth anniversary as principal of Springfield Elementary School, when a man arrives claiming that Skinner has assumed his identity. Principal Skinner admits that his real name is Armin Tamzarian, and that he had thought the true Seymour Skinner, a friend from the Army, had died in the Vietnam War. Armin leaves Springfield, but is later persuaded to return as principal.

"The Principal and the Pauper" was written by Ken Keeler and directed by Steven Dean Moore. It guest-starred Martin Sheen as the real Seymour Skinner. Although it aired during the show's ninth season, it was a holdover from season eight. The episode is one of the most controversial episodes of "The Simpsons". Many fans and critics reacted extremely negatively to the revelation that Principal Skinner, a recurring character since the first season who had undergone a lot of character development, was an impostor. The episode has been criticized by series creator Matt Groening, and by Harry Shearer, who provides the voice of Principal Skinner. Despite this, Ken Keeler considers the episode the best work he has ever done for television.

On the eve of his twentieth anniversary as school principal, Seymour Skinner is lured by his mother to Springfield Elementary School for a surprise party. The celebration goes well until a strange man arrives, claiming to be the real Seymour Skinner. Principal Skinner admits that he is an impostor, and that his real name is Armin Tamzarian. Armin then tells the story of the events that led him to steal Seymour Skinner's identity.

Armin was once a troubled young man from Capital City who enlisted in the Army in order to avoid a jail sentence for petty crimes. There, he met and befriended the real Sergeant Seymour Skinner, who became his mentor and helped him find meaning in his troubled life. Seymour told Armin that his dream was to become an elementary school principal after the war. Later, Seymour was declared missing and presumed dead. Armin took the news of the apparent death to Seymour's mother, Agnes. Upon meeting him, however, Agnes mistook him for her son, and Armin could not bear to deliver the message. He instead allowed Agnes to call him Seymour, and took over Seymour's life. Meanwhile, the real Seymour Skinner spent five years in a POW camp, then worked in a Chinese sweatshop for two decades until it was shut down by the United Nations.

After these revelations, the people of Springfield begin to distrust Armin. Armin decides that there is no longer any place for him in Springfield. The real Skinner is then offered the chance to realize his dream and take over as school principal. He takes the job, but the real Skinner finds himself isolated by the townspeople, who realize they prefer Armin to him. Armin, however, has already left Springfield and gone to Capital City to resume his old persona as a no-good street thug.

Marge heads to Capital City with Edna Krabappel, Agnes and the rest of the Simpson family. After Agnes orders Armin to return home, Homer persuades Mayor Quimby and all the other citizens to allow Armin to resume his assumed identity as Principal Skinner. The real Skinner is unhappy about this and refuses to give up his job and his dignity just because the people of Springfield prefer Armin to him. In response, the townspeople banish the real Skinner from town by tying him to a chair on a flatcar of a freight train (literally running him out of town on a rail). Judge Snyder declares that Armin will again be referred to as Seymour Skinner, that he will return to his job as school principal, and that no one shall ever again refer to Skinner or the fallout from his visit, under penalty of torture.

"The Principal and the Pauper" was the last episode of "The Simpsons" written by Ken Keeler, who also pitched the original idea for the episode. Many fans believe the episode is based on the story of Martin Guerre or the 1993 film "Sommersby". According to animation director Steve Moore, one of the working titles for the episode was "Skinnersby". However, Keeler has said he was inspired by the Tichborne Case of nineteenth-century England. The episode's official title is a reference to the book "The Prince and the Pauper" by Mark Twain.

Producers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were excited about the episode because Principal Skinner was one of their favorite characters. The pair had already written the season five episode "Sweet Seymour Skinner's Baadasssss Song", which was an in-depth study of the character. Oakley said he and Weinstein "spent a month immersed in the mind of Seymour Skinner" to prepare that episode, and from that point forward, took every opportunity to "tinker with [Skinner's] personality and his backstory and his homelife".

Describing the real Seymour Skinner, Keeler remarked, "It would have been easy to make him a really horrible, nasty, dislikeable guy, but we didn't do that. We made him just not quite right, not quite Skinner, and a little bit off." Bill Oakley said the idea behind the character was that he "just lacked pizzazz". The producers selected Martin Sheen to voice the character because they admired his performance in "Apocalypse Now" and felt his voice would be appropriate for a Vietnam veteran.

Keeler borrowed the name Armin Tamzarian from a claims adjuster who had assisted him after a car accident when he moved to Los Angeles. However, the real Tamzarian (now a California Superior Court Judge) was unaware his name was being used until after the episode aired. Keeler said he later received a "curtly phrased" letter from Tamzarian, who wanted to know why his name appeared in the episode. Keeler feared he would face legal troubles, but afterwards, Tamzarian explained that he was simply curious and did not intend to scare anyone.

"The Principal and the Pauper" finished 41st in the United States in the ratings for the week of September 22–28, 1997, with a Nielsen rating of 9.2. The episode was the second highest rated show on the Fox network that week, following "King of the Hill". The Fox network's ratings average for the week was 6.4.

The revelation that Principal Skinner was an impostor and the self-referential deus ex machina ending were negatively received by many fans and critics, with many seeing this episode responsible for jumping the shark. Skinner had been a recurring character since the first season and, after years of development, his backstory had suddenly been changed. Bill Oakley considers "The Principal and the Pauper" the most controversial episode from his tenure as executive producer.

In his 2004 book "Planet Simpson", Chris Turner describes "The Principal and the Pauper" as the "broadcast that marked [the] abrupt plunge" from "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> "Golden Age", which he says began in the middle of the show's third season. He calls the episode "[one of] the weakest episodes in "Simpsons" history", and adds, "A blatant, continuity-scrambling plot twist of this sort might've been forgivable if the result had been as funny or sharply satirical as the classics of the Golden Age, but alas it's emphatically not." Turner notes that the episode "still sports a couple of virtuoso gags", but says that such moments are limited.

In July 2007, in an article in "The Guardian", Ian Jones argues that the "show became stupid" in 1997, pointing to "The Principal and the Pauper" as the bellwether. "Come again? A major character in a long-running series gets unmasked as a fraud? It was cheap, idle storytelling", he remarks.

In a February 2006 article in "The Star-Ledger", Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz cite the episode when asserting that the quality of "The Simpsons" "gets much spottier" in season nine. Alan Sepinwall observes in another "Star-Ledger" article, "[The episode] was so implausible that even the characters were disavowing it by the end of the episode." Jon Hein, who coined the term "jumping the shark" to refer to negative changes in television series, writes in "Jump the Shark: TV Edition", "We finally spotted a fin at the start of the ninth season when Principal Skinner's true identity was revealed as Armin Tamzarian." James Greene of "Nerve.com" put the episode fifth on his list "Ten Times The Simpsons Jumped the Shark", calling it a "nonsensical meta-comedy" and arguing that it "seemed to betray the reality of the show itself".

Other figures associated with "The Simpsons" have publicly criticized the episode. In an April 2001 interview, Harry Shearer, the voice of Principal Skinner, recalled that after reading the script, he told the writers, "That's "so" wrong. You're taking something that an audience has built eight years or nine years of investment in and just tossed it in the trash can for no good reason, for a story we've done before with other characters. It's so arbitrary and gratuitous, and it's disrespectful to the audience."

In a December 2006 interview, Shearer added, "Now, [the writers] refuse to talk about it. They realize it was a horrible mistake. They never mention it. It's like they're punishing [the audience] for paying attention." In the introduction to the ninth season DVD boxset, series creator Matt Groening describes "The Principal and the Pauper" as "one of [his] least favorite episodes". He also called the episode "a mistake" in an interview with "Rolling Stone".

In contrast, Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the authors of "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", praised the episode, calling it "one of the series' all-time best episodes, mainly because it shows us a human side, not just of Principal Skinner, but of his hectorish Mom as well." They add that "Martin Sheen steals the show [...] in a brief but important slice of Simpsons history." "Total Film"s Nathan Ditum named Martin Sheen's performance in the episode the 20th best guest appearance on "The Simpsons".
Ken Keeler, Bill Oakley, and Josh Weinstein all defend the episode in its DVD commentary. Keeler asserts, "I am very, very proud of the job I did on this episode. This is the best episode of television I feel I ever wrote." He describes the episode as a commentary on "people who like things just the way they are", and remarks, "It never seems to have occurred to anyone that this episode is about the people who hate it." However, Keeler says that some of the dialogue was changed from his original draft, making this point less obvious. Oakley and Weinstein explain that they wanted to push the boundaries of the series while working as show-runners, and advise viewers to treat "The Principal and the Pauper" as an "experiment". They surmise that the negative reception was partly due to the fact that it was not immediately apparent to viewers that this was such an episode (as opposed to, for example, "The Simpsons Spin-Off Showcase"). They also describe the ending of the episode as an attempt to reset the continuity and allow fans to consider the episode as non-canonical, divorced from the larger series.

Later episodes of "The Simpsons" contain references to "The Principal and the Pauper". A clip from the episode was used in season eleven's "Behind the Laughter" as an example of the show's increasingly "gimmicky and nonsensical plots". In the season fifteen episode "I, (Annoyed Grunt)-Bot", Lisa addresses Principal Skinner as "Principal "Tamzarian"" when Skinner chides her for naming her new cat Snowball II, after a cat that had died earlier in the episode.




</doc>
<doc id="2059365" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2059365" title="Bohor reedbuck">
Bohor reedbuck

The bohor reedbuck ("Redunca redunca") is an antelope native to central Africa. The animal is placed under the genus "Redunca" and in the family Bovidae. It was first described by German zoologist and botanist Peter Simon Pallas in 1767. The bohor reedbuck has five subspecies. The head-and-body length of this medium-sized antelope is typically between . Males reach approximately at the shoulder, while females reach . Males typically weigh and females . This sturdily built antelope has a yellow to grayish brown coat. Only the males possess horns which measure about long.

A herbivore, the bohor reedbuck prefers grasses and tender reed shoots with high protein and low fiber content. This reedbuck is dependent on water, though green pastures can fulfill its water requirement. The social structure of the bohor reedbuck is highly flexible. Large aggregations are observed during the dry season, when hundreds of bohor reedbuck assemble near a river. Males become sexually mature at the age of three to four years, while females can conceive at just one year of age, reproducing every nine to fourteen months. Though there is no fixed breeding season, mating peaks in the rainy season. The gestation period is seven and a half months long, after which a single calf is born. The calves are weaned at eight to nine months of age.

The bohor reedbuck inhabits moist grasslands and swamplands as well as woodlands. The bohor reedbuck is native to Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sudan, Tanzania and Togo. The animal is possibly extinct in Ivory Coast and Uganda. Reckless hunting and loss of habitat as a result of human settlement have led to significant decline in the numbers of the bohor reedbuck, although this antelope tends to survive longer in such over-exploited areas as compared to its relatives. The total populations of the bohor reedbuck are estimated to be above 100,000. Larger populations occur in eastern and central Africa than in western Africa. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) rates the bohor reedbuck as of Least Concern.

The scientific name of the bohor reedbuck is "Redunca redunca". The animal is placed under the genus "Redunca" and in the family Bovidae. It was first described by German zoologist and botanist Peter Simon Pallas in 1767. The three species of "Redunca", including the bohor reedbuck, are the least derived members of the tribe Reduncini (except the genus "Pelea"). The order of size in the genus "Redunca" is an evidence supporting the descent of the reduncines from a small ancestor.

Five subspecies of the bohor reedbuck have been recognized:

The bohor reedbuck is a medium-sized antelope. The head-and-body length is typically between . Males reach approximately at the shoulder, while females reach . Males typically weigh and females . The bushy tail is long. This reedbuck is sexually dimorphic, with males 10% to 20% larger than females and showing more prominent markings. 
Of the subspecies, "R. r. cottoni" is the largest, whereas "R. r. redunca" is the smallest.

This sturdily built antelope has a yellow to grayish brown coat. Generally, the bohor reedbuck is yellower than other reedbucks. The large and diffuse sebaceous glands present on the coat make the coat greasy and give it a strong odour. Juveniles are darker than the adults as well as long-haired. While "R. r. bohor" appears yellowish gray, "R. r. wardi" is richly tinted. The undersides are white in color. A few distinct markings can be observed—such as a dark stripe on the front of each foreleg; white markings under the tail; and a pale ring of hair around the eyes and along the lips, lower jaw, and upper throat. However, "R. r. redunca" lacks dark stripes on its forelegs. The males have thicker necks. Its large, oval-shaped ears distinguish it from other antelopes. There is a round bare spot below each ear. Apart from sebaceous glands, bohor reedbuck have a pair of inguinal glands and vestigial foot glands, and four nipples. A bohor reedbuck can survive for at least ten years. The tracks of the bohor reedbuck are slightly smaller than those of the southern reedbuck.

As a prominent sign of sexual dimorphism, only males possess a pair of short, stout horns, that extend backward from the forehead and hook slightly forward. The horns measure about . However, some Senegalese individuals have longer and wide-spreading horns. In comparison to the other reedbucks, the bohor reedbuck has the shortest and most hooked horns. The longest horns are observed in "R. r. cottoni", which are hooked less than normal and may curve inwards. In contrast to "R. r. cottoni", "R. r. bohor" has short and stout horns, with hooks pointing forward. The length of the horns of an individual of a certain region seems to be related to the population density in that region to some extent. While short horns are observed in individuals of eastern Africa, where populations are dispersed, longer and wide-spreading horns are found on animals in the Nile valley, where populations are concentrated.

The bohor reedbuck is host to several parasites. The most notable helminths found in the bohor reedbuck are "Carmyerius papillatus" (in the rumen), "Stilesia globipunctata" (in the small intestine), "Trichuris globulosa" (in the caecum), "Setaria" species (in the abdominal cavity), "Dictyocaulus" species (in the lungs) and "Taenia" cysts (in the muscles). Other parasites include "Schistosoma bovis", "Cooperia rotundispiculum", "Haemonchus contortus", species of "Oesophagostomum", "Amphistoma" and "Stilesia". The common ticks found on the bohor reedbuck are "Amblyomma" species and "Rhipicephalus evertsi".

Bohor reedbuck are active throughout the day, seeking cover during the daytime and grazing in the night. A large proportion of the whole day is spent on feeding and vigilance. They can easily camouflage in grasses and reeds, and hide themselves rather than running from danger. When threatened, they usually remain motionless or retreat slowly into cover for defense, but if the threat is close, they flee, whistling shrilly to alert the others. It hides from predators rather than forming herds in defense. Many predators, including lions, leopards, spotted hyenas, African wild dogs and Nile crocodiles, prey on the reedbuck.

If shade is available, females remain solitary; otherwise they, along with their offspring, congregate to form herds of ten animals. Female home ranges span over , while the larger territories of males cover . These home ranges keep overlapping. As the daughters grow up, they distance themselves from their mothers' home ranges. Territorial males are much tolerant; they may even associate with up to 19 bachelor males in the absence of females. As many as five females may be found in a male's territory. Territorial bulls drive out their sons when they start developing horns (when they are about a year-and-a-half old). These young males form groups of two to three individuals on the borders of territories, till they themselves mature in their fourth year. Large aggregations are observed during the dry season, when hundreds of bohor reedbuck assemble near a river.

Two prominent forms of display among these animals is whistling and bounding. Instead of scent-marking its territory, the reedbuck will give a shrill whistle to make the boundaries of its territory be known. As it whistles, it expels air through its nose with such a force that the whole of its body vibrates. These whistles, usually one to three in number, are followed by a few stotting bounds. This behaviour is also used to raise alarm in herds. In this, the reedbuck raises its neck, exposing the white patch on its throat, but keeping the tail down, and leaps in a way similar to the impala's jumps, landing on its forelegs. This is accompanied by the popping of the inguinal glands in the legs. Fights begin with both opponents holding their horns low, in a combat stance; followed by the locking of horns and pushing one another. These fights can even lead to deaths.

A herbivore, the bohor reedbuck prefers grasses and tender reed shoots with high protein and low fiber content. This reedbuck is dependent on water, though green pastures can fulfill its water requirement. A study of the bohor reedbuck's diet in Rwenzori Mountains National Park (Uganda) revealed that, throughout the year, the most preferred species was "Sporobolus consimilis". Other grasses the animals fed on included "Hyparrhenia filipendula", "Heteropogon contortus" and "Themeda triandra", all of which are species commonly found in heavily grazed grasslands. Bohor reedbuck preferred "Cynodon dactylon" and "Cenchrus ciliaris" in the wet season, and switched to "Sporobolus pyramidalis" and "Panicum repens" in the dry season. Though they rarely feed on dicots, these can include "Capparis" and "Sida" species. On regularly burnt pastures, the bohor reedbuck feeds on "Imperata" species, while in places close by water sources, it eats "Leersia" and newly sprouted "Vossia" species (like topi and puku).

Primarily a nocturnal grazer, the bohor reedbuck may also feed at daytime. A study showed that feeding peaked at dawn and late afternoon. In the night, two feeding peaks were observed once again: at dusk and midnight. They traverse a long way from their daytime refuges while grazing. Seasonal differences in the amount of time spent while grazing in a particular area is possibly related to the availability and quality of grasses there. The bohor reedbuck often grazes in association with other grazers such as hartebeest, topi, puku and kob. In Kenyan farmlands, the reedbuck may feed on growing wheat and cereals.

Males become sexually mature at the age of three to four years, while females can conceive at just one year of age, reproducing every nine to fourteen months. Though there is no fixed breeding season, mating peaks in the rainy season. Fights for dominance take place in some particular "assembly fields", where up to 40 males may assemble in an area of . Some parts of these grounds are the main attractions - marked with dung and urine. The reason behind the attractiveness of these few spots for sexually active males is the oestrogen in the females' urine.

Courtship begins with the dominant male approaching the female, who then assumes a low-head posture and urinates. Unresponsive females run away on being pursued by a male. A male keen on sniffing the female's vulva keeps flicking his tongue. As they continue their "mating march", the male licks the female's rump and persistently attempts mounting her. On mounting, the males tries to clasp her flanks tightly. If she stands firmly, it is a sign that she is ready to mate. Copulation is marked by a single ejaculation, after which both animals stand motionless or a while, and then resume grazing.

The gestation period is seven and a half months long, after which a single calf is born. The mothers keep their offspring concealed for as long as eight weeks. The mother keeps within a distance of of its calf. Nursing, usually two to four minutes long, involves licking the whole body of the calf and suckling. The infant is suckled usually once in the day and one to two times at night. The female's previous calf usually resists separation. At the age of two months, the calf begins grazing alongside its mother, and seeks protection from her if alarmed. Though after four months the calf is no more licked, it may still be groomed by its mother. The calves are weaned at eight to nine months of age.

The bohor reedbuck inhabits moist grasslands and swamplands as well as woodlands. It is found in two kinds of habitat in northern Cameroon: the seasonally flooded grasslands rich in grasses like "Vetiveria nigritana" and "Echinochloa pyramidalis" (in the Sahelo-Sudan region) and "Isoberlina" woodlands (in the Sudano-Guinean region). Often found on grasslands susceptible to floods and droughts, the bohor reedbuck can adapt remarkably well to radical seasonal changes and calamities. It is not so widespread as the bushbuck due to its habitat requirements. In some margins of its range, the bohor reedbuck shares its habitat with the mountain reedbuck. The ranges of the bohor reedbuck and southern reedbuck extensively overlap in Tanzania.

Endemic to Africa, the bohor reedbuck is native to Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sudan, Tanzania and Togo. The animal is possibly extinct in Ivory Coast and Uganda. Formerly widespread in western, central and eastern Africa, its present range extends from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in the east. Among the three reedbuck species, bohor reedbuck is the most widespread in Tanzania. Its status in Burundi, Eritrea, Ghana and Togo is uncertain, while it is rare in Niger and Nigeria.

Reckless hunting and loss of habitat as a result of human settlement have led to significant decline in the numbers of the bohor reedbuck, although this antelope tends to survive longer in such over-exploited areas as compared to its relatives. Natural calamities, like drought, are also major threats. While populations have declined in northern Cameroon due to degradation of floodplains through the construction of upstream dams, their habitat has been destroyed in Chad and Tanzania due to expansion of agriculture and settlement. Several deaths occur due to roadkill and drowning as well. During the dry season, bohor reedbuck are hunted with dogs and nets in Uganda. Reedbuck with the largest horns are prized by hunters.

The total populations of the bohor reedbuck are estimated to be above 100,000. Though the populations are decreasing, it is not sufficiently low to meet the Near Threatened criterion. Thus, the IUCN rates the bohor reedbuck as of Least Concern. Around three-fourth of the populations survive in protected areas. Populations of the reedbuck are either declining or uncertain in Boucle du Baoulé National Park (Mali); Comoé National Park (Ivory Coast); Mole and Digya National Parks (Ghana). Numbers in the Akagera National Park, where its last-known populations in Rwanda exist, have seen a steep fall.

Though populations have substantially decreased in western Africa, bohor reedbuck still exist in Niokolo-Koba National Park (Senegal); Corubal River (Guinea-Bissau); Kiang West National Park (Gambia); Arly-Singou and Nazinga Game Ranch (Burkina Faso). Larger numbers occur in eastern and central Africa, mostly in protected areas such as Bouba Ndjida (Cameroon); Manovo-Gounda St. Floris National Park (Central African Republic); Bale Mountains National Park (Ethiopia); Murchison Falls National Park and Pian Upe Wildlife Reserve (Uganda); Maasai Mara (Kenya); Serengeti National Park, Moyowosi-Kigosi and Selous Game Reserve (Tanzania).



</doc>
<doc id="2067725" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2067725" title="Mitchell Freeway">
Mitchell Freeway

Mitchell Freeway is a freeway in the northern suburbs of Perth, Western Australia, linking central Perth with the satellite city of Joondalup. It is the northern section of State Route 2, which continues south as Kwinana Freeway and Forrest Highway. Along its length are interchanges with several major roads, including Graham Farmer Freeway and Reid Highway. The southern terminus of the Mitchell Freeway is at the Narrows Bridge, which crosses the Swan River, and the northern terminus is at Hester Avenue, Clarkson, a suburb within the City of Wanneroo.

Planning for the route began in the 1950s, and the first segment in central Perth was constructed between 1967 and 1973. The Mitchell Freeway has been progressively extended north since then. In the 1970s, the first two extensions were completed, up to Hutton Street in Osborne Park. By the end of the 1980s, the freeway had reached Ocean Reef Road in Edgewater. The Joondalup railway line was constructed in the freeway median in the early 1990s. This necessitated the relocation of a section of the southbound carriageway, and the construction of three new bridges. In conjunction with these works, additional lanes were constructed in the realigned section.

Since the 1990s, extensions to the Mitchell Freeway have taken it to Burns Beach Road at the northern edge of Joondalup. During 2013, two sections of the northbound carriageway will be widened with an additional lane. In August 2017, an extension was completed to Hester Avenue, after construction starting in 2014. Further works are planned, which will take the freeway past Yanchep and Two Rocks to the boundary of the Perth Metropolitan Region.

The Mitchell Freeway is the northern section of State Route 2. It commences at the northern end of the Narrows Bridge, Perth, continuing from Kwinana Freeway, and terminates just north of the satellite city of Joondalup at Burns Beach Road, Currambine. All intersections with the freeway are via grade separated interchanges. The speed limit is except in central Perth, where the limit is reduced to as the freeway interchanges with Graham Farmer Freeway and Mounts Bay Road. South of Hepburn Avenue, the freeway has 3 to 5 lanes in each direction. From that point north, there are mostly two lanes in each direction, expanding to three lanes between Hodges Drive and Shenton Avenue. The median strip of the freeway also houses the Joondalup railway line, with all but two of the line's stations also built on the strip. Additionally, a is built alongside most of the freeway.

The section near the Perth city centre, within the City of Perth local government area (LGA), features many partial access interchanges. The Narrows Interchange is located just north of the Narrows Bridge, on the eastern edge of Kings Park. This is a hybrid interchange connecting the freeway with Mounts Bay Road and Riverside Drive, over a distance of . There is complete access to and from Mounts Bay Road via a standard northbound exit ramp and looped ramps for the other movements. There is a partial Y-Interchange incorporated for direct access to and from Riverside Drive via a southbound exit ramp and a northbound entrance ramp. All other traffic movements must be made via Mounts Bay Road. The Riverside Drive entrance ramp merges with the Mounts Bay Road northbound entrance ramp. The southbound exit ramp is similarly shared, before diverging for three destinations: Mounts Bay Road, Riverside Drive, and the Perth Convention and Exhibition Centre car park. The main northbound exit to Hay Street is via an access road, which begins on the Mounts Bay Road exit ramp. The access road rejoins the freeway as an outside lane on the shared Riverside Drive and Mounts Bay Road entrance ramp. The Hay Street exit ramp, a short distance later, can be accessed from the two outermost lanes. This allows the traffic entering the freeway from the ramp to continue north or exit at Hay Street without weaving.

The freeway continues north-westerly for , splitting Mount Street in half, and passing under Malcolm Street. After this, it turns north-easterly for , and lines up with the city blocks between George and Elder streets, a pair of one way frontage roads. The freeway also marks the boundary between Perth and West Perth. Partial access is provided to or from all the roads that the freeway crosses over (or under in the case of Hay Street), with the exception of Roe Street. North of Roe Street, the freeway turns north-west towards Glendalough over the course of . In this section the freeway marks the boundary between the City of Perth and City of Vincent LGAs. There is a full Y-Interchange here with Graham Farmer Freeway, which bypasses the Perth city centre via a tunnel, and provides access to Perth Airport. Combined with this interchange is a partial Y-Interchange with Charles Street. The southbound entrance ramp merges with, and northbound exit ramp diverges from, the Graham Farmer Freeway ramps. There is a traffic light controlled intersection with Newcastle Street at the northern end of these ramps. Charles Street is the start of State Route 60, an alternative route to Perth's northern suburbs and areas north of the Perth Metropolitan Region. Located in the vicinity of these interchanges are the Sutherland Street northbound entrance ramp, from West Perth, and a southbound exit ramp to both James Street, Northbridge, and Wellington Street, Perth. The Loftus Street overpass, near the northwestern end of the Graham Farmer Freeway ramps, is the edge of the City of Perth LGA; beyond this point the freeway is the boundary between West Leederville in the Town of Cambridge and Leederville in the City of Vincent.

In the northern suburbs of Perth, most of the interchanges are standard diamond interchanges, and the rest are modified versions, which have ramps missing or replaced with loop ramps. The first interchange north-west of West Perth, is with Vincent Street and Lake Monger Drive. This interchange has a looped southbound entry ramp, so that Leederville Parade can join to the south side of intersection with Vincent Street and the southbound ramps. The northbound exit ramp terminates at Southport Street, south of Vincent Street and Lake Monger Drive. The freeway then proceeds northwest for alongside Lake Monger's eastern edge, after which there is a half diamond interchange with Powis Street, with only a northbound exit ramp and a southbound entrance ramp. The freeway continues north, now within the City of Stirling LGA, through Osborne Park, until it reaches Hutton Street after . There are several local roads in Osborne Park that have T-Junction intersections with the freeway ramps south of Hutton Street. These are McDonald Street West and Hector Street West, with the northbound exit ramp; and Cape Street, Hector Street, and McDonald Street with southbound entry ramps. The freeway has an S-curve after Hutton Street, moving to an alignment further west that does not bisect any suburbs. The interchanges with Cedric Street on the S-curve, and Karrinyup Road at the end of the S-curve, are diamond interchanges. There are slight modifications to the entrance and exit ramps between these roads, which merge for , requiring traffic to weave. The curved section is the boundary between Stirling to the east of the freeway, and Osborne Park and Innaloo to the west.

The next interchange, after , is with Erindale Road. It is another half diamond interchange, with only northbound exit and southbound entrance ramps. Beyond Erindale Road, the suburb to the east of the freeway is Balcatta, and further north is Reid Highway, with the southbound entry ramp looped. Balcatta Road joins the intersection of the southbound ramps with Reid Highway. Reid Highway, together with Tonkin Highway, provides a limited-access route to Perth Airport.
North of Reid Highway, Mitchell Freeway divides Carine to west from Hamersley to the east. There is no access to next major road, Beach Road. It forms the border between the City of Stirling and City of Joondalup LGAs; as well as between Carine and Duncraig west of the freeway, and Hamersley and Warwick to the east. However, Warwick Road's interchange is only north of Reid Highway. It is a standard diamond interchange, but weaving is required between Reid Highway and Warwick Road due to the short distance between the interchanges. Greenwood is located north of Warwick Road and east of the freeway.
The following two interchanges, after and respectively, are with Hepburn Avenue and Whitfords Avenue. The Hepburn Avenue interchange is located at the corners of Duncraig, Greenwood, Kingsley, Western Australia, and Padbury; while the Whitfords Avenue interchange is located at the corner of Kingsley, Padbury, Cragie, and Woodvale. Each interchange also provides access for the railway stations in the median (Greenwood and Whitfords respectively) via the southbound entry ramps, which are two-way north of the carparks' entrances. North of here, over a distance of , are standard diamond interchanges with Ocean Reef Road, Hodges Drive, and Shenton Avenue, which provide access to Joondalup city centre, and Joondalup Health Campus, east of the freeway. West of the freeway are the suburbs of Heathridge, Connolly and Currambine. After the freeway passes under Moore Drive, and then terminates at Burns Beach Road, further north. Until the freeway is extended, access to areas further north is provided by Marmion Avenue to the west of the terminus, or via Wanneroo Road to the east.

The Mitchell Freeway began as a highway proposed in the Metropolitan Region Scheme in the mid-1950s. The original plan took the route, then known as Yanchep Highway, inland from what is now known as Karrinyup Road to the intersection of Wanneroo Road and Balcatta Road. However, the first gazetted edition of the Metropolitan Region Scheme, from 1963, shows a controlled-access highway along the current freeway alignment. The later plan only detailed the route up until a point east of Sorrento, at a proposed east-west controlled-access highway on the modern day Hepburn Avenue alignment.

Detailed design on the first stage of the freeway, from the Narrows Bridge to Sutherland Street at the northern edge of the city, began in 1960, and took several years to be completed. The design included a complex interchange at the Narrows Bridge that was to be built on reclaimed land that was mostly soft mud. Ground improvement works, which included the installations of 43,000 sand drains, began in 1964; demolition of buildings in the freeway's path commenced in 1965. The freeway was completed in three sections, under three separate contracts. Construction on the central section from Mount Street to Wellington Street started on 18 November 1966, following a groundbreaking ceremony conducted by Premier David Brand. It was opened to traffic two years later, connected to the Narrows Bridge via a temporary Bailey Bridge over Mounts Bay Road. The new road carried up to 1400 vehicles per hour during peak hours.

Work on the section north of Wellington Street, known as the Hamilton Interchange, began in October 1969. It was partially opened on 17 November 1971, but was not completed until 4 October 1972. The final part of the project to be completed was the Narrows Interchange. Construction began in 1970 with the installation of thirteen caissons, which would house foundation columns. Placement of the caissons was difficult; as well as sinking vertically as intended, they also tilted and slid horizontally. Corrections were made by selective excavation, blasting bedrock, and applying tension via guy-wires. Following the foundation works, construction proceeded swiftly; most of the work was completed by 1972. Premier John Tonkin opened the interchange on 30 November 1973. This initial section functioned only as a distributor for Narrows Bridge traffic accessing Perth's central business district or adjacent areas to the north-west. Whilst initially referred to as the "Western Switch Road", it was renamed after the former Western Australia State Premier and Governor Sir James Mitchell, on 5 June 1963.

Several stages were built through the late 1970s, 1980s and early 1990s. The first extension of the freeway was nearly a mile long (), taking the freeway to Vincent Street. This stage also included a long, curving bridge, eight-span bridge connecting northbound traffic to Charles Street. The construction of this stage, which began in February 1974, resulted in the suburb of Leederville being split in two. Residential and industrial buildings were demolished, and streets were cut off on both sides of the freeway's path. The extension opened to traffic on 8 March 1976, having cost $15.15 million. It was opened by the state Minister for Transport, Mr R J O’Connor, MLA. A commemorative plaque was located under the bridge leading to Charles Street.

The design of Stage 3 of the freeway, a section extending to Hutton Street, was completed in 1974. The existing soil was not suitable for construction, as the area generally consisted of soft peat and old landfills. In 1975, the ground was consolidated with of sand. Construction took place between 1976 and 1978, with the section opened by the Minister for Transport, David Wordsworth, on 2 June 1978. A commemorative plaque was unveiled at the Powis Street bridge. This stage cost $12.5 million, and received the Institution of Engineers Australia's Western Australian Division Engineering Excellence Award in 1978.

After a four-year gap, construction of Stage 4 began, which would take the freeway to Erindale Road. The first half of the stage, up to Karrinyup Road, opened on 12 December 1983, while the project wasn't complete until 21 September 1984. It was opened by the state Minister for Transport Julian Grill, MLA. This section completed of freeway in Perth, from Bull Creek to Balcatta. The next two stages were constructed together, extending the freeway to Hepburn Avenue. Stage 5 was from Erindale to Warwick Road, and involved excavating a large quantity of material, including of limestone. That stage cost $22.73 million, while Stage 6 only cost $8.06 million. Both stages were opened together, on 6 August 1986. The first stage of Reid Highway (then known as the North Perimeter Highway) was built at the same time, and opened on 16 May 1986. A further extension to Ocean Reef Road was opened on 2 July 1988 by the Federal Minister for Transport, Peter Morris, at a cost of $17.5 million. The state and federal governments provided most of the funds, $9.7 million and $5.2 million respectively. The City of Wanneroo contributed $1.3 million, Joondalup Development Corporation $1 million, and land developers $300,000, as they wanted the freeway built ahead of schedule to stimulate local development.
In 1991 and 1992, the median strip of the entire freeway was significantly widened to accommodate the Joondalup railway line, being built under the Northern Suburbs Transit System project. The line was to be located in the middle of the road reserve, between the freeway carriageways. At the time, the northbound and southbound carriageways, between Loftus Street and McDonald Street, were positioned next to each other, with space for future widening located on the eastern side of the road reserve. Initially, three new road bridges were constructed over Vincent Street, Powis Street, and Scarborough Beach Road. Once the road bridges had been completed and surfacing works completed, the southbound carriage was relocated, creating the required space for the railway line construction. Additional lanes were constructed in the realigned section, funded from regular road funding sources, whilst the bridges and some associated works were included as part of the costs for the Northern Suburbs Transit System project.
After a 7-year-hiatus, a extension to Hodges Drive was opened by the Premier Richard Court in December 1999, two months ahead of schedule. The project also included widening the section between Karrinyup Road and Hepburn Avenue to three lanes in each direction.

After another 7-year-hiatus, construction began on a 4-kilometre extension to Burns Beach Road, with a diamond interchange at Shenton Avenue and an overpass for Moore Drive. Local residents were opposed to aspects of the initial plans, such as the design of a section near a primary school and the clearing of native vegetation. The state government therefore established the Community Consultative Working Group and later the Construction Reference Group, composed of members of the local community. The input from these groups resulted in several changes to the design. The project was managed by Main Roads in conjunction with Macmahon Contractors. Construction of the extension was initially planned for May 2006, but began on 14 December 2006. By July 2008, 90% of the works had been completed and the new section was predicted to open in September 2008. However, the official opening was not until 2 November 2008, when the road was opened by Western Australia's Minister for Transport, Simon O'Brien, and the previous Minister for Planning and Infrastructure Alannah MacTiernan. The $160 million project was completed $10 million under budget. The opening was celebrated with a procession of vintage cars along the new freeway segment.

The latest extension was a 6-kilometre stretch between Burns Beach Road and Hester Avenue. In December 2012, the State Government announced the freeway would be extended to Hester Avenue between 2014–15 and 2016–17, over a distance of . The extension included interchanges at Burns Beach Road and Neerabup Road. Work on the extension began with a ground-breaking ceremony on 20 May 2015. The projected cost was $261.4 million, with the federal government contributing $209.1 million and the state government funding the remaining $52.3 million. The project scope included a dual carriageway extension to Hester Avenue, Clarkson, with grade-separated interchanges at Burns Beach Road, Neerabup Road and Hester Avenue. Other roads in the area were upgraded, including widening Hester Avenue and Wanneroo Road, and extending Neerabup Road east to the intersection of Flynn Drive and Wanneroo Road. The project was completed on 3 August 2017, opened by Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, Premier Mark McGowan and Transport Minister Rita Safiioti.

In its 2011/12 budget, the State Government committed $30 million for the widening of Mitchell Freeway northbound between Hepburn Avenue and Hodges Drive from two to three lanes. Traffic volumes in the preceding years had increased rapidly, almost reaching the previously projected 2016 traffic volume of 40,000 vehicles per day. The resulting congestion in the afternoon traffic peak increases the chances of rear-end crashes as well as driver frustration. Construction of the third lane began in February 2013, and is scheduled to be completed by the end of the year. A section from Hepburn Avenue to Ocean Reef Road opened in August 2013. As part of the project, the existing lanes will be resurfaced afterwards, during the summer months of 2013–14. The design of the freeway is such that no bridgeworks will be required on overpasses, and rail services in the median will not be affected.

The freeway has also been expanded with an extra lane northbound between Perth and Hutton Street, in conjunction with works to increase the capacity of the Graham Farmer Freeway tunnel. Works progressed in two stages, with Vincent Street as the midpoint. As part of the project, the overpasses at Powis Street, Vincent Street and Scarborough Beach Road have been widened. An additional slip lane has been constructed, from Graham Farmer Freeway's Loftus Street exit ramp to Mitchell Freeway northbound, to access Vincent Street without changing lanes to the left lanes of Mitchell Freeway northbound. The project commenced in February 2013 and was completed in December 2013.

The Mitchell Freeway is planned to continue north to the Metropolitan Region Scheme's boundary, beyond Yanchep and Two Rocks. The state government announced in March 2012 the formation of the Mitchell Freeway Extension Community Working Group. The group worked with Main Roads Western Australia to investigate options for relieving congestion, with a focus on the next freeway extension. Several options were considered, before the group released a strategic business case in November 2012. The report recommends a staged approach, starting with intersection improvements between 2013 and 2015. This was followed by a freeway extension to Hester Avenue in 2017. An expressway standard extension to Romeo Road, Alkimos is proposed to be completed by 2021.

In October 2012 the state government announced that the freeway's diamond interchange with Reid Highway will be upgraded with the installation of extra turning lanes and traffic lights. The project is an interim solution to lower congestion and reduce the volume of traffic using local roads to avoid the interchange. The longer term plan is to upgrade Reid Highway to a dual carriageway near the freeway interchange, including a second overpass bridge. The dual carriageway works are scheduled for construction in 2014–15.

The entire freeway is in the Perth Metropolitan Region.




</doc>
<doc id="2080826" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2080826" title="Farhan Akhtar">
Farhan Akhtar

Farhan Akhtar (born 9 January 1974) is an Indian film director, screenwriter, actor, playback singer, producer, and television host. Born in Mumbai to screenwriters Javed Akhtar and Honey Irani, he grew up under the influence of the Hindi film industry. He began his career in Bollywood by working as an assistant director in "Lamhe" (1991) and "Himalay Putra" (1997).

Akhtar, after establishing a production company named Excel Entertainment along with Ritesh Sidhwani, made his directorial debut with "Dil Chahta Hai" (2001) and received critical acclaim for portraying modern youth. The film also won a National award. Following it, he made "Lakshya" (2004) and had his Hollywood debut through the soundtrack of "Bride and Prejudice" (2004), for which he wrote the lyrics. He went on to make the commercially successful "Don" (2006). He directed a short film titled "Positive" (2007), to spread awareness on HIV-AIDS.

Although he initially started his acting career with "The Fakir of Venice", his official debut was with "Rock On!!" (2008), for which he won a second National Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi as producer, and indulged in further experimentation before he wrote the dialogues, produced and acted for the critical and commercial success "Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara" (2011), which won him two Filmfare Awards, including Best Supporting Actor. In the same year, he directed a sequel to "Don" titled "Don 2" (2011), which remains his highest-grossing film till date. He achieved further success by portraying Milkha Singh in the 2013 film "Bhaag Milkha Bhaag", earning him the Filmfare Award for Best Actor. In 2016, Akhtar received praise for starring in the crime thriller "Wazir" and the comedy drama "Dil Dhadakne Do".

Farhan Akhtar was born to screenwriters Javed Akhtar and Honey Irani in Mumbai. His sister is writer–director Zoya Akhtar. His parents divorced during his early days, and his father married Shabana Azmi in 1984. Akhtar has termed his parents the "harshest" critics in his career, and also considered Robert De Niro as an "inspiration" in the film industry. Akhtar is of Zoroastrian Irani origin, from his mother's side. Akhtar grew up in an agnostic environment and along with his sister Zoya and father Javed Akhtar, he does not believe in any religion.

He is the grandson of Urdu poet Jan Nisar Akhtar and great-grandson of poet Muztar Khairabadi. Muztar Khairabadi was grandson of Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi, who was a scholar of Islamic studies and theology, notably edited the first diwan of Mirza Ghalib on his request, and later became an important figure during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 in his native Khairabad.

. He is also the cousin of Farah Khan and Sajid Khan. He studied at Maneckji Cooper school in Mumbai, and went on to study for a law degree from the HR College, also in Mumbai.

He married Adhuna Bhabani in 2000, after being in a relationship with her for 3 years. They first met during the filming of his directorial debut "Dil Chahta Hai" in 2001, which also marked Adhuna's debut as a Bollywood hairstylist. The couple have two daughters named Shakya and Akira. On 21 January 2016, the couple officially announced their separation after 16 years of marriage..

Akhtar worked as an apprentice in film distribution and direction for Yash Chopra's "Lamhe" (1991) when he was 17 years old and later shifted to an advertisement production house named "Script Shop" to spend an approximate 3 years there. He also assisted Pankaj Parashar as a director in "Himalay Putra" (1997) before launching himself into direction and writing.

Akhtar made his writing and directorial debut with the critically acclaimed film "Dil Chahta Hai" (2001), produced by Excel Entertainment Pvt. Ltd., a production company he established along with Ritesh Sidhwani in 1999. It was shot over a period of three months in Sydney, Goa and Mumbai. Due to its acclaim, he called it a "turning point" in his career. The film dealt with the lives of westernised urban youth in Mumbai. Akhtar had written the script based on his trips to Goa and New York, as well as a narration of a story outline by a friend of his. It received international critical acclaim and attained an iconic status, with Akhtar receiving credit for starting a "new wave" in Indian cinema. Critic Ziya Us Salam praised Akhtar's direction and commented for "The Hindu": "In his maiden venture, Javed Akhtar's son shows enough glimpses of his pedigree to indicate that promise will attain fulfilment sooner than later." Various award shows conferred accolades on the film and nominated it for several categories. The year's National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi for 2002 was won by the film. It was also screened at the International Film Festival of India, the Palm Springs International Film Festival, and the Austin Film Festival. In the same year, he and his sister Zoya Akhtar assisted their father in writing the English lyrics of a song in "Lagaan", for which the soundtrack was scored by A. R. Rahman.

Akhtar's next project was "Lakshya" (2004), a film about an aimless youngster finally setting a goal for himself, starring Hrithik Roshan and Preity Zinta. It was shot in Ladakh, Dehra Dun and Mumbai, and marked the beginning of the collaborations between Akhtar and Hrithik. He had to research the army before writing the script and directing the venture. The theme of the film, as stated by Akhtar, was about "finding oneself". He also believed that if the same characters and situation were set elsewhere, the main core of the story would remain the same as the film was not about war, as it had been reported. Post-release, the film failed to make a mark at the box office and became a commercial failure. Parul Gupta of "The Times of India" gave it a negative review and explained that "It's hard to reconcile to such triviality when it comes from Farhan Akhtar, considered the ultimate symbol of cool in Hindi filmdom." On the contrary, Manish Gajjar from "BBC" wrote, in his positive review: "Young Farhan Akhtar, proves yet again that he is one of the finest directors Bollywood has to date. He has paid full attention to the script and the technical aspects, giving rise to a polished product".

Meanwhile, Akhtar wrote the English lyrics of Gurinder Chadha's Hollywood film "Bride and Prejudice" (2004), along with his sister, Zoya Akhtar, after being recommended by his father. The music for the film was composed by Anu Malik and consisted of a mixture of "Hindi songs", "West side story", "Fiddler on the Roof" and "Grease".

In 2006, Akhtar directed, produced and wrote the screenplay of "Don" starring Shah Rukh Khan in the title role, a remake of "1978 film Don", starring Amitabh Bachchan. It marked his first project holding the status of a remake. The character of Don became iconic and popular. Despite this, he noted that he did not mean to be a "torchbearer of the remake brigade" and did not feel comfortable with being credited for the trend of remakes in the film industry. The film released on 20 October 2006 and was declared a "hit" at the box office, grossing around 105 crore worldwide. It became widely known for its dialogues. However, critics predominantly condemned Akhtar's direction and screenplay. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama said Akhtar had "climbed the ladder as far as craftsmanship is concerned [every frame is well decorated and makes a spellbinding impact] but despite a readymade classic at his disposal, the storyteller just doesn't get it right this time."

In 2007, Akhtar produced the film "Honeymoon Travels Pvt. Ltd.", directed by debutant Reema Kagti and starring Abhay Deol, Minissha Lamba, Shabana Azmi and Boman Irani. The music for the film was composed by Vishal-Shekhar, marking their first collaboration with him. Akhtar was supposed to make his acting debut with the project, but he had to be replaced by Abhay Deol as he was involved with "Don". The film was financed and funded by Exim Bank. This was the first time Excel Entertainment collaborated with a different director as all their previous projects had been involving Farhan as a director. The story of the film revolved around six couples who went to Goa on a honeymoon. The film opened up on 23 February and received mixed reviews from critics, and ended up with an "average" box office result.

In the same year, Akhtar directed "Positive", a film produced by Shernaz Italia and Frenzy Kodaiji, starring Boman Irani and Shabana Azmi. It was a short film running for 12 minutes. Dealing with a family's attitude towards a person suffering from HIV-AIDS, the film was shot in Mumbai and aimed at creating awareness about the problem. It also introduced Arjun Mathur in the film industry. Speaking about the purpose of the project, Akhtar stated that "Just as a social stigma, many people believe that an HIV patient should be isolated. They also have certain misconceptions about dealing with the disease. And since India has a lot of joint families, it becomes very important for them to understand the value of support to the person who has acquired this disease. This is exactly what Positive talks about." The film had its background score composed by Ram Sampath but had no soundtrack. It was a part of the "AIDS JaaGo" ("AIDS Awake"), a series of four short films, directed by Mira Nair, Santosh Sivan, Vishal Bhardwaj and himself, in a joint initiative of Mira Nair's Mirabai Films, voluntary organisations Avahan and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.

Akhtar's first project in 2011 was the drama thriller "Game", directed by Abhinay Deo. The lead cast consisted of Abhishek Bachchan, Kangana Ranaut, Boman Irani and Jimmy Shergill. He wrote the dialogues and produced the venture. The film received highly negative reviews after release, with critics panning almost all the aspects of it. At the box office, it had a poor opening, and later resulted in giving losses for the distributors, due to a heavily negative word-of-mouth. It was described as a "washout" by trade analysts.

Later that year, Akhtar wrote, produced and directed "Don 2", a sequel to his 2006 "Don". It marked his return to direction after a gap of nearly 5 years. His decision of making a sequel was explained by him in an interview: "I am wary of sequels having to be made. With "Don 2" I could finally make an action thriller the way I wanted to. Good story, classic action and simple plot which has one goal and work towards it effectively and dramatically." The film was a major success in India and went on to become the year's highest-grossing Bollywood production abroad with a worldwide gross of 210 crore. It received mixed to positive reviews from critics, with Khalid Mohammed stating: "Throughout, you can’t help feeling that Farhan Akhtar could have made three far more valuable films out of the budget squandered on this thriller where cars are smashed as if they were tea cups."

Next year, Akhtar produced and wrote the dialogues of the neo-noir thriller "". His production work was followed by the comedy films: "Fukrey" (2013) and "Bangistan" (2015), "Baar Baar Dekho" (2016), "Raees" and "Fukrey Returns" (both in 2017).

In 2008, Akhtar made his acting and singing debut in a musical film titled "Rock On!!", for which he wrote the dialogues and also produced. The film was directed by Abhishek Kapoor. Prachi Desai, Arjun Rampal and Purab Kohli co-starred along with him. As he had been learning guitar ever since the start of his directing career, he had been well-versed with it and used it for the film. The role played by him was that of Aditya, lead singer of the rock band "Magik". He sang five songs for the soundtrack album. The film was acclaimed by critics and received positive reviews upon release. Gaurav Malani of "The Economic Times" wrote that the film seemed to be "clearly designed by Farhan Akhar as his own acting debut and he doesn't let himself down. Lending voice to all his songs helps him to get into his character with effortless ease. One could certainly overlook the lisp in his dialogue delivery." Manish Gajjar of "BBC" wrote of his performance: "Director-turned-actor, Farhan Aktar surprises all with his superb, flawless performance, transforming from a hippy-style lead-singer to a subdued, dismal workaholic banker." Akhtar received several accolades for his debut performance. The film, in addition won the National Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi. However, it did not create an impact at the box office and turned out to be an "average" grosser.

After refusing an offer to sing a song for A. R. Rahman's album "Blue", Akhtar acted in, and produced his sister Zoya's directorial and written debut "Luck By Chance", which had Hrithik Roshan and Konkona Sen Sharma in the lead roles. He was cast in the film after being deemed as a "perfect choice" for it. The story of the film revolved around a struggling actor who arrives in Mumbai to become a film star. It was released on 30 January 2009. Though failing to do well at the box office and being declared a "flop", the film received generally positive reviews from critics. Neil Genzlinger from "The New York Times" said: "It is Mr. Akhtar whose understated performance holds together this far-ranging, cameo-filled film. He manages to remain sympathetic even while wreaking romantic havoc." Rajeev Masand noted: "Farhan Akhtar delivers a simple-enough likeable performance that is just what the film required — no showy flourishes, no loud outbursts, just a straight off spontaneous act that works like a dream."

Following "Luck By Chance", Akhtar acted in a project titled "", which was initially scheduled to release before "Rock on!!" and was supposed to be his acting debut. Due to several delays, it was released in mid-2009. It was written and directed by Anand Surapur, and accepted by Akhtar after he described its script as "very powerful", while emphasising that it "touches upon weaknesses and confusions in all human beings." Before release, it premiered at the Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles, and the Venice Film Festival at the ArcLight Hollywood. Kirk Honeycutt of "The Hollywood Reporter" praised the film and felt that "Akhtar, a producer, director and writer making his film debut here as an actor, is talented and handsome enough – and with looks that could translate into any number of ethnicities – to have a huge career ahead of him."

Akhtar acted in, and produced his next film "Karthik Calling Karthik" (2010), a psychological thriller directed by Vijay Lalwani. He played Karthik, an introvert character, starring alongside Deepika Padukone for the first time. Preparation for the role involved working on the Rubik's Cube, which he learnt from the director. The film received mixed reviews and praise for Akhtar's acting from critics, with Sukanya Verma highlighting that "He conveys the anxiety, simplicity and frailty of Karthik even when the script isn't doing it for him. Perhaps it's his innate filmmaker instinct." The film had a good opening at the box office, as it was targeted towards the youth of the multiplexes. However, it failed to continue on its business and went on to become a "below average" grosser.

Akhtar produced and appeared as one of the three leads in his sister, Zoya Akhtar's coming-of-age film "Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara" along with Hrithik Roshan and Abhay Deol, Katrina Kaif and Kalki Koechlin, starring opposite Ariadna Cabrol. He was also credited as the dialogue writer for the film. He was the first actor to be cast in the film, and described his role as a "fun character" and a "guy who for the longest time takes nothing seriously." His real life father, Javed Akhtar wrote poetry for the film, which he performs as a voice-over. His performance was favourably received by critics, with Shaikh Ayaz of Rediff.com highlighting his dialogues as "gentle, they won't make you ROFL; they are more like tender dig in the ribs." Kaveree Bamzai of "India Today" called his acting "sensitive, soulful", further saying that he was "perfectly capable of reading out his father's poetry." The film made 153 crore worldwide and was declared a commercial success at the box office. It also became one of the highest grossing Bollywood films overseas, earning around US$7.25 million. It won two National Awards, the Best Choreography and the Best Audiography.

Following "Don 2", Akhtar was signed up for the biopic "Bhaag Milkha Bhaag", directed by Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra. He plays the role of Milkha Singh. For his role, he had to undergo a training phase at the gym and study the character of Milkha Singh by researching his body language. He also had to prepare his looks to depict a 17-year-old army recruit and endure an on-the-spot preparation at an army cantonment. In 2014, Akhtar acted for the romantic comedy "Shaadi Ke Side Effects" alongside Vidya Balan, a film directed by Saket Chaudhary and produced by Pritish Nandy. It was a sequel to "Pyaar Ke Side Effects" (2006).

Next year, Akhtar featured in the supporting role in his sister Zoya Akhtar's "Dil Dhadakne Do", an ensemble comedy-drama starring Anil Kapoor, Shefali Shah, Priyanka Chopra, Ranveer Singh and Anushka Sharma.

In 2016, Akhtar played the lead role of an Anti Terrorist Squad officer in Bejoy Nambiar's "Wazir". It was his first action role as an actor, and for which he went through intense physical training and put on eight kilograms of weight. Raja Sen in his review called him "pretty good [..] early on in the film, but his performance starts to unravel once the film hits hysterical gear and he is required to do more than frown." Akhtar also sang the duet "Atrangi yaari" with Amitabh Bachchan for "Wazir". The film was a box-office success. Akhtar's final release of the year was the rock musical drama "Rock On 2", a sequel to the 2008 critically acclaimed "Rock On!!". He reprised his role of Aditya Shroff, the lead singer of his band. The film was Akhtar's attempt to bring northeast India into popular culture.

In 2017, Akhtar essayed the role of a Dawood Ibrahim-alike mafia don Maqsood in "Daddy", co-starring Arjun Rampal and received favorable reviews for his performance. His next release was the ensemble drama "Lucknow Central", co-starring Diana Penty, Gippy Grewal and Deepak Dobriyal. The film was about a prison escape drama planned by a group of prisoners who also form a music band and was inspired by a real incident. "Lucknow Central" was released on 15 September 2017 and met with mixed reviews and financial failure. 

Farhan Akhtar's next film will be with Anjum Rajabali. His other next film is The Sky Is Pink directed by Shonali Bose and co-starring Priyanka Chopra and Zaira Wasim. His other next film will be Toofan, remake of 2017 Punjabi film Rocky Mental, Toofan will be directed by Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra (Akhtar’s 2nd film with Mehra since Bhaag Milkha Bhaag and it co stars Isha Talwar as the female lead.

Akhtar appeared as one of the nine judges in the beauty pageant Femina Miss India (2002). He was the judge on the first season of the dance-reality show "Nach Baliye" (2005). He hosted a TV show on NDTV Imagine, called "Oye! It's Friday!" in the same year. He has endorsed several brands as a part of his career, especially after the release of "Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara". These include Hindustan Unilever's water purifier product titled Pureit, Chivas Regal, Britannia Nutri Choice Biscuits, IndusInd Bank, Dulux Paint and Titan Industries.

Men Against Rape and Discrimination or MARD is a social campaign launched by Akhtar. The idea came to the mind of Akhtar when in August 2012, Pallavi Purkayastha, a lawyer by profession, was sexually assaulted and then killed by her home watchman.



</doc>
<doc id="2105618" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2105618" title="El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)">
El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)

"El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)", () also known as "The Mysterious Voyage of Our Homer", is the ninth episode in the eighth season of the American animated television series "The Simpsons". It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 5, 1997. In the episode, Homer eats several hot chili peppers and hallucinates, causing him to go on a mysterious voyage. Following this, he questions his relationship with Marge and goes on a journey to find his soulmate.

"El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" was written by Ken Keeler and directed by Jim Reardon. The episode explores themes of marriage, community, and alcohol use. Homer's voyage features surreal animation to depict the elaborate hallucination. The episode guest stars Johnny Cash as the "Space Coyote".

On a particular weekend, Marge tries to divert the attention of Homer in strange ways, like cutting certain things out of the morning newspaper and smoking in the house. Upon stepping outside, Homer smells the scents of Springfield's annual chili cook-off. Marge admits to trying to keep Homer from attending due to his drunken antics the previous year, but lets him go as long as he promises to not drink beer. At the cook-off, Homer demonstrates an extraordinary ability to withstand hot foods, but is burned by Chief Wiggum's super-hot chili and runs away screaming as the town folks laugh. Sitting at a table with Ralph Wiggum quenching the heat with water, he nearly drinks melted candle wax. When Ralph points this out, he gets the idea to use the wax to coat his mouth, enabling him to eat several of Chief Wiggum's peppers. 

After winning the chili eating contest, the peppers make Homer hallucinate. In a bizarre fantasy world, he encounters a snake, butterfly and tortoise, and accidentally destroys the sun. He arrives at a large Mayan pyramid and meets his spirit guide in the form of a coyote, who advises him to find his soulmate and questions Homer's assumption that Marge is his. Meanwhile, Marge hears of Homer's strange behavior and believing this was due to drinking alcohol, drives home without him.

The next day, Homer awakes in a golf course. Returning home, he finds Marge angry with him for his embarrassing behavior at the cook-off and asks for forgiveness, but she refuses. Homer makes note of the two's fundamental personality differences and questions if she is truly his soulmate. While roaming the streets at night, he thinks a lonely lighthouse keeper is his soulmate, but finds the lighthouse is operated by a machine. Seeing an approaching ship, Homer destroys the lighthouse's light hoping its passengers will stop and befriend him. An apologetic Marge arrives, having known exactly where Homer would go, and the pair realize they really are soulmates despite their differences. Marge fixes the light so the ship does not run into them, but it runs aground nearby, spilling its cargo of hotpants. Springfield's citizens happily retrieve them as Marge and Homer embrace.

The episode was pitched as early as the third season by George Meyer, who was interested in an episode based on the books of Carlos Castaneda. Meyer had wanted to have an episode featuring a mystical voyage that was not induced by drugs, and so he decided to use "really hot" chili peppers instead. The staff, except for Matt Groening, felt it was too odd for the show at that point. Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein resurrected the story, and decided to use it for season eight.

Most of the hallucination sequence was animated completely by David Silverman. Silverman did not want the risk of sending it to South Korea, as he wanted it to look exactly as he had imagined it, including rendered backgrounds to give a soft mystical feel to the scene. The coyote was intentionally drawn in a boxier way so that it looked "other-worldly" and unlike the other characters. During Homer's voyage, the clouds in one shot are live-action footage, and 3D computer animation was used for the giant butterfly. During the same hallucination, Ned Flanders' line was treated on a Mac computer so that it increased and decreased pitch. The Fox censors sent a note to the writers, questioning Homer coating his mouth with hot wax. The note read: "To discourage imitation by young and foolish viewers, when Homer begins to pour hot wax into his mouth, please have him scream in pain so kids will understand that doing this would actually burn their mouths." The scream was not added; however, they did add dialog from Ralph Wiggum, questioning Homer on his action. The director also created a "wax-chart" for Homer for the animators to follow during the sequence when Homer's mouth is coated with candle-wax.

Homer waking up on a golf course was a reference to something that happened to a friend of the producers, who blacked out, and woke up on a golf course. He had to buy a map from 7-Eleven in order to find out where he was. He discovered that not only was he in a different town, but he was also in a different state. He then had to walk several miles in order to get back to his friend's house, which was the last place he remembered being the night before.

Johnny Cash and Bob Dylan were the writers' top two choices to play the coyote; the writers had wanted to use one of The Highwaymen as the voice of the spirit guide. Bob Dylan had turned the show down many times, having previously been offered a role in the season seven episode "Homerpalooza". Johnny Cash was offered the role, which he accepted. Matt Groening described Cash's appearance as "one of the greatest coups the show has ever had".

The main plot of the episode is based on the works of Carlos Castaneda, with some of the Native American imagery being similar to that used in the film "Dances with Wolves". The lighthouse keeper actually being a computer is a reference to the episode of "The Twilight Zone" called "The Old Man in the Cave", in which a man in a cave turns out to be a computer. The main theme from "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" is used during the scenes when Homer walks into the chili festival, and the song "At Seventeen" by Janis Ian plays in the background as Homer walks through the town of Springfield looking for his soul-mate after he wakes up from his vision. The scene at the end of Homer's hallucination, when the train is heading towards him, is a reference to the opening titles of "Soul Train". Homer's record collection features albums by Jim Nabors, Glen Campbell, and The Doodletown Pipers.

In its original broadcast, "El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" finished 34th in ratings for the week of December 30, 1996 – January 5, 1997, with a Nielsen rating of 9.0, equivalent to approximately 8.7 million viewing households. It was the highest-rated show on the Fox network that week, beating "Millennium".

The authors of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, said: "Homer's chili-induced trip is brilliant, complete with the surreal tortoise and Indian spirit guide." The episode was placed eighth on AskMen.com's "Top 10: Simpsons Episodes" list, and in his book "Planet Simpson", Chris Turner named the episode as being one of his five favorites, although he found the ending too sentimental. In 2011, Keith Plocek of "LA Weekly"s Squid Ink blog listed "El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" as the best episode of the show with a food theme. "IGN" ranked Johnny Cash's performance as the 14th-best guest appearance in the show's history. Cash also appeared on AOL's list of their 25 favorite "The Simpsons" guest stars, and on "The Times" Simon Crerar's list of the 33 funniest cameos in the history of the show. Andrew Martin of Prefix Mag named Cash his third-favorite musical guest on "The Simpsons" out of a list of ten. Fred Topel of Crave Online named it the best episode of the entire series.



</doc>
<doc id="2118256" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2118256" title="Bart Gets an Elephant">
Bart Gets an Elephant

"Bart Gets an Elephant" is the seventeenth episode of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> fifth season. It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 31, 1994. In this episode, Bart wins a radio contest and is awarded a full-grown African elephant that he names Stampy. After Stampy wrecks the Simpsons' house and eats all the food, Homer decides to sell Stampy to an ivory dealer. Bart runs away with Stampy to save his pet, but the family finds the two at a museum exhibit, where Homer sinks into a tar pit. Homer is saved by Stampy, and so gives the elephant away to an animal refuge instead.

The episode was written by John Swartzwelder, and directed by Jim Reardon. It introduced the fictional elephant Stampy, and marks the first appearance of the recurring character Cletus Spuckler. The episode features cultural references to the songs "Sixteen Tons" and "Do-Re-Mi", and the La Brea Tar Pits cluster of tar pits located in Hancock Park in Los Angeles, California. Since airing, the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics. It acquired a Nielsen rating of 10.7, and was the highest-rated show on the Fox network the week it aired.

During cleaning day at the Simpsons' house, Bart wins a KBBL radio contest after the station's DJs, Bill and Marty, call him up. They give Bart the choice of two prizes: $10,000 in cash or a full-grown African elephant. Bart chooses the elephant. This surprises Bill and Marty, who believed that nobody would ever choose an elephant, and thus have no elephant to give away. They offer Bart a variety of other prizes, all of which he refuses. Word spreads throughout town about Bill and Marty's refusal to give Bart an elephant, prompting their boss to give them a choice: either arrange for delivery of the elephant, or lose their jobs. They decide on the former option.

Bart names his new elephant Stampy and ties him to a post in the backyard. Lisa begins complaining that keeping an elephant as a pet is cruel, while Homer is concerned that Stampy will eat him out of house and home. In an effort to offset food costs, Bart and Homer exhibit Stampy by charging customers to pet and ride him, but they fail to make enough money to cover the elephant's food costs for one day. Homer and Marge decide that their house is unsuitable for an elephant to live in, and that Stampy is way too expensive to maintain as a pet, and tell the children the elephant must go. The family is visited by a representative of a game reserve, who says their acres of open land similar to African Savannah would be a good habitat for the elephant to live in, but Homer turns them down when they will not give him any money since the reserve itself is a nonprofit organization. However, as the family is pondering what to do about Stampy, a wildlife poacher named Mr. Blackheart offers to buy Stampy. Homer wants to take the money, but Lisa is against the idea — especially since Mr. Blackheart openly admits to being an ivory dealer. Just as Homer and Mr. Blackheart reach a deal, Stampy and Bart run off, wreaking havoc throughout Springfield, and are soon nowhere to be found. The family begins searching and finds them at the Springfield Tar Pits, where Homer gets stuck in one of the tar pits. Homer is freed by Stampy, and gratefully agrees to donate the elephant to a wildlife reserve.

The episode was written by John Swartzwelder, and directed by Jim Reardon. "The Simpsons"' creator Matt Groening thought it was a "quintessential" Swartzwelder episode, and executive producer/show runner David Mirkin said it was a "fantastic job by one of the most prolific writers of the show". The most important thing to Mirkin while making the episode was to make sure that the elephant would be a "bastard" and behave rudely, unlike other animals on the show. For example, instead of putting people on his back, Stampy would put them in his mouth. Mirkin said the elephant "never quite bonds because it's a very cantankerous animal, a concept that was very important to this episode". Stampy has since been used several times in jokes later on in the series. For example, Stampy made an appearance in the season nine episode "Miracle on Evergreen Terrace" in one of Bart's dreams, and in the season fourteen episode "Large Marge", where he is used by Bart in a stunt to help Krusty the Clown win back his popularity. Stampy appeared briefly in "The Simpsons Movie", where he tries to break down the giant glass dome lowered over Springfield. The episode also introduces the character Cletus Spuckler. He is shown as one of the "slack-jawed yokels" gawking at Stampy in the Simpson family's backyard. Cletus is not named in the episode, so the staff simply referred to him as the Slack-Jawed Yokel.

The Springfield Tar Pits are inspired by the La Brea Tar Pits located in Hancock Park in Los Angeles, California. The museum in the background of the scene where Homer sinks into one of the tar pits resembles the George C. Page Museum of the La Brea Discoveries. When Stampy runs away, he passes the Republican National Convention, with people cheering, and then he passes the Democratic National Convention, with people booing. This is a reference to the fact that an elephant is the symbol of the Republican Party. Homer uses Mr. Cleanser, a parody of the detergent brand Mr. Clean, to clean the basement. As Bart cleans, he accidentally scrubs the paint off an "American Gothic" painting hanging on the wall. Under the paint is a message signed by the painter, Grant Wood, reading: "If you can read this, you scrubbed too hard."

The scene in which Stampy's eye is seen through a window of the Simpson family's house is similar to a scene with a Tyrannosaurus rex in the film "Jurassic Park". While cleaning the house, Marge turns on the radio and the song "Sixteen Tons" by Merle Travis is heard. The scene in which Homer crashes his car into a deer statue at the Springfield Tar Pits parodies the lyrics to the "Sound of Music" song "Do-Re-Mi" as Homer shouts: "D'oh!" followed by Lisa: "A deer!" and Marge: "A female deer!" Homer reads an old "TV Guide" in which the synopsis of an episode of "Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C." reads "Gomer upsets Sgt. Carter", a possible synopsis for every episode of that series. He also imagines the episode with a thought of both Carter and Pyle standing next to each other. Carter yells, "Pyle!" and Pyle responds, "Shazam!". As Stampy wreaks havoc throughout Springfield, Patty and Selma are sucked up by a tornado and fly through the air in rocking chairs, similar to a scene in the 1939 film "The Wizard of Oz".

In its original broadcast, "Bart Gets an Elephant" finished forty-second in the ratings for the week of March 28 to April 20, 1994, with a Nielsen rating of 10.7, equivalent to 10 million viewing households. It was the highest-rated show on the Fox network that week.
The episode won an Environmental Media Award in the Best Television Episodic Comedy category, which has been awarded every year since 1991 to the best television episode with an environmental message. The episode has also received a Genesis Award in the Best Television Comedy Series category. The Genesis Awards are given out annually by the Humane Society of the United States "to the news and entertainment media for shining that spotlight into the darkest corners of animal abuse and exploitation."

Since airing, the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics. The authors of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, wrote: "Another favourite. It's hard to explain the special appeal of this episode. Perhaps it's because Homer is so exceptionally dumb. Or perhaps because it contains the 'D'oh!' 'A deer!' 'A female deer!' gag." This gag was also praised by BBC News's Mark Milne, who said: "[It] just cracks me up every time. Brilliant!" DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson thought the fifth season included "plenty of programs with potentially cheesy concepts", such as "Deep Space Homer" and "Bart Gets an Elephant". However, he thought the episode managed to "easily overcome its possible flaws" to turn into a "very fine program". Homer's line "Marge, I agree with you in theory. In theory, communism works — "In theory"" was Jacobson's favorite of the episode. Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of A, and Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave it a score of 4 out of 5.



</doc>
<doc id="2121277" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2121277" title="Lost Our Lisa">
Lost Our Lisa

"Lost Our Lisa" is the twenty-fourth episode in the ninth season of the American animated television series "The Simpsons". It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 10, 1998. The episode contains the last appearance of the character Lionel Hutz. When Lisa learns that Marge cannot give her a ride to the museum and forbids her to take the bus, she tricks Homer into giving her permission. After Lisa gets lost, Homer goes looking for her and the two end up visiting the museum together. The episode is analyzed in the books "Planet Simpson", "The Psychology of the Simpsons: D'oh!", and "", and received positive mention in "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide".

Bart and Milhouse visit a joke shop. Meanwhile, Marge and Lisa plan a trip to the Springsonian Museum so they can see the Egyptian Treasures of Isis exhibit and the Orb of Isis. Marge has to take Bart to a doctor instead, since he has superglued various novelty items to his face. Since this is Lisa's last chance to see the exhibit, she phones Homer to ask him if she can take the bus. He seems uncertain, which prompts her to trick him into letting her take the bus.

However, once on the bus, Lisa realizes she is on the wrong bus and is dropped off in the middle of nowhere. During his lunch break at work, Homer has a conversation with Lenny and Carl. He tells them that he let Lisa ride the bus alone. Lenny and Carl point out the error of his judgment, and Homer leaves work to go look for her. He heads to the museum and ends up in downtown Springfield. He uses a cherrypicker to get up higher. Homer and Lisa spot each other, but the vehicle's wheels creak backwards and it rolls down a hill. It slides off the edge of a pier at the harbor into a river. Lisa tells the drawbridge operator to close the bridge so Homer can grab on. His head is caught between the two closing halves and he survives with nothing more than a few tire marks across his forehead.

With Homer and Lisa re-united, he tells her that it is all right to take risks in life. The two decide to go to the museum after all, by illegally entering since it is now closed. While there, they make a fascinating discovery that the Orb of Isis is a music box which had gone overlooked by scientists and museum staff. Lisa concludes that what her father said about risks was right – until the alarm goes off and guard dogs chase them out of the building.

Writer Mike Scully came up with the idea for the plot because he used to live in West Springfield, Massachusetts and he would ask his parents if he could take the bus to Springfield, Massachusetts and they finally agreed to let him one day. The production team faced several challenges during development of this episode. The animators had to come up with a special mouth chart to draw Bart's mouth with the joke teeth in. The pile of dead animals in the back of Cletus' truck originally included dead puppies, but the animators thought it was too sad, so they removed them. Scully used to write jokes for Yakov Smirnoff so he called him up to get the signs in Russian. Dan Castellaneta had to learn proper Russian pronunciation so he could speak it during the chess scene in which he voiced the Russian chess player.

In the season 9 DVD release of the episode, "The Simpsons" animators use a telestrator to show similarities between Krusty and Homer in the episode. This episode contains the last showing of character Lionel Hutz. He is seen standing at the bus stop with Lisa, but does not speak. Due to Phil Hartman's death, the recurring characters of Lionel Hutz and Troy McClure were retired.

In his book "Planet Simpson", Chris Turner cites Lisa's experiences on the bus as an example of "satirical laughs scored at the expense of Lisa's idealism". "Lost Our Lisa" is cited in "" along with episodes "Lisa the Iconoclast", "Lisa the Beauty Queen", and "Lisa's Sax", in order to illustrate Homer's "success bonding with Lisa".

In "The Psychology of the Simpsons: D'oh!", the authors utilize statements made by Homer in the episode to analyze the difference between heuristic and algorithmic decision-making. Homer explains to Lisa, "Stupid risks are what make life worth living. Now your mother, she's the steady type and that's fine in small doses, but me, I'm a risk-taker. That's why I have so many adventures!" The authors of "The Psychology of The Simpsons" interpret this statement by Homer to mean that he "relies on his past experiences of taking massive, death-defying risks and winding up okay to justify forging ahead in the most extreme circumstances".

In its original broadcast, "Lost Our Lisa" finished 45th in ratings for the week of May 4–10, 1998, with a Nielsen rating of 7.8, equivalent to approximately 7.6 million viewing households. It was the fourth highest-rated show on the Fox network that week, following "The X-Files", "Ally McBeal", and "King of the Hill".

Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood write positively of the episode in their book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide": "A smashing episode, loads of good jokes and clever situations ... and best of all, Lisa working intelligently. The teaming up of father and daughter has rarely been more enjoyable and lovely. Gives you a warm feeling." A review of "The Simpsons" season 9 DVD release in the "Daily Post" notes that it includes "super illustrated colour commentaries" on "All Singing, All Dancing" and "Lost Our Lisa".





</doc>
<doc id="2124911" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2124911" title="Summer of 4 Ft. 2">
Summer of 4 Ft. 2

"Summer of 4 Ft. 2" is the twenty-fifth and final episode of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> seventh season. It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 19, 1996. In the episode, the Simpson family stay in Ned Flanders' beach house. Hanging around with a new set of children, Lisa becomes popular, while Bart is left out. Bart tries to sabotage his sister's newfound acceptance, but fails.

The episode was written by Dan Greaney and directed by Mark Kirkland. The episode guest stars Christina Ricci, who recorded her lines over the phone instead of going into the studio. The beach house at Little Pwagmattasquarmsettport the Simpson family stays in is based on then-show runner Josh Weinstein's parents' house in New Hampshire. The episode features cultural references to Pippi Longstocking, "The New Yorker" character Eustace Tilley, and Alice and The Hatter from "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland". Since airing, the episode has received positive reviews from television critics. It acquired a Nielsen rating of 8.8, and was the second highest-rated show on the Fox network the week it aired.

Lisa finds out on the last day of school how unpopular she is when nobody signs her yearbook. Meanwhile, Ned Flanders offers the Simpson family the use of his beach house at Little Pwagmattasquarmsettport over the summer. Marge likes the idea and suggests that Bart should bring Milhouse and that Lisa should bring a friend too. However, Lisa has no friends to bring and decides to change her image as a result. After reaching the beach house, Lisa tells Marge that she forgot to pack, so they go shopping for new clothes. Lisa buys a new set of clothes that she believes will make her look "cool", and goes to look for some cool children.

When Lisa succeeds in making friends with a group of local children, Bart becomes jealous and plots revenge against Lisa. He decides to teach Lisa a lesson by showing her friends her yearbook, revealing that she is a nerd. Lisa is furious at Bart, thinking that his disclosure has turned her friends away. Eventually, at a carnival, Bart realises how depressed Lisa has become, and how he cost her the only friends she has ever had. However, when Lisa returns to the beach house from the carnival she finds her friends in the act of decorating the Simpsons' car with sea shells in her honor, and they explain that they like her for who she is. To make up with Lisa, Bart has them sign her yearbook.

The episode was written by Dan Greaney, and directed by Mark Kirkland. It was Greaney's second episode on "The Simpsons". The staff of the show wanted to do a summer episode because there was "so much stuff" about summer vacations that they felt had to be covered in an episode. David Silverman, one of the show's animators, particularly liked the episode because he thought it captured the feeling of being on summer vacation.

The area in which the Flanders family's beach house is located in is based on the Cape Cod peninsula. Many of the writers of "The Simpsons" spent time on Cape Cod so they decided to model the new locations on it. The animators looked at Cape Cod photographs to get inspiration for the episode, and one of the show's background designers, Lance Wilder, grew up in that area. The beach house is based on then-show runner Josh Weinstein's parents' house in New Hampshire, which the writers had visited many times. They played several board games when they were there, which gave them the idea to have to the Simpson family play the "Mystery Date" board game in the episode. Silverman said that the episode was difficult to animate and direct because it had so many new and detailed backgrounds and completely different locations.
American actress Christina Ricci guest starred in the episode as Erin, one of Lisa's new friends. Ricci was not able to come to the recording studio, so she recorded all of her lines over the phone. Weinstein, who was a fan of Ricci, thought she did a nice performance in the episode.

The episode's title is a parody of the 1971 film "Summer of '42". Lisa has a daydream in which the following fictional characters appear: Pippi Longstocking, "The New Yorker" character Eustace Tilley, and Alice and The Hatter from "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland". Milhouse compares Lisa's new appearance to the character Blossom from the American television series "Blossom". TeeJay's ZayMart is a spoof of defunct retailer Zayre and parent company T.J. Maxx. Homer replicates a scene from the 1973 film "American Graffiti" when he nonchalantly buys some stereotypically embarrassing products at the store in order to get some illegal fireworks. The "Mystery Date" board game that the family is forced to play is an actual Milton Bradley Company board game from the 1960s. Weinstein recalled playing it as a child and claimed it to be "a very disappointing game to play as a little boy" because of the female target audience. The Beach Boys song "All Summer Long" plays during the credits.

In its original broadcast, "Summer of 4 Ft. 2" finished forty-second (tied with "Melrose Place" and "Married... with Children") in the ratings for the week of May 13 to May 19, 1996, with a Nielsen rating of 8.8. The episode was the second highest-rated show on the Fox network that week (tied with "Melrose Place" and "Married... with Children"), following "The X-Files".

Since airing, the episode has received positive reviews from television critics. The authors of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, wrote: "This episode will strike a chord with anyone that's ever tried to fit in with the crowd [...] Lisa gets to show the many facets of her character, and there's a superb slapstick sequence as Homer tries to dispose of a firework." Dave Foster of DVD Times praised the episode and said: "The episode is quite simply my favourite Lisa episode regardless of season. From calm to cool and fiercely aggressive, we've rarely seen Lisa so enticing as we do here, and the episode's many elements including the side stories for the other family members culminate in one of the finest this season has to offer." DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson enjoyed the episode and said that he likes how it addresses Bart's resentment of Lisa's popularity. "Granted, it makes [Bart] a little too mean, but it's entertaining", he added. Jacobson went on to say: "Marge gets the best moment again, as I love watching her non-violent approach to the bumper cars." Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best parts of the episode to be the scenes that feature Milhouse, particularly his yearbook message to Lisa and the scene with the Mystery Date board game. She concluded her review by giving the episode a grade of A.



</doc>
<doc id="2126054" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2126054" title="New York State Route 3">
New York State Route 3

New York State Route 3 (NY 3) is a major east–west state highway in New York, in the United States, that connects central New York to the North Country region near the Canada–US border via Adirondack Park. The route extends for between its western terminus at an intersection with NY 104A in the Cayuga County town of Sterling and its eastern terminus at a junction with U.S. Route 9 (US 9) in the Clinton County city of Plattsburgh. NY 3 traverses eight counties and is a lakeside roadway from Mexico to Sackets Harbor, a mountainous route in Adirondack Park, and an urban arterial in Fulton, Watertown, and Plattsburgh.

In 1924, the segment of the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway within New York was designated NY 3. At that time, it spanned the full east–west length of the state, extending from the eastern bank of the Niagara River in North Tonawanda to the western edge of Lake Champlain in Plattsburgh; however, the routing through the North Country was significantly different at that time from its modern alignment. The route was moved onto its modern routing east of Watertown as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York; it was truncated to Sterling on its western end and rerouted to follow its current alignment from Sterling to Watertown roughly five years later.

Since 1924, there have been 14 suffixed routes of NY 3, all designated between NY 3A and NY 3G. Of these, all but one only existed during the 1930s. The only active designation is NY 3A, which was assigned in the 1950s to an alternate route of NY 3 in Jefferson County.

A substantial portion of NY 3 travels east–west across northern New York and passes through the northern part of the Adirondack Mountain Range. Much of this section of the highway is named as part of the Olympic Trail Scenic Byway.
The areas NY 3 passes through alternate between long stretches of rural area, consisting of a mix of open terrain and dispersed residences, and compact settlements containing concentrations of houses and businesses. NY 3 is classified mainly as a minor arterial road, the major exception being the section that is concurrent with NY 812, which is a principal arterial road. Most of the route is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation. Exceptions are in the cities of Watertown and Plattsburgh, where at least part of the road is city-maintained. In Watertown, NY 3 is locally maintained from Massey Street (southbound US 11 junction) to the end of the NY 3/NY 12 overlap. The route is entirely city-maintained in Plattsburgh.

NY 3 begins at an intersection with NY 104A in Sterling. NY 3 continues east to meet NY 104 in the center of Hannibal. From there, NY 3 progresses across Oswego County and passes Lake Neatahwanta prior to entering Fulton. Within Fulton, NY 3 intersects NY 48 on the west bank of the Oswego River before crossing the river and meeting NY 481 at the eastern bank. East of the city, NY 3 passes south of the Oswego County Airport as it heads to the northeast through Palermo. Upon intersecting NY 264, NY 3 becomes signed as a north–south highway instead of as an east–west route. It proceeds north to the village of Mexico, where it meets NY 104 once again. NY 3 and NY 104 overlap briefly through the western portion of the village before separating at the center of Mexico. While NY 104 heads east toward Williamstown, NY 3 heads north toward the hamlet of Texas.

East of Texas, NY 3 meets NY 104B near the Lake Ontario shoreline. Past NY 104B, NY 3 parallels both Interstate 81 (I-81) and US 11 as it heads along the shore of Lake Ontario. Near the Selkirk Shores State Park west of Pulaski, NY 3 intersects NY 13 adjacent to the mouth of the Salmon River. After crossing the Salmon River, NY 3 passes the Sandy Island Beach State Park before entering Jefferson County. At the county line, NY 3 becomes signed as an east–west highway once again. The route continues northward toward Ellisburg where it meets NY 193 at the entrance to Southwick Beach State Park northwest of the community. Past NY 193, NY 3 passes the lakeside at Westcott Beach State Park prior to entering the vicinity of Sackets Harbor. The route bypasses both Sackets Harbor and the Sackets Harbor Battlefield State Historic Site to the east before separating from Lake Ontario and proceeding eastward toward Watertown.
West of the city of Watertown, NY 3 intersects NY 180 southwest of the Watertown International Airport before connecting to I-81 by way of an interchange at the city line. NY 3 heads east into Watertown, intersecting with both US 11 and NY 12 at Massey Street. At this point, maintenance of NY 3 shifts from the state to the city of Watertown. The route overlaps NY 12 southbound and a short piece of US 11 northbound through downtown to Public Square, where NY 3 meets northbound NY 12. US 11 northbound leaves NY 3 here while the overlap between NY 3 and NY 12 continues eastward through Watertown. The concurrency ends near the eastern fringe of the city, where NY 3 leaves NY 12 and becomes state-maintained once more as it departs the city to the northeast.

In Black River, northeast of Watertown, NY 3 intersects NY 342 at the southwestern tip of the Fort Drum Military Reservation. NY 3 follows the southern edge of the base to Deferiet, where NY 3 turns south to follow the Black River while NY 3A continues along the border of Fort Drum. NY 3 follows the river to Carthage, where it overlaps NY 126 briefly before heading northeast to rejoin NY 3A at Fargo. NY 3 forms the southern boundary of the base from NY 3A east to just west of the Jefferson-Lewis County line; however, near Natural Bridge, the Fort Drum boundary heads due north before becoming delimited by the Indian River. NY 3, meanwhile, traverses the river and enters Lewis County.
Midway between Natural Bridge and Harrisville, NY 3 intersects NY 812. NY 812 turns east onto NY 3, following NY 3 northeast into St. Lawrence County before splitting to the northwest between Harrisville and Pitcairn. Shortly after departing NY 812, NY 3 enters Adirondack Park. The route follows a largely east–west routing from its entry point to Tupper Lake, where it merges with NY 30. Near Upper Saranac Lake, NY 30 heads north toward Malone as NY 3 continues northeast through nearby Saranac Lake toward Plattsburgh.

West of Plattsburgh, NY 3 exits the park and encounters NY 374 via an interchange. Past the exit, the two routes follow parallel routings before separating outside of Plattsburgh. NY 3 curves to the southeast toward the former Clinton County Airport, where it meets NY 22B just west of what was once the main entrance to the airport. From NY 22B, NY 3 continues east to the outskirts of Plattsburgh, where it meets the Adirondack Northway (I-87). Past I-87, NY 3 follows Cornelia Street into the city, where it becomes city-maintained. Within Plattsburgh, NY 3 intersects NY 22 before terminating at US 9 just west of Lake Champlain.

NY 3 originally followed a vastly different alignment than it does today. In 1924, it was assigned to the New York portion of the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway, an auto trail that extended from Portland, Maine, to Portland, Oregon. In New York, it connected North Tonawanda (near Niagara Falls) in the west to Plattsburgh in the east via Rochester and Watertown. NY 3 began at what is now the intersection of US 62 and NY 425 and followed modern NY 425 north through Cambria Station to Cambria Center, from where the highway continued to Lockport on Lower Mountain, Gothic Hill, and Upper Mountain Roads and modern NY 31. It remained on current NY 31 through the city and mostly followed that route's modern alignment across western New York to the city of Rochester. The most significant exception to this was between Lockport and Gasport, where NY 3 veered south by way of modern NY 77 and County Route 10 (CR 10) to serve the hamlet of McNalls.
Within Rochester, NY 3 remained on the current alignment of NY 31 to what is now the intersection of Lyell Avenue and Broad Street. Here, NY 3 broke from modern NY 31 and continued east on Lyell Avenue to State Street. NY 3 then followed State Street, Main Street, and East Avenue (modern NY 96) through downtown before turning north onto Culver Road in the eastern portion of the city. The route remained on Culver Road to Empire Boulevard, where it turned east toward Irondequoit. Once in Irondequoit, it followed what is now NY 404 around the southern extent of Irondequoit Bay to Webster. NY 3 was realigned by 1930 to stay on East Avenue to Winton Road near the eastern edge of the city. Here, the route turned north, following Winton Road through eastern Rochester to Irondequoit, where it rejoined its previous routing at Empire Boulevard.

Past Webster, NY 3 followed Ridge Road through Wayne County to Red Creek, where it continued northeast on what is now NY 370 and NY 104A through Red Creek, Fair Haven, and Sterling to western Oswego County. At Southwest Oswego, NY 3 joined the routing of modern NY 104 through Oswego and Mexico to Maple View. Between Maple View and Watertown, NY 3 overlapped NY 2 along what is now US 11. Past Watertown, NY 3 was routed along today's NY 12F and NY 180 to Limerick, where it continued north to Clayton by way of modern NY 12E. East of Clayton, it followed modern NY 12, NY 26 and CR 192 through Alexandria Bay to Redwood. From there, it utilized the current alignment of NY 37 up through Ogdensburg (by way of Main and Ford Streets in the city) before continuing to Waddington on Van Rensselaer Road. NY 3 went east from here along a now-dismantled riverside highway and Town Line Road to Massena, where it was routed on modern NY 37B.
East of Massena, NY 3 followed a series of local roads that parallel the modern divided highway section of NY 37 to Rooseveltown, at which point it rejoined current NY 37. The highway remained on today's NY 37 up to CR 51 northwest of Malone, where NY 3 continued south on CR 51 to modern US 11 (then NY 2) west of the village. After briefly overlapping NY 2 (current US 11) into Malone, NY 3 turned south onto what is now NY 30, following the route to Paul Smiths. Past Paul Smiths, NY 3 continued east along the length of modern NY 86 to Jay, overlapping then-NY 10 from Harrietstown to Saranac Lake in between. Lastly, from Jay to Plattsburgh, NY 3 overlapped then-NY 6 along what is now NY 9N and US 9.

In the late 1920s, NY 3 was rerouted near Malone to follow modern NY 37 into the village, largely eliminating the overlap with US 11. Additionally, NY 3 was truncated to Jay on its eastern end. The former alignment to Plattsburgh became part of NY 9W from Jay to Keeseville and US 9 from Keeseville to Plattsburgh. A more substantial realignment of NY 3 took place as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York. NY 3 now began concurrent with NY 31A at then-NY 18 (now NY 104) in Niagara Falls. The routes proceeded eastward along modern NY 31 to Sanborn, where NY 31A turned north to follow what is now NY 429 back to then-NY 31. NY 3 continued on current NY 31 for another two miles to Shawnee, where it met its original alignment to North Tonawanda, which became part of NY 425 in the renumbering. At this point, NY 3 rejoined its previous alignment, overlapping NY 425 up to Cambria–Wilson Road, where that route split off and continued to the north.

NY 3 was realigned in two locations between Lockport and Rochester. One was just east of Lockport, where it was straightened out to go directly from Lockport to Gasport on modern NY 31, bypassing McNalls. The other was between Middleport and Medina, where it was realigned to use modern NY 31E instead. NY 3's old alignment from Lockport to Gasport via McNalls became part of NY 77 west of McNalls and NY 359 north of the community. Its former routing between Middleport and Medina became NY 3A.
The most significant realignment that occurred at this time was in the North Country, where NY 3 was shifted onto its current alignment between Watertown and Plattsburgh. From Tupper Lake east to Plattsburgh, most of what became NY 3 was previously part of NY 10. The NY 10 designation remained in place from Tupper Lake east to Upper Saranac Lake, forming an overlap with NY 3; however, it was completely replaced by NY 3 from Saranac Lake east. Between Upper Saranac Lake and Saranac Lake, the routing of NY 3 was previously unnumbered, as was the routing from Watertown to Tupper Lake.

At least four suffixed routes of NY 3 were created as part of the 1930 renumbering. The longest of the four initial routes was NY 3C, an alternate route of NY 3 that generally followed NY 3's current alignment between Sterling and Watertown. Another was assigned when NY 3 was rerouted between Deferiet and Wilna to bypass Carthage to the north on modern NY 3A. The portion of NY 3's former routing from Deferiet to Carthage became NY 3F. NY 3 was shifted southward onto modern NY 31 between Shawnee and Lockport . The realignment eliminated overlaps with NY 425 and NY 93, the latter of which had used NY 3's former routing east of Cambria–Wilson Road since it was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering. Even though all of the former routing had a designation, it was also designated as NY 3A anyway. As a result, the designations of all of NY 3's spur routes were increased by one letter, meaning the existing NY 3A became NY 3B, NY 3C became NY 3D, and so forth.
US 104 was assigned , extending from Niagara Falls to Maple View mostly by way of then-NY 31 west of Rochester and NY 3 from Rochester to Maple View. As a result, NY 31 was shifted southward onto the alignment of NY 3 from Niagara Falls to Rochester while NY 3 was realigned south of Watertown to follow the routing of NY 3D to a new terminus in Sterling. Every spur route of NY 3 was eliminated at this time except for NY 3G. The alignments of NY 3 and NY 3G between Deferiet and Wilna were flipped .

At some point between 1935 and 1938, NY 3 was truncated further to end at its junction with US 104 in Hannibal. It was moved another half-mile (0.8 km) to the east in the early 1960s following the completion of the super two bypass carrying US 104 around the eastern edge of the village. NY 3 continued to end at the super two until the early 1980s. On April 1, 1980, ownership and maintenance of NY 3's former routing between the Cayuga County line and NY 104 was transferred from Oswego County to the state of New York. One year later, on April 1, 1981, the state assumed ownership and maintenance of the Cayuga County portion from that county. Both transactions were part of larger highway maintenance swaps between the state and the two counties. NY 3 was reextended westward to NY 104A following the second swap.

From Sandy Creek to Henderson, NY 3C (later NY 3D) was routed on Weaver Road, CR 121, NY 193, CR 78, NY 178, and CR 123. A new lakeside highway between Sandy Creek and the modern junction of NY 3 and NY 193 was opened to traffic as a realignment of NY 3D. An extension of the roadway north to Henderson was completed by the following year. To the southwest in Oswego County, NY 3 was originally routed on modern CR 3 between Hannibal and Fulton and on Hannibal and Oneida Streets through the city of Fulton. The modern arterial through the city was constructed while the Hannibal–Fulton highway was built in the mid-1960s.

NY 3 has had 14 suffixed routes over the years; however, all of them except for one only existed during the 1930s. The only active designation is NY 3A, which is currently assigned to an alternate route of NY 3 in Jefferson County.

At least four suffixed routes of NY 3 were created as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York. Two more were assigned by the following year. All of these were renumbered .


All the routes below except for the current NY 3A were assigned .





</doc>
<doc id="2133367" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2133367" title="Cuthbert of Canterbury">
Cuthbert of Canterbury

Cuthbert (died 26 October 760) was a medieval Anglo-Saxon Archbishop of Canterbury in England. Prior to his elevation to Canterbury, he was abbot of a monastic house, and perhaps may have been Bishop of Hereford also, but evidence for his holding Hereford mainly dates from after the Norman Conquest of England in 1066. While Archbishop, he held church councils and built a new church in Canterbury. It was during Cuthbert's archbishopric that the Diocese of York was raised to an archbishopric. Cuthbert died in 760 and was later regarded as a saint.

Of noble birth, Cuthbert is first recorded as the abbot of Lyminge Abbey, from where he was elevated to the see of Hereford in 736. The identification of the Cuthbert who was Bishop of Hereford with the Cuthbert who became archbishop, however, comes from Florence of Worcester and other post-Conquest sources. The contemporary record in the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" says that Cuthbert was consecrated archbishop, where if he had been Bishop of Hereford, he would have been translated. No consecration is needed when a bishop is translated from one see to another. Given the nature of the sources, the identification of the bishop of Hereford with the archbishop of Canterbury, while likely, must not be regarded as proven.

If Cuthbert was at Hereford, he served in that capacity for four years before his elevation to the See of Canterbury in 740. He is credited with the composition of an epitaph for the tomb of his three predecessors at Hereford. The cathedral church of the see may not even have been located at Hereford by Cuthbert's time.

Whoever Cuthbert was prior to his election to Canterbury, he probably owed his selection as archbishop to the influence of Æthelbald, King of Mercia. A number of Mercians were appointed to Canterbury during the 730s and 740s, which suggests that Mercian authority was expanding into Kent.

Cuthbert was the recipient of a long letter from Boniface who complained about the lax morals of the clergy in the British Isles, and too much drinking of alcohol by the Anglo-Saxon bishops. Cuthbert also sent letters to Lull who was Archbishop of Mainz and a native of England. During Cuthbert's time as archbishop he no longer claimed authority over all of Britain, like his predecessor Theodore. Pope Gregory III in 735 had sent a pallium to the bishop of York, raising the see of York to the status of an archbishopric. As a sign of the enhanced status of York, Cuthbert only consecrated bishops south of the Humber and his synods were attended only by bishops from the south of England.

Cuthbert presided over the Council of Clovesho in 747 along with Æthelbald of Mercia. This gathering mandated that all clergy should explain the basic tenets of Christianity to the laity, as well as legislating on clerical dress, control of monasteries, and the behavior of the clergy. It also mandated that each diocese hold a synod to proclaim the decisions of the council. Cuthbert sent his deacon Cynebert to Pope Gregory III after the council with a report on the council and its resolutions. This action may have been taken in response to Boniface's complaints about Cuthbert and Æthelbald to the papacy. The actions of the council were also gathered into a collection at Cuthbert's command.

After the council, Cuthbert continued to correspond with Boniface up until Boniface's martyrdom in 754, and then sent condolences to Boniface's successor. Cuthbert held a second synod in 758, but nothing is known of any enactments it made. He also built the church of St. John the Baptist in Canterbury, which was destroyed by fire in 1067. He was buried in his new church. The new church was located on the west side of the cathedral, and was used as a baptistery. The church also became a burial site for many of the archbishops, and later was used for trials by ordeal. There is no explicit contemporary reference that states that these uses were intended by Cuthbert, but the fact that the church was dedicated to St. John the Baptist argues strongly that Cuthbert at least intended the new building as a baptistery.

The burial practices of the archbishops did change after Cuthbert, but it is not clear whether this was intended by Cuthbert, as a Post-Conquest Canterbury cartulary has it, or due to other reasons, unconnected with Cuthbert. Although Sonia Hawkes argues that the change in burial customs, which extended over most of Britain, resulted from Cuthbert's mandating burial in church yards, instead of outside the city limits as had been the custom previously. However, the main evidence for this theory is a 16th-century tradition at Canterbury and the archaeological evidence of a change in burial patterns. Although a change did occur, the archaeological evidence does not give a reason why this change happened, and given the late date of the Canterbury tradition, the theory cannot be considered proven.

Cuthbert died on 26 October 760, and was later considered a saint with a feast day of 26 October. He was buried in his church of St. John, and was the first Archbishop of Canterbury that was not buried in St Augustine's Abbey. His letters to the Anglo-Saxon missionaries on the European continent show him to have been highly educated.




</doc>
<doc id="2134051" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2134051" title="Bregowine">
Bregowine

Bregowine (died August 764) was a medieval Archbishop of Canterbury. Little is known of his origins or his activities as archbishop, although a number of stories were told about his possible origins after the Norman conquest in 1066. There are no records of him prior to his becoming archbishop. He possibly owed his elevation to the Kentish monarch. The records after his elevation to Canterbury are mainly about disputes over land, but knowledge of his time in office is hampered by the destruction of many of the contemporary records. After his death, he was considered a saint and a life about him was written in the 12th century.

Various stories have been told about Bregowine's origins, including that he was a nobleman and a continental Saxon who converted to Christianity and came to Canterbury because of the saintly reputation of Theodore of Tarsus. Others say that he owed his elevation to King Æthelbert II of Kent, but all these stories rest on works that were written after the Norman conquest of England in 1066. There are no contemporary records of Bregowine before he was archbishop. It does not appear, however, that he was of Mercian origins like his predecessors Tatwin and Nothhelm.

Whatever his upbringing, Bregowine was consecrated as archbishop on 27 September 761. His election took place in a brief period when Kent was free of Mercian dominance between 756 and 764, so the story that he owed his election to Æthelbert does fit with the time frame. He wrote letters to Archbishop Lul of Mainz which still exist, and which discuss an earlier meeting between the two men. Other activities as archbishop are recorded in surviving charters. One records that he protested at the loss of a church at Cookham that was confiscated by King Cynewulf of Wessex sometime after 760. Another surviving charter from Dunwald, a thegn of King Æthelbert, concerning land in Canterbury, records that Bregowine consented to the gift of land. Unfortunately, many of the early charters of the diocese of Canterbury are lost, which restricts knowledge of Bregowine's activities as archbishop.

Bregowine died in 764 and was originally buried in the baptistry in Canterbury, but his remains were moved to the choir of Canterbury Cathedral in 1123. This followed an attempt in around 1121 to remove his remains to another monastery, which came to nothing. The remains were placed by the altar of St Gregory in the south transept, after having been briefly placed in the north transept. Bregowine was later considered a saint, with a feast day of 26 August, although Florence of Worcester, a 12th-century writer, recorded his death date as 24 August. Other sources record the death date as 25 August. His life was later written by Eadmer in the 12th century.


</doc>
<doc id="2149576" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2149576" title="Commit This to Memory">
Commit This to Memory

Commit This to Memory is the second studio album by American rock band Motion City Soundtrack. Produced by Mark Hoppus, the album was released on June 7, 2005, in the United States by Epitaph Records. Motion City Soundtrack, formed in 1997, had first found success with their debut album, "I Am the Movie" (2002). The band toured in the interim years, creating positive word-of-mouth. In 2004, the band joined Blink-182 on the road for a string of shows, which led to their bassist, Mark Hoppus, joining the band in the studio for his first producing effort.

Recorded over six weeks in late 2004, "Commit This to Memory" was created largely at Seedy Underbelly Studios, a suburban home converted into a studio in Los Angeles' Valley Village region. The album was written partially in their hometown of Minneapolis and partially in Los Angeles, during a period in which frontman Justin Pierre was seeking treatment for alcohol abuse. He hoped for his lyricism to better emphasize storytelling, inspired by the lyrics of Tom Waits, Ben Folds and John K. Samson. Hoppus mainly worked with the band on completing song arrangements.

The album became the band's breakthrough, with lead single "Everything Is Alright" becoming the band's signature song. The album peaked at number two on "Billboard" Independent Albums chart. The singles' music videos achieved rotation on cable channel MTV2 while the band toured alongside Fall Out Boy and Panic! at the Disco on the Nintendo Fusion Tour, later also joining the Warped Tour for a stint. In 2014, "The A.V. Club" referred to the album as a classic of pop punk, "full of hook-laden, keyboard-assisted songs whose bright melodies don’t mask the despair and self-loathing lurking beneath them."

Motion City Soundtrack formed in 1997 in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The band signed to Epitaph Records in 2003 after recording "I Am the Movie", their debut, independently and selling copies of it out of the back of their tour van for a year. Motion City became part of a slew of Epitaph signings, including Matchbook Romance, Scatter the Ashes and From First To Last, amid concerns the Southern California label had strayed too far from its roots, and seemed "a little too emo." By the time the band began production on their sophomore record, "I Am the Movie" had sold nearly 62,000 copies. The group had accumulated significant buzz, and were regarded as a "must-see" act on the Warped Tour 2004.

Mark Hoppus' involvement stems from when an Atticus Clothing employee played him "I Am the Movie". He was so taken with it that he raved about the band in "Rolling Stone", inviting them to open for his group, Blink-182 on their 2004 European tour. On the trek, he became good friends with the musicians. He told them that he had purchased an abundance of recording gear and amplifiers for the previous Blink-182 album and told the band of his interest in recording music from a production standpoint. At the final show of the tour, guitarist Joshua Cain went to Hoppus' dressing room and asked him to produce their next record. Although Hoppus had never produced anything before, he was excited to be a part of the album and accepted the offer.

The band first began writing songs at their rehearsal space in their hometown of Minneapolis, which they nicknamed the "Dungeon", due to its ability to "suck the life and energy out of the band." For Pierre, the album came at the brink of a transitional period for him, in which he began to seek treatment for alcohol abuse. He left the band during the writing stages for Los Angeles where he moved in with Epitaph founder Brett Gurewitz and began attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. Afterwards, the band rejoined Pierre in Los Angeles to begin recording demos for a month; the change of scenery brought about new energy for the group, according to Pierre. "Commit This to Memory" would be the first album by the band to feature material crafted by each musician in the group, as previous releases had featured songs written in the years prior to each member joining. In addition, the band had more time and funds to spend time working on the album. "It was also the first time we had a lot more time and money to go in and feel like we were making a real record this time, whereas "I Am the Movie" was recorded in little segments here and there and eventually pieced together," said drummer Tony Thaxton.

Recording sessions for "Commit This to Memory", which were booked by Hoppus, were scheduled over six weeks at Seedy Underbelly Studios in Valley Village, a district of Los Angeles, California, which was actually a rented house that had once belonged to Jeff Porcaro, the drummer for Toto. The band had, according to Hoppus, "a million ideas and a lot of energy and enthusiasm to make a great record". Pierre strove for the record to have a sound that resembled the bands Braid, Superchunk, Jawbox and the Pixies. Living in a suburb, the neighbors had called police to the band and Hoppus several times for being too loud at night time, especially when Hoppus brought a Roland TR-808 drum machine outside to work on a song late at night. According to Pierre, Hoppus was not interested in putting his own stamp on the music, but rather bringing out the best in what he saw in the group. Hoppus generally modeled his production after Jerry Finn (a longtime producer of Blink-182), and therefore it involved much watching and listening. "Mark kept telling us, 'Your name is going to be a lot bigger on the front than mine is on the back'," recalled Justin Pierre, "So he would throw suggestions out there but always say, 'Feel free to turn these down.' And we would!"

Pierre characterized Hoppus as both "very involved and not involved," with his job as producer mainly giving notes on the sound of the instruments and offering suggestions to improve songs. Hoppus mostly worked with the band on arrangements, believing the songs were too packed and "needed to breathe". Hoppus mentioned that label politics had hindered the creativity of Blink's "Take Off Your Pants and Jacket" (2001), and did not want to see the same fate befall the band. He was "meticulous" in his approach, partially due to the fact that it was his first production job. Hoppus was the one who advised the band to merge two previously unrelated songs—a slower, softer song and a pulsating drum track—into one, which became "Time Turned Fragile". The frontman of Fall Out Boy, Patrick Stump, contributed guest vocals to "Everything Is Alright", and Hoppus to "Hangman". With production completed, Hoppus was very excited for the band that he felt was on the cusp of "great things", recalling, "After six weeks of these guys living all together in two rooms of this house with a studio attached they created this amazingly beautiful and honest album. Justin's lyrics are so brutally truthful." The group completed recording in November 2004, and judged final mixes over the interim months. Pierre later called "Commit This to Memory" his personal favorite album by the band.

In a 2015 interview, Pierre notes that fans have told him that they find "Commit This to Memory" a "winter album," to which he agrees, noting the unintentional mention of the new year in several songs. His lyricism on "Commit This to Memory" centralizes around change and, in his words, "being a complete fuckup, yet, at the same time, being somewhat successful". On the record, he "addresses the themes of substance abuse, psychological disorders and failing relationships." Pierre penned "Everything Is Alright" as a summary of his OCD (Obsessive–compulsive disorder) tendencies. He intended to utilize his social anxiety and fears in the song's form, which he has since employed in numerous other compositions. "I don’t think the [phrase] "tongue-in-cheek" is correct, but it’s something where the verses are one thing and then the chorus is another, but it's sort of like giving yourself a pep talk," said Pierre. The song's lyrics include hating such mundane things as "theme parks, flying, strangers, [and] waiting in line," things that Pierre genuinely disliked at the time of the song's writing. For the record, he intended to simplify his lyrics to enhance storytelling and he drew inspiration from Tom Waits, Ben Folds and John K. Samson's writing styles. Keeping in the Waits/Folds inspiration, Pierre strove to write from another person's point of view; in the case of "Time Turned Fragile", it is sung from the perspective of his father.

Pierre has in retrospect labeled half of the album's writing as being completed while inebriated and the other half while getting sober. For example, he penned the lyrics to "Attractive Today" and "Time Turned Fragile" while drunk in his apartment, in a "sad and lonely place." In this approach, words mostly "just came out," and were not substantially revised. In addition, he was listening to the 2003 album "Reconstruction Site" by the Weakerthans, and found himself inspired by the songwriting of frontman John K. Samson. Pierre would often take lyrics from other bands songs for song titles; "Time Turned Fragile" is lifted from a lyric in Limbeck's "Julia", while "Together We'll Ring in the New Year" was pulled from the Tom Waits song "Please Wake Me Up". "L.G. FUAD"—which stands for "Let's Get Fucked Up and Die"—grew out of a night on Motion City Soundtrack's 2003 UK tour with The All-American Rejects, in which the latter band's merchandise manager was severely inebriated. He stood on the merchandise stand and shouted what became the song's refrain. All involved found great humor in the "mantra", which went on to be printed on business cards as a joke. "Hold Me Down" was inspired by a former roommate of Pierre's. After she had moved out, Pierre found a portion of her math homework in a couch cushion, leading to him imagining a scenario of finding a letter from a departed lover.

The album has been called definitive of pop punk. Joshua Cain dismissed this label, remarking, "I definitely wouldn't consider us a pop-punk band. Our influences are more based on '90s bands like Superchunk and early Weezer."

Upon its release, "Commit This to Memory" received general acclaim from music critics. Scott Heisel of "Alternative Press" wrote that ""Memory" is an inspired, mature sophomore disc chock full of catchy, intelligent pop-rock." Allmusic's Johnny Loftus considered the band more intelligent and sophisticated than their Warped Tour peers: "Motion City Soundtrack['s] wistful memories, tales of breaking up, and frantic searches for answers [are] realer than the next pop-punk combo on the quadruple summertime bill." Jennifer Maerz of "Entertainment Weekly" ended her review with the note that "MCS' slick, soaring anthems ultimately unite the spirits of those who see themselves, like Pierre, as 'lifeless corners of this empty frame.'" Mark Griffiths of "Kerrang!" wrote, "It's a bright and invigorating affair [...] and is, in short, fantastic." "The Washington Post" Marianne Meyer opined that the record "nimbly moves from skittish rhythms to genuinely tender sentiment."
Jessica Grose of "Spin" favorably compared it to Blink-182's "Enema of the State" (1999). Tony McMenamin of "Blender" deemed it the publication's album of the month, calling it "a charged mix of instantly catchy pop-punk lashings and somber acoustic wailings."

The album was leaked to file sharing websites within a day of the final mastering and months before its official release. It debuted on the "Billboard" 200 in the issue dated June 25, 2005 at position 72, selling 16,000 copies in its opening week. It charted better on the magazine's Independent Albums chart, where it peaked at number two. The last official estimate placed it at 285,000 albums sold in the U.S., but Pierre said in 2015 interview that the number is closer to 500,000. The band's music videos found regular rotation on networks such as MTV2, and the band also performed on "Late Night with Conan O'Brien". "Rolling Stone"s Lauren Gilton considered the album a sleeper hit. Nevertheless, the band’s breakthrough brought naysayers, and the group became targets for critics of pop punk: "[the band was] frequently characterized as the sort of ultra-commercial punk poseurs who water down the genre to the point of drowning it."

Subsequent reviews of the album have continued to be positive. In 2014, "The A.V. Club" referred to the album as a classic of pop punk, "full of hook-laden, keyboard-assisted songs whose bright melodies don’t mask the despair and self-loathing lurking beneath them." Reyan Ali of "Cincinnati CityBeat" wrote that "Commit This to Memory" "absolutely bleeds charm," commenting, "Even with all the dire thematic matter Pierre’s lyrics covered, [...] the band framed the words with music that sparkled, owing to spunky, inspired hooks, full-sounding record production and ample doses of Moog." "Alternative Press" Tyler Sharp deemed the record a "classic," while Taylor Morgan of "OC Weekly" called it "the soundtrack of millennial youth, reminiscent of breakups, making out, goofing off, and growing up." BuzzFeed included the album at number 21 on their "36 Pop Punk Albums You Need To Hear Before You F——ing Die" list. "NME" listed the album as one of "20 Pop Punk Albums Which Will Make You Nostalgic".

During the recording of the album, the band embarked on their first headlining tour, The Sub-Par Punk Who Cares Tour 2004. After recording, the band set out on the inaugural Epitaph Tour, alongside Matchbook Romance and From First to Last, with appearances by the Matches and Scatter the Ashes on select dates. The tour visited every major US city, and ran from February 2 to March 19, 2005. The band played to larger crowds on the tours supporting the album, including over 9,000 fans on a Chicago date in 2005. The group "toured incessantly," including dates on the Warped Tour 2005. Afterwards, the band joined the Nintendo Fusion Tour with Fall Out Boy, Panic! at the Disco, and The Starting Line, which was their largest nationwide tour to that point. The group had been friends with Fall Out Boy for many years prior, having both played side-by-side before either group found their respective success.

The band embarked on a tour celebrating the tenth anniversary of the album between January and February 2015, playing the album in its entirety. "It doesn't feel like ten years ago, but then it also feels like a lifetime ago," said Pierre. The group later extended this anniversary tour, and further toured the album between June and August 2015.

Credits adapted from the album's liner notes. 
Band

Additional musicians

Production

Design



</doc>
<doc id="2159211" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2159211" title="Music of the Final Fantasy VII series">
Music of the Final Fantasy VII series

"Final Fantasy VII" is a role-playing video game developed by Square (now Square Enix) and published by Sony Computer Entertainment as the seventh installment in the "Final Fantasy" series. Released in 1997, the game sparked the release of a collection of media centered on the game entitled the "Compilation of Final Fantasy VII". The music of the "Final Fantasy VII" series includes not only the soundtrack to the original game and its associated albums, but also the soundtracks and music albums released for the other titles in the collection. The first album produced was "Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack", a compilation of all the music in the game. It was released as a soundtrack album on four CDs by DigiCube in 1997. A selection of tracks from the album was released in the single-disc "Reunion Tracks" by DigiCube the same year. "Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII", an album featuring piano arrangements of pieces from the soundtrack, was released in 2003 by DigiCube, and Square Enix began reprinting all three albums in 2004. To date, these are the only released albums based on the original game's soundtrack, and were solely composed by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu; his role for the majority of subsequent albums has been filled by Masashi Hamauzu and Takeharu Ishimoto.

The "Compilation of Final Fantasy VII" began eight years after the release of "Final Fantasy VII" with the release of the animated film sequel "" in 2005. The soundtracks for each of the titles in the collection are included in an album, starting with the album release of the soundtrack to "Advent Children" that year. The following year, Nippon Crown released a soundtrack album to correspond with the video game "", while Square Enix launched a download-only collection of music from the multiplayer mode of the game, which was only released in Japan. After the launch of the game "" in 2007, Warner Music Japan produced the title's soundtrack. The latest album in the collection, "Before Crisis: Final Fantasy VII & Last Order: Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack", was released by Square Enix the same year as a combined soundtrack album for the game "" and the animated movie "".

The original music received highly positive reviews from critics, who found many of the tunes to be memorable and noted the emotional intensity of several of the tracks. The reception for the other albums has been mixed, with reactions ranging from enthusiastic praise to disappointment. Several pieces from the soundtrack, particularly "One-Winged Angel" and "Aeris' Theme", remain popular and have been performed numerous times in orchestral concert series such as "Dear Friends: Music from Final Fantasy" and "Tour de Japon: Music from Final Fantasy". Music from the Original Soundtrack has been included in arranged albums and compilations by Square as well as outside groups.

Nobuo Uematsu composed the music of "Final Fantasy VII" in less than one year, matching the game's development time, although he had taken two years to create the soundtrack for the previous title, "Final Fantasy VI". "Final Fantasy VII" was the first game in the series to be developed for the PlayStation, and while the media capabilities of the console allowed for CD quality music, Uematsu opted instead to use MIDI sounds. This decision has been credited as giving the soundtrack "a very distinctive mood and feel", forming a strong association for listeners between the game and its soundtrack. The music was rendered using the console's native sound chip rather than being incorporated onto the disc due to superior overall sound quality: while the SNES had only eight sound channels, the PlayStation had twenty-four. Eight were reserved for sound effects, leaving sixteen available for the music. Uematsu had initially planned to use CD quality music with vocal performances for the game to take advantage of the console's capabilities, but found that the advanced audio quality in turn made the game have much longer loading times in each area. Uematsu decided that the quality was not worth the affects on gameplay, though after the release and seeing "Suikoden II" (1998, PlayStation), which had used higher-quality music instead, he reversed his stance for "Final Fantasy VIII". There was a plan to use a "famous vocalist" for the ending theme to the game as a "theme song" for the game, but the shift to MIDI, along with time constraints and thematic concerns, caused the idea to be dropped. Uematsu has stated, however, that the move into the "PlayStation era", which allowed video game composers to use sounds recorded in the studio rather than from synthesizers, had "definitely been the biggest change" to video game music.

Uematsu's approach to composing the game's music was to treat it like a film soundtrack and compose songs that reflected the mood of the scenes rather than trying to make strong melodies to "define the game", as he felt that approach would come across too strong when placed alongside the game's new 3D visuals. As an example, he composed the track intended for the scene in the game where Aerith Gainsborough is killed to be "sad but beautiful", rather than more overtly emotional, creating what he feels is a more understated feeling. Uematsu has additionally said that the soundtrack has a feel of "realism", which also prevented him from using "exorbitant, crazy music". The first piece that Uematsu composed for the game was the opening theme; game director Yoshinori Kitase showed him the opening cinematic to the game and asked him to begin the project there. The track was well received in the company, which gave Uematsu "a sense that it was going to be a really good project". He later stated in the liner notes for the soundtrack album that the music for "Final Fantasy VII" was his "greatest harvest" to date.
"Final Fantasy VII" was the first game in the series to include a track with digitized vocals, "One-Winged Angel". The track has been called Uematsu's "most recognizable contribution" to the music of the "Final Fantasy" series, though the composer did not expect it to gain such popularity. The piece, described as "a fanfare to impending doom", is said to not "follow any normal genre rules" and has been termed "possibly the most innovative idea in the series' musical history". Uematsu approached the piece, which accompanies the final battle of the game, in a different manner than previous "boss tracks": as he felt that using his normal approach would cause unfavorable comparisons to his well-received "Final Fantasy VI" boss tracks, he instead tried to take a different approach. Inspired by "The Rite of Spring" by Igor Stravinsky to make a more "classical" track, and by rock and roll music from the late 1960s and early 1970s to make an orchestral track with a "destructive impact", he spent two weeks composing short unconnected musical phrases, and then arranged them together into a song, an approach he has never used before or since. The lyrics of "One-Winged Angel", a Latin choral track that plays at the climax of the game, were taken from the medieval poetry that forms the basis of Carl Orff's "Carmina Burana", specifically "Estuans Interius", "O Fortuna", "Veni, Veni, Venias" and "Ave Formosissima". Uematsu has stated that the intro of "One-Winged Angel" is based on Jimi Hendrix's "Purple Haze", that the piece revolves around the image of Sephiroth, and that despite the chorus and orchestra, he still thinks of it as a "rock piece". He said in a 2005 interview that "One-Winged Angel" is his favorite tune from the soundtrack, and in 2004 that it was his favorite battle theme from any "Final Fantasy" game.

"Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack" is a soundtrack album containing musical tracks from the game, composed by Nobuo Uematsu and produced by Uematsu and Minoru Akao. It was originally released on February 10, 1997 through DigiCube and later reissued directly by Square Enix on May 10, 2004. The soundtrack spans 85 tracks over four discs and has a combined duration of 4:39:53. A limited edition was produced along with the original album, containing illustrated liner notes with several pictures of Uematsu's workspace and personal effects, various cutscenes and in-game screen shots from the game, and a discography.

The soundtrack covers a wide variety of musical genres, including rock, techno, orchestral, and choral, although the soundtrack as a whole is primarily orchestral. While many of the tracks were intended as background music, reviewers noted the emotional intensity of several tracks, especially "Aerith's Theme", which plays during a moment described as "the most shocking moment in video games," and has been described as the most memorable track from the album. The theme has become popular among fans, and has inspired various arrangements. Other notable tracks include "Main Theme of Final Fantasy VII". Themes from this track play during several other tunes from the soundtrack, such as "Words Drowned by Fireworks", to tie the soundtrack together.

The regular edition of the album reached #3 on the Japan Oricon charts, while the limited edition reached #19. Overall, the album sold 148,000 copies as of January 2010, with the limited edition selling a further 21,000. The album was well received by critics. Allmusic awarded Uematsu's original soundtrack a five-star rating. Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan claimed that "for the most part, it's a diamond", with his primary complaint being the quality of the MIDI sound. He found the tracks to be "beautiful" and said that "One-Winged Angel" was "possibly the most innovative idea in the series' musical history". Patrick Gann of RPGFan concurred and found all of the soundtrack's tunes to be "memorable" and the Original Soundtrack to be "very worth the purchase". Philip of Square Enix Music Online, however, disliked the sound quality of the soundtrack and saw several tracks as "trivial", though he did note that Uematsu "has a flair for strong, memorable" pieces. In 2006, IGN ranked the album as the best "Final Fantasy" soundtrack to date and cited the "gripping" character themes and "One-Winged Angel" in particular as contributing factors. They also named "One-Winged Angel" as the best piece of music from the entire "Final Fantasy" series.

The original CDs for both releases were only published in Japan and include only Japanese track names. The official English track names were later added to digital releases of the soundtrack.

Track listing

"Final Fantasy VII Reunion Tracks" is a single-disc album that comprises a selection of tracks from "Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack". It was initially released through DigiCube on October 22, 1997 and later reissued by Square Enix on February 23, 2005. While the record was never published outside Japan, the music is available in the North American iTunes Store. All of the pieces are the same as on the Original Soundtrack except for "Main Theme of Final Fantasy VII", "One-Winged Angel", and "Aerith's Theme", which were re-recorded with an orchestra and choir. Some versions of the album also contain a hidden pregap track, which can be accessed by rewinding from the start of the album. This track is an instrumental version of "One-Winged Angel" without the choir. The new arrangements were created by Shirō Hamaguchi. The album spans 1:12:24 over 19 tracks.

"Final Fantasy VII Reunion Tracks" reached #20 on the Japan Oricon charts, and sold over 25,600 copies. It received mixed reviews. Gann liked the newly orchestrated tracks, calling them "incredibly well-done orchestrations", and said that "depending on how willing you are to spend money" they made the album worth purchasing on their own, although he felt the other tracks offered nothing new to owners of the original soundtrack. Chris of Square Enix Music Online, however, felt that while the orchestrated tracks were well-done, the selection of the other tracks was poor and that the album as a whole was "a lousy purchase for most who enjoyed "Final Fantasy VII"s score".

"Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII" is an album featuring piano arrangements of selected "Final Fantasy VII" pieces composed by Nobuo Uematsu, arranged by Shirō Hamaguchi, and performed by Seiji Honda. The album was released through DigiCube on December 3, 2003 and later reissued by Square Enix on May 10, 2004. It covers a duration of 47:37 over 13 tracks. The album includes light-hearted tracks as well as slower, more emotional pieces, covering a variety of genres such as marches, new-age themes, and jazz. Unlike previous and subsequent "Final Fantasy" piano albums, "Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII" was produced many years after the release of the original game. As three of the tracks from this album were reused in the soundtrack to "", it has been speculated that the album was produced with the intention to provide tunes for "Advent Children".

"Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII" reached #228 on the Japan Oricon charts, selling 1,200 copies, and was well received by reviewers, with Gann raving that the pieces were fun to listen to, the performer was "amazing", the choice of tracks was "excellent", and the album as a whole was a "spectacular CD". Sophia of Soundtrack Central concurred and stated that the album was "quite fulfilling to listen to" and that it surpassed her expectations.

"" is the 2005 CGI film sequel to the original game, and the beginning of the "Compilation of Final Fantasy VII". Its soundtrack album, "Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Original Soundtrack", was released on September 28, 2005, containing new material created specifically for the movie, as well as arrangements of tunes from the "Final Fantasy VII" soundtrack. Both the original tracks and the arrangements cover a variety of musical styles, including orchestral, choral, classical piano, and rock music; "Variety" noted that the styles vary between "sparse piano noodlings, pop metal thrashings and cloying power ballads". The tracks were composed by Nobuo Uematsu, Keiji Kawamori, Kenichiro Fukui, and Tsuyoshi Sekito, and arranged by Fukui, Sekito, Kawamori, Shirō Hamaguchi, and Kazuhiko Toyama. Upon hearing each track, Nomura would make some changes, and have the composers re-record the piece. The song "Calling" from 1989 by former Boøwy vocalist Kyosuke Himuro was used in the film's credits. Some of the piano tracks are longer than what was included in the movie. The album spans 26 tracks on two discs, covers a duration of 1:21:41. In addition to the regular release, a limited edition was produced with a foil slipcover and a booklet of credits and lyrics. The soundtrack album reached position #15 on the Japanese Oricon music charts, and stayed on the charts for 10 weeks.

A mini-album titled "Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete Mini Album" was released on April 10, 2009 to coincide with the release of the "Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete" version of the movie. The new release of the movie included a new ending theme, "Safe and Sound", by Kyosuke Himuro and My Chemical Romance singer Gerard Way, and replaced "Water" with a new song, "Anxious Heart". The mini-album was five tracks and 29:17 long. The included tracks on the album were new versions of "The Chase of Highway", "Those Who Fight Further", "Sign", "Advent: One-Winged Angel", and "On the Way to a Smile", a piece from the "Final Fantasy VII"-based anime "On the Way to a Smile". A larger album, "Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete: Reunion Tracks", was released with 21 tracks on September 16, 2009. This album contains the tracks from the mini-album, as well as several pieces that were lengthened for the "Complete" film version but not rearranged. "Reunion Tracks" appeared on the Oricon charts for a single week at position #108.

"Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Original Soundtrack" sold over 38,900 copies, and was well received by critics. Gann said that "Final Fantasy" fans have "no excuse" not to buy the album and noted that his only disappointments were that three of the tracks were the same as on the Piano Collections album, and that as a film score, some of the shifts in the pieces make less sense outside of the context of the visuals. Chris Carle of IGN called it a "jagged but beautiful blend of opera, metal and electronica", and a "richly-layered, complex and utterly listenable soundtrack" while praising the variety of musical styles used and the quality of the pieces. In contrast to Gann, he felt that "divorced from the film, the score is still amazingly listenable".

Track listing

"" was released for the PlayStation 2 in January 2006, and its soundtrack, "Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack", was released a month later. The tracks were composed by Masashi Hamauzu and orchestrations were provided by Yoshihisa Hirano, making it the first "Final Fantasy VII"-related soundtrack to not include new material from Nobuo Uematsu. Koji Haishima conducted the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra, which performed the music for around half of the album. The soundtrack also contains the songs "Longing" and "Redemption" by Japanese musician and actor Gackt, and was released through the artist's ex label, Nippon Crown. The album contains a mix of orchestral and rock tracks, with some orchestral performances of slow compositions and marches and both styles of music used for faster-paced "threatening" and "dynamic" tunes. GameSpot describes the music as ranging from "quiet, almost nonexistent ambient tunes to dramatic, orchestrated tracks". The album was launched on February 15, 2006, and spans 53 tracks over two discs, covering a duration of 2:14:22. The limited edition of the soundtrack includes a case which is designed to hold the soundtrack, along with the game disc and the limited edition of the "Redemption" single and associated DVD, although these other albums must be purchased separately.

"Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack" was given mixed reviews from critics. Gann called it "solid, [...], but not awe-inspiring" and dismissed the limited edition extras as not worth the purchase. Eduardo of Square Enix Music Online, however, described it as "nearly perfect" and said that he "can, and will, run out of positive adjectives to describe the "Dirge of Cerberus Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack". It's a work of genius". The album reached position #19 on the Oricon charts, and sold over 14,300 copies; the "Redemption" single sold over 125,000 copies.

Track listing

The Japanese version of "Dirge of Cerberus" included a multiplayer mode absent from other releases, which contained music tracks not used in the single-player game. "Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII Multiplayer Mode Original Sound Collections" is a download-only soundtrack album for the multiplayer tracks released through the Japanese iTunes Store and the Square Enix Music Download website on August 22, 2006. It spans 1:07:07 over 27 tracks. The soundtrack includes all the music from the multiplayer mode and some music from the single-player game which did not appear on the previous soundtrack album, including two tracks composed by Ryo Yamazaki for the North American release of the game.

Eduardo of Square Enix Music Online also appreciated "Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII Multiplayer Mode Original Sound Collections", saying that it accented the Original Soundtrack well and that "Hamauzu and Yamazaki have delivered strongly and, with a decent mix of electronica, orchestral music, and rock, the entirety of the "Dirge of Cerberus" musical experience cannot be missed".

"Crisis Core: Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack" is the soundtrack of the game "". It was released on October 10, 2007 by Warner Music Japan and covers 55 tracks over two discs with a total duration of 2:20:59. The music was primarily composed by Takeharu Ishimoto, with a few tracks provided by Kazuhiko Toyama. It was Ishimoto's second major work, after the soundtrack to "The World Ends with You"; the only titles he had composed for previously were "World Fantasista", a little-known soccer game for which he was a co-composer, and the cell phone game "". The tracks composed by Ishimoto cover a range of moods, from "harsh and in-your-face" to "stunning and lovely", but were primarily used as ambient background music. The soundtrack also includes a large number of arrangements of tunes from the original "Final Fantasy VII" score, as well as a theme song entitled "Why", performed by Ayaka. A variety of musical instruments were used for the soundtrack, including piano and synthesizers, but critics noted that Ishimoto used guitars, both electronic and acoustic, more and better than any previous "Final Fantasy" soundtrack.

"Crisis Core: Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack" sold over 13,300 copies, while "Why" sold 60,000 copies. It received mixed reviews by critics, with Don of Square Enix Music Online stating that while some of Ishimoto's and all of Toyama's arrangements were excellent, the original pieces that made up the bulk of the album offered "very little that is actually worth a listen". Gann was more lenient, praising Ishimoto for writing "an excellent soundtrack" and being especially happy with the quality of the arrangements of Uematsu's pieces. Gann did, however, note that because Ishimoto's original works were more ambient, his arrangements, and by extension Uematsu's work, far outshone his own new contributions. He also felt that the theme song "Why" was "generic" and "bland". Sophia Tong of IGN described the album as a "mixed bag", stating that some of the arrangements and new tracks were "fantastic" while others were "not all that compelling", and lamented the overuse of a few themes throughout the soundtrack.

Track listing

"Before Crisis: Final Fantasy VII & Last Order: Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack" is the combined soundtrack album of the original video animation "" and the game "Before Crisis: Final Fantasy VII". "Before Crisis" serves as a prequel to "Final Fantasy VII" while "Last Order" is a side story to "Final Fantasy VII", showing some of the same story elements from "Crisis Core" and "Final Fantasy VII" from an alternate viewpoint. The album spans 27 tracks, of which the first 12 are from the game and the remainder are from the animation. The album was released on December 19, 2007 by Square Enix, and was mainly composed by Ishimoto, with some tunes based on works from "Final Fantasy VII" by Uematsu. Many of the pieces composed for the two works were used either directly or in an arranged form in "Crisis Core". As this soundtrack album was released after the soundtrack to "Crisis Core", these pieces were generally not included in the "Before Crisis" album. The album covers a duration of 63:48.

"Before Crisis: Final Fantasy VII & Last Order: Final Fantasy VII Original Soundtrack" was poorly received by critics. Gann said that "the whole album is a flop compared to the quality composition of "Crisis Core"" and that the contents of the album were "the leftovers, B-Sides, and less-impressive tracks from Ishimoto's arsenal of "FFVII" music", especially as many tracks were used in the "Crisis Core" soundtrack and not repeated in this album. Chris (also known as "Dark Cloud") of Square Enix Music Online agreed, saying that the album "is probably one of the worst I've heard in a very long time" and recommended it only for listeners who like "loud music without much creativity".

The Black Mages, a now defunct band led by Nobuo Uematsu that arranged music from the "Final Fantasy" series into a rock music style, has arranged four pieces from "Final Fantasy VII". These are "J-E-N-O-V-A" and "Those Who Fight Further" from "The Black Mages", published in 2003, "Advent One-Winged Angel" from "Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Original Soundtrack" and "Opening ~ Bombing Mission" from "", published in 2008. Music from "Final Fantasy VII" has also been used in other games, such as the fighting game "Ehrgeiz", and the "Kingdom Hearts" series.

Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in the Dear Friends -Music from Final Fantasy- concert series. The music of "Final Fantasy VII" has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums, such as "20020220 Music from Final Fantasy", a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including "Aerith's Theme" and "One-Winged Angel". Additionally, several pieces from the game were performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon: Music from Final Fantasy concert series, and in the Video Games Live international concert series. The "Advent Children" version of "One-Winged Angel" was performed at the Press Start -Symphony of Games- 2007 concerts in Yokohama and Osaka, Japan, while The Black Mages performed "Those Who Fight Further" at the "Extra: Hyper Game Music Event 2007" concert in Tokyo on July 7, 2007. Independent but officially licensed releases of "Final Fantasy VII" music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix, which focuses on arranging video game music. Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums, called dōjin music, and on English remixing websites, such as OverClocked ReMix. On September 14, 2007, the OverClocked ReMix community released an unofficial tribute album titled "Voices of the Lifestream", a compilation containing 45 arrangements of "Final Fantasy VII" music. "Aerith's Theme" was voted into Classic FM's 2012 HOF in 16th place out of 300 compositions.



</doc>
<doc id="2161823" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2161823" title="HMS Unicorn (I72)">
HMS Unicorn (I72)

HMS "Unicorn" was an aircraft repair ship and light aircraft carrier built for the Royal Navy in the late 1930s. She was completed during World War II and provided air cover over the amphibious landing at Salerno, Italy in September 1943. The ship was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in the Indian Ocean at the end of the year. "Unicorn" supported the aircraft carriers of the fleet on their operations until the British Pacific Fleet (BPF) was formed in November 1944. She was transferred to Australia in early 1945 to support the BPF's operations during Operation "Iceberg", the Allied invasion of Okinawa in May. To shorten the time required to replenish the BPF's carriers, the ship was based in the Admiralty Islands and in the Philippine Islands until the Japanese surrender in August. "Unicorn" was decommissioned and placed in reserve when she returned to the UK in January 1946.

The ship was recommissioned in 1949 to support the light carrier of the Far East Fleet, as the Eastern Fleet had been redesignated after the end of World War II. She was unloading aircraft and equipment in Singapore in June 1950 when the Korean War began. She spent most of the war ferrying aircraft, troops, stores and equipment in support of Commonwealth operations in Korea. "Unicorn" supported other carriers during operations in Korea, but she became the only aircraft carrier to conduct a shore bombardment with her guns during wartime when she attacked North Korean observers on the coast during the war. The ship returned to the UK after the end of the war and was again placed in reserve. She was listed for disposal in 1958 and sold for scrap in 1959.

The Abyssinia Crisis of 1934–35 demonstrated to the Admiralty that it needed a depot ship to support the aircraft carriers in active service, just like submarine and destroyer tenders supported those types. Such a ship would be able to perform a wider range of aircraft repair and maintenance tasks than aircraft carriers and on the full range of aircraft operated by the Royal Navy, including amphibians. Admiral Reginald Henderson, Controller of the Navy was instrumental for gaining approval for the ship and ensuring that she had a complete flight deck that would allow her to land, service and launch aircraft on active operations. She was the first ship built in any navy that could "carry out the full range of aircraft maintenance and repair work in addition to the ability to operate aircraft from the flight deck". In practice, "Unicorn" proved the value of the concept and two similar support ships, and were converted into aircraft maintenance ships by modifying light aircraft carriers still under construction.

"Unicorn" had an overall length of , a beam of , and a draught of at deep load. She was somewhat overweight as completed and displaced at standard load rather than her designed . Each of the ship's two sets of Parsons geared steam turbines drove one propeller. Steam was supplied by six Admiralty three-drum water-tube boilers operating at a pressure of . The turbines were designed for a total of and gave "Unicorn" a speed of . The ship carried of fuel oil which gave her a range of at .

In order to land aircraft aboard, "Unicorn" was designed with a full-length, -long flight deck with arresting gear. She was also fitted with a catapult capable of launching a aircraft to a speed of . The ship had two hangars, each high. The upper hangar was 324ft by 65ft, and the lower 360ft by 62ft. Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by two aircraft lifts (elevators); the forward lift measured and the rear one . "Unicorn" could carry about 36 operational aircraft. Bulk petrol storage consisted of . During wartime, the ship's crew totaled 1200. The ship carried a self-propelled lighter under the rear of the flight deck to allow unflyable aircraft to be transferred between ships or to shore facilities. This lighter was lowered flush with the upper hangar deck so that an aircraft could be rolled onto it or an aircraft could be lifted onto it once the lighter was in the water.

"Unicorn" was armed with four twin mounts for the 45-calibre QF 4-inch Mk XVI dual purpose gun. This mounting could elevate from −10 to +80°. The Mk XVI gun fired about 12 high-explosive shells per minute at a muzzle velocity of . Against surface targets it had a range of and a maximum ceiling of , but an effective anti-aircraft range of much less. She was also equipped with four quadruple mounts for the QF 2-pounder Mk VIII gun ("pom-pom"). These gun mounts could depress to −10° and elevate to a maximum of +80°. The Mk VIII 2-pounder gun fired a shell at a muzzle velocity of to a distance of . The gun's rate of fire was approximately 96–98 rounds per minute. Close-range air defence was provided by twelve 20 mm Oerlikon autocannon, in two twin mounts and eight single ones. The Oerlikon fired a shell at a muzzle velocity of . It had a rate of fire of 465–480 rounds per minute and a maximum range of .

The ship was equipped with two HACS (High Angle Control System) directors on her island and each "pom-pom" mount had its own director as well. "Unicorn" was the first ship to mount a Type 281B early-warning radar, and each HACS director was fitted with a Type 285 gunnery radar.

"Unicorn" was ordered on 14 April 1939, and laid down at Harland and Wolff in Belfast, Northern Ireland on 29 June. Her construction was delayed several times in favour of higher priority projects and she was not launched until 20 November 1941. The ship was completed on 12 March 1943. In order to accelerate the ship's completion, the Admiralty decided in 1942 that she would not be equipped with her full suite of maintenance and repair equipment. Excluding her armament, "Unicorn" cost £2,531,000. 

Whilst working up, 818 and 824 Squadrons flew aboard in April 1943. 818 Squadron had nine Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers and 824 Squadron had six. 887 Squadron, with nine Supermarine Seafire IIC fighters was also embarked during this time. In late May, "Unicorn" escorted Convoy MKF 15 to Gibraltar while carrying a number of Royal Air Force Bristol Beaufighters that she off-loaded there. She escorted the returning convoy back to the Clyde in early June. Together with the aircraft carrier , the ship made a sweep towards the Norwegian coast as part of Operation "Governor", a diversion for the Allied landings in Sicily in early July. For this operation, 887 Squadron was replaced by 800 Squadron with Hawker Sea Hurricanes.

"Unicorn" was assigned to Force V, a flotilla of British carriers, commanded by Admiral Philip Vian, intended to provide air cover to Operation "Avalanche", the Allied landings at Salerno. In preparation for this mission, the ship disembarked all of her Swordfish, except for a small detachment of three from 818 Squadron for self-defence, and the Sea Hurricanes of 800 Squadron. They were replaced by Seafires of 809 and 897 Squadrons. Each of the Seafire squadrons had 10 aircraft, for a total of 33. "Unicorn" joined the escort carriers of Force V in August at Gibraltar before they moved forward to the Central Mediterranean for intensive training prior to the commencement of the amphibious landing on 9 September.

The ship's Seafires flew 75 sorties on the first day of operations and 60 on 10 September, but the Seafire was not well suited to carrier landings in low wind conditions and many were damaged in landing accidents. 44 sorties were flown on 11 September and only 18 on 12 September, even though "Unicorn"s mechanics had managed to repair ten Seafires over the previous night. The fighter shortage grew so acute during the operation that fighters from the carriers "Illustrious" and , intended to provide distant cover against an attempt by the Italian fleet to interfere with the invasion, staged forward to "Unicorn" in order to provide air cover over the landings. By 12 September, the situation had improved so that 887 Squadron was able to fly off six Seafires to a temporary airfield ashore.

The ship returned to the UK on 20 September with a full load of damaged Seafires, in addition to her own aircraft, that were off-loaded at Glasgow to be repaired. Afterwards, she was refitted by her builders and reconfigured for her designed role as an aircraft repair ship.

At the end of December 1943, "Unicorn" joined "Illustrious", the battlecruiser and the battleships and , the other reinforcements for the Eastern Fleet. Only four Swordfish from 818 Squadron were carried aboard at this time. The ship delivered a consignment of aircraft to Royal Navy Air Station Cochin, India, on 27 January 1944 before arriving at Trincomalee, Ceylon on 2 February. In addition to her repair duties, the ship was often used for deck-landing practice. She was given a brief refit in Bombay during May. On 23 August, 818 Squadron was transferred to and later disbanded. On 7 November, 817 Squadron flew aboard to provide anti-submarine protection with its Fairey Barracudas as "Unicorn" was ordered to Durban, South Africa. There she was to be modified with separate workshops and additional equipment to accommodate American engines which used different screw threads and electrical fittings.

That same month, "Unicorn" was transferred to the newly formed BPF. She left Durban on 1 January 1945 and arrived at Colombo, Ceylon where she conducted deck-landing practice for pilots new to the BPF. The ship loaded 82 aircraft and 120 engines later in the month for transport to Australia, emptying the available stocks of the Eastern Fleet, and departed for Sydney on 29 January. "Unicorn" arrived on 12 February and disembarked her stored aircraft. She sailed for Manus Island, in the Admiralty Islands, on 28 February to support the BPF's training before the opening stages of Operation "Iceberg". The ship arrived at San Pedro Bay, Philippines on 27 March which was to serve as the BPF's intermediate replenishment base while it supported Operation "Iceberg".

The BPF was tasked to attack Japanese airfields in the Sakishima Islands and Formosa before and during the early stages of the invasion of Okinawa. "Unicorn" was primarily engaged in preparing aircraft for issue to the operational squadrons aboard the fleet carriers during this time, rather than repair them, but she did repair, modify or service 105 aircraft in March–May 1945. The ship sailed for Australia on 22 May and arrived in Sydney on 1 June. She sailed for Brisbane on 6 June to have her bottom cleaned at the Cairncross Dockyard and to load more replacement aircraft. "Unicorn" arrived at Manus on 22 July to prepare for operations off Japan. She was still there when Japan surrendered on 15 August. The ship began to ferry aircraft, equipment and men back to Australia after the surrender, a task which ended on 6 November, when she arrived at Sydney. "Unicorn" departed for home in December 1945 and arrived in Plymouth in January 1946. She was decommissioned and placed in reserve.

In 1949, "Unicorn" was reactivated for service in the Far East, in support of the carrier . She sailed from HMNB Devonport on 22 September with a cargo of Seafires and Fireflies. When the Korean War broke out in June 1950, the ship was disembarking aircraft, equipment and her maintenance personnel at RAF Sembawang, Singapore in preparation to return home and then to reserve. The Admiralty ordered her to be used as a replenishment carrier to ferry replacement aircraft and supplies to the Royal Navy and Commonwealth aircraft carriers operating in Korean waters. "Unicorn" left Singapore on 11 July and arrived at Sasebo, Japan on 20 July and transferred seven Seafires and five Fireflies to "Triumph". In August, the ship ferried the 1st Battalion of the Middlesex Regiment and the Headquarters of the 27th Brigade from Hong Kong to Pusan, arriving on 29 August. She delivered supplies to Sasebo before returning to Singapore to begin a refit.

"Unicorn" resumed her duties in December, carrying about 400 troops in addition to the usual aircraft, stores and equipment. She was used by pilots for deck-landing practice en route. In March, she ferried the Gloster Meteor jet fighters of No. 77 Squadron RAAF to Iwakuni, Japan. The ship remained there for the next three months so she could be used as an accommodation ship. Afterwards, "Unicorn" resumed her role as a ferry carrier. Whilst transiting the Shimonoseki Strait on 2 October, she destroyed the overhead power cables stretching between Honshu and Kyushu as they were sagging lower than normal due to a heavy snowfall. On 21 November, "Unicorn" and the carrier exchanged crews at Singapore and the ship began a refit shortly afterwards. After her refit was completed on 20 January 1952, she returned to her ferry duties. In April, she was "adopted" by the Middlesex Regiment (possibly one of only three ships to be honoured by an Army regiment). During operations by in July, the ship acted as a spare flight deck to allow for damaged aircraft to land without disrupting the strike operations. She arrived back at Singapore on 27 July to load more replacement aircraft, including Meteors, and sailed on 9 August for Japan. During September, "Unicorn" borrowed four of "Ocean"s Hawker Sea Fury fighters to fly combat air patrols over the fleet whilst the latter ship conducted strike operations. She was docked for maintenance in October, and embarked the First Sea Lord, Admiral Rhoderick McGrigor and the Commander-in-Chief, Far East Station for a tour of Commonwealth forces in Japan. At one point, "Unicorn" became the only aircraft carrier to conduct a shore bombardment during wartime when she engaged North Korean coastwatchers at Chopekki Point.

The ship returned to Singapore for another refit on 15 December and did not leave Singapore until 17 July 1953. On 26 July, en route for Japan, "Unicorn" received a distress call from , saying that she was under attack by pirates. The carrier closed on the freighter's position at high speed and the pirates abandoned their prize when "Unicorn" circled the freighter with all guns bearing at less than . The Korean Armistice Agreement came into effect the following day, but the ship accompanied "Ocean" on two patrols on 30 July and 25–29 August to monitor North Korean compliance with the terms of the armistice. She sailed for home on 15 October and arrived at Devonport on 17 November, where she returned to reserve.

In 1951, "Unicorn" was considered for modernisation to make her capable of operating modern, heavier jet aircraft. This would have required fitting of a steam catapult, reinforcing her flight deck to handle heavier aircraft and moving and enlarging her forward lift to make room for the new catapult and larger aircraft. A new crane would also have been necessary to handle the heavier aircraft. The Director of Naval Construction proposed to combine both of her hangars into a single one to eliminate problems with hangar height, but this was rejected because of the excessive cost. This reconstruction would have begun in July 1954, but the entire scheme was cancelled in November 1952 because providing existing carriers with angled flight decks was much more important.

"Unicorn" was redesignated as a Ferry Carrier in June 1953. The ship was reduced to extended reserve in March 1957 and placed on the disposal list in 1958. "Unicorn" was sold for scrap in June 1959 and arrived at Dalmuir on 15 June to begin the process. Her hull was broken up at Troon in 1960.





</doc>
<doc id="2187605" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2187605" title="1997 Pacific hurricane season">
1997 Pacific hurricane season

The 1997 Pacific hurricane season was a very active hurricane season. With hundreds of deaths and hundreds of millions of dollars in damage, this season was one of the costliest and deadliest Pacific hurricane seasons. This was due to the exceptionally strong 1997–98 El Niño event. The 1997 Pacific hurricane season officially started on May 15, 1997, in the eastern Pacific, and on June 1, 1997, in the central Pacific, and lasted until November 30, 1997. These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when almost all tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean.

Several storms impacted land. The first was Tropical Storm Andres which killed four people and left another two missing. In August, Tropical Storm Ignacio took an unusual path, and its extratropical remnants caused minor damage in the Pacific Northwest and California. Linda became the most intense east Pacific hurricane in recorded history, a record it maintained until it was surpassed by Hurricane Patricia in 2015. Although it never made landfall, it produced large surf in Southern California and as a result five people had to be rescued. Hurricane Nora caused flooding and damage in the Southwestern United States, while Olaf made two landfalls and caused eighteen deaths and several other people were reported missing. Hurricane Pauline killed several hundred people and caused record damage in southeastern Mexico. In addition, Super Typhoons Oliwa and Paka originated in the region before crossing the International Date Line and causing significant damage in the western Pacific. There were also two Category 5 hurricanes: Linda and Guillermo.

Activity in the season was above average. The season produced 17 named storms, which was a little above normal. The average number of named storms per year is 15. The 1997 season also had 9 hurricanes, compared to the average of 8. There were also 7 major hurricanes compared to the average of 4.

The 1997 Pacific hurricane season officially started on May 15, 1997, in the eastern Pacific, and on June 1, 1997, in the central Pacific, and lasted until November 30, 1997. These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean. This season exceeded these boundaries appreciably, as Tropical Storm Paka formed December 2, and dissipated nineteen days later after crossing the International Dateline and then moved into the Western Pacific.

The 1997 Pacific hurricane season was fairly active, due to the strong El Niño that was occurring at the time. El Niño causes wind shear to be reduced and water temperatures to increase, resulting in conditions more conductive for tropical cyclones in the East Pacific. There were 24 cyclones in total, including five unnamed tropical depressions. Of these, 19 were in the east Pacific (east of 140°W). Of these, eight peaked at tropical storm intensity, while ten reached hurricane status. Seven of these reached Category 3 intensity or higher on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale, including central Pacific cyclones Super Typhoons Oliwa and Paka, which became typhoons after crossing into the western Pacific. The first hurricane of the year was Hurricane Dolores, and the first major hurricane was Hurricane Enrique. Most months during the year had several storms, but no records were set for storms in any particular month.

Activity in the central Pacific was also above average. Two tropical storms formed, as did several tropical depressions. A number of storms moved in from the east. With a total of nine tropical cyclones entering or forming there, this was the fourth highest number since satellite observations began. The first storm formed on June 1. The last storm dissipated December 21, which gives this season the latest known end. However, if December 6, the date the last storm crossed the dateline is taken to be the end, this season has the second latest end, behind the 1983 season and tied with the 1957 season.
The National Hurricane Center uses Accumulated Cyclone Energy (ACE) to rank hurricane seasons as above-normal, near-normal, and below-normal. This season has a total of 17 tropical storms, 9 hurricanes, and 7 major hurricanes. The total ACE of this season is 160*10 kt in the east Pacific proper. This qualifies this season as above-normal.

Andres originated from a disturbance that slowly organized and formed into Tropical Depression One-E on June 1. The next day, it reached tropical storm status as a second circulation formed north-northwest of the initial circulation. However, the former circulation became dominant, and Andres intensified slightly. After a brief period of a normal track to the northwest, Andres was picked up by westerly winds and became the first named storm to threaten Central America. Initially forecast to cross the isthmus and enter the Caribbean Sea, Andres instead turned to the southeast and paralleled the coast. This was the first time since record-keeping began that any East Pacific storm had taken such a path. Andres then turned back to the northeast. It weakened to a depression and made landfall near San Salvador on June 7 and dissipated shortly thereafter.

Among the casualties were two fishers who were reported missing. Andres caused power outages, flooding rivers, several car crashes, and damage to roughly ten homes. The highest rainfall report from Mexico was at Mazatan. Damage was noted in parts of Nicaragua. Andres also killed four people in Usulután, El Salvador due to heavy flooding.
Tropical Depression Two-E formed from a broad area of low pressure on June 9. Six hours later the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Blanca. This system developed a good outflow, and reached its peak intensity with winds of 45 mph (75 km/h). However, its circulation was not well-defined and a weakening trend began, and Blanca was downgraded to a depression on June 12. It lost its closed circulation shortly thereafter and was thus declared dissipated.

Blanca briefly threatened land on June 10 as warnings and watches were established by the Mexican "Servicio Meteorológico Nacional". Shortly thereafter, a ridge of high pressure turned Blanca away from the coast. As Blanca moved just south of the Mexican coast, it dropped a total of of rainfall at Fincha Chayabe/Maragaritas. There were no major damage or casualties as Blanca's impact was generally minimal.

Tropical Depression Three-E formed June 21. Moving rapidly westward, it never strengthened and the winds of the depression soon decreased. It dissipated early on June 24. The depression never impacted land.

On June 22, showers increased associated with a tropical wave several hundred miles away from land. Three days later, deep convection became more concentrated, and the system became a tropical depression. It intensified into Tropical Storm Carlos as banding features increased and the outflow became better defined. As it moved west, convection diminished as Carlos moved into cooler water. Shortly thereafter, increased wind shear took its toll on Carlos as the low-level center became exposed from the deep convection. Carlos weakened into a depression early on June 27, and dissipated June 28. However, a swirl of clouds remained for a couple of days. Except for Socorro Island, which the system passed close to, Carlos never threatened land. No indications of casualties or damage were reported.

On the afternoon of June 29, Tropical Depression Five-E formed. It erratically moved westward. On July 1, the depression weakened slightly, but quickly reintensified. It dissipated on July 4, without even threatening land.

In early July, shower activity increased in association with an area of disturbed weather. With surface pressures lower than normal for a tropical disturbance, deep convection increased further and Tropical Depression Six-E formed late on July 5 and reaching tropical storm status the following day and was named Dolores. Despite moderate wind shear, very cold cloud tops formed as the winds increased to , a moderate tropical storm. Moving westward, Dolores strengthened into the first hurricane of the season on July 7 as a ragged eye formed.

Dolores continued to intensify and it reached a peak windspeed of , a strong Category 1 hurricane, two days later. Meanwhile, Dolores became the first hurricane in over two years to cross longitude 125°W. Shortly thereafter, the hurricane started losing strength as it moved over cooler waters. The eye dissipated from satellite imagery while the associated thunderstorm activity became sheared. Dolores weakened back into a tropical storm on July 10 and a tropical depression the next day. The cyclone then crossed into the Central Pacific Hurricane Center's area of responsibility (west of longitude 140°W) while producing minimal shower activity. It dissipated on July 12. The hurricane was not a threat to any land.

The first major hurricane of the season originated from a broad area of low pressure on July 8 near the Gulf of Tehuantepec. The thunderstorms gradually became more concentrated and a tropical depression formed on July 12. It strengthened into a tropical storm twelve hours later, and then began to rapidly intensify as convection increased further near the center. It became a hurricane on July 13. Enrique continued to steadily intensify and became a Category 2 hurricane on July 14. The next day, Enrique reached its peak intensity of and peak pressure 960 mbar (hPa) on July 14. Shortly thereafter, the hurricane outflow became asymmetrical and it began to weaken over cool waters. It weakened fairly quickly and was downgraded into a Category 2 hurricane on July 15. It then lost hurricane intensity later that day. On July 16 the winds had decreased further to . Enrique weakened into a depression the next day, and degenerated into a swirl of clouds shortly thereafter. The system never threatened land.

A large area of disturbed weather formed on July 13. It then organized into a depression south of Manzanillo, Colima, on July 14. Intensification was delayed by wind shear due to its proximity to Enrique for about two days. However, it became a tropical storm late July 15 as it moved west-northwestward. Continuing to intensify, an eye formed. Based on this, Felicia was upgraded into a hurricane on July 17. Its development was again halted by increased wind shear, and as such it leveled off in intensity. After the shear decreased, Felicia began to intensify and the hurricane's winds reached and its pressure fell to 948 mbar (hPa), making it a moderate low-end Category 4 hurricane. Shear increased for the third time, and then moved into cooler waters. It began to weaken as it moved west-northwest. On July 20, it lost major hurricane intensity. Shortly before being downgraded to a tropical storm, it crossed 140°W. A strong wind shear took toll on Felicia and it was downgraded into a tropical depression July 22. No damage or deaths were reported in wake of the hurricane.

Tropical Depression One-C formed on July 26 from a disturbance that had been showing signs of organization for the past three days. It moved west to southwest through an unfavorable environment. On the morning of July 27, it dissipated due to strong wind shear caused by an upper-level trough. The system never impacted land, thus no damage was reported.
A tropical wave emerged into the Pacific Ocean on July 27. It organized into a depression July 30 and was named Tropical Storm Guillermo the next day. It quickly intensified, reaching hurricane status on August 1. Guillermo became a major hurricane August 2. It reached Category 4 intensity on August 3. Continuing to rapidly intensify, Guillermo attained Category 5 strength August 4. The tropical cyclone peak intensity was 919 mbar (hPa) and .

Guillermo then weakened slowly, becoming a tropical storm August 8. It crossed 140°W and entered the Central Pacific. It weakened to a depression late August 10, but restrengthened back into a storm 24 hours later when it encountered a small area of warmer water. It weakened to a depression for the second and final time August 15 and became an extratropical cyclone early the next day. The storm's remnants recurved over the far northern Pacific. They were tracked to a point west of Vancouver Island. The remnants persisted for a few more days and drifted south before being absorbed by a mid-latitude cyclone August 24 off the coast of California.

A tropical wave that had showed signs of development emerged into the East Pacific and organized into Tropical Depression Ten-E on August 10. Despite some wind shear, the depression managed to become a tropical storm late on August 11. Hilda reached its peak intensity as a moderate 50 mph (85 km/h) tropical storm the next day. After maintaining its peak intensity for 24 hours, it gradually weakened due to increasing wind shear On August 14, shear weakened Hilda to a depression and the cyclone dissipated early the next morning. Hilda was no threat to land and caused no known damage or deaths.
Tropical Storm Ignacio formed first as a depression in an area of disturbed weather on August 17. Twelve hours later, it organized into a tropical storm. Its location of tropical cyclone formation was further north and west of where most East Pacific tropical cyclones develop. Steering currents pulled Ignacio north, where it encountered wind shear and cooler waters. Ignacio never intensified beyond 40 mph (65 km/h) and then was downgraded into a depression on August 18. It last transitioned into an extratropical cyclone 24 hours later. It was then absorbed by a cyclone associated with the remnants of Hurricane Guillermo.

Ignacio's remnants moved north, bringing gusty winds to California coastal waters before dissipating. Severe flooding was recorded along Highway 97 with a debris flow estimated at and deep. They caused rainfall as far north as the U.S. state of Washington. Thunderstorms caused power outages in central California.
During the third week of August, a tropical disturbance formed far from land. Although the system was located over warmer than average sea surface temperatures, the upper-level environment was initially unfavorable. However the environment gradually became more conducive for tropical cyclone formation and Tropical Depression Twelve-E formed August 25 from an area of disturbed weather in a rather easterly location. It became a tropical storm the next day and a hurricane on August 27. Intensification was rapid, with winds increasing from to in just 6 hours. Continuing to rapidly intensify, it reached its peak intensity as a low-end category 4 hurricane. After maintaining peak intensity for 30 hours, it moved north-northwest and encountered increasing wind shear which reduced its winds from to in just 24 hours. Jimena completely dissipated on August 30, not long after entering the Central Pacific Basin. Hurricane Jimena was of no threat to land.
Tropical storm Oliwa began as a tropical disturbance that had meandered south of Johnston Atoll. It organized into Tropical Depression Two-C on September 2. Later that day, it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Oliwa (Hawaiian for Oliver) as it slowly moved towards the west. It crossed the dateline late on September 3 and entered the Joint Typhoon Warning Center's Area of Responsibility.) In the Pacific Ocean, tropical cyclones are not renamed when they cross basin boundaries, so Oliwa kept its name.

Oliwa passed south of Wake Island on September 6, where it caused heavy rains but no damage. On September 7, Oliwa started a period of rapid strengthening, becoming a typhoon on September 8 and a Super Typhoon eight hours later. Oliwa stayed at that intensity for over two days. While still a strong typhoon, Oliwa passed near the Northern Marianas Islands. It then started weakening as it curved towards Japan. It made landfall as a minimal typhoon September 16. It quickly dissipated later that same day. Typhoon Oliwa caused 12 fatalities and left 30,000 people homeless. Damage totaled to 4.36 billion yen ($50.1 million USD).

Tropical Storm Kevin, first displayed hints of development while located near Panama, and developed a well-defined circulation after emerging into the Pacific. It was classified as a tropical depression in the Pacific on September 3 while located south-south west of Baja California. Convection increased and the outflow of the storm became better defined. As such, it became a tropical storm on the morning of September 4. Gradually intensifying, it reached it peak intensity as a mid-level tropical storm on September 5. As it moved westbound, it maintained its intensity for 12 hours. The environment was unfavorable, and two days later, Kevin weakened to a depression when deep convection ceased. It dissipated early on September 7, having never posed a threat to land.

A tropical disturbance formed on September 9 and became Tropical Depression Fourteen-E later that day. The cyclone moved northwest and strengthened into a tropical storm on September 10. Linda then rapidly intensified, reaching hurricane intensity the next day as an eye formed. On September 12, Linda reached its peak intensity, with maximum sustained winds of —making it a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale—and a minimum pressure of 902 mbar (902 hPa), making it the most intense Pacific hurricane ever recorded until Hurricane Patricia surpassed it in 2015. However, Linda soon moved over cooler waters, and began to weaken, falling below hurricane intensity on September 16. It then slowly weakened and dissipated on September 17.

Linda passed very near Socorro Island. In addition, early forecasts predicted that Linda would make landfall in California. The landfall never materialized and warnings or watches were not necessary for any location. However, Linda caused large surf, which crashed ashore in California, where it swept five people off a jetty. Moisture related to Linda also contributed to a landslide in southern California that destroyed or damaged 79 houses.

An area of disturbed weather formed early on September 10. It became better organized two days later as convection increased, and then organized into Tropical Depression Fifteen-E late on September 12. Moving slowly in a westward direction, it strengthened into a tropical storm in the morning of September 14. Later that day, the system reached its peak intensity of . Meanwhile, the storm's forward speed slowed down even more, and it turned to the south. It then encountered an area of strong wind shear, and it weakened into a depression on September 15 as the center of circulation became displaced from the deep convection. The shear continued to weaken, and the tropical cyclone dissipated late on September 16. There were no deaths or damage.
A large area of disturbed weather moved into the Pacific on September 12. It then organized into Tropical Depression Sixteen-E on September 16 and quickly strengthened into a tropical storm. Early on September 18, a poorly defined and ragged eye appeared on infrared imagery. Shortly thereafter, its winds reached . Nora eventually peaked at Category 4. It then encountered water temperature anomalies, and fluctuated in strength. Then, a trough pulled Nora northward and accelerated the storm. After weakening to a Category 1, Nora made landfall in northern Baja California and stayed a tropical storm as it entered the United States. At that time, however, most of the deep rest convection was displaced to the northeast. Nora dissipated over Arizona, but its remnants kept going north.

Hurricane Nora was the first Pacific hurricane to bring gale-force winds to the Continental United States since Kathleen in 1976. In Mexico, Nora produced high waves, flooding, and heavy damage. Many homes were destroyed. In the United States, rains were heavy, and damage amounted to several hundred million dollars. Several hundred people were rendered homeless, and there was wind and flood damage in Arizona. Nora killed two people in Mexico, and several indirect deaths were reported in California.
A tropical disturbance left Central America on September 22. Despite some wind shear, the system gradually became better organized and a tropical depression formed September 26, being upgraded to a tropical storm several hours later. The cyclone immediately moved north. Instead of strengthening into a hurricane before landfall as forecasted, Olaf weakened due to its proximity to land. On September 29, Olaf made landfall near Salina Cruz, Oaxaca.

Olaf, as a tropical depression, moved westward, far out to sea. Operationally, Olaf was believed to have dissipated for six days. however, in the Tropical Cyclone Report, a report issued several months after the hurricane's duration, it was believed to have remained a tropical cyclone the entire time. After restrengthening slightly, Olaf moved southeast on October 5 due to the influence of Hurricane Pauline. Olaf then turned north, and on October 12 made a second landfall near Manzanillo, Colima, as a tropical depression. Olaf's surface circulation weakened, and its remnants moved back out to sea, but did not redevelop.

Olaf resulted in some reports of damage and flooding in Mexico and Guatemala. During two time frames, from September 27 through October 2 and 10 through October 16, a total of of rainfall fell in association with Olaf in Soyalapa/Comaltepec. Several people were reported missing. Most of its damage was from its first landfall. Throughout southern Mexico, Guatemala and El Salvador, flooding caused by Olaf was blamed for eighteen deaths.
On October 3, a distinct area of disturbed weather formed. It drifted eastbound, and a well-defined low pressure soon formed. It became Tropical Depression Eighteen-E on October 5. Early the next day it intensified into tropical Storm Pauline. An eye feature developed on October 7 and as such Pauline was upgraded into a hurricane. In a favorable environment, the cyclone rapidly intensified, reaching Category 4 intensity. After fluctuating in intensity, interaction with land weakened Pauline to a Category 2 by the time it made landfall on October 9. It accelerated to the northwest, and passed over a mountainous region. The mountains disrupted Pauline's circulation, and squeezed the moisture from the hurricane. Pauline dissipated on October 10 while over Jalisco.

Hurricane Pauline was the deadliest storm of the season. Landslides and flooding caused by heavy rain caused tragic loss of life and left thousands homeless. There were at least 230 casualties. The Red Cross reported that 400 people died, but this was disputed by Mexican officials. Pauline was Mexico's deadliest hurricane since 1976's Liza. In addition, the hurricane caused $447.8 million in damage (1997 USD; $473 million 2008 USD).

A tropical disturbance formed near 140°W. It became Tropical Depression Three-C on October 6. The waters were very warm, and there was only moderate wind shear. However, the depression slowly moved westward without intensifying, and dissipated the next day.

A tropical disturbance formed in late October. It became Tropical Depression Four-C on October 30 well southwest of Hawaii. Although the waters were very warm, some dry air was located north of the system. It slowly moved westward without intensifying, and dissipated the next day as the circulation became exposed.
The first hurricane in November since 1991 formed from a tropical disturbance. Although the circulation was initially poorly defined, it later acquired enough organization and was classified as a tropical depression on November 7. It moved north until a trough of low pressure turned it to the northeast. It was named on November 8, and was upgraded to a hurricane the next day. It reached its peak intensity of 100 mph (160 km/h) and 973 mbar (hPa). Rick made landfall in Oaxaca – the same area devastated by Hurricane Pauline one month earlier – and quickly weakened, dissipating early on November 11.

The storm downed trees, washed out recently repaired roads, and disrupted communications in some small population centers. A total of of rain was reported at Astata/San Pedro Huameluca near the point of landfall in Mexico. No one was killed.

Rick is one of only eight known hurricanes to form in the Pacific Ocean east of the dateline in the month of November. The other ones are Nina, Tara, Iwa, Nora, Sergio, Kenneth, and Sandra of which only Rick, Tara, and Iwa directly impacted land. It was also the second-latest landfalling Pacific hurricane.
Tropical Depression Five-C formed on December 2, two days after the season ended. It was the second December tropical depression east of the dateline; 1983's Hurricane Winnie was the only other one. The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Paka (Hawaiian for Pat) while west of Palmyra Atoll. The system began to move westward at a steady pace. As Paka moved westward, dry air and wind shear disrupted its development until it crossed the dateline on December 6.

After entering the Western Pacific, the cyclone encountered a more favorable environment, resulting in rapid intensification. It became a typhoon on December 10 and passed near Kwajalein with winds of . It strengthened further, twice reaching Category 5 intensity. While a super typhoon, Paka passed close to Guam on December 17, causing major damage. Afterwards, Paka encountered a hostile environment and had completely dissipated by the evening of December 22.
This is a table of the storms in 1997 and their landfall(s), if any. Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect (an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident), but are still storm-related. Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical or a wave or low, but do not include impacts in the Western Pacific basin.

The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1997. Names that were not assigned are marked in gray. The names not retired from this list were used again in the 2003 season. This is the same list used for the 1991 season except for Felicia, which replaced Fefa. A storm was named Felicia for the first time in 1997. Also, the name "Dolores" was misspelled "Delores" in the 1991 season; in this and subsequent seasons, the typo was corrected.

For storms that form in the Central Pacific Hurricane Center's area of responsibility, encompassing the area between 140 degrees west and the International Date Line, all names are used in a series of four rotating lists. The next four names that were slated for use in 1997 are shown below, however, only two of them were used.

The World Meteorological Organization retired one name in the spring of 1998: Pauline. It was replaced in the 2003 season by Patricia. In 2006, a name from the Central Pacific list was retired due to its effects west of the International Dateline in this season: Paka. The name set to replace it is Pama.




</doc>
<doc id="2193264" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2193264" title="Publishers Clearing House">
Publishers Clearing House

Publishers Clearing House (PCH) is a direct marketing company that markets merchandise and magazine subscriptions with sweepstakes and prize-based games.

Publishers Clearing House was founded in 1953 by Harold Mertz to replace door-to-door magazine subscription sales by a single vendor offering multiple subscriptions by mail. It introduced its sweepstakes in 1967. In the early 1990s, the company was the subject of concerns and legal actions regarding whether consumers were misled about their odds of winning the sweepstakes and whether purchases increased their chances. By 2010, the company had reached settlements with all 50 states.

The company acquired search company Blingo in 2006, online gaming company Funtank in 2010, and mobile marketing company Liquid Wireless in 2012.

Publishers Clearing House was founded in 1953 in Port Washington, New York, by Harold Mertz, a former manager of a door-to-door sales team for magazine subscriptions. The company started in Mertz's basement with help from his wife LuEsther and daughter Joyce. Its first mailings were of 10,000 envelopes from Mertz's home in Long Island, New York, and offered 20 magazine subscriptions. 100 orders were received. Within a few years the company moved out of Mertz's basement into an office building and started hiring staff. When PCH moved its headquarters in 1969, its prior location was donated to the city and renamed the Harold E. Mertz community center. The company revenue had grown to US$50 million by 1981, and $100 million by 1988.

In 1967 PCH started its first sweepstakes as a way to increase subscription sales, based on the sweepstakes held by "Reader's Digest". The first prizes ranged from 25 cents to $10 and entrants had a 1 in 10 chance of winning. After the sweepstakes increased response rates to mailings, prizes of $5,000 and eventually $250,000 were offered. PCH began advertising the sweepstakes on TV in 1974. It was the only major multi-magazine subscription business until 1977. Former client Time Inc. and several other publishers formed American Family Publishers (AFP) to compete with PCH after the company refused repeated requests by Time for a larger share of sales revenue from magazine subscriptions.

AFP and PCH competed for exclusive rights to magazines and for the better promotion and prize ideas. When AFP increased their jackpot to $1 million, then to $10 million in 1985, PCH raised its prizes to match. $7 million in prizes were distributed by 1979, $40 million by 1991 and $137 million by 2000. In 1989 two members of its advertising team, Dave Sayer and Todd Sloane, started the Prize Patrol, a publicized event where winners are surprised with a check at their home. The idea was inspired by the 1950s television series "The Millionaire".

In 1992 thousands of discarded sweepstakes entries from contestants who had not bought magazine subscriptions were found in the company's trash, reinforcing beliefs that the company favored those who made purchases in selecting a sweepstakes winner. PCH said this was done by a disgruntled employee at their mail processing vendor. A class action ensued, which PCH settled by giving discarded entrants a second chance to win.

In the 1990s PCH and its primary competitor, AFP, experienced a series of legal troubles due to concerns that their mailings misled consumers about their odds of winning and implied that magazine purchases increased their chances. This led to the Deceptive Mail Prevention and Enforcement Act of 2000, which regulates direct mail businesses. At the senate hearings regarding this Act, PCH said most consumers were not confused about their chances of winning or that purchases did not increase their chances. The company said less than five percent of participants spend more than $300. Government officials from California said 5,000 local consumers paid more than $2,500 each in magazine purchases under the false belief that they were increasing their odds of winning the sweepstakes.

Industry sources estimated PCH's response rates decreased by 7-12 percent and its sales volume by 22 to 30 percent in response to the bad publicity from the lawsuits. In 2000, PCH laid off a quarter of its 800-person work force.

In 1994 PCH sent mailings telling recipients they were all "finalists", which led to a lawsuit involving the attorneys general of 14 US states. Later that year, PCH denied wrongdoing, but agreed to pay a settlement of $490,000 and to change their practices. Under the agreement, PCH said it would define terms like "finalist" and disclose the chances of winning.

In 1997, a contestant of competitor AFP flew to Tampa, Florida, thinking he had won, though he had not. The resulting publicity caused more lawsuits for both companies. PCH reached a $30 million national settlement in 1999. In 2000, another $18 million settlement was reached with 24 states, after the company sent mass mailings that said "You are a winner!" and used mock personalized checks. PCH agreed to avoid similar mailings in the future, and add a "sweepstakes fact box" to mailings.

State attorneys spoke out against the national settlement from 2000 and additional lawsuits were filed by individual states. Another $34 million settlement was reached in 2001 in a lawsuit involving 25 states, bringing the total settlements since 1999 to $82 million. As part of the settlement, PCH was required to avoid terms like "Guaranteed Winner," add disclaimers to mailings saying that the recipient has not won and that purchasing merchandise won't increase their chances. PCH reached settlements with all fifty states and agreed to work with a "compliance counsel." PCH apologized in the settlement and said it would contact customers who had spent more than $1,000 on merchandise the prior year.

PCH also reached an agreement with Iowa in 2007. In 2010 the company paid $3.5 million to the Attorneys General of 32 states and the District of Columbia to settle possible contempt charges that it had violated the terms of the 2001 agreement. The company denied wrongdoing, but agreed to work with both an ombudsman and a compliance counsel who would review its mailings quarterly.

In April 2014, an investigation by the Senate Special Committee on Aging concluded that PCH had "pushed the limits" of prior agreements and that additional legislation may be needed.TMZ.com retrieved March 27,2019

In April, 2018 a lawsuit was filed in United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York alleging that PCH engaged in deceptive marketing practices through direct mail and email marketing campaigns, as well as targeting elderly, in violation of federal and state law.

PCH began selling merchandise in 1985 with two products. After a Hershey's Chocolate Cookbook and a diet cookbook sold more than other products, the company began expanding into jewelry, media, collectibles, household products and others. The company also shifted its focus online. It began selling magazine subscriptions and merchandise on PCH.com in 1996. In 2006, it acquired Blingo Inc., an ad-supported metasearch engine that was later re-branded as PCH Search and Win. PCH ran contests on Twitter, Facebook, and Myspace. iPhone apps for slot games and trivia were developed. The company created online play-and-win sites like PCH Games (formerly Candystand) and PCHQuiz4Cash, with air-hockey and video poker games.

In December 2010, PCH acquired Funtank and its online gaming site Candystand.com. In 2011, PCH promoted a "$5,000 every week for life" sweepstakes in TV ads and the front page of AOL.com. The following year the company acquired a mobile marketing company, Liquid Wireless. The company utilized, then stopped then started again utilizing coregistration (through other websites) to expand its customer base.

In 2008, a PCH spokesperson said the digital properties were intended to attract younger consumers. By 2013, the internet had become PCH's primary channel of interaction with consumers. "The New York Times" described the digital transition as "part of an overall effort to collect information on Web users, show them advertisements and use the registration information for PCH’s mailing lists."

PCH is a direct-marketing company that sells merchandise, magazine subscriptions and operates several prize-based websites. While best known for the sweepstakes and Prize Patrol it uses to promote its magazine subscriptions, the majority of the company's revenue now comes from merchandise. The company has been selling books, media, jewelry and other consumer items since the 1980s. PCH operates eight websites, including PCH Search and Win, PCH Lotto, PCH Games, PCH Save and Win, and Candystand.

The company also sells magazine subscriptions at a discount and advertises subscriptions along with its sweepstakes. It's estimated that companies like PCH keep 75-90 percent of the fees from the original subscription, while publishers use the increased distribution to improve circulation numbers and revenue from renewals. PCH popularized the idea of using sweepstakes to sell magazine subscriptions in the direct-marketing market and became known by detractors as a producer of junk-mail for advertising through mass-mailings. Documents filed with the New York State Department in 1993 said that year the company mailed 220 million envelopes. Frequent buyers can receive 30-40 mailings a year.

Although PCH advertises its sweepstakes along with magazine subscriptions, no purchase is necessary to enter or win. In 1995, PCH began the tradition of announcing winners of its $10 million prize just after the Super Bowl. As of 2012, $225 million in prizes have been distributed. Some of its larger prizes are for $5,000 a week for life, or $10 million. Prizes can also range from $1 Amazon gift cards to $2,500, $1 million or $3 million. The larger cash prizes are paid in installments, typically with a balloon payment at 30 years, reducing the present value of prizes to much less than their nominal values.

According to the official rules, as of February, 2019, the odds of winning “$7000 a Week for Life” in Giveaway 13000 are 1 in 6.2 billion. The odds of winning a PCH sweepstakes vary depending on the number of entries and what prize or sweepstakes is involved. Smaller prizes have better odds that may vary from one in 223 to one in 80,000, depending on the prize.

The Prize Patrol surprises sweepstakes winners at their homes, work or other locations with cash prizes and captures the event on video. Since their introduction in 1989, these reality TV-style videos of prize-winners surprised at their doorstep with checks for $1,000 to $10 million have been used in widely broadcast television commercials, and, more recently, in the company's online acquisition efforts, websites and social media communications. In 2013, a $5 million television campaign modified the traditional prize patrol commercial by digitally altering video from classic sitcoms like "The Brady Bunch" and "Gilligan's Island" to show the prize patrol visiting characters in the show.

The Prize Patrol has made in-person appearances or delivered prizes on TV programs such as "The Oprah Winfrey Show" and "The Price Is Right". Their surprise winning moments have been spoofed by Jay Leno, Conan O'Brien and the cast of "Saturday Night Live"; woven into the plots of movies such as "Let's Go to Prison", "The Sentinel" and "Knight and Day"; and the subject of cartoons.



</doc>
<doc id="2200400" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2200400" title="German Eastern Marches Society">
German Eastern Marches Society

German Eastern Marches Society (, also known in German as ') was a German radical, extremely nationalist xenophobic organization founded in 1894. Mainly among Poles, it was sometimes known acronymically as "Hakata" or "H-K-T" after its founders von Hansemann, Kennemann and von T"'iedemann. Its main aims were the promotion of Germanization of Poles living in Prussia and destruction of Polish national identity in German eastern provinces. Contrary to many similar nationalist organizations created in that period, the Ostmarkenverein had relatively close ties with the government and local administration, which made it largely successful, even though it opposed both the policy of seeking some "modo vivendi" with the Poles pursued by Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg and Leo von Caprivi's policies of relaxation of anti-Polish measures. While of limited significance and often overrated, the organization formed a notable part of German anti-democratic pluralist part of the political landscape of the Wilhelmine era.

Initially formed in Posen, in 1896 its main headquarters was moved to Berlin. In 1901 it had roughly 21,000 members, the number rose to 48,000 in 1913, though some authors claim the membership was as high as 220,000. After Poland was re-established following World War I in 1918, the society continued its rump activities in the Weimar Republic until it was closed down by the Nazis in 1934 who created the new organisation with similar activity Bund Deutscher Osten.

Following the Partitions of Poland in late 18th century, a large part of the former Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth (namely the regions of Greater Poland and Royal, the later West Prussia) was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia, the predecessor of the German Empire, which was formed in 1871. Primarily inhabited by Poles, Greater Poland initially was formed into a semi-autonomous Grand Duchy of Posen, granted with a certain level of self-governance. However, under Otto von Bismarck's government, the ethnic and cultural tensions in the region began to rise. This was paired by growing tendencies of nationalism, imperialism, and chauvinism within the German society. The tendencies went in two different directions, but were linked to each other. On one hand, a new world order was demanded with desires of creating a German colonial empire. And on the other, feelings of hostility towards other national groups within the German state were growing.

The situation was further aggravated by Bismarck's policies of Kulturkampf that in Posen Province took on a much more nationalistic character than in other parts of Germany and included a number of specifically anti-Polish laws that resulted in the Polish and German communities living in a virtual apartheid. Many observers believed these policies only further stoked the Polish independence movement. There is also a question regarding possible personal antipathy towards Poles behind Bismarck's motivation in pursuing the Kulturkampf. Unlike in other parts of the German Empire, in Greater Poland—then known under the German name of "Provinz Posen"—the Kulturkampf did not cease after the end of the decade. Although Bismarck finally signed an informal alliance with the Catholic Church against the socialists, the policies of Germanization did continue in Polish-inhabited parts of the country. However, with the end of von Bismarck's rule and the advent of Leo von Caprivi, the pressure for Germanisation was lessened and many German landowners feared that this would lead to lessening the German control over the Polish areas and in the end deprive Germany of what they saw as a natural reservoir of workforce and land. Although the actual extent of von Caprivi's concessions towards the Poles was very limited, the German minority of Greater Poland feared that this was a step too far, and that von Caprivi's government would cede the power in Greater Poland to the Polish clergy and nobility. The Hakata slogan was: "You are standing opposite to the most dangerous, fanatic enemy of German existence, German honour and German reputation in the world: The Poles."

Under such circumstances a number of nationalist organizations and pressure groups was formed, all collectively known as the "nationale Verbände". Among them were the Pan-German League, German Navy League, German Colonial Society, German Anti-Semitic Organization, and the Defence League. Many landowners feared that their interests would not be properly represented by those organizations and decided to form their own society. It was officially launched November 3, 1894 in Poznań, then referred to under its German name of "Posen". The opening meeting elected an assembly and a general committee composed of 227 members, among them 104 from the Province of Posen and Province of West Prussia, and additional 113 from other parts of German Empire. The social base of the newly founded society was wide and included a large spectrum of people. Some 60% of the representatives of areas of Germany primarily inhabited by Poles were the Junkers, the landed aristocracy, mostly with ancient feudal roots. The rest were all groups of middle class Germans, that is civil servants (30%), teachers (25%), merchants, craftsmen, Protestant priests, and clerks.

The official aims of the society was "strengthening and rallying of Germandom in the Eastern Marches through the revival and consolidation of German national feeling and the economic strengthening of the German people" in the area. This was seen as justified due to alleged passivity of Germans in the eastern territories. Officially it was to work for the Germans rather than against the Poles. However, in reality the aims of the society were anti-Polish and aimed at ousting the Polish landowners and peasants from their land at all cost. It was argued that the Poles were an insidious threat to German national and cultural integrity and domination in the east. The propagandistic rationale behind formation of the H-K-T was presented as a national Polish-German struggle to assimilate one group into the other. It was argued that either the Poles would be successfully Germanized, or the Germans living in the east would face the Polonization themselves. This conflict was often portrayed as a constant biological struggle between the "eastern barbarity" and "European culture". To counter the alleged threat, the Society promoted the destruction of Polish national identity in the Polish lands held by Germany, and prevention of "polonization" of the Eastern Marches, that is the growing national sentiment amongst local Poles paired with migration of Poles from rural areas to the cities of the region.

In accordance with the views of Chancellor von Bismarck himself, the Society saw the language question as a key factor in determining one's loyalty towards the state. Because of this view, it insisted on extending the ban on usage of the Polish language in schools, to other instances of everyday life, including public meetings, books, and newspapers. During a 1902 meeting in Danzig (modern Gdańsk), the Society demanded from the government that the Polish language be banned even from voluntary classes in schools and universities, that the language be banned from public usage and that the Polish language newspapers be either liquidated or forced to be printed in bilingual versions.

With limited local success and support, the Ostmarkenverein functioned primarily as a nationwide propaganda and pressure group. Its press organ, the "Die Ostmark" (Eastern March) was one of the primary sources of information on the "Polish Question" for the German public and shaped the national-conservative views towards the ethnic conflict in the eastern territories of Germany. The Society also opened a number of libraries in the Polish-dominated areas, where it supported the literary production of books and novels promoting an aggressive stance against the Poles. The popular "Ostmarkenromane" (Ostmark novels) depicted Poles as non-white and struggled to portray a two race dichotomy between "black" Poles and "white" Germans

However, it did not limit itself to mere cultural struggle for domination but also promoted a physical removal of the Poles from their lands in order to make space for the German colonization. The pressure of the H-K-T indeed made the government of von Caprivi adopt a firmer stance against the Poles. The ban on Polish schools was reintroduced and all teaching was to be done in German language. The ban was also used by the German police to harass the Polish trade union movement as they interpreted all public meetings as educational undertakings.

An important issue was the colonisation of Polish territory: the organisation actively supported the nationalist policy of Germanisation through removal of Polish population and promoting settlement of ethnic Germans in the eastern regions of the German Empire. It was among the main supporters of creation of the Settlement Commission, an official authority with a fund to buy up the land from the Poles and redistribute it among German settlers. Since 1905 the organisation also proposed and lobbied for a law that would allow forced eviction of Polish owners of land, and succeed in 1908 when the law was eventually passed. However, it remained on paper in the following years, to which the H-K-T responded with large scale propaganda campaign in the press. The campaign proved to be successful and on October 12, 1912 the Prussian government issued a decision allowing eviction of Polish property owners in Greater Poland.

Although the H-K-T is to this day primarily associated with the Junkers, it was one of the groups to oppose the Society's goals the most. Initially treated with reserve by most of the conservative Prussian aristocracy, with time it became actively opposed by many of them. The Society opposed any immigration of Poles from the Russian Poland to the area, while the Junkers gained large profits from seasonal workers migrating there every year, mostly from other parts of Poland. Also the German colonists brought to formerly Polish lands by the Settlement Commission or the German government largely benefited from the cooperation with their Polish neighbours and mostly either ignored the "Hakatisten" or even actively opposed their ideas. This made the Ostmarkenverein an organization formed mostly by the German bourgeoisie and settlers, that is middle class members of the local administration, and not the Prussian Junkers. Other notable group of supporters included the local artisans and businessmen, whose interests were endangered by the organic work, that is the Polish response to the economical competition promoted by the Settlement Commission and other similar organizations. In a sample probe of H-K-T's members, the social classes represented were as follows:

By 1913 the Society had roughly 48,000 members. Despite its fierce rhetoric, support from the local administration and certain popularity of its goals, the Society proved to be largely unsuccessful as were the projects it promoted. Much like other similar organizations, the H-K-T not only managed to incite some public awareness to the "Polish Question" within German public and radicalise the German policies in the area, but also sparked a Polish reaction. As an effect of the external pressure, the Poles living in the German Empire started to organize themselves in order to prevent the plans of Germanisation. In addition, the main opposition centre on the Polish side became the middle class rather than aristocracy, which strengthened the Polish resistance and intensified the national sentiment within the Polish society. Also, the pressure from the German nationalists resulted in strengthening the Polish national-democrats, particularly the Polish National-Democratic Party of Roman Dmowski, and Wojciech Korfanty.

For instance, the Settlement Commission throughout the 27 years of its existence managed to plant about 25,000 German families on 1,240 km² (479 mi²) of land in Greater Poland and Pomerania. However, at the same time the reaction of Polish societies resulted in about 35,000 new Polish farmers being settled in the area of roughly 1,500 km² (579 mi²) of land. Similarly, the attempts at banning the teaching of religion in Polish language met with a nationwide resistance and several school strikes that sparked a campaign in foreign media.

All in all, even though the H-K-T Society was not the most influential and its exact influence on the German governments is disputable, it was among the best-heard and for the Polish people became one of the symbols of oppression, chauvinism, and national discrimination, thus poisoning the Polish-German relations both in the borderland and in entire Germany. On the eve of World War I the nationalisms on both sides ran high and the liberal politicians who were seeking some compromise with the German Empire were seen as traitors, while German politicians trying to tone down the aggressive rhetoric on both sides were under attack from the Hakatisten. This situation proved vital to the failure of German plans of creation of Mitteleuropa during the Great War, as the Polish political scene was taken over mostly by politicians hostile to Germany.

The works of the Ostmarkenverein practically ceased during the war. At its end, some of its members joined the "Deutsche Vereinigung" ("German Association"), a society that aimed at preventing newly restored Poland from acquiring the lands that were formerly in Prussia. Many more of its members feared possible Polish reprisals after the take-over of Greater Poland, Pomerania and Silesia, and were among the first to pack their belongings and head westwards after the armistice, while others stayed in the lands that were taken over by Poland, protected by the Minority Treaty. Even though the Ostmarkenverein had lost its main rationale as Germany had no influence over the lands of the Republic of Poland, it continued to exist in a rump form. Headed from Berlin, it tried to force the government of the Weimar Republic to use the threat of reprisals against the remaining Polish minority in Germany in order to win further concessions for the German minority in Poland. However, the post-war government of Gustav Stresemann mostly rejected the pleas as there were many more Germans in Poland than Poles in Germany, and such a tit-for-tat tactics would harm the German side more. The Society continued to exist in Berlin, limiting its activities mostly to a press campaign and rhetoric, but its meaning was seriously limited. Finally, after the advent of Adolf Hitler's rule in Germany, it was disbanded by the Nazis. Some of its former members, now living in Poland, remained members of other German societies and organizations, and formed the core of the German Fifth column during the German Invasion of Poland of 1939.




</doc>
<doc id="2200407" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2200407" title="Malta-class aircraft carrier">
Malta-class aircraft carrier

The "Malta"-class aircraft carrier was a British large aircraft carrier design of World War II. Four ships were ordered in 1943 for the Royal Navy, but changing tactical concepts, based on American experience in the Pacific War, caused repeated changes to the design, which was not completed before the end of the war. All four ships were cancelled in 1945 before they were laid down.

In July 1942 the Royal Navy formed the Future Building Committee, chaired by the Deputy First Sea Lord, to examine the fleet's requirements for the rest of the war. Tasked with anticipating the Navy's readiness and requirements for January 1944, the committee realised that a major expansion of naval aviation was required, which meant that more aircraft carriers would be needed. Many factors combined to drive up the size of these new carriers, notably the increasing size and speed of aircraft and the desire to increase the numbers of aircraft aboard fleet carriers. Another important consideration was the change in carrier tactics from the earlier doctrine of more attacks with smaller numbers of aircraft to the use of large, single airstrikes.

Sir Stanley V. Goodall, Director of Naval Construction (DNC), proposed a variety of designs, both open and closed hangar. On 8 October 1943, the Board of Admiralty selected a closed-hangar design with an armoured flight deck and five propeller shafts. Reports of American operations in the Pacific convinced the Board to reconsider hangar design; American experience had shown that the ability to fly off all of a carrier's aircraft in a single airstrike was vital. That required a well-ventilated, open-hangar design, which would reduce the time required to launch the aircraft by allowing them to begin the typical 15-minute engine warm-up while still in the hangar. On 15 May 1944, the Board reversed itself and ordered the DNC to produce an open-hangar design with deck-edge lifts. An unarmoured flight deck was agreed upon in June by the Controller of the Navy and the Fifth Sea Lord.

The new design, long at the waterline and known as Design X, was submitted to the Board on 10 August, although it was not approved. In October, concerns arose over the size of Design X in that it might have problems manoeuvering in constricted harbours, and the DNC was asked for two smaller designs: X1, shorter, and Y, shorter. Design Y was too short for efficient operations with the larger aircraft the committee anticipated, and the First Sea Lord selected X1. It was submitted to the Board on 12 April 1945 and fully worked out in anticipation of approval that never came. The Board minutes for 31 August noted that further consideration of the design had been postponed.

Had the X1 design received final approval, the "Malta" class would have been about the same size as the American s at in length overall and at the waterline. The beam would have been at the waterline and they would have had a draught of at deep load. The ships would have displaced at standard load and at deep load. Their metacentric heights were estimated to be at standard load and at deep load. Their complement was expected to consist of 3,520 officers and enlisted men.

The flight deck had a maximum width of . Because the unarmoured flight deck required an expansion joint about amidships, the "Malta"s' island could not be a single structure and was split into two, each section with its own funnel. This allowed turbulence around the islands to be reduced and provided more space for radars and fire-control directors. The carriers would have been fitted with 16 arrestor cables that were designed to stop landing aircraft up to in weight, at speeds of up to . They would have been backed up by three crash barricades to prevent landing aircraft from crashing into aircraft parked on the ship's bow. Positioned on the forward part of the flight deck, two newly designed hydraulic aircraft catapults were intended to launch fully laden aircraft at . The ships were designed with four lifts (two on the centreline (, and two on the portside deck edge () to facilitate the rapid movement of aircraft between the flight deck and the hangar. This was long, with a maximum width of , and high to accommodate American aircraft designed for that height. In case of fire the hangar was intended to be divided by four sliding steel doors. Between the hangar spaces and the deck park, the "Malta" class would have been capable of accommodating between 80 and 108 aircraft. For these aircraft, the ships would have been provided with of aviation gasoline.

The ships would have used four Parsons double-reduction geared steam turbines, each driving one shaft, using steam supplied by eight Admiralty 3-drum boilers. The boilers were distributed between four boiler compartments, but all four turbines were in a single compartment, well aft. The turbines were designed to produce a total of , enough to give them a maximum speed of . The "Malta" class was designed to carry a maximum of of fuel oil and diesel fuel (for the emergency generators); this was intended to give the ships a range of at or at .

The ships' main armament was intended to be sixteen quick-firing (QF) dual-purpose guns in eight powered RP 41 Mk VII twin-gun turrets, four on each side of the hull. The gun had a maximum range of at an elevation of +45° and a ceiling of . The light anti-aircraft (AA) armament would have consisted of 55 40 mm Bofors AA guns in eight sextuple stabilised, powered RP 50 Mk VI mounts and seven single mounts of an unknown type. The Bofors gun had a maximum range of and a ceiling of .

An August 1944 study anticipated that the ships would carry four early warning radars, including height-finders, four surface search radars and eight gunnery/fire-control radars. Historian David Hobbs wrote that they would mount Type 960 early warning, Type 982 intercept, Type 983 height-finding and Type 293M target indication radars. In addition a number of gunnery radars would also be needed.

The hangar-deck armour of Design X1 was a reduction from the called for in the original X configuration. The waterline armour belt was also four inches thick, but only covered the central portion of the ship to form the armoured citadel. The belt was closed by transverse bulkheads fore and aft. of armour extended forward and aft of the belt to protect the waterline against splinter damage.

The underwater defense system was a layered system of liquid- and air-filled compartments, backed by an inclined holding bulkhead that was four inches thick at the top and tapered to a thickness of at the bottom, and was estimated to resist a explosive charge. An earlier version, however, had been estimated to be able to resist a charge, but failed against a charge in a full-scale test.

The magazines for the 4.5-inch guns and the steering gear both lay outside the armoured citadel and had their own armour. The magazines had four-inch roofs and sides, with three-inch ends while the steering gear also had a four-inch roof, but only three-inch sides and ends.

Well before the design was finalised, four ships were ordered in July 1943. "Africa" was originally ordered as an unnamed "Audacious"-class carrier, but the order was modified to a "Malta"-class ship on 12 July 1943. "Malta", "New Zealand" and "Gibraltar" were all ordered three days later. "New Zealand" was originally ordered from Cammell Laird, but the contract was transferred to Harland and Wolff on 22 July 1944. The Admiralty ordered Vickers not to order any more material on 27 April 1944 and given that final drawings were never issued to the builders, it is unlikely that any of them actually did more than preliminary work. None of the ships were ever laid down and all of them were cancelled before the end of 1945.




</doc>
<doc id="2208235" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2208235" title="The Oval (Belfast)">
The Oval (Belfast)

The Oval is a football stadium in Belfast, Northern Ireland, which has been home to Glentoran F.C. since 1892. The Oval was bombed during the Belfast blitz of World War II, and was out of use until 1949 when it was rebuilt by the club along with supporters, who had jointly formed the 'Back to the Oval' committee. During their exile, the club played games at the ground of fellow Belfast club, Distillery - Grosvenor Park. It had a new stand built in 2000 but requires consistent maintenance to fulfill health and safety requirements and its capacity is currently restricted to 6,050. The Oval has occasionally hosted the final of the Irish Cup as well as hosting the final of the County Antrim Shield and the Setanta Cup.

From 1882 to 1886, Glentoran used Ormeau Park as their home ground. They moved to Westbourne in Ballymacarrett for six years until 1892. They then moved to The Oval. Initially it was on Dee Street, however in 1903 The Oval's pitch was rotated 90 degrees to its current location. During the early 20th century, the land on which The Oval stood was given in perpetuity to Glentoran by the Lord Mayor of Belfast, Daniel Dixon.

In 1941 the Oval was bombed in the Belfast blitz, destroying both grandstands and leaving a crater in the pitch. As a result, the ground was flooded repeatedly by the Connswater River; the water pumps were insufficient to drain the pitch. Grosvenor Park was used as a temporary home for Glentoran, until August 1949. In 1953 the main grandstand was built.
In September 1995, Glentoran had an advertising board with "JESUS" in white letters on a black background erected at The Oval. This became known as the "Jesus sign". It remained at the ground until 2010; Glentoran officials removed it, saying that they needed the space to sell advertising because of the club's financial troubles and because the sign had garnered no income for Glentoran for several years. In 2000 The Oval received funding for the refurbishment of the railway stand, by bolting seats on to the old terracing to create a 1,600-person-capacity stand. It was funded by a small grant as part of the much bigger £2,000,000 investment in Northern Irish sports announced by the Northern Ireland sports minister Michael McGimpsey.
Other than new floodlights and a small section of terracing refurbishment, the ground has received no public investment since. During this time, in excess of £50 million of public money has been spent on 15 other football grounds in Northern Ireland.

In 2005, after a match between Glentoran and rival team Linfield, Linfield fans broke down a gate in The Oval to access the pitch and throw objects at Glentoran fans in the main stand after both sets of fans had been throwing missiles at each other beforehand. Two people were charged with rioting.

In 2008, The Oval was the site of a protest by the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster against a decision by the Irish Football Association to allow football matches to be played on Sundays, a first in Northern Ireland due to traditional sabbatarianism. The protesters were concerned that regular Sunday matches would attract churchgoers away from attending church. The protest was led by Reverend David McIlveen, who said "Fundamentally, it is a desecration of God's day." In October 2010 the British National Party (BNP), who were trying to gain electoral support, held a rally outside The Oval. Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) Member of the Legislative Assembly, Robin Newton described the BNP's presence outside The Oval as "nauseous". In July 2011, an incendiary bomb was discovered outside The Oval requiring evacuation of surrounding streets. In October 2011 during an Irish Cup match between Glentoran and Portadown, a Portadown fan threw fireworks onto the pitch, injuring Glentoran's assistant manager Pete Batey and goalkeeping coach Davy McClelland.

In the 21st century, the Oval has been dilapidated and has required constant repairs to fulfill Health and Safety requirements for Glentoran to host its home matches there. In 2009, Glentoran's Irish Cup match against Limavady United was abandoned after the stadium's floodlight pylons started shaking in the high winds and the referee deemed it too dangerous for the match to continue. In 2012, after considering selling naming rights to The Oval, Glentoran unveiled plans to move the club to a new stadium in the Titanic Quarter of Belfast. The Oval was sold to property developers in March 2003 for £4 million. Glentoran's chairman suggested that the Oval might be redeveloped into social housing.

The Oval is located near the Port of Belfast, and Harland and Wolff's Samson and Goliath cranes are visible from inside the stadium. It is viewed as a historic ground by football fans because of its concrete terraces and steel fencing. This limits its capacity in UEFA-sanctioned matches to the 3,000 seats in the two main stands as terracing has not been permitted in UEFA matches since 1998.

The stadium's capacity is 26,556, but was estimated in 2010 by the Northern Ireland Assembly to have a safe capacity of 5,056 under safety legislation. However, since 2011, the safe capacity permitted by Health and Safety authorities is 5,300; before 2010 the stadium could hold more than 8,000. Linfield's manager David Jeffrey criticised these restrictions and said that they were "murdering local football." The main stand holds 2,720 and the Railway stand holds 2,070. The Oval's record attendance is 55,000 for a European Cup Winners Cup match against Rangers on 27 September 1966.

The design of the main stand is very similar to the one at Springfield Park, former home of Wigan Athletic. This was also built in 1953.

In previous years, the Oval was used to host the final of the Irish Cup as one of Northern Ireland's biggest stadiums along with Windsor Park, with the location of the final often being decided on a coin toss. During the 1985 Irish Cup final, Glentoran supporters released a cockerel and a pig that had been painted blue onto the pitch to antagonize Linfield supporters. The Oval was used to host the final of the County Antrim Shield in 2012. The Oval has also been used to host the Setanta Cup final. It hosted the 2012 final between Belfast's Crusaders representing the IFA Premiership, and County Londonderry based Derry City, representing the League of Ireland.
The 2015 Irish Cup Final between Glentoran and Portadown was played at The Oval.



</doc>
<doc id="2212124" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2212124" title="Joe Delaney">
Joe Delaney

Joe Alton Delaney (; October 30, 1958 – June 29, 1983) was an American football running back who played two seasons in the National Football League (NFL). In his two seasons with the Kansas City Chiefs, Delaney set four franchise records that would stand for more than twenty years.

He was a two-time All-American athlete for the Northwestern State Demons football team, as well as a track and field star. Delaney played two seasons with the Chiefs and was chosen as the AFC Rookie of the Year in 1981 by United Press International.

Delaney died on June 29, 1983 while attempting to rescue three children from drowning in a pond in Monroe in northeastern Louisiana. He was posthumously awarded the Presidential Citizen's Medal from U.S. President Ronald W. Reagan. While not officially retired, his jersey number while playing for the Chiefs, No. 37, has not been worn since his death.

The third of Woodrow and Eunice Delaney's eight children, Delaney was born in Henderson, on October 30, 1958, and attended Haughton High School in Bossier Parish in northwestern Louisiana. Discouraged by his father from pursuing his dreams of playing football, Delaney became the starting wide receiver by his junior year at Haughton. Major Division I schools that scouted him included Grambling State, Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana State.

Delaney played for Division I-AA's Northwestern State Demons from 1977 to 1980. After telling his coach of his willingness to play football at the collegiate level, Delaney switched to the running back position. He went on to be an All-American selection in 1979 and 1980. While at Northwestern State, Delaney met his future wife, Carolyn, and they had two children by his senior year.

On October 28, 1978, Delaney carried the ball 28 times and gained 299 yards for Northwestern State against Nicholls State University with 263 of the yards coming in the game's second half. Delaney's rushing stats in the second half of the game are an NCAA record. In the same game, he scored four touchdowns, one of which was on a 90-yard run, as he led his team to a 28–18 victory.

Delaney finished his career at Northwestern State with 3,047 yards rushing, 31 touchdowns, and 188 points. In 1980, his senior season, he was ranked eighth in the nation in all-purpose rushing yards. On November 22, 1980 he played his last game at Northwestern State and the school retired his jersey, number 44, at halftime. Delaney was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame in 1997.

At Northwestern State, Delaney also starred in track. In high school, he ran the 100 yard dash in 9.4 seconds and was on the Northwestern State track and field team, which won the NCAA 400-meter relay in 1981. He holds the school 200 meter dash record with a time of 20.64 seconds.

Delaney was selected in the second round of the 1981 NFL Draft by the Kansas City Chiefs. United Press International named him Rookie of the Year of the American Football Conference for the 1981 NFL season after he rushed for 1,121 yards, set four club records, and averaged 80.9 yards a game. Delaney's effort helped propel the Chiefs to a 9–7 record, the team's first winning season since 1973. In his rookie season, he was selected to the Pro Bowl after setting Chiefs records for most yards in a season (1,121), most yards in a game (193 vs. Houston), most consecutive 100-yard-plus games (three) and most 100-yard games in a season (five).

After coming off the bench to record 101 rushing yards in his initial NFL action at New England, he ran for 106 yards and registered 104 receiving yards in his first professional start against Oakland. In the Chiefs' October 18, 1981 game against the Denver Broncos, Delaney broke loose for a 75-yard touchdown run, but an offside penalty caused the play to be restarted from five yards back. On the second play after the penalty, Delaney scored an 82-yard touchdown, the longest rushing play from scrimmage in the 1981 NFL season.

Following Delaney's record-setting 196-yard rushing performance against the Houston Oilers on November 15, 1981, Oilers defensive end (and future Pro Football Hall of Famer) Elvin Bethea was quoted in saying:

A strike by NFL players and an eye injury limited Delaney's playing time in the 1982 NFL season. He underwent surgery to repair a detached retina, and only registered 380 rushing yards in the eight-game shortened season, which the Chiefs finished with a 3–6 record. Delaney averaged 4.6 yards per carry, 9.1 yards per reception, and registered 1,811 all-purpose yards during his career with three touchdowns.

Delaney had a lifelong history of helping others, and once paid for the funeral of a former teacher whose family could not afford a proper service. On June 29, 1983, Delaney, who was living in nearby Ruston, went with friends to Critter's Creek, an amusement center at Chennault Park in Monroe, Louisiana. While reportedly discouraging swimming children from venturing too far out in a pond, Delaney dove in to save three children who were screaming for help, floundering in a water hole left by recent construction work. The water hole, which covered two acres and was six feet deep, was not intended for swimming but to add to the park's aesthetics. Despite his inability to swim, Delaney nevertheless tried to rescue the children. One child managed to get out of the water without harm and another was taken to an emergency room where he later died; police recovered the body of Delaney and the remaining child. The amusement park has since been closed to the public.
Three thousand people attended Delaney's burial and memorial service on July 4 which was held in the sweltering heat of the Haughton High School gymnasium. President Ronald Reagan honored Delaney with the Presidential Citizens Medal on July 15, and it was presented to Delaney's family by Vice President George H. W. Bush. Reagan's words were:

For the 1983 NFL season, the Chiefs honored Delaney by wearing a circular patch bearing a gold eagle and the number 37 on the upper-left chest of their uniforms. Haughton High School also made a park, Joe Delaney Park, in his memory. The NCAA posthumously awarded Delaney the NCAA Award of Valor in 1984. Louisiana Governor Dave Treen presented the Louisiana State Civilian Bravery Award to Delaney's family following his death.

Delaney's heroism is honored through an award for one of the NFL's best running backs who also demonstrates admirable character and unselfishness, traits that were embodied by Delaney. The award is given annually by ProFootballTalk.com.

Northwestern State's football permanent team captains award, the Joe Delaney Memorial Leadership award, is named in his honor, as is the annual spring football game ("Delaney Bowl") and a golf tournament that generates support for the athletic program. A permanent shrine honoring him sits under the home stands at Northwestern State's Turpin Stadium and his number 44 jersey hangs in the football offices. In Virginia, the Delaney Athletic Conference took its name to honor his memory in the fall of 1983, and today 13 Virginia private high schools comprise the DAC.

A group of Chiefs fans in Kansas City formed the "37Forever Foundation", which works with the American Red Cross to provide swimming lessons for underprivileged children. The Kansas City Chiefs unofficially retired Delaney's jersey number 37 following his death, and he was elected to the team's Hall of Fame in 2004. His name is included in the Chiefs' ring of honor at Arrowhead Stadium.




</doc>
<doc id="2215034" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2215034" title="Ike's Wee Wee">
Ike's Wee Wee

"Ike's Wee Wee" is the fourth episode of the second season of the American animated television series "South Park". The 18th episode of the series overall, it first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on May 27, 1998. In the episode, school counselor Mr. Mackey is fired, and turns to drugs. Meanwhile, the boys misconstrue what circumcision entails, and try to save Kyle's younger brother Ike from his upcoming bris.

The episode was written and directed by series co-creator Trey Parker. "Ike's Wee Wee" satirizes certain attitudes towards drug users, and explores whether family can only mean those who are related by blood. This episode introduced Ike's backstory as an adopted Canadian child. "Ike's Wee Wee" received positive responses from critics, who especially praised the episode for its touching moments.

Mr. Mackey, the school counselor, is giving a drug and alcohol prevention lecture to the class, emphasizing that smoking, drinking, marijuana, and LSD are bad. He passes a sample of marijuana around the class so that the children can learn its smell, but it is never returned. As a result, Mackey is fired, and is later kicked out of his house, leaving him homeless. A desperate Mackey gives in to trying marijuana one night in an alley, and later, LSD. Soon enough, Mr. Mackey becomes a drug-addled hippie, and meets a female hippie, with whom he decides to get married. While on honeymoon in India, Mr. Mackey is captured and taken into rehab. Mr. Mackey emerges clean from rehab and is given his job back.

Meanwhile, Kyle invites Stan, Cartman, and Kenny to his younger brother Ike's bris. When they learn more about what a bris is, and misconstrue it as a party where they are going to remove his penis, Kyle tries to find a way to hide his brother from his parents and the circumcision process. Kyle puts Ike on a train to Nebraska and makes an Ike-style doll out of meat bones in an attempt to not arouse his parents' suspicions. This backfires when the doll is eaten by a dog, which leads to them to think that Ike is dead. It is at the funeral that Kyle finds out that Ike is not his biological brother, but was adopted from Canada due to the tombstone featuring the Canadian flag. Upon discovering this, Kyle decides that Ike is no longer his brother. His parents are shocked after Kyle reveals the truth, and Ike is retrieved from Nebraska.

The day of the bris arrives, and Kyle is grounded for sending Ike away. When the mohel arrives to perform the bris, Ike flees to Kyle's room in terror. Seeing Ike in distress and some old pictures prompts a change of heart in Kyle, and he defends his brother fiercely before it is explained to him what a circumcision actually is, at which point Stan and Cartman decide they want to be circumcised too. They watch the process; even though the boys pass out momentarily, Kyle is relieved to see Ike unharmed.

"Ike's Wee Wee" was written and directed by series co-creator Trey Parker. The scene where Mr. Mackey loses the marijuana cigarette in class was inspired by a real event from Parker's life, where a counselor came into his class in seventh grade, and passed around a lit piece of marijuana, which then disappeared. At the beginning and end of the episode, there are scenes where the kids imitate Mr. Mackey's voice to him, while he is oblivious to the fact that he is being made fun of. Parker and his classmates used to do the same thing to their counselor in junior high school, who was the basis for Mr. Mackey's character. Parker said that he was especially proud of Chef's line, "There's a time and a place for everything, and it's called college", which is something Parker believes in, noting that if he had a child, he would tell him: "Do whatever you want, just wait till college because you don't know what the fuck's up right now." Chef's sentence would later return in the season four episode "The Tooth Fairy Tats 2000".

The episode introduced Ike's backstory as a Canadian child adopted by the Broflovskis. Ever since the recurring characters Terrance and Phillip were established to be Canadians in the season one finale "Cartman's Mom Is a Dirty Slut", and the subsequent season two premiere "Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus", all Canadian characters on "South Park" have shared the same simplistic design: having simple beady eyes and a floppy head made up of two halves. While Ike had been on the show since its first episode, the writers originally did not know that he was going to be Canadian; he was retroactively made one based on his visual similarity to Terrance and Phillip. Ike's backstory would play an important role in the film "", which involves a fictional American–Canadian war, as well as in future episodes of the series, such as the season seven episode, "It's Christmas in Canada", in which Ike's biological parents take him away from the Broflovskis and bring him back to Canada.

"Ike's Wee Wee" features regular voice acting from series creators Parker and Matt Stone for most characters, Mary Kay Bergman (credited as Shannen Cassidy) for female characters, and Isaac Hayes for Chef. Additional dialogue was provided by "South Park" audio engineer Bruce Howell, while Ike's lines were uttered by Howell's then-5-year-old son Jesse.

"Ike's Wee Wee" raises the question of who really can be considered one's family. At first, Kyle's implicit idea is that family consists of "those for whom we care that are related by blood". Based on this viewing of family, he no longer feels the need to help Ike when he learns that they are not related by blood. As the story progresses, Kyle questions his initial beliefs, and forms the episode's central moral by saying that "Family isn't about whose blood you have. It's about who you care about." Thus, Kyle's reformed view of family not only includes his adopted brother, but his friends as well. Kyle's questioning of his own morals has been likened to engaging in the dialectical Socratic method of inquiry.

The subplot of "Ike's Wee Wee" satirizes certain drug subcultures, as well as drug use, and societal attitudes towards drug users. The way the episode portrays Mr. Mackey's lack of real knowledge about drug use and addiction has been described as an example of "South Park" satirizing left-wing politics, when "they lead to the sort of hypocrisy inconsistent with a proper open society".

Part of the episode revolves around the practice of religious male circumcision in Judaism, and the related ceremony called the "brit milah" or bris, and the boys' misunderstanding of the tradition. The boys believe that circumcision entails the cutting off of one's penis, which they refer to by the childish colloquial term "wee wee", except for Cartman, who insists on calling it "fireman". Cannabis is also referred to by various names, including "weed", "grass", "pot", and "marijuana", in which Mr. Mackey constantly pronounces the letter "j" as (as in "jam"), which makes Kyle mispronounce the drug as "marry-Jew wanna".

Drug use is often portrayed in conjunction with the hippie subculture, through hippie characters, such as the two teenagers that give LSD to Mackey, and the woman that he befriends and eventually marries. Jimbo and Cartman both use the term "hippie" pejoratively. During their argument, Jimbo tells Mackey that he should just go to a Grateful Dead concert, to which Mackey says he can't since Jerry Garcia is deceased. On two occasions, the episode shows people watching "Teletubbies" while high on marijuana or in rehab. In his drug prevention speech, Mackey claims that LSD was made famous by John Lennon and Paul McCartney, former members of The Beatles. Both Lennon and McCartney are known to have experimented with the drug.

While walking home, Mr. Mackey drunkenly sings the 1983 Pat Benatar song "Love Is a Battlefield". During Ike's supposed funeral, a bagpipe player starts playing the Hebrew folk song "Hava Nagila". At the funerals, the priest uses the phrase "Ashes to ashes, dust to dust", from the Anglican burial service. When the townspeople start to harass Mackey, one of them shouts, "Now we see what you and Homer Simpson have in common... Dope!". This references the famous catchphrase from "The Simpsons", "D'oh!", which sounds similar to the word "dope", meaning illicit drugs. At Kyle's house, Kyle's parents offer the boys a dish called "GaHekgafuga", which is not a real dish. When Mackey is in India, he is captured by members of The A-Team, and driven away in their van. Mackey is taken to rehabilitation to the Betty Ford Clinic, which is based on a real-life hospital.

A common plot device is referenced, where a shoulder angel (represents conscience) and a shoulder devil (representing temptation) appear near a character. This concept is spoofed in the episode, as both the devil and the angel suggest to Mackey that he should drink the beer. When Stan tells Kyle what he thinks a bris means, a dolly zoom is used, which is an unsettling filmmaking effect often used to show that a character is undergoing a major realization. The hallucinogenic effects of certain drugs are portrayed by different means. When inhaling cannabis, the alley that Mr. Mackey is in suddenly turns very colorful. After taking LSD, Mackey's head inflates like a giant balloon, and then literally detaches from his body, and floats away (the boys interact with Mackey by looking up at his head as it floats over them).

In the scene where the boys are talking to Chef, he leaves without answering the boys' sexual question, angrily saying, "Dammit, children, why do I always have to be the one to explain all this stuff to you. Ask your parents for once!". This is in reference to Chef's tendency to give advice to the boys. While the children are trying to think of what is the most important thing for a man, Cartman says "Ham?", to which Stan angrily replies, "No, not ham, you fat fuck!". This exchange was used verbatim between the same characters in "The Spirit of Christmas", the 1995 short film that was the precursor to "South Park".

Two episodes preceded "Ike's Wee Wee" in the second season of the show. The episode scheduled for April 1, 1998 promised to resolve the cliffhanger ending of the first season finale, "Cartman's Mom Is a Dirty Slut", regarding the identity of Cartman's father, but was in fact an April Fools' Day joke: "Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus", an entire episode revolving around the two title characters. The April 1 episode was supposed to be a one-off, with the rest of the season starting in May. However, following overwhelmingly negative fan reaction, the episode resolving the Cartman's father storyline, "Cartman's Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut", was moved from its planned May 20 air date to April 22. "Ike's Wee Wee" then started a six-episode run of the season when it was broadcast on Comedy Central in the United States on May 20, 1998.
"Ike's Wee Wee" was met with favorable reviews. Critics especially praised the episode for its touching moments, in contrast with the off-color humor often employed in the series. In his review of the episode in the "Chicago Tribune", Allan Johnson praised the episode, especially in comparison with the first two episodes of the season, considering it to be one of the better episodes of the series. When the series reached its 100th episode in 2003, the same writer also listed "Ike's Wee Wee" as one of the "top 10 episodes that have made one of the most provocative comedies on TV". A review in the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette said that "n the midst of all this potty-mouthed humor, there are moments that are downright touching", and particularly highlighted the ending of "Ike's Wee Wee" as an example, explaining that "all's well in the end, and Kyle and the boys learn a lesson about family values that even Dan Quayle would approve of". In 2000, visitors of the Comedy Central website chose "Ike's Wee Wee" as their favorite episode during a voting called ""South Park" e-Lections", held around the time of the United States presidential election that year.

Mr. Mackey's line, "drugs are bad, m'kay?", has entered popular culture. The Eminem song, "The Kids" (which is featured on the B-side of the single "The Way I Am" and the clean version of "The Marshall Mathers LP"), is thematically about drug use, and makes numerous references to "South Park" and impressions of the show's characters, including an impression of Mr. Mackey's voice and the repetition of his line. The song "Hip Hop Quotables" by Ludacris, from his album "Chicken-n-Beer", also contains the line. In 2008, the line was referenced in the dissenting opinion of a judge, in a case of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. Also, in a 2010 marijuana-related court case at the Maryland Court of Appeals, Judge Clayton Greene, Jr. referenced the episode in his dissenting opinion, calling Mr. Mackey's words "immortal". In 2011, during a judiciary committee hearing about a marijuana-related bill in Denver, Colorado, a representative showed off a potential packaging for edible marijuana products. According to a group called the Cannabis Therapy Institute, the label on the package, which bore the placeholder text, "Legal and governmentally approved statement describing that pot is bad, M-ok", was a reference to the "South Park" episode.

"Ike's Wee Wee" was released on VHS in April 1999, along with the episode "Chickenlover", on a video titled "South Park: Volume 8". The episode saw its first DVD release in December 1999, on a disc called "South Park: Volume 4", which also included "Chickenlover", as well as "Cartman's Mom Is a Dirty Slut" and "Cartman's Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut". "South Park: The Complete Second Season" was released on DVD on June 3, 2003. On these home releases, "Ike's Wee Wee" has a humorous introduction by series co-creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone, who are playing music to the elderly in a retirement home. Episodes of season two have also been released digitally, on services such as Amazon Video, the iTunes Store, and Xbox Live Marketplace. Like most episodes of "South Park", "Ike's Wee Wee" is available to watch for free on the show's website, SouthParkStudios.com.



</doc>
<doc id="2217991" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2217991" title="Ireland cricket team">
Ireland cricket team

The Ireland cricket team represents all of Ireland. They participate in Test, One Day International (ODI) and Twenty20 International (T20I) matches. They are the 11th Full Member of the International Cricket Council (ICC), having been awarded Test status, along with Afghanistan, on 22 June 2017.

Ireland are ranked 12th in ODI cricket, having played their first ODI in 2006 against England. Since then, they have gone on to play 137 ODIs, resulting in 60 victories, 67 defeats, 7 no results, and 3 ties. Contracts for players were introduced in 2009, marking the transition to becoming a professional team. Cricket Ireland is the sport's governing body in Ireland.

Cricket was introduced to Ireland in the 19th century, and the first match played by an Ireland team was in 1855. Ireland toured Canada and the United States in the late 19th century, and occasionally hosted matches against touring sides. Rivalry with the Scotland national cricket team was established when the teams first played each other in 1888. Ireland's maiden first-class match was played in 1902.

In 1993 the Irish Cricket Union, the predecessor to Cricket Ireland, was elected to the ICC as an Associate member. Associates are the next level of team below those that play Test cricket. Due to their successes in the Intercontinental Cup and at the World Cup, they were labelled the "leading Associate" and stated their intention to become a full member by 2020. This intention was realised in June 2017, when the ICC unanimously decided to award Ireland and Afghanistan full Test status, which allows them to participate in Test matches.

Ireland qualified for the Cricket World Cup for the first time in 2007, and has since played in the 2011 and 2015 tournaments. They also qualified for the 2009, 2010, 2012, and 2014 World Twenty20 competitions. Ireland also play international cricket in the ICC Intercontinental Cup, which they have won four times since 2005, including the most recent competition in 2013.

Cricket was introduced to Ireland by the English in the towns of Kilkenny and Ballinasloe in the early 19th century. In the 1830s, the game began to spread; many of the clubs which were founded in the following 30 years are still in existence today. The first Irish national team played in 1855 against The Gentlemen of England in Dublin. In the 1850s, the Englishman Charles Lawrence was responsible for developing the game in Ireland through his coaching. In the 1850s and 1860s, Ireland was visited for the first time by touring professional teams. Ireland's first match against Marylebone Cricket Club (the M.C.C.) was in 1858.

The game gained popularity until the early 1880s. The land war in the 1880s resulting from the Irish Land Commission and a ban on playing "foreign" games, in practice, British, by the Gaelic Athletic Association set back the spread of cricket. The ban was lifted in 1970, and before then anyone playing foreign games, such as cricket was banned from the Irish games such as hurling and Gaelic football. Irish teams toured Canada and the US in 1879, 1888, 1892, and 1909. On top of this, Ireland defeated a touring South African side in 1904. Their first match with first-class status was played on 19 May 1902 against a London County side including W.G. Grace. The Irish, captained by Sir Tim O'Brien, won convincingly by 238 runs.

After the 1902 tour of England, where four matches yielded one win, two draws and one loss, Ireland did not play first-class cricket again for five years. Although the team had lost to the South Africans in 1894 – Ireland's first match against a Test-playing nation – Ireland defeated South Africa in 1904; it was the team's first victory against a Test side. In 1909, the first annual first-class match between Ireland and Scotland was held, and an annual match against the MCC was arranged from 1924 onwards.

The Irish played yearly first-class matches with the Scots, only interrupted by world wars, until 1999, but all their other cricket depended upon touring international sides finding it convenient to include a visit to Ireland in their schedules. However, Ireland sometimes surprised Test nations on these occasions, beating the West Indies by 60 runs in a three-day match in Dublin in 1928, for example; it was Ireland's first match against the West Indies. In 1969, in a match played at Sion Mills in County Tyrone, the team defeated a West Indian side including Clive Lloyd and Clyde Walcott by nine wickets, after bowling them out for 25. This was the last time Ireland defeated a touring side until 2003, when they beat Zimbabwe by ten wickets.

The Scots and the Irish were mostly competing with Sri Lanka for the title as the best non-Test nation at the time – indeed, Ireland drew with Sri Lanka in a rain-hit first-class match in 1979, Ireland scoring a total of 341 for 7 in two innings, while Sri Lanka made 288 for 6 in one innings. Ireland, along with Scotland and the Netherlands, has at times played in competitions for English county cricket sides, including the Benson & Hedges Cup and the Friends Provident Trophy (previously the C&G Trophy). Since there is no nationality restriction in county cricket, non-Irish people were allowed to compete for Ireland in these matches. For example, Hansie Cronje of South Africa played for Ireland in 1997, as did New Zealander Jesse Ryder in 2007.

Ireland joined the ICC as an Associate member in 1993, a year before Scotland. This meant Ireland could play in the ICC Trophy for the first time in 1994, and they finished seventh in the tournament. Three years later they progressed to the semi-finals of the competition but lost the third place play-off with Scotland, thus missing a place at the 1999 cricket World Cup. Ireland finished eighth in the 2001 tournament. After this, Adrian Birrell was hired as coach.
With the introduction of the ICC Intercontinental Cup in 2004, Ireland had a chance to play first-class on a regular basis. After failing to progress beyond the group stages in the 2004 competition, Ireland won their first Cup title in October 2005 with a six-wicket win over Kenya. The 2005 ICC Trophy, which was hosted in Ireland – the group stages in Belfast, Northern Ireland, the final stages in Dublin, Republic of Ireland – saw the Irish make the final, which they lost to Scotland. Though Ireland were runners-up, they had secured their place at the 2007 World Cup as well as an extra $500,000 over the next four years from the ICC to encourage development of Irish cricket. They also gained official ODI status.

Ireland's inaugural ODI was played in front of a full house of 7,500 spectators at Stormont, Belfast, on 13 June 2006 against England. It was the first time Ireland had played the full England side. Though Ireland lost by 38 runs, they were praised by Andrew Strauss, England's stand-in captain.

August saw them participate in Division One of the European Championship, against Denmark, Italy, the Netherlands and Scotland. The games against the Netherlands and Scotland had ODI status. In the tournament, and what was the team's second ODI, Ireland recorded their first ODI win, beating fellow Associates Scotland by 85 runs after man-of-the-match Eoin Morgan made 99. Although the match against the Netherlands was a no-result, Ireland won the European Championship title. Ireland's second Intercontinental Cup title came in the 2006–2007 competition. They faced Canada in the final and won by an innings and 115 runs, the four-day match concluding within two days. This made Ireland the first team to successfully defend the Continental Cup.

For the 2006 season, the C&G Trophy was reorganised to include a round-robin stage instead of being entirely knock-out. Whereas Ireland had only one match guaranteed in the tournament before, they now had more fixtures against English county sides. Ireland recorded one win in their nine matches. Ireland participated in the competition until it was restructured again in 2009. In that time they played 25 matches and won two. The latter of those victories was against Worcestershire; in that match Ireland bowled Worcestershire out for 58, which was their lowest ever one-day total. It was the first time that Ireland had bowled out a county for less than 100. Ireland were invited to participate in the reformatted competition from 2010 onwards, but chose not to do so, and instead focused their limited financial resources on international cricket.

At the start of 2007, Ireland saw more than three months of almost constant cricket. First was a visit to Kenya, where they took part in Division One of the ICC World Cricket League. They finished fifth in the league after four narrow defeats, and Kenya won the league. Before the World Cup, the team participated in a high-performance camp in South Africa. Ireland's performance in their inaugural World Cup in the 2007 Cricket World Cup took many pundits by surprise. In their first game, on 15 March, they tied with Zimbabwe, primarily thanks to Ireland's first ever World Cup century by man-of-the-match Jeremy Bray and economical bowling in the final overs by Trent Johnston and Andre Botha. In their second match, played on Saint Patrick's Day, they beat the fourth-ranked team in the world, Pakistan, by three wickets, thus knocking Pakistan out of the competition. 

These two results were enough to advance Ireland to the Super 8 stage of the tournament. In their final group stage game, the West Indies beat them by eight wickets. In the Super 8 stage, they lost their five matches against England, South Africa, New Zealand, Australia, and Sri Lanka, but recorded a 74-run victory against Test playing nation Bangladesh, the 9th ranked team in the world. The team received a heroes' welcome in Dublin.

After the World Cup, former West Indies cricketer Phil Simmons took over the role of coach from Birrell. India were scheduled to play South Africa in a series of One Day Internationals in Ireland in June 2007. Ireland also played one-off matches at Stormont against the two teams. Missing several players from their World Cup squad, Ireland lost both games. Ireland hosted a quadrangular tournament in Dublin and Belfast in July involving the West Indies, the Netherlands, and Scotland. Ireland and the West Indies both won their games against Scotland and the Netherlands with their direct encounter ending in no result due to rain. The West Indies won the tournament because of a bonus point won against the Netherlands. Trent Johnston stepped down as captain and was replaced by William Porterfield in March 2008.

The 2007–08 ICC Intercontinental Cup began in June, with Ireland playing their first match in August. In November 2008, the team's campaign ended. After finishing second in the round-robin stage of the competition, Ireland faced Namibia in the final. Ireland won by nine wickets, securing their third consecutive Intercontinental Cup title. In March 2008 Ireland toured Bangladesh, playing three ODIs against the hosts and losing all of them. In July, Ireland played a tri-series against New Zealand and Scotland in Aberdeen but lost both matches.

Reigning champions Ireland hosted the European Cricket Championship (Division One) in late July and they won their third European title, winning every match, including the decisive encounter against Scotland by seven wickets. In early August, Ireland hosted five other Associate nations at the 2009 ICC World Twenty20 Qualifier in Belfast; this was Ireland's Twenty20 International debut. Ireland would have faced the Netherlands in the final, however the match was rained off and the teams shared the trophy. By getting to the final of the tournament, Ireland qualified for the 2009 ICC World Twenty20 in England in June 2009. Later in August, Ireland were due to play three ODIs at home against Kenya. Ireland won the first game, the second game could not be finished due to rain and the last match was completely washed out. In October, the team visited Kenya for a tri-series of ODIs with the hosts and Zimbabwe. Only two of Ireland's four games in the round-robin stage could be played, the others were rained off. Ireland lost their first match to Zimbabwe, but won their second against Kenya, though they failed to qualify for the final.

In the run-up to the 2009 ICC World Twenty20, Ireland were deprived of batsman Eoin Morgan, similarly to Ed Joyce several years earlier, who was selected to play for England, making him ineligible to play for Ireland again. Ireland played their first Twenty20 International against a full ICC member side on 8 June 2009 and in their opening match of the tournament defeated Bangladesh by four wickets and knocked them out of the tournament. Ireland progressed to the second stage of the competition. They were grouped with New Zealand, Pakistan and Sri Lanka and lost all three of their matches. In 2009, Ireland played nine ODIs, winning the seven they played against Associate nations, losing their only match against a Test team (England), and one match was abandoned.

Ireland played 17 One Day Internationals in 2010, winning 11 (including a victory over Bangladesh) and losing six. Ireland were knocked out of the 2010 ICC World Twenty20, hosted by South Africa in April and May, after being beaten by the West Indies and a washed out match against England.

The 2011 Cricket World Cup was held between February and March and hosted by Bangladesh, India and Sri Lanka. Though Ireland did not progress beyond the first round they secured a historic victory against England. Ireland beat England by 3 wickets with Kevin O'Brien hitting the fastest century in World Cup history, managing the feat in just 50 balls. In passing England's total of 327 for victory, Ireland broke the record for the highest successful run chase in the World Cup.

Shortly after the tournament ended, the ICC announced that the World Cups in 2015 and 2019 would contain ten teams; the Associate countries, who were most likely to miss out in a tournament with fewer teams strongly objected, and, led by Ireland, urged the ICC to reconsider. In June the decision was reversed. After the World Cup Ireland played Pakistan, England, and Scotland in ODIs but lost each match. A further ODI against Sri Lanka was rained off. In all, Ireland played 12 ODIs in 2011, winning four.

Ireland qualified for the 2015 Cricket World Cup, and were promoted to the ICC ODI Championship, leaving the World Cricket League, but not the ICC Intercontinental Cup. In their first match of the World Cup, Ireland defeated the West Indies by 4 wickets, chasing down 304 runs with 25 balls to spare. 

In their second match they beat the United Arab Emirates by two wickets with four balls to spare; the target was 279. Out of only five successful World Cup chases of 300 runs or more, Ireland have provided three.

In July 2016, Ireland played in its first five-match ODI series against Afghanistan which ended 2-2 with the first ODI being washed out. In September, Ireland toured South Africa for a one match ODI series against Australia and the hosts but lost both games. At the ICC's board meeting in October, Ireland was awarded first-class status for its domestic competition, the Inter-Provincial Championship.
In May 2017, Ireland travelled to England to play a two-match ODI series for the first time, though they ended up losing both games.

In January 2012 Cricket Ireland chief executive Warren Deutrom publicly declared Ireland's ambition to play Test cricket by 2020. Their desire to achieve Test status was in part to stem the tide of Irish players using residency rules to switch to England for the opportunity to play Test cricket. Deutrom outlined the ambition as he unveiled the new strategic plan for Irish cricket to 2015. The plan set out a series of stretching goals including increasing the number of participants in the game to 50,000, setting a target of reaching 8th in the World rankings, establishing a domestic first-class cricket structure, and reinforcing cricket as the fifth most popular team sport in Ireland.

Deutrom had already sent a letter to the ICC in 2009 stating his board's intention to apply for Full Membership – a potential pathway to Test cricket – and to seek clarification on the process. Former Australian bowler Jason Gillespie said that if Ireland got Test status it "would be huge news in world cricket, and it would be a massive positive story for the world game". Following Ireland's victory over the West Indies in the 2015 Cricket World Cup, former fast bowler Michael Holding said that the International Cricket Council should grant Ireland Test status immediately, saying "they need to be recognised now". The ICC said in 2015 that Ireland would be granted Test status in 2019 should they win the 2015–17 ICC Intercontinental Cup and beat the 10th ranked Test nation in a four-match Test series in 2018.

However, on 22 June 2017, after more than a decade of playing top-class international cricket, full ICC membership was granted to Ireland (along with Afghanistan) at an ICC meeting in London, thus making them the eleventh Test cricket team. In October 2017, the ICC announced that Ireland's first Test match would be at home against Pakistan in May 2018. Ireland are scheduled to play their first 'touring' test in India in March 2019 against fellow newcomers Afghanistan, followed by a four-day Test match against England at Lord's in July 2019. According to the ICC Future Tours Programme for 2019–23, Ireland are scheduled to play sixteen Tests.

The Irish Cricket Union (ICU) – the governing body of Irish cricket – was officially founded in 1923, although its predecessor had been active since 1890. In common with a number of other Ireland sporting governing bodies, the Union was formed to represent cricket throughout the island of Ireland, rather than just the Republic of Ireland. In common with its counterparts for rugby union and field hockey, the Union therefore does not use the Irish tricolor, but instead employs its own flag, which is used by such bodies as the International Cricket Council to represent the team and in ICC tournaments; "Ireland's Call" is used as the national anthem.

In 2007, the ICU announced major changes to bring it into line with the main cricket governing bodies. After the World Cup, Irish cricket had poor results in the 2007 Friends Provident Trophy, as many players were unavailable. The Irish cricket team was an amateur side and most of the players had full-time jobs with commitments conflicting with cricket.

Warren Deutrom, the chief executive of the ICU, has stated that it wants to "seek actively to place Irish players into top-level cricket, by developing relationships with [especially] county cricket which will incorporate appropriate player release for Irish international duty, and feeder systems for developing Irish cricketers". The reorganised ICU sought closer links with the English county teams, to encourage the development of age group cricket, and to introduce a professional element into the Irish game. They also want to take the Ireland cricket team on winter tours more often.

In an attempt to prevent the game losing players to counties or other commitments such as jobs, it was suggested that central contracts should be introduced. This was done in June 2009, with the first two going to Trent Johnston and Alex Cusack. The number of full-time contracts was expanded to six in January 2010 with support for a further nine players; the contracts were split into three categories. In January 2012 the number of contracts was increased to 23, and coach Phil Simmons highlighted the process of becoming professional as an important factor in the team's success.

‡ Only the matches between Scotland, Ireland and the Netherlands in the 2006 tournament have official ODI status.

This lists all the active players who have played for Ireland in the past year (since 6 March 2019) and the forms in which they have played, or any players (in italics) outside this criteria who have been selected in the team's most recent squad. In addition, it includes all 19 players contracted by Cricket Ireland in December 2018, apart from Ed Joyce, John Anderson and Niall O'Brien who retired from cricket in 2018.

Key


International Match Summary – Ireland


Test record versus other nations

Most Test runs for Ireland
Most Test wickets for Ireland


Most ODI runs for Ireland
Most ODI wickets for Ireland

Highest ODI score for Ireland
ODI record versus other nations

Most T20I runs for Ireland

Most T20I wickets for Ireland

Highest T20I score for Ireland

T20I record versus other nations


Most first-class runs

Most first-class wickets

Highest individual innings

Note: Ivan Anderson's 198* v Canada was in a non-first-class match




</doc>
<doc id="2244090" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2244090" title="New York State Route 104">
New York State Route 104

New York State Route 104 (NY 104) is a long east–west state highway in Upstate New York in the United States. It spans six counties and enters the vicinity of four cities—Niagara Falls, Lockport, Rochester, and Oswego—as it follows a routing largely parallel to the southern shoreline of Lake Ontario, along a ridge of the old shoreline of Glacial Lake Iroquois. The western terminus of NY 104 is an intersection with NY 384 in Niagara Falls, Niagara County, while its eastern terminus is a junction with NY 13 in the town of Williamstown, Oswego County. The portion of NY 104 between Rochester and the village of Webster east of the city is a limited-access highway known as the Keeler Street Expressway west of NY 590 and the Irondequoit–Wayne County Expressway east of NY 590; from Williamson to Oswego, NY 104 is a super two highway.

The majority of Ridge Road and modern NY 104 from the village of Red Creek to the town of Mexico were originally designated as part of Route 30, an unsigned legislative route, early in the 20th century. All of Ridge Road and its continuation through Oswego to the hamlet of Maple View gained a signed designation by 1926 and became part of U.S. Route 104 (US 104), a United States Numbered Highway extending from Niagara Falls to Maple View, . US 104, which never connected to US 4, its implied parent route, was redesignated as NY 104 . As part of the redesignation, NY 104 was extended east to NY 13 in Williamstown over what had been New York State Route 126.

The 104 designation, whether it be US 104 or NY 104, has shifted from surface streets to expressways and super twos, particularly from Rochester east to Oswego. The first such realignment occurred in the 1940s in Wayne County and was completed by the realignment of NY 104 onto the Irondequoit–Wayne County Expressway near Webster in the 1980s.

NY 104 begins at the Rainbow Bridge in Niagara Falls. The Seaway Trail crosses NY 384 and follows NY 104 north on First Street for one block to the Niagara Scenic Parkway, where the byway and NY 104 veer onto Main Street. NY 104 follows Main Street through the city's largely commercial west side and intersects the northern or eastern terminus for US 62 (Ferry Avenue and Walnut Avenue) and US 62 Business (Pine Avenue). North of US 62 Business, the area becomes more residential as NY 104 meets NY 182 southeast of the Whirlpool Rapids Bridge. To the north, NY 104's name changes to Lewiston Road as it passes the south campus of Niagara University. Near the northern extent of the campus, NY 104 intersects the western terminus of NY 31, here named College Avenue. At the city limits, NY 104 meets the northbound Robert Moses State Parkway by way of a half-interchange. The portion of NY 104 between Third Street and the Lewiston town line is maintained by the city of Niagara Falls, and is the only part of NY 104 that is not maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation.

Now in the town of Lewiston, NY 104 comes within view of the Niagara River gorge and begins to run along its eastern rim. NY 104 meets the northernmost point of NY 61 at the northern campus of Niagara University. Past NY 61, the route passes by the Niagara Power Visitors Center and over the Robert Moses Niagara Power Plant. On the opposite side of the plant, NY 104 connects with Interstate 190 (I-190) at exit 25 via Upper Mountain Road and passes under the eastern approach to the Lewiston–Queenston Bridge, which links I-190 with Ontario's Highway 405.

Past I-190, NY 104 begins to deviate from the Niagara River. It heads through a small neighborhood situated between the Moses Parkway and NY 104 and intersects the northern end of NY 265. North of this junction, NY 104 curves northeast to descend the Niagara Escarpment. As it heads downward in elevation, it intersects the western terminus of NY 18 by way of an interchange. As part of the same exit, NY 104 meets the parkway one more time as well as the southern terminus of NY 18F near the village of Lewiston. Here, the Seaway Trail leaves NY 104 to follow NY 18F. East of the exit, NY 104 intersects NY 18 again by way of another interchange.

East of Lewiston village, NY 104 follows Ridge Road through a sparsely populated area of Niagara County. Much of this portion of NY 104 is bordered on its southern end by the Tuscarora Indian Reservation. At the Lewiston hamlet of Dickersonville, the extents of the reservation head south, and development along NY 104 increases slightly. NY 104 meets the northern terminus of NY 429 at the Lewiston–Cambria town line and crosses over NY 425 at Streeters Corners. Just east of this location is an intersection with NY 93 in the community of Molyneaux Corners. The two routes form a concurrency east to Warrens Corners, a hamlet on the Cambria–Lockport town line, where NY 93 turns south to serve the city of Lockport.

NY 104 heads northeast through the extreme northwest corner of the town of Lockport to the town line, where it turns eastward to straddle the boundary between the towns of Lockport and Newfane. As it approaches the hamlet of Wrights Corners, the development along NY 104 increases substantially with the level peaking at the junction of NY 104 and NY 78. The two routes join for roughly into the town of Newfane before splitting north of the hamlet. Ridge Road continues northeast through a residential district, which gives way to open fields once more at Ridgewood. NY 104 turns east here, passing through the town of Hartland and intersecting the southern terminus of NY 148 and the northern terminus of NY 271. The route crosses into Orleans County at a junction with the southern terminus of NY 269, which straddles the county line.

The route heads northeast through the town of Ridgeway to the hamlet of the same name, where NY 104 meets NY 63. NY 63 joins NY 104 east along Ridge Road for about before continuing north toward Lake Ontario. NY 104, meanwhile, continues through the rural towns of Ridgeway and Gaines to a junction with NY 279 north of Albion. Not far to the east, NY 104 intersects NY 98, the primary north–south highway through Albion, in the hamlet of Childs. Just past the intersection on the north side of the road are two of the three cobblestone buildings of the Cobblestone Historic District, a National Historic Landmark.

Farther east, Ridge Road enters the town of Murray, where it meets the northern terminus of NY 387 and intersects NY 237 in the hamlet of Murray. The two routes join for just under a mile (1.6 km) before NY 237 breaks away to the south toward Holley. NY 104 exits Orleans County later in the same fashion as it entered: by intersecting a state highway. After meeting the southern terminus of NY 272, NY 104 crosses into Monroe County and becomes West Ridge Road as it heads through the town of Clarkson. In the densely populated hamlet of Clarkson Corners, NY 104 intersects NY 19. The open fields return east of the hamlet, and largely surround Ridge Road as NY 104 intersects NY 260. NY 104 heads onward into Parma, where it widens to four lanes and has a junction with NY 259 in Parma Corners.
East of Parma Corners, development on NY 104 steadily increases as it heads toward the town of Greece. By the Parma–Greece town line, where NY 104 intersects the southern terminus of NY 261, Ridge Road is lined with commercial properties of varying size. Continuing east, NY 104 meets the northern terminus of NY 386. Here, NY 104 widens to a six-lane divided highway. Between NY 386 and NY 390 exit 24, NY 104 passes by several large shopping malls, the largest of which is The Mall at Greece Ridge at the intersection of NY 104 and Long Pond Road. At NY 390, NY 104 continues to be a six-lane divided highway as it heads toward Rochester. It enters the city limits upon meeting Mount Read Boulevard at an interchange.

In Rochester, NY 104 passes through an area known as Kodak Park, the large industrial complex owned by Eastman Kodak that occupies an entire neighborhood. In the middle of the complex, NY 104 crosses the Rochester and Southern Railroad and the CSX Transportation-owned Charlotte Running Track and intersects the eastern terminus of NY 18. Continuing east, NY 104 crosses the Genesee River gorge on the Veterans Memorial Bridge. On the opposite bank, it loses the name West Ridge Road and becomes a limited-access highway known as the Keeler Street Expressway.
North of the first exit with St. Paul Street, Ridge Road resurfaces as East Ridge Road, which parallels the expressway to the north. NY 104 continues through Rochester and Irondequoit, connecting to North Clinton Avenue, Seneca Avenue, Hudson Avenue, Carter Street, Portland Avenue, North Goodman Street and Culver Road by way of interchanges. Between the Goodman Street and Culver Road exits, NY 104 passes the former Medley Centre. East of Culver, NY 104 encounters NY 590 and connects to NY 590 southbound by way of an interchange. East Ridge Road runs through the middle of this interchange, although there are no connections between Ridge and NY 104. There is also no access from NY 104 eastbound to NY 590 northbound; eastbound traffic must take Culver Road in order to go north toward Sea Breeze. Just east of the NY 590 interchange, NY 104 becomes the Irondequoit–Wayne County Expressway and crosses the Irondequoit Bay by way of the Irondequoit Bay Bridge. An access road between NY 104 just west of the bridge and NY 590 at Titus Avenue was once planned. Although entrance and exit ramps were built for the connection along NY 104, the rest of the link was never built, leaving no access from NY 104 westbound to NY 590 northbound and from NY 590 southbound to NY 104 eastbound.

On the other side of the bridge in the town of Webster, NY 104 has exits leading to Bay Road, Five Mile Line Road, Hard Road, and Holt Road prior to entering the village of Webster. Within the village, NY 104 meets NY 250 (North Avenue) and Phillips Road by way of interchanges before exiting the village. The expressway loosely parallels the southern edge of the primary Xerox campus to an exit with Salt Road, where it downgrades to a divided highway as it continues east to Basket Road and the Monroe–Wayne county line, partially delimited by NY 404.

As Ridge Road follows to the south, NY 104 continues east through Ontario, where it meets the northern terminus of NY 350 in Ontario Center. The four-lane divided highway continues east to Williamson, where the median separating the two directions of NY 104 comes to an end west of the hamlet of Williamson. In the center of the hamlet, NY 104 intersects the northern terminus of NY 21. NY 104 narrows to two lanes east of Williamson as development along the route declines once more, giving way to open fields and thick forests.
Near the center of the county in the town of Sodus, NY 104 serves as the northern terminus of NY 88 northwest of the village of Sodus. While NY 88 heads east into the village, NY 104 bypasses Sodus to the north. East of the village, Ridge Road and NY 104 intersect as Ridge Road flips to the north side of NY 104. The two highways follow parallel routings southeast toward Alton, where NY 104 intersects NY 14. East of Alton, the gap between the two widens as Ridge Road veers north to access Sodus Bay. NY 104, meanwhile, follows a nearly linear routing into the town of Huron, where it intersects the northern terminus of NY 414.

NY 104 continues on the eastward routing to the vicinity of the village of Wolcott, where it connects to the northern terminus of NY 89 via a half-diamond interchange south of the village. Northeast of this location in the town of Wolcott, Ridge Road intersects NY 104 once again, returning to the south side of the route. The two roads follow parallel routings once more to a junction south of Red Creek. At this rural intersection, NY 104 acts as the southern and northern (western) terminus of both NY 104A and NY 370, respectively, both occupying an extension of Ridge Road. Just east of the intersection is the Wayne–Cayuga county line. Only of the route are situated in Cayuga County, and the only junction of note within the county is with NY 38, which it meets in the Sterling hamlet of Martville. East of the junction, NY 104 turns sharply to the northeast and enters Oswego County.

The route continues northeast through the town of Hannibal to the village of the same name. Instead of entering the community, NY 104 bypasses it to the east. It intersects NY 3 east of Hannibal and heads north toward Lake Ontario. In the town of Oswego, NY 104 meets the northern terminus of NY 104A and assumes its northeasterly routing. It is here that the Seaway Trail rejoins NY 104. NY 104 heads along the Lake Ontario shoreline to the lake-side city of Oswego, the first location with significant development along the route since Williamson. The route intersects Sweet Road, a connector leading to the campus of SUNY Oswego, just west of the city limits.
NY 104 enters the city as the two-laned West Seneca Street. At Baylis Street, the road widens to four lanes separated by a median. After seven blocks, NY 104 veers onto West Bridge Street, a four-lane street with no median. NY 104 continues along Bridge Street into downtown, where it intersects the northern terminus of NY 48 on the west bank of the Oswego River and the northern terminus of NY 481 on the east bank. As NY 104 heads through eastern Oswego, it separates from East Bridge Street and curves east to follow a more inland routing. The route reverts to two lanes as it exits the city limits.

The high level of development along NY 104 continues to the Scriba hamlet of the same name, where it begins to become more sporadic and give way to fields and dense forests. NY 104 heads northeast to New Haven and the western terminus of NY 104B. While NY 104B heads northeast toward the lake shore as part of the Seaway Trail, NY 104 cuts southeast to serve the village of Mexico. In the village center, NY 104 briefly overlaps NY 3 and intersects the western terminus of NY 69. The route continues due east through the rural town of Mexico to the small hamlet of Maple View, centered around the junction between NY 104 and US 11. Just outside the hamlet, NY 104 meets I-81 at exit 34. Past I-81, NY 104 heads east and southeast for nine miles (14 km) through the predominantly rural towns of Albion and Williamstown to its eastern terminus at a junction with NY 13.

In 1908, the New York State Legislature established Route 30, an unsigned legislative route extending from Niagara Falls, Niagara County in the southwest to Rouses Point, Clinton County, in the northeast. From Rochester to Red Creek, Route 30 was assigned to Ridge Road. Between Red Creek and the hamlet of Union Square (now Maple View) in the town of Mexico, it included most of modern NY 104. At the same time, the roadway alongside the Niagara River between Ridge Road in Lewiston and Pine Avenue in downtown Niagara Falls was designated, but not signed, as part of Route 18. By 1914, Route 30 was amended to also include the section of Ridge Road from Porter (modern NY 429) to Ridgeway (NY 63). In 1914, another section—from Ridgeway to the Orleans–Monroe county line—was also included in Route 30's definition as a spur route. The spur route became part of Route 30 on March 1, 1921, when the mainline route was realigned to follow Ridge Road between Ridgeway and Rochester.

When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924, the segments of Route 30 from Rochester to Red Creek and from Oswego to Maple View became part of NY 3. Between Red Creek and Oswego, NY 3 was routed on what is now NY 104A. Farther west, the portion of Route 18 from Niagara Falls to Lewiston was included as part of NY 34. By 1926, all of legislative Route 30 west of Rochester was designated as part of NY 31. In the late 1920s, however, NY 31 was realigned to follow Ridge Road west from Porter to Lewiston. In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York, NY 34 became part of an extended NY 18 while NY 3E was assigned to the portion of former legislative Route 30 between Red Creek and Oswego. NY 3E was renumbered to NY 3F .

US 104 was assigned across Upstate New York in April 1935, extending from Niagara Falls to Maple View via Lewiston, Rochester, and Oswego. It overlapped NY 18 from Niagara Falls to Lewiston and replaced NY 3 and NY 31 from Lewiston to Maple View (except from Red Creek to Oswego, where US 104 followed NY 3F instead). As a result, NY 31 was shifted south onto most of its modern alignment while NY 3 was rerouted south of Watertown to follow what had been NY 3D. Although US 104 was technically a child route of US 4, it did not connect to US 4. A highway extending eastward from US 11 and US 104 at Maple View to NY 13 in Williamstown was designated as NY 126 .

When it was first assigned, US 104 dipped south to serve downtown Rochester instead of bypassing it to the north. US 104 left Ridge Road at Lake Avenue and followed Lake Avenue and State Street south to Main Street in downtown. It followed Main Street and Winton Road to Empire Boulevard, where it turned east to rejoin Ridge Road in Webster. It was rerouted to continue east on Ridge Road over the Veterans Memorial Bridge and through Irondequoit to Culver Road. US 104 turned here, following Culver Road south to Empire Boulevard and the latter east to Winton Road, where it reconnected to its original routing through the city. The realignment created a significant overlap with NY 18, which joined US 104 in the vicinity of Kodak Park and separated at Culver Road, where it headed north instead.

Work began in the 1940s on new super two alignments for US 104 in Wayne, Cayuga, and Oswego counties. The new highway was built on a routing parallel to that of Ridge Road and served as a bypass of the communities along Ridge Road. The first portion of the super two, extending from the Monroe–Wayne county line at Union Hill to west of Sodus, was built in the mid-1940s and completed by 1947. An extension of the highway around Sodus to NY 414 in Huron was constructed in the mid-1960s and opened by 1968. In between the end of the super two and Ridge Road, US 104 was routed on Lake Bluff Road. The remainder of the super two between Huron and Red Creek was finished by 1974. East of the super two, a bypass was constructed around the village of Hannibal during the early 1960s and opened to traffic by 1964.
Similar conversion projects were also conducted elsewhere. In Irondequoit, the portion of the Sea Breeze Expressway (now NY 590) from Empire Boulevard to Culver Road opened in the late 1950s. US 104 and NY 18 were extended eastward along East Ridge Road to meet the expressway at what is now exit 11. Both designations entered the freeway; however, NY 18 followed the roadway north to Culver Road while US 104 progressed south to Empire Boulevard, where it rejoined its former surface alignment towards Webster. The of Empire Boulevard between the Rochester city line and the Sea Breeze Expressway remains state-maintained to this day as NY 941B, an unsigned reference route.

In the mid-1960s, construction began on the Keeler Street Expressway, a limited-access highway extending across Irondequoit from the Genesee River (at the Veterans Memorial Bridge) to the Sea Breeze Expressway. The first section from North Goodman Street to the Sea Breeze Expressway was completed by 1968 while the remainder opened in late 1969. The name of the expressway was derived from Keeler Street, a small residential street that originally connected to East Ridge Road and St. Paul Street by way of a traffic circle on the east bank of the Genesee River. The street was turned into a dead-end street as a result of the expressway's construction. US 104 was moved from East Ridge Road to the expressway, which remains known, albeit infrequently, as the Keeler Street Expressway to this day. NY 18 remained on East Ridge Road, however, reducing the overlap between US 104 and NY 18 to just the portion on the Veterans Bridge. NY 18 was truncated to its current eastern terminus , eliminating the overlap entirely.
The first segment of an eastward extension of the Keeler Street Expressway, named the Irondequoit–Wayne County Expressway, opened between the Sea Breeze Expressway (at this point designated as part of NY 47) and Five Mile Line Road. In between, US 104 crossed Irondequoit Bay by way of the Irondequoit Bay Bridge. US 104's former surface alignment between NY 47 and Five Mile Line Road was redesignated NY 404 while US 104 was temporarily realigned onto Five Mile Line Road between the expressway and Ridge Road to connect to its former alignment.

The segment of I-81 through central New York was built on an alignment that closely paralleled US 11 from the Pennsylvania state line northward to the city of Watertown. The portion of I-81 near Maple View was completed in late 1961, at which time US 104 was extended eastward over NY 126 to meet the new highway. NY 126 was truncated on its west end to the I-81 interchange as a result. US 104 was redesignated as NY 104 , making the route the third to bear the NY 104 designation. As part of the change, NY 104 was extended east to NY 13, completely supplanting NY 126.

By 1978, the frontage roads between Five Mile Line Road and NY 250 in Webster were completed. NY 104 was rerouted eastward along the roadways while NY 404 was extended over NY 104's old alignment to NY 250 in Webster. The section from NY 250 to the existing expressway at the Wayne County line was built in the late 1970s while the main carriageway of NY 104 between Five Mile Line Road and NY 250 was completed in the early 1980s. NY 404 was extended east along the former alignment of NY 104 to the county line upon the total completion of the Five Mile Line Road–NY 250 segment.

NY 104 has two suffixed routes, both of which were assigned .

New York State Route 104 Truck is a long truck route of NY 104 through the city of Rochester and town of Irondequoit in Monroe County. The route, which exists in the eastbound direction only, extends from the ramps connecting NY 104 to St. Paul Street east along East Ridge Road to Hudson Avenue, where it turns south to access NY 104. A long segment of NY 104 Truck follows the former alignment of US 104 east along East Ridge Road from St. Paul Street to Hudson Avenue.




</doc>
<doc id="2248349" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2248349" title="Blue Jay Way">
Blue Jay Way

"Blue Jay Way" is a song recorded by the English rock band the Beatles. Written by George Harrison, it was released in 1967 on the group's "Magical Mystery Tour" EP and album. The song was named after a street in the Hollywood Hills of Los Angeles where Harrison stayed in August 1967, shortly before visiting the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco. The lyrics document Harrison's wait for music publicist Derek Taylor to find his way to Blue Jay Way through the fog-ridden hills, while Harrison struggled to stay awake after the flight from London to Los Angeles.

As with several of Harrison's compositions from this period, "Blue Jay Way" incorporates aspects of Indian classical music, although the Beatles used only Western instrumentation on the track, including a drone-like Hammond organ part played by Harrison. Created during the group's psychedelic period, the track makes extensive use of studio techniques such as flanging, Leslie rotary effect, and reversed tape sounds. The song appeared in the Beatles' 1967 television film "Magical Mystery Tour", in a sequence that visually re-creates the sense of haziness and dislocation evident on the recording.

While some reviewers have dismissed the song as monotonous, many others have admired its yearning quality and dark musical mood. The website Consequence of Sound describes "Blue Jay Way" as "a haunted house of a hit, adding an ethereal, creepy mythos to the City of Angels". Among its continued links with Los Angeles, the song was one of the first Beatles tracks that cult leader Charles Manson adopted as the foundation for his Helter Skelter theory of an American race-related countercultural revolution. Artists who have covered the song include Bud Shank, Colin Newman, Tracy Bonham, Siouxsie and the Banshees and Greg Hawkes.

George Harrison wrote "Blue Jay Way" after arriving in Los Angeles on 1 August 1967 with his wife Pattie Boyd and Beatles aides Neil Aspinall and Alex Mardas. The purpose of the trip was to spend a week with Derek Taylor, the Beatles' former press officer and latterly the publicist for California-based acts such as the Byrds and the Beach Boys. The visit also allowed Harrison to reunite with his sitar tutor, Ravi Shankar, whose Kinnara School of Music and upcoming concert at the Hollywood Bowl he helped publicise.
The title of the song came from a street named Blue Jay Way, one of the "bird streets" high in the Hollywood Hills West area overlooking the Sunset Strip, where Harrison had rented a house for his stay. Jet-lagged after the flight from London, he began writing the composition on a Hammond organ as he and Boyd waited for Taylor and the latter's wife, Joan, to join them. The home's location, on a hillside of narrow, winding roads, together with the foggy conditions that night, created the backdrop for the song's opening lines: "There's a fog upon L.A. / And my friends have lost their way." Harrison had almost completed the song by the time the Taylors arrived, around two hours later than planned.

The week with Taylor proved to be important for the direction of the Beatles. At the height of the Summer of Love and the popularity of the band's "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" album, Harrison, Taylor and their small entourage visited the international "hippie capital" of Haight-Ashbury, in San Francisco, on 7 August. Harrison had expected to encounter an enlightened community engaged in artistic pursuits and working to create a viable alternative lifestyle; instead, he was disappointed that Haight-Ashbury appeared to be populated by drug addicts, dropouts and "hypocrites". Following his return to England two days later, Harrison completed work on "Blue Jay Way" at his home in Esher, and he shared his disillusionment about Haight-Ashbury with John Lennon. The Beatles then publicly denounced the popular hallucinogen LSD (or "acid") and other drugs in favour of Transcendental Meditation under Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, whose seminar in Bangor in Wales the band attended in late August. While noting Harrison's role in "inspir[ing] the West's mainstream acquaintance with Hindu religion" through his leadership in this aspect of the Beatles' career, author Ian MacDonald describes "Blue Jay Way" as a "farewell to psychedelia", just as "It's All Too Much", which the Beatles recorded in May 1967, became Harrison's "farewell to acid".

"Blue Jay Way" was one of several songs that Harrison composed on a keyboard over 1966–68 – a period when, aside from in his work with the Beatles, he had abandoned his first instrument, the guitar, to master the sitar, partly under Shankar's tutelage. The song is in 4/4 time throughout; its structure consists of an intro, three combinations of verse and chorus, followed by repeated choruses. While MacDonald gives the musical key as "C major (minor, diminished)", musicologist Alan Pollack views it as a mix of C major and C modal, and acknowledges the "highly unusual" incorporation of the notes D and F. The inclusion of the latter note suggests the Lydian mode, which, according to musicologist Walter Everett, had only been heard previously in popular music in the Left Banke's 1966 single "Pretty Ballerina".
The song's melody oscillates over the chords of C major and C diminished, a chord favoured by Harrison in his Indian music-inspired compositions for the Beatles. Acknowledging Harrison's statement that the tune is "slightly Indian", Everett considers "Blue Jay Way" to be related to the ragas Kosalam and Multani. According to author Simon Leng, however, Harrison based the song partly on Raga Marwa. Following the inclusion of a raga-style introduction (or alap) in his previous Indian compositions, "Love You To" and "Within You Without You", "Blue Jay Way" begins with a preview of the song's melody played softly, in free time, over the opening drone. Author Ian Inglis credits the song's incorporation of ambient drone, specifically its role in providing "an anchorage point for vocal and instrumental improvisation", as one of the first examples of a musical device that soon became prevalent in the work of Fairport Convention, the Incredible String Band and other folk artists.

The length of the verses falls short of an even eight bars through the omission of a final beat. Pollack recognises this detail as reflecting a sense of impatience, in keeping with the circumstances surrounding the song's creation. Following the third verse–chorus combination, the outro comprises four rounds of the chorus, with the lyrics to the final round consisting of the repeated "Don't be long" refrain. As a feature that Pollack terms "compositionally impressive", each of the four sections in this outro varies in structure by being either shorter in length or less musically detailed.

The lyrics to "Blue Jay Way" relate entirely to Harrison's situation on that first night in Los Angeles. He refers to fighting off sleep and recalls his advice to Taylor to ask a policeman for directions to Blue Jay Way. Author Jonathan Gould views the song as "darkly funny", with the singer's concern over his friends' tardiness almost resembling "a metaphysical crisis". In the choruses, Harrison repeatedly urges "Please don't be long / Please don't you be very long", a refrain that Inglis identifies as central to the composition's "extraordinary sense of yearning and melancholy".

Taylor later expressed amusement at how some commentators interpreted "don't be long" as meaning "don't belong" – a message to Western youth to opt out of society – and at how the line "And my friends have lost their way" supposedly conveyed the idea that "a whole generation had lost direction". With regard to whether Harrison was telling contemporary listeners not to "belong", Inglis writes, this "alternative reading" of the song aligned with Timothy Leary's catchphrase for the 1960s American psychedelic experience, "Turn on, tune in, drop out". In Gould's opinion, the continual repetition of the line at the end of "Blue Jay Way" transforms the words into "a plea for nonattachment – 'don't belong'". Rather than attaching any countercultural significance to this, however, Gould views it as the Beatles repeating the wordplay first used in the chorus of Lennon's 1963 song "It Won't Be Long".

The Beatles began recording "Blue Jay Way" on 6 September 1967 at EMI Studios (now Abbey Road Studios) in London. The song was Harrison's contribution to the television film "Magical Mystery Tour", the first project undertaken by the band following the death of their manager, Brian Epstein. Author Nicholas Schaffner describes "Blue Jay Way" as the first Harrison-written Beatles recording on which he "adapt[ed] some of his Indian-derived ideas to a more Western setting", with Hammond organ, cello and drums serving the function of, respectively, tambura drone, sitar and tabla.

The group achieved a satisfactory rhythm track in a single take. On 7 September, this recording – comprising two organ parts, bass guitar and drums – was reduced to two tracks on the 4-track master tape, after which Harrison overdubbed his double-tracked lead vocal, and he, Lennon and Paul McCartney added backing vocals. Among Beatles biographers, MacDonald credits Harrison as the sole organ player on the song, while Kenneth Womack and John Winn write that Lennon played the second keyboard part. Recording was completed at Abbey Road on 6 October, with the addition of tambourine, played by Ringo Starr, and cello. The latter was performed by an unnamed session musician. As with all the songs recorded for "Magical Mystery Tour", final mixing was carried out on 7 November.

"Blue Jay Way" features extensive use of three studio techniques employed by the Beatles over 1966–67: flanging, an audio delay effect; sound-signal rotation via a Leslie speaker; and (in the stereo mix only) reversed tapes. Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn compares "Blue Jay Way" with two Lennon tracks from this period, "Strawberry Fields Forever" and "I Am the Walrus", in that the recording "seized upon all the studio trickery and technical advancements of 1966 and 1967 and captured them in one song". Together with the pedal drone supplied by the keyboard parts, the various sound treatments reinforce the sense of dislocation evident in the song.

In the case of the reversed-tape technique, a recording of the completed track was played backwards and faded in at key points during the performance. This effect created a response to Harrison's lead vocal over the verses, as the backing vocals appear to answer each line he sings. Due to the limits of multitracking, the process of feeding in reversed sounds was carried out live during the final mixing session. Described by Lewisohn as "quite problematical", the process was not repeated when the Beatles and their production team worked on the mono mix.

The song's segment in "Magical Mystery Tour" was shot mainly at RAF West Malling, an air force base near Maidstone in Kent, during the week beginning on 19 September. Described by Womack as "the movie's hazy, psychedelic sequence", it features Harrison sitting on a pavement and playing a chalk-drawn keyboard. Dressed in a red suit, he is shown busking on a roadside; next to his keyboard are a white plastic cup and a message written in chalk, reading: "2 wives and kid to support". The depiction of Harrison, seated cross-legged, matched his public image as the most committed of the Beatles to Transcendental Meditation and Eastern philosophy.
The filming took place in an aircraft hangar, with the scene designed to re-create a typically smog-ridden Los Angeles. Music journalist Kit O'Toole writes that the smoke surrounding Harrison "almost engulf[s] him, mimicking the 'fog' described in the lyrics".<ref name="O'Toole/SomethingElse"></ref> Through the use of prismatic photography, the "Blue Jay Way" segment also shows Harrison's "image refracted as if seen through a fly's eye", according to author Alan Clayson, who describes the scene as mirroring "the requisite misty atmosphere" suggested by the recording. In its preview of "Magical Mystery Tour" in 1967, the "NME" highlighted the segment as one of the film's "extremely clever" musical sequences, saying: "For 'Blue Jay Way' George is seen sitting cross-legged in a sweating mist which materialises into a variety of shapes and patterns. It's a pity that most TV viewers will be able to see it only in black and white."

At other times during the sequence, the four Beatles alternate in the role of a solo cellist. These scenes were filmed on 3 November, on the rockery at Sunny Heights, Starr's house in Weybridge, Surrey. Tony Barrow, the production manager for "Magical Mystery Tour", recalls that, as "a colourful conclusion" to the segment, they set off fireworks that had been bought for the upcoming Guy Fawkes Night celebrations. The version of "Blue Jay Way" appearing in the 2012 DVD release of "Magical Mystery Tour" is an alternative edit and includes some previously unused footage. O'Toole admires the "Blue Jay Way" sequence as "one of the film's too-few bright spots" and "a perfect representation of the track's hallucinatory qualities".

"Blue Jay Way" was issued in Britain as the final song on the "Magical Mystery Tour" double EP on 8 December 1967. In America, where Capitol Records had combined the six EP tracks with five songs issued on the band's singles throughout the year, creating a full album, the release took place on 27 November.

Reviewing the EP for the "NME", Nick Logan considered it to be "Sergeant Pepper and beyond, heading for marvellous places", during which "we cruise down 'Blue Jay Way' with [Harrison] almost chanting the chorus line. A church organ starts this one off and leads us into a whirlpool of sound ..." Among reviews of the US release, "Saturday Review" admired the album as a "description of the Beatles' acquired Hindu philosophy and its subsequent application to everyday life", while Robert Christgau wrote in "Esquire" that, despite three of the new songs being "disappointing", "Magical Mystery Tour" was "worth buying ... especially for Harrison's hypnotic 'Blue Jay Way'". Christgau described the track as "an adaptation of Oriental modes in which everything works, lyrics included".

In a combined review of concurrent releases such as "Magical Mystery Tour", the Rolling Stones' "Their Satanic Majesties Request" and Cream's "Disraeli Gears", "Hit Parader" praised the Beatles for further "widening the gap between them and 80 scillion other groups". The reviewer added: "The master magicians practice their alchemy on Harrison's 'Blue Jay Way', recorded perhaps in an Egyptian tomb, and 'I Am The Walrus', a piece of terror lurking in foggy midnight moors. These two songs accomplish what the Stones attempted."

A critic of the Beatles' output immediately post-"Sgt. Pepper",<ref name="Harris/Mojo"></ref> Ian MacDonald found "Blue Jay Way" "as unfocused and monotonous as most of the group's output of this period", adding that the song "numbingly fails to transcend the weary boredom that inspired it". Writing for "Rolling Stone" in 2002, Greg Kot considered it to be "one of [Harrison's] least-memorable Beatles tracks … a song essentially about boredom – and it sounds like it". Similarly unimpressed with "Magical Mystery Tour", Tim Riley describes "Blue Jay Way" as a song that "goes nowhere tiresomely", with a vocal that "sounds as tired and droning" as the musical accompaniment.

Ian Inglis writes that the emotion Harrison conveys on the track "belies its apparently trivial lyrics" and that, together with the instrumentation and backing vocals, his pleas "create an unusually atmospheric and strangely moving song". Writing for Rough Guides, Chris Ingham deems the song to be "essential Beatlemusic"; he views it as Harrison's "most haunting and convincing musical contribution of the period", after "Within You Without You", as well as "possibly the most unnerving of all Beatles tracks". In a 2002 review for "Mojo", Charles Shaar Murray described the song as "eerie, serpentine" and "a fine and worthy companion for "Pepper"s Within You Without You". Writing in "Uncut" that same year, Carol Clerk called it "a weirdly atmospheric triumph".
In his book "Indian Music and the West", Gerry Farrell refers to the song when discussing its author's contribution to popularising Indian classical music, writing: "It is a mark of Harrison's sincere involvement with Indian music that, nearly thirty years on, the Beatles' 'Indian' songs remain among the most imaginative and successful examples of this type of fusion – for example, 'Blue Jay Way' and 'The Inner Light.'" Simon Leng writes of the song: "Harrison was working at a sophisticated level of extrapolating Indian scales to the Western setting, something no one else had done … 'Blue Jay Way' explores the structures of Indian music just as 'Within You Without You' debates its philosophical roots." In her song review for the music website Something Else!, Kit O'Toole describes "Blue Jay Way" as one of its composer's "most eccentric and abstract compositions" and "the perfect snapshot of the Beatles' most unusually creative artistic phase". Former "Record Collector" editor Peter Doggett, writing in Barry Miles' "The Beatles Diary", similarly admires the recording, saying that the Beatles rendered the song "an exotic, almost mystical journey" that evokes a mysterious Eastern mood "without a single Indian instrument being employed". Music critic Jim DeRogatis ranks "Blue Jay Way" at number 7 in his list of the Beatles' best psychedelic rock songs.

In a 2009 review for Consequence of Sound, Dan Caffrey highlights the track among the "stellar moments in the album's first half" and considers it to be "George Harrison's most underrated song". Caffrey adds: "For a piece inspired by the simple act of waiting for a friend to arrive at his Los Angeles home on a foggy night, 'Blue Jay Way' is a haunted house of a hit, adding an ethereal, creepy mythos to the City of Angels."<ref name="Caffrey/CoS"></ref> Writing for "The A.V. Club", Chuck Klosterman describes the song as being among "the trippiest ... material [the Beatles] ever made", while Mark Kemp of "Paste" views it as "wonderfully wobbly". Scott Plagenhoef of Pitchfork Media includes "Blue Jay Way" among the EP's four "low-key marvels", about which he opines: "Few of them are anyone's all-time favorite Beatles songs ... yet this run seems to achieve a majesty in part because of that: It's a rare stretch of amazing Beatles music that can seem like a private obsession rather than a permanent part of our shared culture." In 2018, the music staff of "Time Out London" ranked "Blue Jay Way" at number 46 on their list of the best Beatles songs.

Lord Sitar included "Blue Jay Way" on his 1968 album of Indian music-style recordings, titled "Lord Sitar". The artist credit was a pseudonym for London session guitarist Big Jim Sullivan, although rumours circulated that Lord Sitar was in fact Harrison himself, partly as a result of EMI/Capitol's refusal to deny the claim. Also in 1968, jazz saxophonist and flautist Bud Shank, another associate of Ravi Shankar, recorded the song for his album "Magical Mystery".

"Blue Jay Way" was a rare Beatles song released before their 1968 self-titled double album that Charles Manson adopted as part of his theory of an impending social revolution in the United States, a scenario that led to his followers carrying out a series of murders in Los Angeles during the summer of 1969. Finding parallels between the Beatles' lyrics and the Book of Revelation, and believing himself to be the messiah, Manson interpreted Harrison's opening verse and chorus as the Beatles calling out to Jesus Christ.
Colin Newman, singer and guitarist with the post-punk band Wire, included a cover of "Blue Jay Way" on his 1982 solo album "Not To". In March 2015, the song was also his selection for the "NME" "100 Greatest Beatles Songs" poll. Newman cited the track as an example of how the Beatles were "properly serious about their art" and why they now "need to be rescued from the clammy clutches of the heritage industry".

Borbetomagus released a live recording of the song on their 1992 album "Buncha Hair That Long", a version that "Trouser Press" later said "could easily reunite the Beatles for good if it were played in the presence of the surviving trio". On their 2003 live album "Seven Year Itch", Siouxsie and the Banshees included a reading that, according to "The Guardian"s reviewer, "transformed [the song] into an apocalyptic howl". Other artists who have covered "Blue Jay Way" include Tracy Bonham, on her 2007 album "In the City + In the Woods", and the Secret Machines, whose version appears in the Julie Taymor-directed film "Across the Universe" (2007). Former Cars keyboardist Greg Hawkes recorded a ukulele rendition for his 2008 solo album "The Beatles Uke".
Harrison's experience when writing "Blue Jay Way" is referenced in the Jonathan Kellerman novel "Obsession" (2007), as the lead character, Alex Delaware, waits among the "bird streets" overlooking Sunset Strip. The US hip hop group Death Grips included a reversed sample of "Blue Jay Way" as well as a quote from the song's lyrics in their 2012 track "Double Helix", released on "The Money Store", an album that "Clash" magazine described as sounding like "the burning skies of LA's decaying empire".

In a 2011 interview, music producer and radio host Kim Fowley identified "Blue Jay Way" as the first song in which a member of the Beatles wrote about America and cited it as evidence of Harrison's standing as "the most American of all the Beatles" during the 1960s. Fowley highlighted this connection – including Harrison's friendships with David Crosby of the Byrds and other California-based musicians, such as Leon Russell – as the foundation for rock music's first all-star charity concert, the Concert for Bangladesh, which Harrison staged in New York in August 1971.

Due to the attention created by the Beatles' song, the street signs for Blue Jay Way have long been collector's items for fans visiting the Hollywood Hills. In May 2015, a lane in the Heavitree area of Exeter, in the English county of Devon, was named Blue Jay Way after the song. In addition to much of the filming for "Magical Mystery Tour" having taken place at various locations in the West Country, the title commemorates the Beatles' three concert appearances at Exeter's ABC Cinema over 1963–64.
According to Ian MacDonald:




</doc>
<doc id="2256577" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2256577" title="Doug Stone">
Doug Stone

Doug Stone (born Douglas Jackson Brooks on June 19, 1956) is an American country music singer. He debuted in 1990 with the single "I'd Be Better Off (In a Pine Box)", the first release from his 1990 self-titled debut album for Epic Records. Both this album and its successor, 1991's "I Thought It Was You", earned a platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America. Two more albums for Epic, 1992's "From the Heart" and 1994's "More Love", are each certified gold. Stone moved to Columbia Records to record "Faith in Me, Faith in You", which did not produce a Top Ten among its three singles. After suffering a heart attack and stroke in the late 1990s, he exited the label and did not release another album until "Make Up in Love" in 1999 on Atlantic Records. "The Long Way" was released in 2002 on the Audium label (now part of E1 Music), followed by two albums on the independent Lofton Creek Records.

Stone has charted twenty-six singles on Hot Country Songs, with his greatest chart success coming between 1990 and 1995. In this timespan, he had eight No. 1 singles on the Hot Country Songs charts including: "In a Different Light", "A Jukebox with a Country Song", "Too Busy Being in Love", and "Why Didn't I Think of That". He is known for his neotraditionalist country sound and his frequent recording of ballads.

Stone was born as Douglas Jackson Brooks on June 19, 1956 in Marietta, Georgia. His mother, who was also a country music singer, taught him how to play guitar when he was five. When he was seven years old, his mother placed him onstage to open for Loretta Lynn. His mother and father later divorced, and afterward, he moved to live with his father. He found additional work singing as a teenager: first at local skating rinks, and then at local bars, and later as one member of a short-lived trio; in addition, he and his father worked as mechanics to make ends meet. He also built a recording studio in his house, while performing in local clubs. By 1982, Stone was suffering from depression brought on by his musical career, when a friend introduced him to Carie Cohen, who would later become his second wife. He played various local venues, and was discovered by a record label manager while singing at a Veterans of Foreign Wars hall. The manager asked him for demos, which she then sent to Epic Records. He chose to record under the name Doug Stone, so as to avoid confusion with Garth Brooks. Record producer Doug Johnson played three tunes for Epic Records producer Bob Montgomery, who disliked the first two that he heard but enjoyed the third one. Through Montgomery's assistance, Stone signed with Epic in 1989, thus becoming the only artist that Montgomery ever signed without seeing perform live.

Stone's self-titled debut album was released in 1990 with Johnson as producer. Mac McAnally, Mark O'Connor, Paul Franklin, Brent Rowan, and Willie Weeks were among the session musicians on it. Contributing songwriters included David Lee Murphy, Larry Boone, Randy Boudreaux, A.L. "Doodle" Owens, and Keith Palmer, who would later chart two singles for Epic in 1991. Its first single, "I'd Be Better Off (In a Pine Box)," spent twenty-five weeks on the "Billboard" Hot Country Songs charts and peaked at No. 4. In addition, the single was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Country Song, and the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for U.S. shipments of one million copies. The album's next two singles were both Top Ten singles as well: "Fourteen Minutes Old" at No. 6 and "These Lips Don't Know How to Say Goodbye" at No. 5. Following these songs was "In a Different Light", co-written by Dickey Lee, which became Stone's first number 1 on "Billboard". Stone received three music award nominations in 1991: the Horizon Award (now New Artist Award) from the Country Music Association, Star of Tomorrow from Music City News, and Top New Male Vocalist from the Academy of Country Music.

Brian Mansfield gave "Doug Stone" a four-and-a-half star rating out of five in his review for Allmusic. His review praised "I'd Be Better Off" in particular, calling the song a "towering expression of self-pity that most singers could spend a career trying to top," also saying that Stone "came close" to matching that song's quality in the album's ballads.

"I Thought It Was You", his second album, was released in August 1991. Also certified platinum, it produced three more chart singles: the No. 4 title track, followed by the number 1 "A Jukebox with a Country Song" and "Come In Out of the Pain" at No. 3. "A Jukebox with a Country Song" spent two weeks at number 1, thus becoming his only multi-week number 1 single. Stone co-wrote the track "The Feeling Never Goes Away" with Kim Williams and Phyllis Bennett, and then-labelmate Joe Diffie co-wrote "Burning Down the Town". Alanna Nash of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the album an "A", saying that it contained "sex-and-smolder ballads" comparable to Conway Twitty. Mansfield was less favorable, saying that Stone "seems to wallow in sorrow".

In early 1992, Stone began experiencing dizziness and pain in one of his arms. He also began feeling chest pains which he initially thought were heartburn. After feeling disoriented at a concert in Oregon, he canceled an appearance at the Academy of Country Music telecast. He then underwent quadruple bypass surgery at Centennial Medical Center to alleviate four severe arterial blockages near his heart which had initially gone undiscovered by doctors. Following the surgery, Stone changed his diet and began exercising, in addition to touring in support of his third album, "From the Heart", released that August. The album's title was seen by many music writers, including Irwin Stambler and Grelun Landon of "Country Music: The Encyclopedia", as ironic in the wake of Stone's heart surgery.

With a gold certification for shipments of 500,000 copies, "From the Heart" produced two more number 1 singles in "Too Busy Being in Love" and "Why Didn't I Think of That". The other two singles were "Warning Labels" and "Made for Lovin' You", at No. 4 and No. 6 respectively. The latter had previously been recorded by both Dan Seals and Clinton Gregory. Mansfield thought that "From the Heart" was more consistent than Stone's previous two albums, saying that his "voice is at its pain-wracked best" on "Warning Labels" and that "The heart references take on a special meaning given the open-heart surgery that preceded this album". Nash criticized the album as "sappy, lightweight tales of infatuation and starry-eyed courtship". One month after "From the Heart", Stone released a Christmas album titled "The First Christmas". Although this album produced no singles, "Sailing Home for Christmas" was made into a music video. Stone was nominated in both 1992 and 1993 for Star of Tomorrow by Music City News, and Top Male Vocalist from the Academy of Country Music, winning the former award in 1993. He toured in 1992 with Patty Loveless, Lynyrd Skynyrd, and Hank Williams, Jr.

His fourth album, "More Love", was released in November 1993. Unlike his previous albums, Stone co-produced with James Stroud, except on the track "Dream High", which Stroud produced with Tom Bahler and Bruce Swedien. It also included different session musicians than his previous albums, such as guitarist Dann Huff and backing vocalist Curtis Wright. Its lead-off single was "I Never Knew Love", which spent two weeks at No. 2 on the country singles charts and accounted for his only entry on the "Billboard" Hot 100, where it peaked at No. 81. The album's next two singles were the No. 4 "Addicted to a Dollar" and the title track, which Stone wrote with Gary Burr, at No. 6. Tom Roland of "New Country" magazine criticized the album for "continu[ing] to mine the drippy side of Stone" through "manipulative" ballads, but cited "Addicted to a Dollar" and "Love, You Took Me by Surprise" as being "tougher" than Stone's previous works.

Starting in June 1994, Stone discovered that he was having breathing problems which were affecting his singing. He consulted throat doctors at Vanderbilt University's medical center, who failed to find any problems in his throat, while a second consultation revealed a lump in his left nostril. Upon its discovery, Stone feared that it might be cancer, and that it would put an end to his career. As a result, Stone quit smoking, although the lump was later discovered not to be cancerous and was successfully removed. While Stone was undergoing treatment, his "Greatest Hits, Vol. 1" compilation was released in late 1994. Also receiving a gold certification, the album comprised nine of his previous hits and the new song "Little Houses", which debuted on the charts in October 1994 and peaked at No. 7 in early 1995. After its release, Stone made his acting debut in the 1995 film "Gordy", in which he starred as Luke McAllister, a struggling musician. The movie's soundtrack featured four songs from "More Love": "More Love", "That's a Lie", "Wishbone", and "Dream High", as well as two other songs that Stone performed: "The Heart I Broke" and "I Could Always Count on You".

Also in 1995, parent company Sony Music Entertainment chose to move Stone from the Nashville division of Epic Records to that of Columbia Records. This decision was made to give Stone a new promotional team. His only Columbia album, "Faith in Me, Faith in You", was released in March of that year, with Stroud again serving as co-producer. This album's three singles were comparatively less successful than his previous singles, with none reaching Top 10: the title track peaked at No. 13, followed by "Sometimes I Forget" at No. 41 (his first single to miss the Top 40) and "Born in the Dark" at No. 12. Stone suffered a nearly-fatal heart attack in December 1995 and a mild stroke in 1996, reducing his ability to record and tour. Stone would later remark that he was "lucky" to have survived his health issues in this timespan. One of his few performances in this timespan was at a show in Dollywood, a theme park owned by Dolly Parton, in mid-1996. His last charting single for Columbia was "Gone Out of My Mind", which he recorded for the multi-artist compilation album "A Tribute to Tradition" in 1998.

Stone signed with Atlantic Records and released "Make Up in Love" in 1999 under the production of Wally Wilson. A more pop-oriented album than his previous ones, the album produced a minor Top 20 hit in its title track. Its next singles were a cover of R.B. Greaves's 1969 single "Take a Letter Maria", which Stone took to number 45, and "Surprise", which spent only one week on the country charts, at number 64. Also included on the album were a duet with Leslie Satcher titled "The Heart Holds On", and the Bobby Braddock-penned "The Difference Between a Woman and a Man", which was later recorded by Josh Turner on his 2003 debut album "Long Black Train". Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album a mixed review, saying that "Since Stone's voice is pleasant, the music is often pleasant, but it's hardly memorable." Andy Turner of "Country Standard Time" was more favorable, saying that it "does not come off 'too country for country' yet is still engaging largely because of Stone's voice — soft with built-in teardrops." Also in 1999, Stone and Skip Ewing co-wrote "In the Name of Love" on the only album released by female country duo Redmon & Vale.

In December 1999, Stone was aboard an airplane which skidded off a snowy runway at O'Hare Airport in Chicago; there were no injuries. Stone began piloting ultra-light airplanes as a hobby in 1999 and 2000. In March 2000, he suffered a broken left ankle, cracked rib, concussion, and bruised kidney after crashing his plane in Robertson County, Tennessee, and was briefly hospitalized before he resumed touring. Stone later said that the accident made him decide to quit flying planes. After the September 11, 2001 attacks, rumors circulated that Stone had been on one of the hijacked planes; a spokeswoman for the singer confirmed that he was at home with his family that day.

Stone signed to Audium Entertainment in 2002 and recorded "The Long Way". This album included seven new songs and acoustic re-recordings of "More Love", "Born in the Dark", and "I'd Be Better Off". One of the original songs on it was "POW 369", which was later recorded by Darryl Worley. Stewart Mason thought that it was "not nearly as suffocatingly slick" as Stone's previous albums, but questioned its commercial success. His next album did not come out until 2005, when he signed to the independent label Lofton Creek Records, recording the album "In a Different Light". The album included a cover of "Georgia on My Mind", which was the first single, and re-recordings of "In a Different Light" and "Why Didn't I Think of That". A second album for Lofton Creek, "My Turn", followed in 2007. It was led off by the single "Nice Problem". William Ruhlmann praised this album for having "a timeless country feel", also saying that "Stone sings with as much fervor and sincerity as ever." Ken Tucker of "Billboard" wrote that "He sounds as good as ever and his music is still relevant".

In 2013, Stone toured with Bryan White and Shenandoah as part of the "Reliving the 90s Tour". He also returned to acting, with roles in the films "When the Storm God Rides" and "The Story of Bonnie and Clyde".

Stone married his second wife, Carie Cohen, in 1982. The couple separated in July 1994, and Cohen filed for divorce two months later, accusing Stone of excessive drinking and infidelity. He married Beth Snyder in December 1996 after being engaged to her for a year. As of 2005, he had one daughter, Baili, with Beth, and four children from his previous marriages: daughter Michelle and son Daniel from his first marriage, son Chanse and daughter Kala from his marriage to Cohen, Stone split from Snyder in late 2006 and returned to his Georgia home.

On March 29, 2015, Stone married 20 year old fiddler Jade Jack in Oklahoma. Doug and Jade have a daughter, Bristol Gail Brooks, born April 14, 2016.

Stone is known primarily for his neotraditionalist country sound, his baritone singing voice, and emphasis on ballads. In "Country Music: A Biographical Dictionary", Richard Carlin describes him as "a solid country crooner whose style is reminiscent of Merle Haggard." Steve Huey of Allmusic wrote that Stone "made his name as a lonesome baritone balladeer, though he's also adept at hard uptempo country." Zell Miller, author of "They Heard Georgia Singing", wrote that Stone has "established himself as a mellow country crooner who is known as 'Mr. Sensitive'" and "the Dean Martin of country music because of his unique flair for communicating the fragility of a broken heart with his delicate baritone voice and laid-back style."

Kurt Wolff of "Country Music: The Rough Guide" described Stone's musical style less favorably. He wrote that Stone seemed "schizophrenic. Half his reputation was established with self-deprecating downers like 'I'd Be Better Off (In a Pine Box)', but then he'd just as easily turn around with a schmaltzy love song like 'Too Busy Being in Love'." He compared "I'd Be Better Off" and "Warning Labels" favorably to Haggard as well, and thought that the change of producers on "More Love" gave him a "much beefier sound".




</doc>
<doc id="2272321" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2272321" title="Eugene Kaspersky">
Eugene Kaspersky

Yevgeny Valentinovich Kaspersky (Russian: Евгений Валентинович Касперский; born 4 October 1965) is a Russian cybersecurity expert and the CEO of Kaspersky Lab, an IT security company with 4,000 employees. He cofounded Kaspersky Lab in 1997 and helped identify instances of government-sponsored cyberwarfare as the head of research. He has been an advocate for an international treaty prohibiting cyberwarfare.

Kaspersky graduated from The Technical Faculty of the KGB Higher School in 1987 with a degree in mathematical engineering and computer technology. His interest in IT security began when his work computer was infected with the Cascade virus in 1989 and he developed a program to remove it. Kaspersky helped grow Kaspersky Lab through security research and salesmanship. He became the CEO in 2007 and remains so as of 2019.

Kaspersky was born on 4 October 1965 in Novorossiysk, Russia. He grew up near Moscow, where he moved at age nine. His father was an engineer and his mother a historical archivist. As a child he developed an early interest in math and technology. He spent his free time reading math books and won second place in a math competition at age 14. When he was fourteen, Kaspersky began attending A.N. Kolmogorov boarding school, which is run by Moscow University and specializes in math. He was also a member of the youth division of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

At the age of 16, Kaspersky entered a five-year program with The Technical Faculty of the KGB Higher School, which prepared intelligence officers for the Russian military and KGB. He graduated in 1987 with a degree in mathematical engineering and computer technology. After graduating college, Kaspersky served the Soviet military intelligence service as a software engineer. He met his first wife Natalya Kaspersky at Severskoye, a KGB vacation resort, in 1987.

Kaspersky's interest in IT security began in 1989, when his PC was infected by the Cascade virus, while working for the Ministry of Defense. He studied how the virus worked and developed a program to remove it. Afterwards he continually found new viruses and developed software to remove them, as a hobby. Early on Kaspersky's anti-virus software had just 40 virus definitions and was distributed mostly to friends.

In 1991, Kaspersky was granted an early release from his military service and left the defense ministry to take a job at the Information Technology Center of a private company KAMI, in order to work on his antivirus product full-time. There, he and his colleagues improved the software and released it as a product called Antiviral Toolkit Pro in 1992. At first the software was purchased by about ten clients per month. It earned about $100 per month, mostly from companies in Ukraine and Russia. Kaspersky's then-future wife Natalya Kaspersky became his coworker at KAMI.

In 1994, Hamburg University in Germany gave Kaspersky's software first place in a competitive analysis of antivirus software. This led to more business for Kaspersky from European and American companies. Kaspersky Lab was founded three years later by Kaspersky, his wife and Kaspersky's friend. Natalya, who pushed Eugene to start the company, was the CEO, while Eugene was the head of research. The following year, the CIH virus (AKA the Chernobyl virus) created a boon for Kaspersky's anti-virus products, which Kaspersky said was the only software at the time that could cleanse the virus. According to "Wired", "their software was advanced for the time." For example, it was the first software to monitor viruses in an isolated quarantine.

Kaspersky's company grew quickly in the late 1990s. From 1998 to 2000, its annual revenue grew 280 percent and by 2000 almost sixty percent of revenues were international. By 2000, it had a staff of 65 people, starting from 13 in 1997. The antivirus product was renamed to Kaspersky Antivirus in 2000, after an American company started using the product's original name, which wasn't trademarked.

As the head of research, Kaspersky authored papers on viruses and went to conferences to promote the software. He was often quoted in the technology press as an antivirus expert. He helped establish the company's Global Research and Expert Analysis Team (GReAT), which helps corporations and governments investigate IT security threats. Initially he told his team not to discuss cyber-terrorism publicly, to avoid giving governments ideas on how to sabotage their political opponents. After the American film "Live Free or Die Hard" (AKA "Die Hard 4.0") (2007) was released, Kaspersky said the idea was now public. He hired the researcher that identified the Stuxnet worm, which is believed to be the first instance of state-sponsored cyberweapon. Afterwards, the company exposed the Flame virus at the request of the International Telecommunication Union. The virus was believed to have been used for cyber-espionage in Middle-Eastern countries.

Kaspersky Lab developed a reputation for discovering cybersecurity threats. In 2015 Kaspersky and Kaspersky Lab discovered a group of hackers known as Carbanak that were stealing money from banks. They also exposed Equation Group, which developed advanced spyware for monitoring computer use and was believed to be affiliated with the National Security Agency in the U.S. According to "The Economist," it was these discoveries, Kaspersky's "relentless salesmanship" and the company's anti-virus product that made Kaspersky Lab uncommon as an internationally recognized Russian company.

Kaspersky became CEO of Kaspersky Lab in 2007. According to a 2008 article in "USA Today," he traveled to 20 to 30 countries per year promoting Kaspersky Lab products. In early 2009, "CRN" said his personality contributed to the company's growth from "relative obscurity to now nipping at the heels of its larger, better-known rivals." At the time, Kaspersky Lab was the fourth largest endpoint security company. It introduced new products for the enterprise market and expanded its channel programs.

In 2011, Kaspersky made a decision against taking the company public, saying it would make decision-making slow and prevent long-term R&D investments. This led to a series of high-level departures from the company, including his ex-wife and co-founder. Another series of departures occurred in 2014 due to disagreements over how to run the company.

Kaspersky Lab has defended itself against allegedly frivolous patent claims more aggressively than most IT companies. In 2012, it was the only one of 35 firms named in a suit by patent troll Information Protection and Authentication (IPAC) to take the case to court, rather than pay a fee. The case was ruled in Kaspersky's favor. Also in 2012, another company, Lodsys, sued Kaspersky and 54 other companies for patent infringement, and that case also resulted in the claimant dropping the case against Kaspersky. According to an article in "TechWorld," the company's aversion to settling these claims is most likely because Eugene "just hates" patent trolls. In his blog he called them "parasites" and "IT racketeers."

Kaspersky himself is the co-author of several patents, including one for a constraint-and-attribute-based security system for controlling software component interaction.

As of 2015, Kaspersky Lab employed more than 2,800 people. As of 2012, Kaspersky was working on developing software to protect critical infrastructure, like power plants, from cyberwarfare.

Kaspersky is influential among politicians and security experts. He has warned about the possibility of cyberwarfare that targets critical infrastructure. He speaks at conferences advocating for an international cyberwarfare treaty, that would ban government-sponsored cyberattacks.

After the Stuxnet attack, Kaspersky proposed that the Internet needed more regulation and policing. One idea was to have some parts of the Internet anonymous, while more secure areas require user identification. He argued that anonymity mostly benefited cybercriminals and hackers. For example, accessing a nuclear power plant network could require a verified identity through a digital passport.

Kaspersky said anonymity on the Internet could be protected by using a proxy, whereby a responsible international body maintains a record of which online identities correspond to which real-world ones. For example, a person's identity would be revealed in cases of malicious activity. Some security experts believe that a centralized database of the real-world identities of Internet users would be "a privacy disaster and a highly attractive target for thieves." "The Age" said it "sounds a little too close for comfort to a Big Brother scenario" and "Wired" said Kaspersky's views were highly aligned with the Russian government's agenda.

Many organizations have been considering reducing privacy to improve security as a result of Kaspersky's arguments. In a more recent "Slashdot" interview Kaspersky said the Internet should be divided into three zones: a red zone for voting, online banking, and other "critical transactions" that would require an Internet ID; a grey zone that may require only verification of age to access the site, but not identity; and a green zone for blogs, news, and "everything related to your freedom of speech." He proposes "special proxies" for red zone websites that allow disclosure of the user's identity only in the case of suspected malfeasance.

Kaspersky's prior work for the Russian military and his education at a KGB-sponsored technical college has led to controversy about whether he uses his position to advance Russian government interests and intelligence efforts. According to Kaspersky, allegations of dubious connections with Russian agencies began after he got his first clients in America. He spends much of his working life trying to get governments and organizations to trust him and his software in spite of the allegations.

"Wired" said Kaspersky's critics accuse him of using the company to spy on users for Russian intelligence. Russian telecommunications companies for example are required by federal law in Russia to cooperate with the government's military and spy operations if asked. Kaspersky said his company has never been asked to tamper with its software for espionage and called the accusations "cold war paranoia." According to "Wired," Kaspersky staffers argue "not unconvincingly" that spying on users would hurt its business and its relationship with the Russian FSB, the KGB's successor, is limited. According to Gartner, "There's no evidence that they have any back doors in their software or any ties to the Russian mafia or state... but there is still a concern that you can’t operate in Russia without being controlled by the ruling party.” "Computing" mocked some of the more extreme accusations of espionage, but said it would be unlikely for a Russian business to grow to the size of Kaspersky Lab without relationships within the Russian government. NPR journalists also said it was unlikely Kaspersky was using its software for espionage, because it would be risky for the company's business, but said Kaspersky showed an unusual disinterest in Russia-based cybercrime.

In August 2015, Bloomberg reported that Kaspersky Lab changed course in 2012. According to the publication, "high-level managers have left or been fired, their jobs often filled by people with closer ties to Russia’s military or intelligence services. Some of these people actively aid criminal investigations by the FSB using data from some of the 400 million customers". Bloomberg and "The New York Times" also said Kaspersky was less aggressive about identifying cyberattacks originating from Russia than from other countries, allegations Kaspersky refutes. For example, he allegedly ignored or downplayed a series of denial-of-service attacks in December 2011 that were made to disrupt online discussion criticizing Russian politicians. Kaspersky also allegedly ignored a Russian-based spyware called Sofacy, which is believed to have been used by Russia against NATO and Eastern Europe. On the other hand, Kaspersky also published information on the Russia-based Crouching Yeti cyberattacks two days before Bloomberg accused him of ignoring Russia-based cyberattacks. At the time, the company had published eleven reports on malicious Russian programs. Competitor FireEye said it is awkward even in the U.S. to investigate cybercrimes performed by one's own government.

A March 2015 article in Bloomberg said an increasing number of executive staff at Kaspersky Lab previously worked for Russian military and intelligence agencies. According to "News & Observer", Kaspersky "published a mammoth response, tearing down Bloomberg's accusations and accusing them of throwing facts out the window for the sake of a juicy anti-Russian narrative." Competitor FireEye said many U.S. IT companies also have executives that formerly worked for government military and intelligence agencies. NPR reported that Kaspersky has been doing an increasing amount of business with Russian cybersecurity agencies to catch cybercriminals. Kaspersky confirmed that Russian agencies are among its government customers.

In May 2017, the allegations resurfaced when US National Security Agency (NSA) director Mike Rogers told a US Senate Intelligence committee that the NSA was reviewing the US government's use of Kaspersky software for fear it would allow Russian intelligence services to conduct spy operations or launch cyber attacks against American digital infrastructure. "ABC" reported that the Department of Homeland Security had issued a secret report in February on possible connections between Kaspersky Lab and Russian intelligence, and that the FBI was currently investigating the matter. According to Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) director Vincent Stewart, his agency is "tracking Kaspersky and their software." In a press release, Eugene Kaspersky denied that his software is currently, or could be, used for such purposes, stating that "As a private company, Kaspersky Lab has no ties to any government, and the company has never helped, nor will help, any government in the world with its cyber-espionage efforts." He also stated that the US does not want to use his company's software for political reasons, and called the allegations "unfounded conspiracy theories."

In August 2015, two former Kaspersky employees alleged that the company introduced modified files into the VirusTotal community anti-virus database to trick its rivals' programs into triggering false positives. The result of the false positives was that important uninfected files would be disabled or deleted. The allegations also claimed that Kaspersky himself had ordered some of the actions, specifically targeting competitors, including Chinese companies he felt were copying his software. Emails dated 2009, two years after Kaspersky became CEO, were allegedly leaked to Reuters, one of which allegedly had Kaspersky threatening to go after competitors by "rubbing them out in the outhouse," using a phrase popularized by Vladimir Putin. The company denied the allegations.

Kaspersky was ranked #1,567 on "Forbes" "Billionaires List 2017" with a net worth of US$1.3 billion (as of March 2017). He first made the list in 2015 when his net worth reached US$1 billion.

Kaspersky lives in Moscow, Russia with his wife and five children. He and his first wife were divorced in 1998. On 21 April 2011, his son, Ivan, then 20, was kidnapped for a $4.4 million ransom. Kaspersky worked with a friend at the FSB and Russian police to trace the ransomer's phone call. They set up a trap for the ransomers, where they rescued his son and arrested many of the kidnappers. The incident had an influence on Kaspersky's sense of personal security. He now travels with a bodyguard and security detail.

Kaspersky is one of the richest people in Russia. His net worth is about $1 billion. According to "Wired," he has "cultivated the image of a wild man with cash to burn." He has an interest in racing and drives his sports cars on race tracks as a hobby. He sponsors various "quirky or scientific projects" such as the Ferrari Formula One racing team or archaeological excavations in Akrotiri (Santorini). Kaspersky owns a BMW M3. Kaspersky describes himself as an "adrenaline junkie." He has gone hiking on volcanoes in Russia and reserved a trip to space on the Virgin Galactic. He travels often and writes about his experiences in his personal blog. He also enjoys photography as a hobby.

Kaspersky is known for shunning formal attire, typically dressing in jeans and a shirt. He supports university projects and competitions in the IT security field.



</doc>
<doc id="2280608" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2280608" title="The Look of Love (Madonna song)">
The Look of Love (Madonna song)

"The Look of Love" is a song by American singer Madonna from the soundtrack album to the 1987 film "Who's That Girl". It was the third and final single release from the album and was released on November 25, 1987 by Sire Records. While shooting for the film, then called "Slammer", Madonna had requested that producer Patrick Leonard develop a downtempo song that captured the nature of her film persona. She later wrote the lyrics and melody to the backing track developed by Leonard, and the song became "The Look of Love". Madonna was also inspired by actor James Stewart's performance in the 1954 film "Rear Window" when writing the song.

Featuring instrumentation from percussion, the song begins with a low bass synth line and a slow backing track, followed by Madonna singing the lyrics. Critically appreciated as a haunting track and noted as a "gem" on the album, "The Look of Love" reached the top ten of the charts in Belgium, Ireland, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. It also charted in France, Germany and Switzerland, while reaching the top 20 of the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles. Madonna's only live performances of the song were on her Who's That Girl World Tour in 1987. During the performance Madonna pretended that she was lost on the stage, like her film character.

In 1986, Madonna was shooting for her third motion picture "Who's That Girl", then known as "Slammer". Needing songs for the soundtrack of the movie, she contacted Patrick Leonard and Stephen Bray, with whom she had written and produced her third studio album "True Blue" in 1986. Madonna explained to them that she needed an uptempo song and a downtempo song. She came to the studio one Thursday, as Leonard developed the chorus of the songs. He handed over that cassette to Madonna, who went to the backroom and finished the melody and the lyrics of the songs, while Leonard worked on the other parts. The uptempo song developed was "Who's That Girl", the first single from the soundtrack, and the downtempo song, developed and written the day after, was "The Look of Love". Madonna later changed the film's name from "Slammer" to "Who's That Girl", preferring the latter. Regarding the development of the songs for the film, Madonna further explained

"I had some very specific ideas in mind, music that would stand on its own as well as support and enhance what was happening on screen and the only way to make that a reality was to have a hand in writing the tunes myself. [...] The songs aren't necessarily about Nikki [her character name in the movie] or written to be sung by someone like her, but there's a spirit to this music that captures both what the film and the characters are about, I think."

Madonna was inspired by the look that actor James Stewart gave actress Grace Kelly in the 1954 film "Rear Window". Madonna said: "I can't describe it, but that is the way I want someone to look at me when he loves me. It's the most pure look of love and adoration. Like surrender. It's devastating." "The Look of Love" was released as the third single from the soundtrack in the United Kingdom, some European countries and Japan. "I Know It", a track from Madonna's self-titled debut album, appeared as the B-side. In 1989, the song was used as the B-side for the "Express Yourself" single release.

"The Look of Love" starts off with a low bass synth line and a slow backing track. It is followed by sound of percussion and a high register note, contrasting with the bassline. The song continues in this way up till the last verse, which is backed by the sound from an acoustic guitar. A two-part vocal is found in the line "No where to run, no place to hide". According to Rikky Rooksby, author of "The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna", Madonna's voice sounds "expressive" when she sings the line "From the look of love" and utters the word "look" over the D minor chord present underneath. The word is sung in a higher note of the musical scale, thus giving an impression of the suspension like quality of the minor ninth chord, dissociating it from the harmony of the other notes. The song is set in the time signature of common time, with a moderate tempo of 80 beats per minute. It is composed in the key of D minor, with Madonna's voice spanning the notes C to B. "The Look of Love" has a basic sequence of C–Dm–Fm–B as its chord progression.

Rooksby called the song as "the other gem" of the "Who's That Girl" soundtrack along with "Causing a Commotion," and denoted it as "an expressive, understated track." J. Randy Taraborrelli, author of "Madonna: An Intimate Biography", commented that "'The Look of Love' was an exotic ballad." Don Shewey from "Rolling Stone" said that the song was "so haunting that it would leave you thinking as to where your life is going." John Evan Seery, author of "Political theory for mortals: shades of justice, images of death", commented that the song portrayed Madonna's "discipline of gaze". Brian Hadden from "Time" found the song depressing. Tiju Francis from "Vibe" wrote: "For a such a commonly titled song, Madonna’s take does at least offer something a little different. [...] 'The Look of Love' actually sounds like part of the score – Madonna could well be singing over what was previously just the moody character development background synth music apparently present in every film in the ’80s. [...] But its slow-burn feel means the song is four minutes of not-particularly-intense brooding that never peaks – unlike a ballad."

"The Look of Love" was never released in the United States, and therefore did not enter any "Billboard" charts. In the United Kingdom, it was released on December 12, 1987, and entered the UK Singles Chart at number 15. The next week, it reached a peak of nine on the chart, her first single to miss the top five since "Lucky Star". The song was present for a total of seven weeks on the chart. According to the Official Charts Company, "The Look of Love" has sold 121,439 copies in the United Kingdom, as of August 2008. In Germany, the song debuted on the Media Control Charts at number 38 on January 24, 1988 and moved to its peak of number 34, the next week. It was present for a total of seven weeks on the chart. In Ireland, the song reached the top ten and peaked at number six. Across Europe, the song reached number nine in Belgium, number 23 in France, number eight in Netherlands and number 20 in Switzerland. On the European Hot 100 Singles, the song reached number 17.

Madonna performed the song on her 1987 Who's That Girl World Tour. It was the seventh song of the setlist. Madonna was dressed in gold lamé pants and a sleeveless top. As she finished the performance of "Causing a Commotion", the spotlight was focused on her. The introductory music of "The Look of Love" started and Madonna roamed around the stage, pretending that she was lost. She wanted to portray her "Who's That Girl" character Nikki, when she was lost in a similar sequence in the film. After she finished singing the song, Madonna pretended to walk forward by pushing through the air, as the conveyor belt took her backwards, ultimately taking her away from the stage.




Credits adapted from the album's liner notes.



</doc>
<doc id="2314043" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2314043" title="Tomahawk (album)">
Tomahawk (album)

Tomahawk is the debut studio album by American experimental rock band Tomahawk. Recorded after a meeting between vocalist Mike Patton and guitarist Duane Denison, the album features members of Faith No More, The Jesus Lizard, Helmet and Melvins. The band toured with Tool in support of the record, but were not well received by Tool's fans.

Released on October 30, 2001, through Patton's record label Ipecac Recordings, "Tomahawk" has received positive attention from critics, with most appraisals drawing attention to the versatility of Patton's vocals. The album charted in both Australia and the United States, reaching a peak of number 20 in the "Billboard" Independent Albums countdown.

For "Tomahawk", the band is composed of Mike Patton, vocalist for Faith No More and Mr. Bungle; Duane Denison, guitarist for The Jesus Lizard; Kevin Rutmanis, bass player for Melvins; and John Stanier, drummer for Helmet. Patton and Denison met in 2000 at a Mr. Bungle concert in Nashville, Tennessee, and began exchanging music. From there, the two began to jam together with a view to releasing an album. In a 2016 interview, Duane Denison stated "I wrote the basic tunes on my own (on a 4-track) and sent the cassettes (this was '99
-2000) to Mike, who then added vocals and samples for me to listen to. I think it took about a year altogether. We tracked and mixed live, altogether, in Nashville." 

The band hired Joe Funderburk to produce the album; Funderburk had previously worked with Emmylou Harris and The Judds. The album was released through Ipecac Recordings, the record label owned by Patton and Greg Werckman. Ipecac is also home to Rutmanis' band Melvins, whose vocalist and guitarist Buzz Osborne had previously collaborated with Patton as a member of Fantômas. It was recorded in Nashville during mid-2001. Denison reflected "Being in Nashville seemed to bring out the worst in everyone--excessive drinking, anxiety, fighting, etc...that's the chemistry!".

Patton described the new group as "the closest thing to a rock band I've been involved with for a while". Regarding their name, Denison stated "It’s the kind of name an average kid says, “Hey TOMAHAWK is coming to town.” It sounds like it would be this hard, aggressive, typical nu metal band… and we’re not. There’s some hard rock to it, but it’s not typical. It’s not wall to wall big riffs and kicking riffs. It’s varied and the name can be deceiving."

"Tomahawk" was released on October 30, 2001. The album was supported by a tour in which the band supported Tool; however, Tool's fans were unreceptive to Tomahawk and frequently booed their performances.

Writing for AllMusic, Blake Butler rated "Tomahawk" four stars out of five, describing the album as "moody, violent, beautiful, sarcastic, vomitive, silly [and] heartstopping". Butler praised Patton's versatility, calling the vocalist "a complete and utter musical visionary, and a mind-blowing and standard-warping genius". "Pitchfork" Luke Buckman award the album a rating of 7 out of 10, similarly highlighting Patton's vocals as exemplary. Buckman called Patton "one of the greatest male vocalists around today"; and felt that "Flashback" and "Cul de Sac" were among the album's best songs. Mark Reed of Drowned in Sound rated the album 8 out of 10, noting the "wit" and "style" of the songwriting. Reed felt that the album was among the most conventional of those recorded by Patton, but still described it as featuring "supercatchy, earstretching vocals, dark lyrics rich in black humour, swathes of crunchy guitars and some of the most unusual rhythms to be played by human hands since time began". 

Writing for the "Boston Herald", Butch Lazorchak rated "Tomahawk" three stars out of four, finding that it "makes mincemeat out of the new-metal Johnny-come-latelies". Lazorchak described the album as having "an updated '70s hard rock approach that echoes Blue Öyster Cult at its sinister best", and found the opening song "Flashback" to be a "head-crushing pleasure". Reviewing a leg of the album's supporting tour for "The Irish Times", Peter Crawley felt that "Sir Yes Sir" was a highlight of the album, due to Patton's "dark utterings" and Rutmanis' "drilling bassline". Writing for "CMJ New Music Monthly", Dana Buoniconti compared the album to the soundtracks of David Lynch's film and television work—specifically likening "Honeymoon" and "Sweet Smell of Success" to the "Twin Peaks" theme. Buoniconti found "Tomahawk" to be "unsettling and unwholesome", but "thoroughly appealing".

"Tomahawk" reached its highest chart position on the United States Independent Albums chart, reaching a peak position of 20 and spending two weeks in that chart. It also reached a peak of 31 in that country's Top Heatseekers chart. It spent one week in the Australian ARIA Charts, reaching number 37.



</doc>
<doc id="2323650" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2323650" title="2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament">
2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament

The 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament was a professional wrestling single-elimination X Cup Tournament produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) promotion. It was the second-ever Super X Cup tournament and the last held until 2017. The competition began on July 19, 2005 and concluded on August 14, 2005 at TNA's Sacrifice pay-per-view (PPV) event. Then-TNA X Division Champion Christopher Daniels called the contest the "Christopher Daniels Invitational".

The tournament featured eight TNA wrestlers: A.J. Styles, Alex Shelley, Chris Sabin, Michael Shane, Petey Williams, Samoa Joe, Shocker, and Sonjay Dutt. The event was preceded by a four-way qualification match at TNA's No Surrender PPV event on July 17, 2005 in which Dutt defeated Elix Skipper, Mikey Batts and Shark Boy. Samoa Joe and A.J. Styles passed through the quarterfinals and the semifinals to make it to the tournament final at Sacrifice. Joe defeated Styles at the event, thus winning the Super X Cup trophy and becoming number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship. Despite losing to Joe, Styles was added to the title match Joe received for winning the competition due to storyline reasons. TNA held a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship between Daniels, Joe, and Styles at the Unbreakable PPV event on September 11, 2005, which Styles won to become the new TNA X Division Champion.

Canadian Online Explorer columnist Corey David Lacroix reviewed Sacrifice, giving the Super X Cup final a rating of 8 out of 10. Lacorix said the final "could have been a certified Match of the Year contender if someone in the back had not decided to make Daniels interfere in this contest." He went on to say the match "was a thing of beauty that got stained." Wade Keller of the "Pro Wrestling Torch" gave the Super X Cup final four out of five stars. Keller wrote that it was a "four-star match that was begging to be given an extra ten minutes to be a match of the year candidate."

TNA editor Bill Banks announced the tournament in July 2005 in his "Bank Shot" column, adding that the final would be held at TNA's Sacrifice PPV event on August 14, 2005. The 2005 tournament was the second Super X Cup held. The first was the 2003 TNA Super X Cup Tournament, won by Chris Sabin in September 2003. Winners of Super X Cup tournaments receive trophies and a future TNA X Division Championship match.

TNA announced the final list of eight participants in July 2005: A.J. Styles, Alex Shelley, Sabin, Michael Shane, Petey Williams, Samoa Joe, Shocker, and Sonjay Dutt. Dutt defeated Elix Skipper, Mikey Batts, and Shark Boy in a Four Way Super X Cup qualification match on July 27, 2005 at TNA's No Surrender PPV event on July 17, 2005 to enter the tournament.

The 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament featured seven matches involving numerous wrestlers from pre-existing scripted feuds and storylines. Wrestlers portrayed villains, heroes and less distinguishable characters in scripted events that built tension and culminated in wrestling matches.
The tournament consisted of three rounds: the quarterfinals, semifinals, and finals. The quarterfinals and the semifinals took place on TNA's television program "TNA Impact!", while the finals were held at Sacrifice. The quarterfinals
were taped on July 19 and aired on the July 22 and July 29 episodes of "Impact!". The semifinals were also taped on July 19 before airing on August 5 and August 10 episodes of "Impact!" Then-TNA X Division Champion Christopher Daniels provided commentary for each encounter. Daniels nicknamed the competition the "Christopher Daniels Invitational".

In the first of two quarterfinal matches aired on July 22, Samoa Joe fought Sonjay Dutt in a match lasting 9 minutes and 32 seconds. Joe won after forcing Dutt to submit with his signature Coquina Clutch submission hold. The second bout pitted A.J. Styles against Michael Shane. Before the match began, Shane announced he was changing his stage name to Matt Bentley. Styles won after America's Most Wanted (Chris Harris and James Storm) interfered. Harris distracted the referee, allowing Storm to kick Bentley in the face.

The third and fourth quarterfinal bouts aired on July 29. Alex Shelley fought Shocker in the first match of the episode, winning with a pinning combination at 5 minutes and 28 seconds. Petey Williams faced Chris Sabin in the second match. A-1 interfered during the encounter by distracting the referee and tossing Williams a hockey stick, which Williams used to hit Sabin across the stomach. He then performed his signature Canadian Destroyer maneuver, forcing Sabin's head into the mat and winning the match at 11 minutes and 45 seconds.

Joe, Shelley, Styles, and Williams advanced to the semifinals. The first match took place on the August 5 episode of "Impact!" between Joe and Shelley. Joe slammed Shelley back-first into the mat with his signature Muscle Buster maneuver and then choked him unconscious with the Coquina Clutch at 9 minutes and 4 seconds to win and advance to the finals. In the second semifinal match on August 10, Styles defeated Williams with a small package pin at 9 minutes and 19 seconds.

The tournament final between A.J. Styles and Samoa Joe took place on August 14 at Sacrifice. As Styles laid against the ring ropes at the beginning of the match, Joe ran across the ring and kicked him in the face, causing him to fly out of the ring and crash down on the floor. Joe followed by diving through the ring ropes and smashing Styles in the face with his forearm as Styles reached his feet. Joe later held Styles in an STF submission hold, which he was forced to release when Styles touched the bottom rope. Styles then gained the advantage with a dropkick and front-flip splash from the ring ropes. He held Joe on his shoulders before twisting him off into a powerbomb, or what he calls a Rack Bomb. During the move, referee Andrew Thomas was kicked in the face and knocked unconscious, allowing Daniels to interfere in the contest. Daniels attacked Styles and attempted to hit Joe with the X Division Title belt before Styles threw Daniels from the ring. Joe followed by lifting Styles up and performing his Muscle Buster maneuver, then placing Styles in his Coquina Clutch submission hold. Styles submitted to the move as the referee came to, giving the victory to Joe. The final bout lasted 15 minutes and 15 seconds.

Joe's win gave him the Super X Cup trophy and made him the number-one contender for the TNA X Division Championship. He earned a title match against Daniels at TNA's Unbreakable PPV event on September 11.

James Caldwell of Pro Wrestling Torch called the Samoa Joe versus Sonjay Dutt encounter in the quarterfinals "another phenomenal match involving Samoa Joe," and wrote that it was "another reason to build the X Division – and the promotion – around Joe." Caldwell also praised the A.J. Styles versus Matt Bentley bout in the quarterfinals, calling it a "solid, methodical match that told a story in the ring." Canadian Online Explorer journalist Chris Sokol said the Styles versus Bentley contest was a "great match." Caldwell said of the July 29 quarterfinal between Alex Shelley and Shocker that "with Shelley winning the match using Shocker's traditional roll up pinning combination, Shelley looked strong coming out of the match for outsmarting his opponent." He went on to say if the bout had lasted longer it "could have allowed the match to tell a more complete story, but the match was good for delivering the intended purpose." Sokol said in a column about the show that it was an "excellent match". On the quarterfinal between Sabin and Williams, Caldwell said the two men "put together a solid finish that was ruined by yet another round of outside interference by Team Canada". Sokol called it "another excellent match."

Reviews of the semifinal matches on August 5 and 10 were also generally positive. Caldwell said the Joe versus Shelley contest was "another outstanding Samoa Joe match." Sokol said the Styles versus Williams bout was a "back and forth match", and Caldwell said it was "a solid match" that was "nothing spectacular or particularly breathtaking, but it didn't need to be because the crowd was into the match simply because of who was in the ring." He went on to say that the wrestlers "didn't need to pull of a four star match with amazing spots to wow the crowd because they had the audience captivated from the get-go."

Canadian Online Explorer columnist Corey David Lacroix reviewed Sacrifice, giving the Super X Cup Final an 8 out of 10 rating. Lacorix wrote that the Super X Cup Final "could have been a certified Match of the Year contender if someone in the back had not decided to make Daniels interfere in this contest." He went on to say the match "was a thing of beauty that got stained." Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch gave the Super X Cup Final four stars out of five, calling it a "four star match that was begging to be given an extra ten minutes to be a match of the year candidate."

A.J. Styles suffered a tendon injury during his title bout with Samoa Joe at Sacrifice. TNA management kept him out of the following "Impact!" tapings, hoping to keep him rested and not risk any further injury despite expectations that he would not be sidelined long. Styles, however, canceled an appearance in the Ring of Honor promotion on August 20. He came back for a promotion on August 27 at their Dragon's Gate Invasion event, losing a match to CIMA.

After winning the 2005 TNA Super X Cup tournament, Samoa Joe was set to face Christopher Daniels for the TNA X Division Championship at Unbreakable. On the August 19 episode of "Impact!", however, Styles assaulted Daniels in an act of revenge for Daniels' interference at Sacrifice. Daniels demanded Styles be suspended for this action. NWA Championship Committee member Larry Zbyszko denied the request, and instead added Styles to the planned encounter at Unbreakable, thus making it a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship. TNA promoted the match as an X Division "Dream Bout" pitting the top competitors in the division against each other for the championship. Styles won the match and the title by pinning Daniels. Wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer bestowed a rare 5 Star match rating to the bout between A.J. Styles, Christopher Daniels and Samoa Joe. 

The three-way match began an extended storyline involving its participants. At TNA's Bound for Glory PPV event on October 23, Styles defeated Daniels in a 30-minute Iron Man match to retain the TNA X Division Championship. TNA then held a Four-on-Four Elimination X match at the Genesis PPV event on November 13. In that match, the team of Alex Shelley, Daniels, Joe, and Roderick Strong defeated the team of Austin Aries, Chris Sabin, Matt Bentley, and Sonjay Dutt. After the contest, Joe assaulted Daniels, performing his signature Muscle Buster maneuver on him twice, the second time on a steel chair. Daniels suffered an injury in the storyline in the attack, sidelining him until December 11's TNA Turning Point PPV event. At that event, Daniels saved Styles from an assault by Joe following Joe's victory over Styles to win the TNA X Division Championship. Daniels then challenged Joe for the championship at TNA's Final Resolution PPV event on January 15, 2006, but Joe retained the title. At TNA's Against All Odds PPV event on February 12, 2006, Daniels, Joe, and Styles competed in another three-way match for the TNA X Division Championship; Joe gained the pinfall to retain the title. The three competed again in a three-way Ultimate X match for the championship at TNA's Destination X PPV event on March 12, 2006. Daniels won, becoming the new TNA X Division Champion. The rivalry ended on the April 13, 2006 episode of "Impact!" when Joe defeated Daniels to win back the championship.

Due to the popularity of the rivalry between the three in 2005 and 2006, TNA held another three-way match at TNA's Turning Point PPV event on November 15, 2009, this time for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. Then-champion Styles retained his title, beating Daniels and Joe. Styles went on to successfully defend the title against Daniels at the following TNA PPV event, Final Resolution, on December 20, 2009.

Most of the wrestlers involved in the 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament, excluding Bentley, Styles, and Joe, went on to compete in the Chris Candido Memorial Tag Team Tournament. In that contest, eight tag teams were drawn at random, and veteran wrestlers were matched with younger wrestlers. Shelley partnered with Sean Waltman, Sabin and Shocker were placed together, Dutt was placed with Ron Killings, and Kip James and Petey Williams teamed up in the tournament. Sabin and Shocker ended faced Shelley and Waltman in the tournament final on the September 9, 2005 episode of "Impact!". Shelley and Waltman won to win the Chris Candido Cup.



</doc>
<doc id="2342988" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2342988" title="Remy Hamilton">
Remy Hamilton

Remy Martin Hamilton (born August 30, 1974) is a former American football kicker who played in the National Football League (NFL) and Arena Football League (AFL). In college, he was an All-American for the Michigan Wolverines football team. As a professional, he played for the Detroit Lions of the NFL in addition to exhibition and training camp experience with the Seattle Seahawks, St. Louis Rams and Chicago Bears. He also played for the Grand Rapids Rampage, Carolina Cobras, Milwaukee Mustangs, Los Angeles Avengers, and Dallas Desperados of the AFL. In the AFL, he holds records for all-time career points and single-season kick points.

At Michigan, he set the current Big Ten Conference record for single-season field goals, which is 25. He ranks both first and second in school history in single-season field goals made and co-holds the school record for consecutive field goals made along with Brendan Gibbons. He is the only All-American placekicker in Michigan history.

Hamilton attended Spanish River Community High School in Boca Raton, Florida, where he was a three-sport star in football, soccer, and tennis. In football, he played as a kicker, punter, defensive back, and quarterback, and as a senior, the "Sun-Sentinel" named him the Offensive Player of the Year. In his senior season, Hamilton passed for 1,147 yards and 12 touchdowns, and rushed for 249 yards and six touchdowns.

Hamilton was named after the Remy Martin brand of cognac, which his parents once served as owners of a New Jersey bar.

Hamilton attended the University of Michigan, where he played football from 1993 to 1996. During this first season at Michigan, he only made one field goal. After making a 47-yard field goal in his only attempt as a freshman, he lost the kicking job to Erik Lovell in spring practice. Lovell handled the kicking duties in the 1994 NCAA Division I-A football season opener and Hamilton did not get the starting assignment until immediately before the second game. Lovell missed an extra point in the opener, which gave Hamilton his second chance. Thus, before the second game of his sophomore season, he had not recorded any field goals that season and still had a career total of one. However, during the September 10, 1994 Michigan – Notre Dame rivalry game against third-ranked Notre Dame, he made four field goals and two extra point conversions, including the game-winning 42-yarder with two seconds remaining. Notre Dame called a timeout to ice Hamilton, but it inadvertently helped Michigan, which had prematurely packed away the kicking net on its sidelines. The field goal redeemed Hamilton for a missed tackle on a kickoff return, which he felt would have cost his team the game. For his performance, the Big Ten named him the Special Teams Player of the Week. Michigan fans still remember Hamilton for this game, and regularly congratulate him for the kick. Two games later, he had a three-field goal game in the Big Ten Conference opener against Iowa. Hamilton had another four-field goal outing later in the season against Illinois. This earned him another Player of the Week recognition.

He was named to the 1994 College Football All-America and 1994 All-Big Ten teams. Hamilton was a first team All-American selection by the Walter Camp Football Foundation and second team selection by the Associated Press and the "Football News". Despite NFL alumni that include Jay Feely, Hayden Epstein and Ali Haji-Sheikh, Hamilton remains the school's only All-American placekicker. During the 1994 football season, Hamilton established the current Big Ten single-season record for successful field goals at 25, which has since been tied three times. The Big Ten was talented at the placekicker position that season, with four of the twenty semifinalists for the Lou Groza Award being from the conference (Hamilton, Illinois' Chris Richardson, Minnesota's Mike Chalberg and Northwestern's Sam Valenzisi). Hamilton won the NCAA statistical championship for field goal kickers that season. He also set Michigan's single season kick point record with 101 in 1994.

During the 1995 season, one of his more important field goals for the Wolverines came in the 5–0 victory over Purdue. However, when Northwestern beat Michigan at Michigan Stadium, 19–13, for its first victory there since 1959, Hamilton missed a key 37-yard field goal. His 1995 total of 19 field goals ranked second in Michigan history, behind only his own 1994 total. Garrett Rivas tied that single-season total twice, but no one has unseated Hamilton from first and second place.

He also helped the 1996 team take a 9–0 halftime lead and converted an extra point to give them a 16–0 lead in what would eventually be a loss to Northwestern, 17–16. His most notable scoring in 1996 gave Michigan essential fourth-quarter points in a 27–20 victory over Indiana. He earned his third Big Ten Special Teams Player of the Week honors following a 13–9 victory over Ohio State in the Michigan – Ohio State football rivalry game on November 23, 1996. He put the team ahead, 10–9, on the last play of the third quarter and added a key field goal with 1:19 remaining. A two-time finalist for the Lou Groza Award, Hamilton finished his career as the all-time Wolverine leader in field goals made (63) and field goals attempted (82). Before his career ended, he became the ninth Wolverine to accumulate over 200 points.

Hamilton holds the Michigan record for consecutive field goals made (14) as well as outright or shared school records for single-game (5), single-season (30) and career (82) field goal attempts. His career field goals made record (63) was eclipsed by Garrett Rivas in 2006 by one. Hamilton was a three-time Big Ten All-Academic selection (1993, 1995, 1996). He was also a three-time Big Ten Conference Special Teams Player of the Week (9/12/94, 10/10/94, 11/25/96). His 14 consecutive field goals mark was one short of Vlade Janakievski's Big Ten record, which has since been broken. Hamilton's 63 career field goals were two short of Todd Gregoire's Big Ten record, which has since been broken.

Hamilton joined the AFL's Grand Rapids Rampage in 1998, for which he played two seasons. During these, he had modest success as a field goal kicker connecting on 31 of 88 attempts (35.2%). In his first season, he also caught a touchdown pass. He then played in 2000 with the Carolina Cobras and in 2001 with the Milwaukee Mustangs, where he posted 11 of 42 (26.2%) and 18 of 47 (38.3%) field goal performances. While with the Cobras, Hamilton played against the Los Angeles Avengers in the first AFL game played at the Staples Center on April 20, 2000.

In 2002, he joined the Avengers for which he had his best years as a professional, making at least half of his field goal attempts each season. Hamilton was second among kickers in the AFL in scoring in 2003. Following his strong performance, he signed with the NFL's Seattle Seahawks, where he competed against Josh Brown. After Brown was perfect in both four field goal and seven extra point attempts in the first three preseason games, Hamilton was released about three weeks later, and he returned to play for Los Angeles again. Hamilton was the top-scoring kicker in the AFL in 2004. In August 2004, he signed with the Chicago Bears, where he battled Paul Edinger for the kicking duties. Bears head coach Lovie Smith noted Hamilton's skill at onside kicks. In terms of distance, Hamilton had a slight edge with his average kick three yards deep in the end zone compared with Edinger's goal line average. However, Edinger was perfect on six field goals and two extra points in the first three preseason games, and Hamilton missed his only exhibition game field goal attempt, a 36-yarder on August 27. The team waived him a few days later. He was again the top-scoring kicker in the AFL in 2005. That year, he eclipsed Jay Taylor's AFL record for single-season field goal percentage, which had been 72%, with a 74.4% 29 for 39 performance. Hamilton started the season with eleven consecutive field goals, giving him a total of twelve in a row for a league record. He earned a couple of NFL tryouts. Hamilton first signed with the St. Louis Rams in July 2005 prior to training camp. He played for them during the 2005 exhibition season. He made the team's final points with a field goal in an August 12, 1995 17–13 preseason victory over the Chicago Bears. For the preseason, he made his only field goal and all six extra points. Nonetheless, the Rams decided to retain Jeff Wilkins who had been their kicker since 1997. Hamilton then signed with the Detroit Lions for their practice squad in September of the 2005 NFL season. He appeared in one NFL game for Detroit, but missed his only point after touchdown attempt, which was blocked by Alfonso Boone. He also executed a couple of kickoffs, and he made the tackle on Jerry Azumah's 33-yard return to the 37-yard line on one in the third quarter. He was activated to replace Jason Hanson who suffered a hamstring injury, which ended Hanson's consecutive games streak at 209. However, Hamilton was released later that month. Hamilton returned to the AFL for Los Angeles, and he led the AFL's kickers in scoring again in 2006. This earned Hamilton his second consecutive AFL's "Kicker of the Year" title and second consecutive First Team All-Arena League selection. His 2006-point total is 2nd in AFL history to his own 2005 total. He signed with the Rams again before training camp, and he played for them in exhibition games during 2006. He made four of six field goals (including a 48-yarder) and four of five extra points during the preseason. Again the Rams kept Wilkins. Hamilton returned to the AFL for his final season in Los Angeles. He ranked third in kicker scoring in the AFL for Los Angeles in 2007. He joined the Dallas Desperados for 2008. He spent the 2011 season with the Dallas Vigilantes. In 2012, Hamilton was assigned to the Philadelphia Soul. By the time of his assignment he was the AFL’s all-time leader in field goals made (188), extra points made (1,082) and scoring by a kicker (1,646 points).

In a May 2009 article, the "Los Angeles Times" reported that, less than 15 hours after a 53–52 overtime loss to the Georgia Force at Staples Center, Hamilton's wife, Heather, delivered the couple's first child, a boy named Tate. Hamilton has served as a personal trainer for other kickers.



</doc>
<doc id="2345780" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2345780" title="George Rogers Clark National Historical Park">
George Rogers Clark National Historical Park

George Rogers Clark National Historical Park, located in Vincennes, Indiana, on the banks of the Wabash River at what is believed to be the site of Fort Sackville, is a United States National Historical Park. President Calvin Coolidge authorized a classical memorial and President Franklin D. Roosevelt dedicated the completed structure in 1936.

On February 25, 1779, Lieutenant Colonel George Rogers Clark, older brother of William Clark, led the capture of Fort Sackville and British Lt. Governor Henry Hamilton as part of the celebrated Illinois Campaign, which lasted from 1778 to 1779. The heroic march of Clark's men from Kaskaskia on the Mississippi River in mid-winter and the subsequent victory over the British remains one of the most memorable feats of the American Revolution.

In 1966, Indiana transferred the site to the National Park Service. Adjacent to the memorial is a visitor center which presents interpretive programs and displays. The center is situated on South 2nd Street in Vincennes. The site is located in the Vincennes Historic District.

The memorial is placed at the believed site of Fort Sackville; no archeological evidence has shown the exact location, but it is undoubtedly within the park's boundaries. The episode being commemorated marked the finest moment in General George Rogers Clark's life. He was sent by the state of Virginia to protect its interest in the Old Northwest. His 1778-1779 campaign included the founding of Louisville, Kentucky and the capture of British forts in the lower Ohio and Mississippi valleys. Forces under Clark's command had captured Fort Sackville months before, but when notified that British forces under Henry Hamilton had retaken the fort, Clark led a desperate march to retake the fort again for the American cause, succeeding on February 25, 1779. This led to the newly formed United States claiming control of what would become the states of Ohio, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and Wisconsin in the 1783 Treaty of Paris.

As Vincennes grew in the 1800s, it overran the site of Fort Sackville and its boundaries were lost. In 1905, the Daughters of the American Revolution placed a stone marker on what they believed was the location of the fort. In 1929, local residents made a major effort to commemorate the 150th anniversary of Clark's campaign. The state of Indiana chose to build a memorial to General Clark's triumph in the 1930s, with the assistance of the United States government; the various funds amounted to $2,500,000. The memorial was designed by New York architect Frederic Charles Hirons and dedicated June 14, 1936, by President Franklin Roosevelt. Though the National Park Service in 1976 called the finished memorial the "last major Classical style memorial" constructed in the United States, the New York State Memorial to Theodore Roosevelt at the American Museum of Natural History by John Russell Pope was also completed in 1936, and Pope's Jefferson Memorial in Washington, D.C. was completed 1939-1943, are of the same era.

The memorial building is a circular granite structure surrounded by sixteen granite fluted Greek Doric columns in a peripteral colonnade, capped with a saucer dome of glass panels and resting on a stylobate. The north and east corners have restrooms and various maintenance rooms. Except for the maintenance rooms, these feature plastered walls and ceilings, marble wainscoting, and terrazzo flooring. Visitors enter the memorial by climbing thirty granite steps in the northwest corner. The basement is unfinished, with fluorescent lighting revealing a ceiling and walls of exposed concrete, and a dirt floor.

Other prominent features in the park include John Angel's granite statue of Francis Vigo, a monument overlooking the Wabash River erected in 1934 that honors the Italian-American merchant who assisted General Clark. The adjacent grounds of the Basilica of St. Francis Xavier hold a 1934 by Albin Polasek honoring Father Pierre Gibault, another figure in the Revolutionary War. Raoul Josset designed the Lincoln Memorial Bridge across the Wabash River to compliment the memorial aesthetically. It includes relief carvings designed by a monument by Nellie Walker on the Illinois side of the bridge and celebrates the migration of Abraham Lincoln. A concrete floodwall that protects the memorial and Vincennes from Wabash flooding is also designed in a complimentary Classical style. The grounds also hold a memorial to the soldiers from Knox County who served in World War I, a marker denoting where Clark's headquarters probably stood during his siege of Fort Sackville, and the original Daughters of the American Revolution memorial, which has moved several times due to construction of the main memorial.

Muralist Ezra Winter executed a series of seven murals for the building.

The park was authorized by the Act of July 23, 1966 (PL 89-517). This law (Appendix A) contains three provisions. The first authorized the Secretary of the Interior to accept from the State of Indiana, the donation of the Clark Memorial and surrounding grounds for a national park. This was accomplished within one year of the law's enactment. The second provision permits the Secretary to enter into cooperative agreements with the owners of other historic properties in Vincennes which are associated with George Rogers Clark and the Northwest Territory. Such properties would become part of the park, and the Secretary could assist in their preservation, renewal and interpretation. The third provision requires the Secretary to administer, protect, develop and maintain the park in accordance with the provisions of the act of August 25, 1916, which established the National Park Service.

George Rogers Clark NHP was established to commemorate the accomplishments of George Rogers Clark and the expansion of the United States into the Northwest Territory; to commemorate this story and its significance to the American people; and to cooperate in the preservation, renewal and interpretation of the sites and structures in Vincennes associated with this story. The park also commemorates the actions of Father Pierre Gibault and Francis Vigo who sided with Clark against the British.

The park is located on the site of Fort Sackville which Clark captured from the British during the American Revolution on February 25, 1779. The victory extended American land claims in the Ohio Valley and contributed to the United States acquisition of the Northwest Territory in the 1783 Treaty of Paris. No structures dating from the Revolution exist in the park today.

The historical theme represented by George Rogers Clark NHP is the "Revolution, War in the Frontier," according to 1987 History and Prehistory in the National Park System and the National Historic Landmarks Program.

August 9, 2008, George Rogers Clark National Historical Park closed for 13 months to complete a three-million-dollar renovation by Frontier Waterproofing, Inc out of Denton, Texas. Park Superintendent Dale Phillips said, "This is a once-in-a-lifetime restoration project, and is critically needed for the long-term preservation of the Clark Memorial". The main goal was to fix the drainage of the terrace, which has leaked since the 1930s, and renovate the access steps. The monument reopened September 24, 2009, and was rededicated on October 3, 2009. The 2009 Spirit of Vincennes Rendezvous was not impacted by the renovation.

Work during the renovation included demolition and installation of new parapets and rustications; repair of wall cracks; removal, temporary storage, and numbering of approximately 1,000 large granite paving stones; installation of new waterproofing on the existing concrete structural deck of the plaza and the monuments stylobate; cleaning and repair of the granite stone, steps, and veneer; installation of a new exposed aggregate concrete walking surface around the Monument plaza; and replacing the existing sprinkler system and landscaping elements. This repaired problems first identified in a 1939 structural inspection.

George Rogers Clark National Historical Park was honored on an America the Beautiful Quarter representing Indiana in 2017.



</doc>
<doc id="2354242" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2354242" title="Byron Brown">
Byron Brown

Byron William Brown II (born September 24, 1958) is the 62nd and current mayor of Buffalo, New York, elected on November 8, 2005 and is the City's first African-American mayor. He previously served Western New York as a member of the New York State Senate and Buffalo Common Council. He was the first African-American politician elected to the New York State Senate to represent a district outside New York City and the first member of any minority race to represent a majority white New York State Senate district.

Brown was born and raised in Queens, New York. He rose to elective office after serving in a variety of political roles. He began his political career performing as an aide to local representatives in several legislative bodies (Buffalo Common Council, Erie County Legislature and New York State Assembly) and later getting involved in a regional political organization. After several roles as a legislative aide, he was appointed to the Erie County cabinet-level Director of Equal Employment Opportunity post.

As both a New York State Senator and Buffalo Mayor, he has been closely involved in the development of the three Seneca Nation casinos that have been planned and built in Western New York since 2002. As someone born and raised downstate who went on to become an upstate political servant, he has been active on the statewide political front. He is a close political ally of New York Governor Andrew Cuomo. He has also been active with the National Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition in efforts to prevent gun-related crime. His plan to revitalize Buffalo by demolishing its abundant vacant buildings has drawn opposition from historic preservationists, but he has made the development of the Buffalo waterfront a priority.

Brown was born on September 24, 1958 in Queens, He was raised in Hollis, a southeastern neighborhood in New York City's Queens borough, in a double that his family shared with his grandparents, who were immigrants from the Caribbean island of Montserrat. He grew up on 200th Street between 100th and 104th Avenues and has several relatives still in the area. As a Queens resident, he was a New York Mets and New York Knicks fan.

Brown's father rose from a job as a stock boy to one as an executive in the garment industry. He was a Boy Scout at Hollis Presbyterian Church in Queens and was also active in the Central Queens YMCA (now called Jamaica YMCA). In high school, Brown played the trumpet in the school band. Brown attended Public School 134 in Hollis, junior high school PS 109, and August Martin High School. Brown and his sister Andrea were the first generation in his family to go to college.

After graduating from August Martin High School Brown attended Buffalo State College, in part due to grudging admiration for Randy Smith. He played a year of Junior Varsity basketball as a guard. While he had considered a potential medical career, Brown finished, in 1983, with a dual Bachelor of Arts in political science and journalism. He subsequently completed a certificate program for senior executives in state and local government at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.

After college, Brown worked for Bristol-Myers for a year as a regional sales representative, a job that came with a respectable salary and employee benefits such as an expense account and a company car. Brown was disappointed with his advancement potential in this position. As a result, he quit and took the New York State Troopers exam before becoming Chief of staff for Buffalo Common Council President George Arthur for two years. He then spent two years as an aide to Erie County Legislator Roger Blackwell (later Erie County Legislature Chairman). Then, he worked for two years under Arthur Eve, the Deputy Speaker of the New York State Assembly. Subsequently, he served eight years as director of the Erie County division of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission under Erie County Executive Dennis Gorski. He resigned his directorship in July 1993 to run for public office.

Brown became a member of Grassroots, a political organization which was founded in 1986 by a group of block club leaders. Brown eventually served as a vice president of the organization.

Brown was recognized in the November 1989 issue of "Ebony" magazine as one the "30 Leaders of the Future" with a caption that read "Byron Brown chosen for leadership skills." The Buffalo Chapter of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1991 honored him with the "Martin Luther King, Jr. Award" for community service. In 1993 he was selected by Business First for its "40 Under Forty Honor Roll". He was awarded the Infinity Broadcasting/WBLK 2001 "Voice of Power Award" and the 2004 "Citizen of the Year" award. He also received the "Political Impact Award" from the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority in 2001.

In 1992, Brown was a delegate to the 1992 Democratic National Convention from the New York's 33rd congressional district. He was originally pledged to Bob Kerrey, but switched to Bill Clinton after Kerrey bowed out of the 1992 Democratic Primary campaign on March 5, 1992. In 1993, Brown was invited to attend Bill Clinton's Inauguration.

In his first attempt at public office in 1993, Brown ran for the third district of the Erie County Legislature against incumbent William Robinson and George "Butch" Holt, who had Eve's endorsement. Robinson earned the Democratic Party endorsement in June 1993, with the help of Holt who voted for Robinson instead of himself. In June, Brown was notified that he must resign his Erie County cabinet-level post in order to run for public office and he did so in July. Holt won the Democratic nomination with a 267-vote 40–37% margin over Brown in the September 14, 1993 primary election.

Brown won the September 1995 Democratic primary for the Masten District Buffalo Common Council seat. He then took time out from campaigning to attend the October 16, 1995 Million Man March. Brown ousted 18-year veteran councilmember, David Collins, to win his seat on the Buffalo Common Council. He beat Collins by a 5,391–1,670 (76–24%) margin in the November 7, 1995 general election. In his 1997 re-election campaign, he won the September 9 Democratic primary handily, and he was unopposed in the November 4 general election. In his 1999 re-election campaign, he again won the Democratic primary easily on September 14, and he won the November 2 general election. Beginning in January 2000, Brown served as part of the first ever African-American majority in the history of the Buffalo Common Council.

In 1996, "The Buffalo News" described Brown as "Buffalo's Julian Bond". While on the council, the future state senator and mayor was called "bright, creative and hardworking" in a 1999 "Buffalo News" survey.

In 2000, he competed for the Democratic nomination for the New York State Senate 57th District against incumbent Al Coppola and Samuel A. Herbert. Coppola was endorsed by Buffalo Mayor Anthony Masiello. Brown won the September 2000 primary by a wide 18% margin. However, Coppola remained on the ballot in the general election on the Conservative Party of New York, Working Families Party and Green Party lines. The Republican Party nominee was the politically inexperienced Harrison R. Woolworth. Although Brown began the race without organized political support, he earned endorsements from many veteran non-Western New York politicians such as H. Carl McCall, Andrew Cuomo, and Hillary Clinton.

When he was sworn into the State Senate on January 1, 2001, Byron Brown became New York's first African-American State Senator elected outside of New York City. He also became the first minority member of the New York State Senate to represent a majority white district.

During Brown's tenure in the New York State Senate his Democratic Party was in the minority. He was part of the majority that backed New York Governor George Pataki's 2001 plan to build up to three Western New York casinos on Seneca Indian land. The legislation was controversial because it granted slot machine rights to casino operators for the first time in New York State. Both of the previous casinos used video gambling machines with debit cards. Brown supported the casinos as a way to support the local economy. When the casino was completed in 2003, he was on the seven-member commission that was to apportion the state's agreed 18% share of the slot machine revenue, amounting to approximately $40 million.

By spring of 2003, Brown was a rising star in the declining years of the "Harlem Clubhouse", a loose political fraternity of David Dinkins, Charles Rangel, Basil Paterson, Percy Sutton and sometimes H. Carl McCall that had dominated state politics while forging the careers of its members for much of the late 20th century. He was envisioned as a front-runner for the 2006 Democratic nomination as Lieutenant Governor of New York or as Buffalo's first black mayor. By 2004 it seemed clear that he was eyeing the mayor's office. In the 2004 New York State Senate elections, Republican nominee Al Coppola opposed Brown for the redistricted 60th District and garnered only 23% of the vote.

In February 2005, Brown announced his candidacy for Mayor of Buffalo. On April 29, 2005 three-term Democratic Mayor Anthony Masiello announced he would not seek a fourth four-year term. Masiello had run on both major party lines for his final two terms and had twice endorsed Republican Governor George Pataki. During his tenure, the city population and industrial tax base had decreased. Six candidates, including Brown, entered the race to replace him, with Brown accumulating many endorsements and the backing of organized labor.

New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer described helping Brown win the Mayoral race as his "biggest campaign priority" in the last month and a half before Primary Day. Buffalo, which had an 8:1 Democrat to Republican ratio and a 38% black population, was 75% contained in Brown's State Senate district. Brown carried 59% of the vote in the September 13, 2005 Democratic primary, and faced Kevin Helfer, a former City Council colleague, in the general election. Brown was the sixth African-American to win the Democratic Mayor Primary since the 1960s, but all before him had failed to win the general election, even though the city had not elected a Republican since 1961. His Republican opponent, Helfer, beat him in the Conservative Party Primary as a write-in candidate, although Brown had been endorsed by that party. Brown raised more than five times as much money as Helfer, however, and defeated him 64% to 27% in the general election.

Brown was sworn in on December 31, 2005 at the Buffalo Convention Center. During his first day in office he toured the Buffalo Waterfront to show his commitment to its development. Before the end of the year, restoration on the original point where the Erie Canal met the Great Lakes was underway. Brown presented his plans for the development during subsequent tours by top state leaders, including future New York State Governors Eliot Spitzer and David Paterson. Erie Canal Harbor eventually opened on July 2, 2008.

In early 2006, the Seneca Nation filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to build the third of the three Western New York casinos that had been legislated in 2002. In 2007, Brown was not sure he was in favor of the third casino, which seemed to cater to local residents instead of luring tourist revenues. Tom Golisano, founder of Paychex, former owner of the Buffalo Sabres National Hockey League franchise and three-time candidate for New York State Governor, suggested that the Buffalo economy would not benefit from a business designed to transfer money from local citizens to the Seneca Gaming Corporation. Brown withheld support while awaiting clarification of the target consumer for the third casino. In October 2006, the Seneca Nation and Brown came to terms on the final sale of a two-block stretch of city road that runs amid the construction site. As part of the sale the nation agreed to both marketing terms (regarding marketing beyond the local region), and hiring preferences for city residents. However, in January 2007, a federal judge ruled that the granting of permission to run the third casino by the National Indian Gaming Commission was improper. Seneca Nation received federal approval for their casino on July 2, 2007 and opened the following day.

Brown was one of the original 15 mayors from United States cities such as Washington, Dallas, Philadelphia, Seattle and Milwaukee who convened at a meeting hosted by Michael Bloomberg and Thomas Menino at Gracie Mansion to confirm their support for more serious attacks on the use of illegal firearms. Bloomberg and Philip A. Amicone, Yonkers Mayor, were the only Republicans. The mayors all signed a six-point "statement of principles" focused on punishing gun possession "to the maximum extent of the law", prosecuting dealers who knowingly sell guns to criminals through so-called straw purchasers, opposing two United States House of Representatives bills to restrict cities' access to gun-tracing data, endorsing technologies to detect illegal guns, and coordinating strategies and outreach to other cities in hopes of reconvening with at least 50 mayors by year end. A little over a year later the Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition co-chaired by Bloomberg and Menino included 225 bi-partisan municipal leaders in pursuit of legal, political and media strategies to stem gun crime and had a stated goal of "making the public safer by getting illegal guns off the streets". Brown noted that he learned several techniques that became useful in Buffalo in reducing the homicide rate 21% from the coalition and talks with specific mayors. Rising homicides had been a disappointment in his first year as mayor.

Brown's first-year review as a mayor was mixed. He was praised for his overhaul of city hall, his follow through on projects and systems, and his influence on statewide redistribution, but he was dogged by crime issues and his efforts for the planned casino. His agenda, hiring and discipline were respected, but rising homicides, continuing decay and evolving bureaucracy were troubling. In addition to public perceptions, Brown had a good working relationship with the Buffalo Common Council.
As mayor of Buffalo, he presided over emergency relief from blizzards such as the mid-October 2006 two-foot snow storm. The storm more than doubled the previous record for single-day October snowfall. Despite the fact that about 200,000 city residents were without electricity, the city saw no spike in criminal activity, according to Brown.

Buffalo is second only to St. Louis among cities nationwide in terms of percentage of vacant properties per capita. Therefore, in fall 2007, Brown committed to a $100 million five-year plan to demolish 5,000 houses, which is about half of the city's total of vacant houses. However, since Buffalo has the second highest residential poverty rate (to Detroit) homes continue to be abandoned. The program may benefit the city because abandoned house costs it an approximate average of $20,060 over five years in lost taxes, debris removal, inspections, and policing. Also, 41% of all fires in Buffalo are in vacant buildings, and more than 90% of all arson cases involved abandoned houses. Subsequently, during the first ever "State of Upstate Address", New York Governor Spitzer suggested committing $100 million in state funds to build or rehabilitate 10,000 homes and apartments. The mayor's initial demolition plans met with resistance from preservationists and he had to negotiate with the National Trust for Historic Preservation, which got him attention from coast to coast.

In 2008, Brown convinced Buffalo to use a real-time wireless video surveillance system. The city installed 56 Avrio Rapid Deployment Surveillance Solution PoleCams. The system was the result of a request by Brown that the city evaluate surveillance cameras in other cities. By January 2009 State of the City Address, Brown reported that crime had fallen 12% and homicide by 50% since he had taken office.

On June 13, 2008, upon the death of NBC News Washington Bureau Chief and "Meet the Press" moderator Tim Russert, who was a proud Buffalo native, Brown ordered that all flags on city property be lowered to half-staff in order to honor Russert's memory. Brown called Russert one of Buffalo's finest ambassadors, and his decision to lower the flags in honor of Russert, a civilian who never held elected office, was an unusual gesture that was described as breathtaking on "Hardball with Chris Matthews" by Tom Brokaw. He was joined by several other officials in recognizing Russert. Chief among those was United States President George W. Bush who signed a bill that named a stretch of U.S. Route 20A that passes in front of Ralph Wilson Stadium (home stadium of the Buffalo Bills) Timothy J. Russert Highway.

In a public relations controversy, Brown got caught in a fight against the movement to replace traditional lawns with front yard gardens. His office had issued an edict that a resident remove her landscape renovations. However, an e-mail campaign in defense of the resident caused the mayor to rethink his stance.

On September 15, 2009, Brown won the Democratic Primary for a second term by a nearly two to one margin over City councilmember Michael P. Kearns. Brown had amassed an early lead amongst voters until several scandals involving former basketball star Leonard Stokes, including the questionable government support of his failed "One Sunset" restaurant and a perceived undue influence in mitigating Stokes's arrest for possessing a stolen handicapped parking permit, cut away most of his lead. There were no Republican, third-party or independent candidates, so Brown ran unopposed and won the general election.

Brown and Erie County Democratic Party chairman Leonard Lenihan were at odds over various political positions after Lenihan played a major role in Brown's election to the office of mayor. Brown supported Andrew Cuomo for New York Attorney General in the 2006 general election, David Paterson for Lieutenant Governor of New York in the 2006 general election and Antoine Thompson for 60th District New York Senator in a special election on February 28, 2006. Lenihan disagreed with each of these choices. Thompson had run Brown's last common council campaign, and Brown was upset that he did not get to select his successor in the 60th District. Many supporters considered boycotting the special election due to a perceived racial slight against an African American who seemed to be wrongfully shutout of the process. Lenihan pointed out that neither of the previous state senators turned mayor, Anthony Masiello and James D. Griffin, was granted the right to pick their successor, and he noted that Thompson had not been timely in entering the special election process. The Erie and Niagara County Democratic committees bypassed Thompson as their nominee in favor of Marc Coppola despite Brown's backing in the February special election. Thompson subsequently decided to run for the New York Senate seat in the November general election.

The week before the 2006 New York State Democratic Convention, Brown was described as a political confidant of Democratic New York Attorney General candidate Andrew Cuomo. He seconded Cuomo's nomination at the convention on May 30, 2006. Throughout the campaign Brown was described as a close political advisor to Cuomo. He was noted as (along with Charles Rangel) one of the important black political leaders that Cuomo courted on his road to victory.

During the 2008 United States presidential election, like most of the New York State Democratic establishment, Brown was a supporter of Hillary Clinton, the United States Senator from New York. This marked a break from his earlier political organization, Grassroots, which supported Barack Obama from the outset. He even ran to be a delegate for Clinton at the 2008 Democratic National Convention. In July 2008, Golisano announced that he would attempt to create change in Albany by spending $5 million on targeted campaigns. During the New York state September primary elections for state office, "The New York Times" alleged that Brown was aiding Golisano's attempt to unseat Sam Hoyt in the New York State Assembly.

As Hillary Clinton resigned her United States Senate seat on January 21, 2009 to assume a position in the United States Cabinet under United States President Barack Obama, New York Governor David Paterson was required to appoint a temporary replacement until a special election in 2010 for the balance of her term. Some thought that the New York State Governor would appoint a minority senator such as Brown, Gregory W. Meeks, H. Carl McCall, William C. Thompson, Jr., José E. Serrano or Nydia M. Velázquez. However, Andrew Cuomo was the front-runner for the seat and the next most likely candidates were Velázquez, Steve Israel, Nita Lowey and Meeks. Prominent women who were mentioned include Carolyn B. Maloney and Caroline Kennedy. "The New York Times"'s Danny Hakim noted that Cuomo, Paterson and Brown were the three names most often mentioned prior to Paterson's ascension to the governor's office. Although these three were the favorites, Brown was considered an unknown outside of Western New York. Nonetheless, Brown's name was mentioned before Kennedy's and Cuomo's in a "New York Times" article paragraph about Paterson's final nomination decision thoughts. In fact, in at least one article in "The New York Times" on the subject, Brown was mentioned and Cuomo wasn't. When Paterson announced he had selected Blue Dog Democrat Kirsten Gillibrand, Brown was one of the few contenders to attend the event.

With Cuomo likely to be running for governor in the 2010 New York gubernatorial election, Brown was mentioned in early 2010 as a possible Lieutenant Governor of New York candidate by numerous sources, including multiple journalists from "The New York Times". Meanwhile, in early 2010, newly transplanted New Yorker Harold Ford, Jr. considered challenging New York's Junior United States Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand in the 2010 United States Senate special election in New York and met with Brown as part of his statewide political travels.

Byron Brown is married to the former Michelle Austin and they have a son, Byron III, who is referred to as Byron, Jr. by some accounts. Brown III enjoys basketball and has attended high-level youth basketball camps. He played for City Honors School. On the national level, he was an unheralded point guard in the 2008 high school graduating class, and he went on to attend Queen City Prep in Charlotte, North Carolina.

The Brown family attends St. John Baptist Church. While mayor, Brown has performed at least one wedding ceremony at the church. Byron Brown is a chapter president of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, a past President of the Buffalo State College Alumni Association Board, and at the time of his mayoral inauguration he sat on the Board of the Boy Scout Council of Western New York and the Community Action Organization of Erie County. Brown collects tropical fish and maintains an aquarium in his Buffalo Mayor's office. His parents divorced and at the beginning of his mayoral tenure, his mother was living in Buffalo. He also is a member of the Erie County Democratic Committee. He was a delegate to the 1992, 2000 and 2004 Democratic National Conventions.



</doc>
<doc id="2359696" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2359696" title="Italian battleship Leonardo da Vinci">
Italian battleship Leonardo da Vinci

Leonardo da Vinci was one of three dreadnoughts built for the "Regia Marina" (Italian Royal Navy) in the early 1910s. Completed just before the beginning of World War I, the ship saw no action and was sunk by a magazine explosion in 1916 with the loss of 248 officers and enlisted men. The Italians blamed Austro-Hungarian saboteurs for her loss, but it may have been accidental. "Leonardo da Vinci" was refloated in 1919 and plans were made to repair her. Budgetary constraints did not permit this and her hulk was sold for scrap in 1923.

"Leonardo da Vinci" was long at the waterline, and overall. The ship had a beam of , and a draft of . She displaced at normal load, and at deep load. The "Conte di Cavour"-class dreadnoughts had a complete double bottom and their hull was subdivided by 23 longitudinal and transverse bulkheads. They had a crew of 31 officers and 969 enlisted men.

The ship's machinery consisted of four Parsons steam turbines, each driving one propeller shaft. Steam for the turbines was provided by 20 Blechynden water-tube boilers, eight of which burned oil and twelve of which burned both fuel oil and coal. Designed to reach a maximum speed of from , "Leonardo da Vinci" failed to reach this goal on her sea trials, despite generally exceeding the rated power of her turbines. The ship only made a maximum speed of using . The ship could store a maximum of of coal and of oil that gave her a range of at , and at .

"Leonardo da Vinci"s main armament consisted of thirteen 46-caliber 305-millimeter guns, in five gun turrets. The turrets were arranged all on the centerline, with a twin-gun turret superfiring over a triple-gun turret in fore and aft pairs, and a third triple turret amidships. These were designated "A", "B", "Q", "X", and "Y" from bow to stern. The turrets had an elevation capability of −5/+20 degrees and the ship could carry 100 rounds for each gun, although 70 was the normal load. Sources disagree regarding these guns' performance, but naval historian Giorgio Giorgerini claims that they fired armor-piercing (AP) projectiles at the rate of one round per minute and that they had a muzzle velocity of which gave a maximum range of .

The secondary armament consisted of eighteen 50-caliber guns mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull. These guns could depress to −−10 degrees and had a maximum elevation of +15 degrees; they had a rate of fire of six shots per minute. They could fire a high-explosive projectile with a muzzle velocity of to a maximum distance of . The ship carried a total of 3,600 rounds for them. For defense against torpedo boats, "Leonardo da Vinci" carried fourteen 50-caliber guns; thirteen of these could be mounted on the turret tops, but they could be mounted in 30 different positions, including some on the forecastle and upper decks. These guns had the same range of elevation as the secondary guns, although their rate of fire was higher at 10 rounds per minute. They fired a AP projectile with a muzzle velocity of to a maximum distance of . The ships were also fitted with three submerged torpedo tubes, one on each broadside and the third in the stern.

The "Conte di Cavour"-class ships had a complete waterline armor belt that was high; of this was below the waterline and above. It had a maximum thickness of amidships, reducing to towards the stern and towards the bow. The lower edge of this belt was a uniform in thickness. Above the main belt was a strake of armor thick that extended up to the lower edge of the main deck. Above this strake was a thinner one, 130 millimeters thick, that extended from the bow to 'X' turret. The upper strake of armor protected the casemates and was thick. The ships had two armored decks: the main deck was thick in two layers on the flat that increased to on the slopes that connected it to the main belt. The second deck was thick, also in two layers. Fore and aft transverse bulkheads connected the armored belt to the decks.

The frontal armor of the gun turrets was in thickness with sides, and an roof and rear. Their barbettes also had 230-millimeter armor above the forecastle deck that reduced to between the forecastle and upper decks and 130 millimeters below the upper deck. The forward conning tower had walls 280 millimeters thick; those of the aft conning tower were 180 millimeters thick.

"Leonardo da Vinci", named after the artist and inventor, was built by the Odero Shipbuilding Co., at their Sestri Ponente, Genoa shipyard. She was laid down on 18 July 1910, launched on 14 October 1911, and completed on 17 May 1914. The ship saw no combat during the war and spent most of it at anchor. Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel, the Italian naval chief of staff, believed that Austro-Hungarian submarines and minelayers could operate too effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic. The threat from these underwater weapons to his capital ships was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way. Instead, Revel decided to implement a blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet, while smaller vessels, such as MAS torpedo boats, conducted raids on Austro-Hungarian ships and installations. Meanwhile, Revel's battleships would be preserved to confront the Austro-Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement.

She capsized in Taranto harbor, in of water, after an internal magazine explosion on the night of 2/3 August 1916 while loading ammunition. Casualties included 21 officers and 227 enlisted men. The subsequent investigation blamed Austro-Hungarian saboteurs, but unstable propellant may well have been responsible.

The "Regia Marina" wanted to raise the ship and rejected initial plans to demolish the wreck with explosives. They ultimately settled on a plan to make the ship's hull airtight and raise it using compressed air and pontoons. This required that the ship's coal, ammunition, and gun turrets be removed or cut loose, respectively, by divers to reduce her weight. A further complication was that the largest drydock in Taranto had a maximum depth of only and the upside-down "Leonardo da Vinci" drew . This meant that her funnels had to be cut off as well.
All of this preparation required over two years and the ship was refloated on 17 September 1919. A deep channel had been dredged from her location to the drydock and she was moved there. A special wooden framework had to be built to support her, still inverted, after the water in the drydock had been drained. Her decks were not designed to handle the stresses involved in her unique situation and had to be reinforced to withstand the weight of the hull and preliminary repairs were made in preparation for righting her. A deep spot in the harbor was dredged for this task and some of ballast were added in spots calculated to assist in the righting effort. The primary work was done by of water pumped into the ship's starboard side and she was successfully righted on 24 January 1921. The "Regia Marina" planned to modernize "Leonardo da Vinci" by replacing her center turret with six AA guns, but ultimately lacked the funds to do so and sold her for scrap on 22 March 1923.





</doc>
<doc id="2374943" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2374943" title="These Words">
These Words

"These Words" (also known as "These Words (I Love You, I Love You)") is a song by Natasha Bedingfield. It was written by Steve Kipner, , Wayne Wilkins and Bedingfield for her 2004 debut album, "Unwritten". The song is the album's opening track, and was released as its second single. "These Words" details Bedingfield's lack of inspiration and her reaction to pressure from her record label to produce a hit song.

"These Words" was released as the album's second international single and as the lead single in North America. The single sold well, reached the top forty worldwide, and topped the charts in both Ireland and the United Kingdom. It was certified platinum in the United States and Australia, and was nominated for "Best British Single" at the 2005 BRIT Awards. The song was very well received by music critics, and was frequently cited as a highlight of the album.

Bedingfield began recording her debut album in mid-2003, following the signing of a recording contract with Sony BMG earlier that year. She was determined not to be shaped into "some music biz pigeonhole" and wanted to write songs that were "organic, different and real". Bedingfield began collaborating with Steve Kipner, Andrew Frampton and Wayne Wilkins in London and Los Angeles, but their sessions were largely unproductive due to Bedingfield's writer's block and the pressure that she felt to produce a hit song. Frustrated, she began to sing "I love you, I love you, I love you" over and over. She was at "wit's end and just wanted to say what I meant in a simple way, without using all those flowery words." The line that Bedingfield sang out of frustration became the song's hook and its subject matter inspired by her real life difficulty writing a love song.

"These Words" was generally very well received by contemporary pop music critics. PlayLouder's Daniel Robson described the song as a "compelling chunk of popply joy", while Allmusic wrote that the track was "near-perfect" and merged "the rhythms and flavors of hip-hop and R&B with unique melodies and Bedingfield's vocal confidence". The BBC called it a "classic love song" with a "really catchy tune", and commented that it was worthy of reaching number one on the UK singles chart. Josh Timmermann of "Stylus Magazine" called it "best single so far this year", and David Welsh of musicOMH.com wrote that the song had a "virally-infectious chorus and (relatively) clever wordplay."

"Stylus Magazine" Colin Cooper ranked "These Words" at number thirteen on his list of the Top 20 Singles of 2004 and About.com ranked the song at number five on its list of the Top 10 Most Memorable Pop Song Lyrics 2005. The website wrote that Bedingfield's naming of the famous poets George Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and John Keats in the song enables the listener to "almost hear the classic poetry over a drum machine" as Bedingfield sings.

Bedingfield's mispronunciation of "hyperbole" as "hyperbowl" has been regularly pointed out throughout the years, including in "The Guardian" ten years after the song's release.

"These Words" entered the UK Singles Chart on 22 August 2004 at number one, remaining on the chart for thirteen weeks. It maintained the number one position for two weeks. In the United Kingdom, Bedingfield and her brother, pop-singer Daniel Bedingfield, became the first sister and brother to achieve separate number one singles. The track also charted at number one in Ireland, remaining on the singles chart for seventeen weeks.

Across Europe, "These Words" was largely successful, reaching number one in Poland, number two in Austria, Germany and Norway, and the top ten in the Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland. Elsewhere, the song peaked within the top ten on the majority of the charts it entered. In Australia, "These Words" debuted at number six and reached a peak position of number five three weeks later. On the 2004 ARIA end of the year chart, the song charted at number forty-nine and was certified gold. In New Zealand the single performed stronger, reaching number two on the singles chart.

"These Words" performed moderately well in North America. The single debuted at number one hundred on the "Billboard" Hot 100 on 2 July 2005 and reached a peak position at number seventeen, remaining on the chart for twenty weeks. The song did well on pop-oriented charts, reaching number nine on the Pop 100 and number ten on the Top 40 Mainstream. "These Words" was helped on the Hot 100 by its strong digital downloads, peaking at number seven on the Hot Digital Songs chart. The single had crossover success in the dance charts, reaching number one on the Hot Dance Airplay chart and number thirty-five on the Hot Dance Club Play chart.

Two music videos were produced for the international and North American markets.

The song's international music video was directed by Scott Lyon and Sophie Muller and premiered in August 2004. The video features several sequences. It opens with Bedingfield sitting at a table in her Spanish villa, in Málaga, frustrated by her inability to find inspiration to write a song. Afterwards, there are multiple scenes which include her walking and dancing through the villa in colorful outfits, sitting by the swimming pool, lying on the beach and being surrounded by dancing chairs, dancing radios, dancing books in the library, and multiple versions of herself on a sofa. The video concludes with Bedingfield scribbling in her notebook on the roof of her villa. Her scribblings lead her boyfriend to her home where she goes to the balcony, telling him "I love you, is that okay?". 

During each sequence of the video, Natasha is wearing different outfits and haircuts, with the only constant being that she is always barefoot.

The North American music video was directed by Chris Milk and filmed in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in March 2005. The music video, however, was discarded by the record label, though this version won four Annual MVPA Awards. The video begins with Bedingfield waking up next to a boombox, dressing, brushing her teeth and leaving her home with the boombox. While performing on Copacabana beach, she kicks her boombox, which comes alive and begins to dance, and she leaves the beach and walks down the street. The video concludes with Bedingfield arriving back home to a house full of dancing boomboxes in the bedroom.

An alternate version of the North American video was directed by Jim Gable using much of the footage from the original. The boomboxes featured in the video are animated to look like drawings and a performance by Bedingfield in a room with flowing white drapery has been added. The video debuted in June 2005 and proved successful on US video chart programs. It debuted on MTV's "Total Request Live" on 28 June 2005 at number ten and remained on the program for a total of six days. VH1 ranked the video at number twenty-two on its Top 40 Videos of 2005 countdown.


The following people contributed to "These Words".


<br>


</doc>
<doc id="2381268" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2381268" title="Flying Spaghetti Monster">
Flying Spaghetti Monster

The Flying Spaghetti Monster (FSM) is the deity of the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster, or Pastafarianism. Pastafarianism (a portmanteau of "pasta" and "Rastafarianism") is a social movement that promotes a light-hearted view of religion and opposes the teaching of intelligent design and creationism in public schools. According to adherents, Pastafarianism is a "real, legitimate religion, as much as any other". In New Zealand, Pastafarian representatives are authorized to officiate weddings. However, in the United States, a federal judge has ruled that the "Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster" is not a real religion. In August 2018 the Dutch Council of State also ruled that Pastafarianism is not a religion.

The "Flying Spaghetti Monster" was first described in a satirical open letter written by Bobby Henderson in 2005 to protest the Kansas State Board of Education decision to permit teaching intelligent design as an alternative to evolution in public school science classes. In the letter, Henderson demanded equal time in science classrooms for "Flying Spaghetti Monsterism", alongside intelligent design and evolution. After Henderson published the letter on his website, the Flying Spaghetti Monster rapidly became an Internet phenomenon and a symbol of opposition to the teaching of intelligent design in public schools.

Pastafarian tenets (generally satires of creationism) are presented both on Henderson's "Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster" website, where he is described as "prophet", and in "The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster", written by Henderson in 2006. The central belief is that an invisible and undetectable Flying Spaghetti Monster created the universe. Pirates are revered as the original Pastafarians. Henderson asserts that a decline in the number of pirates over the years is the cause of global warming. The FSM community congregates at Henderson's website to share ideas about the Flying Spaghetti Monster and crafts representing images of it.

Because of its popularity and exposure, the Flying Spaghetti Monster is often used as a contemporary version of Russell's teapot—an argument that the philosophic burden of proof lies upon those who make unfalsifiable claims, not on those who reject them. Pastafarianism has received praise from the scientific community and criticism from proponents of intelligent design. Pastafarians have engaged in disputes with creationists, including in Polk County, Florida, where they played a role in dissuading the local school board from adopting new rules on teaching evolution.

In January 2005, Bobby Henderson, then a 24-year-old Oregon State University physics graduate, sent an open letter regarding the Flying Spaghetti Monster to the Kansas State Board of Education. In that letter, Henderson satirized creationism by professing his belief that whenever a scientist carbon-dates an object, a supernatural creator that closely resembles spaghetti with meatballs is there "changing the results with His Noodly Appendage". Henderson argued that his beliefs were just as valid as intelligent design, and called for equal time in science classrooms alongside intelligent design and evolution. The letter was sent prior to the Kansas evolution hearings as an argument against the teaching of intelligent design in biology classes. Henderson, describing himself as a "concerned citizen" representing more than ten million others, argued that intelligent design and his belief that "the universe was created by a Flying Spaghetti Monster" were equally valid. In his letter, he noted,

According to Henderson, since the intelligent design movement uses ambiguous references to a designer, any conceivable entity may fulfill that role, including a Flying Spaghetti Monster. Henderson explained, "I don't have a problem with religion. What I have a problem with is religion posing as science. If there is a god and he's intelligent, then I would guess he has a sense of humor."

In May 2005, having received no reply from the Kansas State Board of Education, Henderson posted the letter on his website, gaining significant public interest. Shortly thereafter, Pastafarianism became an Internet phenomenon. Henderson published the responses he then received from board members. Three board members, all of whom opposed the curriculum amendments, responded positively; a fourth board member responded with the comment "It is a serious offense to mock God". Henderson has also published the significant amount of hate mail, including death threats, that he has received. Within one year of sending the open letter, Henderson received thousands of emails on the Flying Spaghetti Monster, eventually totaling over 60,000, of which he has said that "about 95 percent have been supportive, while the other five percent have said I am going to hell". During that time, his site garnered tens of millions of hits.

As word of Henderson's challenge to the board spread, his website and cause received more attention and support. The satirical nature of Henderson's argument made the Flying Spaghetti Monster popular with bloggers as well as humor and Internet culture websites. The Flying Spaghetti Monster was featured on websites such as Boing Boing, Something Awful, Uncyclopedia, and Fark.com. Moreover, an International Society for Flying Spaghetti Monster Awareness and other fan sites emerged. As public awareness grew, the mainstream media picked up on the phenomenon. The Flying Spaghetti Monster became a symbol for the case against intelligent design in public education. The open letter was printed in several major newspapers, including "The New York Times", "The Washington Post", and "Chicago Sun-Times", and received worldwide press attention. Henderson himself was surprised by its success, stating that he "wrote the letter for [his] own amusement as much as anything".

In August 2005, in response to a challenge from a reader, Boing Boing announced a $250,000 prize—later raised to $1,000,000—of "Intelligently Designed currency" payable to any individual who could produce empirical evidence proving that Jesus is not the son of the Flying Spaghetti Monster. It was modeled as a parody of a similar challenge issued by young-earth creationist Kent Hovind.

According to Henderson, newspaper articles on the Flying Spaghetti Monster attracted the attention of book publishers; he said that at one point, there were six publishers interested in the Flying Spaghetti Monster. In November 2005, Henderson received an advance from Villard to write "The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster".

In November 2005, the Kansas State Board of Education voted to allow criticisms of evolution, including language about intelligent design, as part of testing standards. On February 13, 2007, the board voted 6–4 to reject the amended science standards enacted in 2005. This was the fifth time in eight years that the board had rewritten the standards on evolution.
Although Henderson has stated that "the only dogma allowed in the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster is the rejection of dogma", some general beliefs are held by Pastafarians. Henderson proposed many Pastafarian tenets in reaction to common arguments by proponents of intelligent design. These "canonical beliefs" are presented by Henderson in his letter to the Kansas State Board of Education, "The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster", and on Henderson's web site, where he is described as a "prophet". They tend to satirize creationism.

The central creation myth is that an invisible and undetectable Flying Spaghetti Monster created the universe "after drinking heavily". According to these beliefs, the Monster's intoxication was the cause for a flawed Earth. Furthermore, according to Pastafarianism, all evidence for evolution was planted by the Flying Spaghetti Monster in an effort to test the faith of Pastafarians—parodying certain biblical literalists. When scientific measurements such as radiocarbon dating are taken, the Flying Spaghetti Monster "is there changing the results with His Noodly Appendage".

The Pastafarian conception of Heaven includes a beer volcano and a stripper (or sometimes prostitute) factory. The Pastafarian Hell is similar, except that the beer is stale and the strippers have sexually transmitted diseases.

According to Pastafarian beliefs, pirates are "absolute divine beings" and the original Pastafarians. Furthermore, Pastafarians believe that the concept of pirates as "thieves and outcasts" is misinformation spread by Christian theologians in the Middle Ages and by Hare Krishnas. Instead, Pastafarians believe that they were "peace-loving explorers and spreaders of good will" who distributed candy to small children, adding that modern pirates are in no way similar to "the fun-loving buccaneers from history". In addition, Pastafarians believe that ghost pirates are responsible for all of the mysteriously lost ships and planes of the Bermuda Triangle. Pastafarians are among those who celebrate International Talk Like a Pirate Day on September 19.

The inclusion of pirates in Pastafarianism was part of Henderson's original letter to the Kansas State Board of Education, in an effort to illustrate that correlation does not imply causation. Henderson presented the argument that "global warming, earthquakes, hurricanes, and other natural disasters are a direct effect of the shrinking numbers of pirates since the 1800s". A deliberately misleading graph accompanying the letter (with numbers humorously disordered on the "x"-axis) shows that as the number of pirates decreased, global temperatures increased. This parodies the suggestion from some religious groups that the high numbers of disasters, famines, and wars in the world is due to the lack of respect and worship toward their deity. In 2008, Henderson interpreted the growing pirate activities at the Gulf of Aden as additional support, pointing out that Somalia has "the highest number of pirates "and" the lowest carbon emissions of any country".

Pastafarian beliefs extend into lighthearted religious ceremony. Pastafarians celebrate every Friday as a holy day. Prayers are concluded with a final declaration of affirmation, "R'amen" (or "rAmen"); the term is a parodic portmanteau of the terms "Amen" and "Ramen", referring to instant noodles and to the "noodly appendages" of their deity.

Around the time of Christmas, Hanukkah, and Kwanzaa, Pastafarians celebrate a vaguely defined holiday named "Holiday". Holiday does not take place on "a specific date so much as it is the Holiday season, itself". According to Henderson, as Pastafarians "reject dogma and formalism", there are no specific requirements for Holiday. Pastafarians celebrate Holiday in any manner they please. Pastafarians also celebrate "Pastover" as a parody of Passover, and "Ramendan" as a parody of Ramadan.

Pastafarians interpret the increasing usage of "Happy Holidays", rather than more traditional greetings (such as "Merry Christmas"), as support for Pastafarianism. In December 2005, George W. Bush's White House Christmas greeting cards wished people a happy "holiday season", leading Henderson to write the President a note of thanks, including a "fish" emblem depicting the Flying Spaghetti Monster for his limousine or plane. Henderson also thanked Walmart for its use of the phrase.

In December 2005 Bobby Henderson received a reported US$80,000 advance from Villard to write "The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster". Henderson said he planned to use proceeds from the book to build a pirate ship, with which he would spread the Pastafarian religion. The book was released on March 28, 2006, and elaborates on Pastafarian beliefs established in the open letter. Henderson employs satire to present perceived flaws with evolutionary biology and discusses history and lifestyle from a Pastafarian perspective. The gospel urges readers to try Pastafarianism for thirty days, saying, "If you don't like us, your old religion will most likely take you back". Henderson states on his website that more than 100,000 copies of the book have been sold.

"Scientific American" described the gospel as "an elaborate spoof on Intelligent Design" and "very funny". In 2006, it was nominated for the Quill Award in Humor, but was not selected as the winner. Wayne Allen Brenner of "The Austin Chronicle" characterized the book as "a necessary bit of comic relief in the overly serious battle between science and superstition". Simon Singh of "The Daily Telegraph" wrote that the gospel "might be slightly repetitive...but overall it is a brilliant, provocative, witty and important gem of a book".

Casey Luskin of the Discovery Institute, which advocates intelligent design, labeled the gospel "a mockery of the Christian New Testament".

In September 2005, before Henderson had received an advance to write the "Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster", a Pastafarian member of the Venganza forums known as Solipsy, announced the beginning of a project to collect texts from fellow Pastafarians to compile into the "Loose Canon, the Holy Book of the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster", essentially analogous to the Bible. The book was completed in 2010 and was made available for download.

Some excerpts from "The Loose Canon" include:

The Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster now consists of thousands of followers, primarily concentrated on college campuses in North America and Europe. According to the Associated Press, Henderson's website has become "a kind of cyber-watercooler for opponents of intelligent design". On it, visitors track meetings of pirate-clad Pastafarians, sell trinkets and bumper stickers, and sample photographs that show "visions" of the Flying Spaghetti Monster.

In August 2005, the Swedish concept designer Niklas Jansson created an adaptation of Michelangelo's "The Creation of Adam", superimposing the Flying Spaghetti Monster over God. This became and remains the Flying Spaghetti Monster's de facto brand image. The Hunger Artists Theatre Company produced a comedy called "The Flying Spaghetti Monster Holiday Pageant" in December 2006, detailing the history of Pastafarianism. The production has spawned a sequel called "Flying Spaghetti Monster Holy Mug of Grog", performed in December 2008. This communal activity attracted the attention of three University of Florida religious scholars, who assembled a panel at the 2007 American Academy of Religion meeting to discuss the Flying Spaghetti Monster.
In November 2007, four talks about the Flying Spaghetti Monster were delivered at the American Academy of Religion's annual meeting in San Diego. The talks, with titles such as "Holy Pasta and Authentic Sauce: The Flying Spaghetti Monster's Messy Implications for Theorizing Religion", examined the elements necessary for a group to constitute a religion. Speakers inquired whether "an anti-religion like Flying Spaghetti Monsterism <nowiki>[is]</nowiki> actually a religion". The talks were based on the paper, "Evolutionary Controversy and a Side of Pasta: The Flying Spaghetti Monster and the Subversive Function of Religious Parody", published in the GOLEM Journal of Religion and Monsters. The panel garnered an audience of one hundred of the more than 9,000 conference attendees, and conference organizers received critical e-mails from Christians offended by it.

Since October 2008, the local chapter of the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster has sponsored an annual convention called Skepticon on the campus of Missouri State University. Atheists and skeptics give speeches on various topics, and a debate with Christian experts is held. Organizers tout the event as the "largest gathering of atheists in the Midwest".

The Moldovan-born poet, fiction writer, and culturologist Igor Ursenco entitled his 2012 poetry book "The Flying Spaghetti Monster (thriller poems)".

On the nonprofit microfinancing site, Kiva, the Flying Spaghetti Monster group is in an ongoing competition to top all other "religious congregations" in the number of loans issued via their team. The group's motto is "Thou shalt share, that none may seek without funding", an allusion to the Loose Canon which states "Thou shalt share, that none may seek without finding." it reported to have funded US$4,002,350 in loans.

"Bathyphysa conifera", a siphonophore, has been called "Flying Spaghetti Monster" in reference to the FSM.

Owing to its popularity and media exposure, the Flying Spaghetti Monster is often used as a modern version of Russell's teapot. Proponents argue that, since the existence of the invisible and undetectable Flying Spaghetti Monster—similar to other proposed supernatural beings—cannot be falsified, it demonstrates that the burden of proof rests on those who affirm the existence of such beings. Richard Dawkins explains, "The onus is on somebody who says, I want to believe in God, Flying Spaghetti Monster, fairies, or whatever it is. It is not up to us to disprove it." Furthermore, according to Lance Gharavi, an editor of "The Journal of Religion and Theater", the Flying Spaghetti Monster is "ultimately...an argument about the arbitrariness of holding any one view of creation", since any one view is equally as plausible as the Flying Spaghetti Monster. A similar argument was discussed in the books "The God Delusion" and "The Atheist Delusion".

In December 2007 the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster was credited with spearheading successful efforts in Polk County, Florida, to dissuade the Polk County School Board from adopting new science standards on evolution. The issue was raised after five of the seven board members declared a personal belief in intelligent design. Opponents describing themselves as Pastafarians e-mailed members of the Polk County School Board demanding equal instruction time for the Flying Spaghetti Monster. Board member Margaret Lofton, who supported intelligent design, dismissed the e-mail as ridiculous and insulting, stating, "they've made us the laughing stock of the world". Lofton later stated that she had no interest in engaging with the Pastafarians or anyone else seeking to discredit intelligent design. As the controversy developed, scientists expressed opposition to intelligent design. In response to hopes for a new "applied science" campus at the University of South Florida in Lakeland, university vice president Marshall Goodman expressed surprise, stating, "<nowiki>[intelligent design is]</nowiki> not science. You can't even call it pseudo-science." While unhappy with the outcome, Lofton chose not to resign over the issue. She and the other board members expressed a desire to return to the day-to-day work of running the school district.

National branches of the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster have been striving in many countries to have FSMism become an officially (legally) recognized religion, with varying degrees of success. In New Zealand, Pastafarian representatives have been authorized as marriage celebrants, however members of other movements considered to be "alternative philosophies" rather than religions are also recognized as celebrants under New Zealand law.

A federal court in the US state of Nebraska ruled that Flying Spaghetti Monster is a satirical parody religion, rather than an actual religion, and as a result, Pastafarians are not entitled to religious accommodation under the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act:

Pastafarians have used their claimed faith as a test case to argue for freedom of religion, and to oppose government discrimination against people who do not follow a recognized religion.

The Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster operates an ordination mill on their website which enables officiates in jurisdictions where credentials are needed to officiate weddings. Pastafarians say that separation of church and state precludes the government from arbitrarily labelling one denomination religiously valid but another an ordination mill. In November 2014, Rodney Michael Rogers and Minneapolis-based Atheists for Human Rights sued Washington County, Minnesota under the Fourteenth Amendment equal protection clause and the First Amendment free speech clause, with their attorney claiming discrimination against atheists: "When the statute clearly permits recognition of a marriage celebrant whose religious credentials consist of nothing more than a $20 'ordination' obtained from the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster... the requirement is absolutely meaningless in terms of ensuring the qualifications of a marriage celebrant." A few days prior to a hearing on the matter, Washington County changed its policy to allow Rogers his ability to officiate weddings. This action was done in an effort to deny the court jurisdiction on the underlying claim. On May 13, 2015 the Federal Court held that the issue had become moot and dismissed the case. The first legally-recognized Pastafarian wedding occurred in New Zealand on April 16, 2016.

In March 2007, Bryan Killian, a high school student in Buncombe County, North Carolina, was suspended for wearing "pirate regalia" which he said was part of his Pastafarian faith. Killian protested the suspension, saying it violated his First Amendment rights to religious freedom and freedom of expression. "If this is what I believe in, no matter how stupid it might sound, I should be able to express myself however I want to", he said.
In March 2008, Pastafarians in Crossville, Tennessee, were permitted to place a Flying Spaghetti Monster statue in a free speech zone on the courthouse lawn, and proceeded to do so. The display gained national interest on blogs and online news sites and was even covered by "Rolling Stone" magazine. It was later removed from the premises, along with all the other long-term statues, as a result of the controversy over the statue. In December 2011, Pastafarianism was one of the multiple denominations given equal access to placing holiday displays on the Loudoun County courthouse lawn, in Leesburg, Virginia.

In 2012, Tracy McPherson of the Pennsylvanian Pastafarians petitioned the Chester County, Pennsylvania Commissioners to allow representation of the FSM at the county courthouse, equally with a Jewish menorah and a Christian nativity scene. One commissioner stated that either all religions should be allowed or no religion should be represented, but without support from the other commissioners the motion was rejected. Another commissioner stated that this petition garnered more attention than any he had seen before.

On September 21, 2012, Pastafarian Giorgos Loizos was arrested in Greece on charges of malicious blasphemy and offense of religion for the creation of a satirical Facebook page called "Elder Pastitsios", based on a well-known deceased Greek Orthodox monk, Elder Paisios, where his name and face were substituted with pastitsio – a local pasta and béchamel sauce dish. The case, which started as a Facebook flame, reached the Greek Parliament and created a strong political reaction to the arrest.

In August 2013, Christian Orthodox religious activists from an unregistered group known as "God's Will" attacked a peaceful rally that Russian Pastafarians had organized. Activists as well as police knocked some rally participants to the ground. Police arrested and charged eight of the Pastafarians with attempting to hold an unsanctioned rally. One of the Pastafarians later complained that they were arrested "just for walking".

In February 2014, union officials at London South Bank University forbade an atheist group to display posters of the Flying Spaghetti Monster at a student orientation conference and later banned the group from the conference, leading to complaints about interference with free speech. The Students' Union subsequently apologized.

In November 2014, the Church of the FSM obtained city signage in Templin, Germany, announcing the time of Friday's weekly "Nudelmesse" ("pasta mass"), alongside signage for various Catholic and Protestant Sunday services.

In July 2011 Austrian pastafarian Niko Alm won the legal right to be shown in his driving license photo wearing a pasta strainer on his head, after three years spent pursuing permission and obtaining an examination certifying that he was psychologically fit to drive. He got the idea after reading that Austrian regulations allow headgear in official photos only when it is worn for religious reasons. Some sources report that the colander in the form of pasta strainer, was recognised by Austrian authorities as a religious headgear of the parody religion Pastafarianism in 2011. This was denied by Austrian authorities, saying that religious motives were not the reason to grant the permission of wearing the headgear in a passport.

On August 9, 2011 the chairman of the church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster Germany, Rüdiger Weida, obtained a driver's license with a picture of him wearing a pirate bandana. In contrast to the Austrian officials in the case of Niko Alm the German officials allowed the headgear as a religious exception.

Some anti-clerical protesters wore colanders to Piazza XXIV Maggio square in Milan, Italy, on June 2, 2012, in mock obedience to the Flying Spaghetti Monster.

In February 2013, a Pastafarian was denied the right to wear a spaghetti strainer on his head for his driver's license photo by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, which stated that a pasta strainer was not on a list of approved religious headwear.

In March 2013 a Belgian's identity photos were refused by the local and national administrations because he wore a pasta strainer on his head.

The Czech Republic recognised this as religious headgear in 2013. In July that year, a member of the Czech Pirate Party from Brno was given permission to wear a pasta strainer on his head for the photograph on his official Czech Republic ID card. The Brno City Hall spokesman explained, "The application complies with the laws...where headgear for religious or medical reasons is permitted if it doesn't hide the face".

In August 2013 Eddie Castillo, a student at Texas Tech University, got approval to wear a pasta strainer on his head in his driver's license photo. He said, "You might think this is some sort of a gag or prank by a college student, but thousands, including myself, see it as a political and religious milestone for all atheists everywhere."

In January 2014 a member of the Pomfret, New York Town Council wore a colander while taking the oath of office.

In June 2014 a New Zealand man obtained a driver's license with a photograph of himself wearing a blue spaghetti strainer on his head. This was granted under a law allowing the wearing of religious headgear in official photos.

In November 2014 former porn star Asia Carrera obtained an identity photo with the traditional Pastafarian headgear from a Department of Motor Vehicles office in Hurricane, Utah. The director of Utah's Driver License Division says that about a dozen Pastafarians have had their state driver's license photos taken with a similar pasta strainer over the years.

In November 2015 Massachusetts resident Lindsay Miller was allowed to wear a colander on her head in her driver's license photo after she cited her religious beliefs. Miller (who resides in Lowell) said on Friday, November 13 that she "absolutely loves the history and the story" of Pastafarians, whose website says has existed in secrecy for hundreds of years and entered the mainstream in 2005. Ms. Miller was represented in her quest by The American Humanist Association's Appignani Humanist Legal Center.

In January 2016 Russian Pastafarian Andrew Filin got a driver's license with his photo in a colander.

In 2016 in Nijmegen, The Netherlands, Pastafarian and law student Mienke de Wilde petitioned the courts to be allowed to wear a colander in her driver's license photo. She lost the petition, both at first instance and on appeal.

A man's Irish driving licence photograph including a colander was rejected by the Road Safety Authority (RSA) in 2013. In 2016, an Equality Officer of the Workplace Relations Commission reviewed the RSA's decision under the Equal Rights Acts and upheld it, on the basis that the complaint did "not come within the definition of religion and/or religious belief".

With regard to Henderson's 2005 open letter, according to Justin Pope of the "Associated Press": 

Pope praised the Flying Spaghetti Monster as "a clever and effective argument". Simon Singh of the "Daily Telegraph" described the Flying Spaghetti Monster as "a masterstroke, which underlined the absurdity of Intelligent Design", and applauded Henderson for "galvanis[ing] a defence of science and rationality". Sarah Boxer of the "New York Times" said that Henderson "has wit on his side". In addition, the Flying Spaghetti Monster was mentioned in an article footnote of the "Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review" as an example of evolution "enter[ing] the fray in popular culture", which the author deemed necessary for evolution to prevail over intelligent design. The abstract of the paper, "Evolutionary Controversy and a Side of Pasta: The Flying Spaghetti Monster and the Subversive Function of Religious Parody", describes the Flying Spaghetti Monster as "a potent example of how monstrous humor can be used as a popular tool of carnivalesque subversion". Its author praised Pastafarianism for its "epistemological humility". Moreover, Henderson's website contains numerous endorsements from the scientific community. As Jack Schofield of "The Guardian" noted, "The joke, of course, is that it's arguably more rational than Intelligent Design."

Casey Luskin of the Discovery Institute, which promotes intelligent design, contested this, saying, "the problem for their logic is that ID is not an arbitrary explanation, because we have much experience with intelligent agents producing the type of informational complexity we see in nature." Columnist Jeff Jacoby wrote in "The Boston Globe" that intelligent design "isn't primitivism or Bible-thumping or flying spaghetti. It's science." This view of science, however, was rejected by the United States National Academy of Sciences. Peter Gallings of Answers in Genesis, a Young Earth Creationist ministry said "Ironically enough, [Pastafarians], in addition to mocking God himself, are lampooning the Intelligent Design Movement for not identifying a specific deity—that is, leaving open the possibility that a spaghetti monster could be the intelligent designer... Thus, the satire is possible because the Intelligent Design Movement hasn't affiliated with a particular religion, exactly the opposite of what its other critics claim!"




</doc>
<doc id="2383757" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2383757" title="Jack Hobbs (footballer)">
Jack Hobbs (footballer)

Jack Hobbs (born 18 August 1988) is an English professional footballer who plays as a defender for Championship club Bolton Wanderers.

A graduate of Lincoln City academy, he made a single appearance for the League Two club in 2004 before signing for Premier League club Liverpool. His playing time there was limited, so to gain first-team experience Liverpool loaned him out to Scunthorpe United and then to Leicester City. In 2009, he signed permanently with the latter and went on to make more than 100 appearances in the three seasons he spent with the club. After a stint with Hull City between 2011 and 2014, where he was also the club captain for the 2011–12 season, he joined Nottingham Forest. Though initially on loan, he later penned a two-year deal. His stint at the club was hampered by persistent injuries.

Hobbs has also been capped at the national youth level and made three appearances for England U19 in 2007.

Though Hobbs was born in Portsmouth, Hampshire, he moved to the village of Moulton, Lincolnshire during his youth. A student of Spalding Grammar School, he played youth football for Moulton Harrox at the age of 10.

Hobbs progressed through the Lincoln City youth set-up and, at the age of 14, scored his first goal in his fourth appearance for the under-19 team in a 1–1 draw with Bradford City on 22 March 2003. In March 2004 he accepted a three-year scholarship with the Imps, commencing at the start of the 2004–05 season. He made his league debut on 15 August 2005 against Bristol Rovers, as a substitute for Matt Bloomer. At 16 years and 149 days, he became the club's youngest ever debutant, breaking a record that was previously held by Shane Nicholson.

At the end of the season, Hobbs was linked with a move to the Premier League with Arsenal. However, the deal fell through because Arsenal demanded the removal of a sell-on clause from the transfer deal. Tottenham Hotspur and Bolton Wanderers also expressed their desire to sign the defender. He finally signed for Liverpool on his 17th birthday on 18 August 2005. Commenting on the transfer he said: "This is unbelievable. I'm still pinching myself and it is a real opportunity for me." He made his debut for the reserves in a 3–2 defeat at the hands of Everton. Praising his performance, coach Hugh McAuley said that he played "very well". He was also a part of the reserve squad which won the 2006 FA Youth Cup by defeating Manchester City 3–2 in the final. In a friendly match against German club 1. FC Kaiserslautern in June 2006, Hobbs made an "error", which allowed Ricardo Villar to score against goalie Jerzy Dudek. Hobbs was deployed in the back alongside Gabriel Paletta in the following friendly against Grasshopper Club Zürich. The "Liverpool Echo" wrote that he "made a spirited recovery" and was "blameless on this occasion".

Hobbs made his debut as a substitute against Reading in the League Cup on 25 September 2007 in a 4–3 win. Hobbs later made his first start for Liverpool against Cardiff City in the League Cup on 31 October 2007, playing all 90 minutes, and gaining praise from pundits and teammates for his composed performance. On 2 December, Hobbs made his league debut against Bolton Wanderers, replacing Jamie Carragher in the home match. A week later, he made his first start for the team in a league match in an away match with Reading. In January 2008, he signed for Championship club Scunthorpe United on a loan deal until the end of the season. Manager Nigel Adkins described Hobbs as a composed player, and they signed him to help the team retain their Championship status. He scored his first senior goal on 15 February against Stoke City. In his spell with Scunthorpe, Hobbs made nine appearances, scoring one goal.

On 16 May 2008, BBC Sport wrote that Hobbs was indecisive about whether to fight for first-team opportunities in Liverpool or to join another club for more playing opportunities. Hobbs said wherever he went, he would look to play first-team football. On 25 May, Hobbs signed for League One club Leicester City on a season-long loan deal. On joining the club, he said he wanted to help Leicester win promotion to the Championship. He made his debut for the club in a pre-season match against Kettering Town, playing 80 minutes of a 4–1 victory. His competitive debut came on 9 August in a 2–0 victory over Milton Keynes Dons, when he came on as an 88th-minute substitute for Aleksandar Tunchev. Hobbs scored his first goal on 24 January 2009, scoring the last goal in a 4–2 victory over Huddersfield Town. In February 2009, he was red carded in a match against Bristol Rovers for fouling Darryl Duffy. However, the resultant penalty by Rickie Lambert was saved by Mark Bunn. Leicester manager Nigel Pearson commented that the red card was unfortunate, as he believed the foul was not intentional. In his first season with the club, besides winning the League One title and achieving promotion to the Championship, Hobbs was also included in the PFA Team of the Year. He was also voted as the club's Young Player of the Year, as he made 44 appearances, where his team conceded 37 goals.

On 24 April 2009, Hobbs signed permanently with Leicester City, penning a four-year contract. After signing, he said that he believed that with Leicester he could win promotion to the Premier League. He played his first league match against Swansea City in a 2–1 victory. Playing alongside Wayne Brown in the centre back position, Hobbs missed two league games in the 2009–10 season, and made a total of 49 appearances. At the end of the season, he won the Player of the Year award, and shared the Players' Player award with Andy King. On winning the Player of the Year award, Hobbs said that he was honoured to win award.

In the 2010–11 season, Hobbs started 23 times for Leicester City. However, with the arrival of Sol Bamba, he found his playing time increasingly limited. With the speculation that Leicester would sign Chelsea defender Jeffrey Bruma on loan, new manager Sven-Göran Eriksson said that he could join another club. After playing 30 times for the club, Hobbs joined Hull City in a season-long loan deal. He made his club debut in a 1–0 away win against Derby County. Failing to break into the first team due to competition from James Chester and Anthony Gerrard, he expressed his desire to return to Leicester once the loan spell ended. Nevertheless, he made 13 appearances for the club during his loan spell.

On 23 July 2011, Hobbs signed permanently with the club, penning a contract keeping him there until 2014. On joining the club, he said that he was delighted to be a Hull City player. He was also appointed as the club captain for the 2011–12 season. Hobbs made his debut for the club in a 1–0 defeat against Blackpool coming as an 87th-minute substitute for Matty Fryatt. On 11 February, he scored his first league goal in three years in a 3–0 victory over Bristol City, heading in a Robert Koren cross from the penalty box. In the following month, in a match against Coventry City, he injured himself while tackling Alex Nimely during the first half's stoppage time, and was taken out of the match. He was substituted by debutant Sonny Bradley. However, two days later, it was announced that he was ruled out of the rest of the season owing to the knee injury sustained during the match.

Recovering from injury, Hobbs played his first match in November 2012, in a reserve team match against Peterborough United. On 9 December, his first league match came in a 2–1 defeat against Watford, pairing with Alex Bruce at the centre back position. He played 22 times for the club in the season, which saw Hull City being promoted to the Premier League.

After Hull City were promoted to the Premier League, the club informed Hobbs that he was no longer required. In July 2013, "Sky Sports" reported that Nottingham Forest were interested in signing him. He ultimately signed a loan deal with Nottingham Forest, with a condition that it would become permanent with Hobbs signing a two-year contract at the end of the 2013–14 season. Manager Billy Davies said that he was pleased to bring Hobbs to the club. Hobbs said that it would be an honour for him "to play for a club the size of Nottingham Forest". He made his club debut in a 1–0 victory over Huddersfield Town, where he blocked a strike of opposition striker James Vaughan. He scored his first goal on 28 September in a 1–0 victory over Derby County, heading in an Andy Reid corner before half time. This goal was voted September's Bed Chambers Dream Moment of the Month. On 24 January 2014, Hull recalled him because of an injury to defender James Chester. However, on the deadline day of the transfer window, (31 January), Hobbs signed permanently with Nottingham Forest on a four-and-a-half-year contract, in a deal reported by Sky Sports to be worth "close to £1million". He said that he was thrilled and had always wanted to play for the club. After signing, he played twice before being ruled out of the rest of the season due to an ankle fracture in March.

In August 2014, Hobbs played his first match after his injury in the reserve team 0–0 draw against Burton Albion. However, he injured himself during the East Midlands derby in September. In the following month he underwent surgery which ruled him out of action for three months. On 14 February 2015, during a 4–4 draw against Blackpool, he suffered a hamstring injury and was ruled out of play for a month. The club's manager Dougie Freedman blamed the condition of the Bloomfield Road pitch for the injury. After recovering from his injury, he played the whole ninety minutes of a match against Brentford in April.

Hobbs played his first match of 2015–16 season in a match against Brighton & Hove Albion. Though the match ended in a 1–0 defeat for Forest, he formed a strong defensive partnership along with Matt Mills. On 28 November, he received a red card in the 66th minute of a 3–1 win against Reading for a challenge on Matěj Vydra. He made a total of twenty three appearances during the season.

Hobbs was dropped from the first team in the first half of 2016–17 by manager Philippe Montanier, but was reinstated after Montanier was replaced by caretaker manager Gary Brazil. On 26 December, he played his first match of the season, starting in a 2–1 defeat against Huddersfield Town. He played this match after recovering from "several niggling injuries". Hobbs played a total of 10 matches in the season.

He was released by Forest at the end of the 2017–18 season.

On 30 July 2018, he signed a one-year contract with Bolton Wanderers following a successful trial with The Trotters. He scored his first goal for Bolton in a 1-1 draw with Reading on 29 January 2019.

Hobbs made three appearances for the England under-19 team in 2007 UEFA European under-19 Championship qualification.

Liverpool

Leicester City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="2385021" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2385021" title="Kenwood, St. George's Hill">
Kenwood, St. George's Hill

Kenwood is a house on the St. George's Hill estate, Weybridge, Surrey, England. Originally called the Brown House, it was designed by architect T.A. Allen, and built in 1913 by local builders, Love & Sons. The estate was constructed around the Weybridge Golf Club, which was designed in 1912 by Harry Colt.

John Lennon, of The Beatles, bought Kenwood for £20,000 (equivalent to £ in 2019). on 15 July 1964, on the advice of The Beatles' accountants, Dr. Walter Strach and James Isherwood. Lennon was resident from the summer of 1964, until the late spring of 1968. Film of the exterior of the house and the gate was included in an ITN programme called "Reporting 66", in 1966. Parts of a home movie showing Lennon at Kenwood (1967) were featured in the film "".

Kenwood is close to Sunny Heights, the former home of Ringo Starr, and a short drive from Kinfauns, George Harrison's former home in Esher. In October 2006, Kenwood went back on the market, with a price of £5.95 million, and was sold in January 2007 for £5.8 million. In June 2013, Kenwood went onto the market once again for £13.75 million.

Kenwood was built in 1913, and was originally called The Brown House. On Wood Lane, off Cavendish Road, and built in a mock-Tudor style, the footprint and gardens cover , of which the house must occupy no more than one fifth and the plot may not be subdivided into more than one home under the rules of the building scheme. It was designed in 1913 by architect Theophilus Arthur Allen, who had been commissioned by local man Norman H. Johnson. Allen employed a local firm called Love & Sons in the construction of Kenwood. The hill was divided into lots around the Weybridge Golf Club, which was designed by Harry Colt in 1912. Many of the original houses on the estate were built by master builder Walter George Tarrant whose firm constructed the original external garage ca.1920 (demolished ca.1995).

Lennon bought the house on 15 July 1964, on the advice of The Beatles' accountants, Dr Walter Strach and James Isherwood. Cliff Richard and Tom Jones had earlier bought homes on the St George's Hill estate. Though reportedly not liking Kenwood (describing it as a "stop-over" on the way to something better), Lennon spent £40,000 (were it cash for ordinary expenditure ). on renovations, reducing its 22 rooms to 17, landscaping the grounds and building an outdoor swimming pool. Much of the initial decoration was left to interior designer Kenneth Partridge, whom Lennon employed after being impressed by his design work at a lavish party held by Beatles' manager Brian Epstein to celebrate the Beatles' departure for their first tour of the United States. However, when Partridge had completed his work, Lennon and then-wife Cynthia immediately made a number of further alterations which better reflected their taste. Cynthia's mother was given an allowance to fill the shelves of the house with antiques and antiquarian books, and a heavy sliding wooden door was installed at the gate entrance to keep out fans.

Kenwood has three floors: on the ground floor during the Lennon period the front door opened onto an entrance hall, where Lennon placed a suit of armour and a gorilla suit. Across the hall was a large living room, which had black carpets, two 18-foot sofas and a marble fireplace. To the left of the hall was a toilet, and through the living room was a dining room, where purple, velvet wallpaper was put up. Adjacent to the dining room, at the back of the house, was a small sunroom. This was decorated with various pictures, caricatures and stickers, such as the one from the "Safe as Milk" debut album (1967) by Captain Beefheart & His Magic Band, and one advertising the Monterey Pop Festival. Photos published by The Beatles Book Monthly show the shelves of the sunroom filled with articles such as a large, ornate cross, a Mickey Mouse doll and a mortar and pestle, reportedly used by Lennon to mix various combinations of cocaine, amphetamine, barbiturates and LSD. There was also a yellow sofa or chaise-longue upon which Lennon would spend much of his time. It was a present from his aunt, Elizabeth Smith (née Stanley) also known as Mimi. Behind the sunroom was the split-level kitchen where state-of-the-art appliances were installed, so complex that a tutor had to come and give the Lennons lessons in their use.

Completing the ground floor was a smaller lounge, and a large garage. The main staircase to the upper floors was situated in the entrance hall. The house had six bedrooms, with five on the first floor. The giant master bedroom featured a huge double bed, white carpets and an en-suite bathroom complete with sunken bathtub, shower, Jacuzzi and 'his and hers' wash basins. Lennon wanted the guest bedrooms to contain works of art by students of the Liverpool Art College. In particular, two drawings by former Beatles' bassist Stuart Sutcliffe were hung, for what Lennon described as "sentimental reasons". The first floor also had a study. On the top floor was the attic, which Lennon claimed as his own, painting the ceiling one bright colour, then changing to another when the paint ran out, and installing most of his musical equipment there. Outside the house, to the right as you looked down from the sunroom, lay the swimming pool. In 1967, Lennon suggested a mirrored bottom for the pool; being advised that this would be not only impractical and expensive, but potentially dangerous to swimmers, he settled for a large eye mosaic set in the side. The mosaic was based on the Eye of Knowledge, which was part of the teachings of the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.

The Lennons initially had problems recruiting reliable staff, but eventually employed a cook/housekeeper (Dorothy Jarlett, or Dot) a chauffeur (Les Anthony) and a groundskeeper. Lennon was surprised and impressed to discover that the groundskeeper had "dropped out" of university to pursue his love of horticulture. Others employed at Kenwood included Lennon's schoolfriend, Pete Shotton, who worked as Lennon's personal assistant in the early part of 1968, and Pauline Jones, who was the girlfriend (later wife) of Lennon's father, Alfred Lennon. Jones worked as an au pair and secretary, answering the large volume of fan mail received at Kenwood, during late 1967.

Lennon did much of his songwriting in the attic, where he had several Studer tape recorders. Little was done with them until fellow Beatle Paul McCartney came over and helped re-install them in sequence, so overdubs could be made. Lennon could thus record his own doubletracked song demos. (These demos, and some other, more avant garde sound recordings also made in the attic, have appeared on various bootlegs). The attic also contained a mellotron, an electronic organ, a piano, a Vox AC30 amplifier and several guitars (including his first Rickenbacker 325, a Hofner Senator, and his Rickenbacker 1996), all of which were used when songwriting. Lennon also wrote on an upright piano in the sunroom.

Aside from the mini-studio, the attic contained two other rooms: a small guest bedroom and a games room used for recreation. Lennon filled it with three full sets of the model car racing game, Scalextric. When not in the attic, Lennon could usually be found in the sunroom watching television or reading newspapers. He would also walk in the garden with his black cat on his shoulder (he had ten cats in total). His drug intake, particularly LSD and hashish, but also amphetamine, was high for much of the time he lived at Kenwood. Drugs were taken there in the company of people such as Marianne Faithfull's ex-husband John Dunbar and art dealer Robert Fraser. At one stage, under the influence of transcendental meditation, Lennon renounced both meat-eating and drugs, and buried a huge quantity of LSD in the garden, which had been obtained by representatives of The Beatles at the Monterey Pop Festival from Augustus Stanley Owsley III. He later tried to find the LSD, but could not remember where he had buried it. Although none of the lavish parties they had planned took place – which remained a source of disappointment to Cynthia – various guests (including Monkee Michael Nesmith and his wife Phyllis, Bob Dylan and Peter Cook) stayed or dined at the house, together with old friends like Ivan Vaughan and Shotton from Liverpool, or strangers Lennon had met at a party or nightclub, such as the Ad Lib. Cynthia and Lennon were beginning to lead separate lives by 1967, and it was not uncommon for Cynthia to wake up in the morning to find the house filled with people in various states of intoxication whom Lennon had met in clubs the night before. Large parts of the house were unused by the Lennons, and visitors remarked that there was frequently a strange atmosphere.

In 1968, Cynthia went on vacation to Greece, leaving Lennon at Kenwood with Shotton. After several days of taking LSD and smoking marijuana, Lennon convened a meeting at the Beatles' business HQ to inform the others that he felt he was the reincarnation of Jesus Christ. Later that day he phoned Ono, whose own husband Tony (Anthony Cox) was in Paris on business, and invited her to Kenwood. Shotton left the two alone, whereupon Lennon invited Ono (who had also taken LSD) up to the attic to hear his largely experimental non-Beatles' recordings. For the rest of the night, the two collaborated on what became the "" album, and then "made love at dawn", according to Lennon. Cynthia returned early from her vacation, and discovered Lennon and Ono sitting cross-legged on the floor and staring intently into each other's eyes (Ono was wearing one of Cynthia's bathrobes). In a state of shock, Cynthia then left to stay with friends for a few days, although Lennon and Cynthia were reconciled for a time upon her return to Kenwood. It was during Cynthia's next holiday in Italy that Lennon and Ono finally entered into a permanent relationship, and Lennon asked for a divorce. Cynthia, together with Julian and her mother, moved back into Kenwood for the summer, where Paul McCartney visited her to offer his support. On the journey to Kenwood he composed the song "Hey Jude", which eventually became The Beatles' biggest selling single. Lennon and Ono, meanwhile, were without a permanent address for a time. They stayed with McCartney at his house in Cavendish Avenue (where it is alleged that a further breach occurred in the Lennon–McCartney relationship when Lennon discovered a derogatory note written by McCartney) and with Peter Brown and then Neil Aspinall, before moving into an apartment leased by Starr at 34 Montagu Square, Marylebone in London. They were evicted from this flat by the owner following a raid by the drug squad on 18 October 1968, and subsequent November trial, and so moved back into Kenwood for a short time, which had been vacated by Cynthia. In the new year Ono and Lennon moved into the Dorchester Hotel in London, leaving Kenwood for the last time.

Film of the exterior of the house and the gate was included in Reporting 66; a programme produced by ITN, in 1966. Parts of a home movie showing Lennon at Kenwood, in 1967, were featured in the film "". This had Lennon in the company of Starr, his son Julian Lennon and the gardener at Kenwood. It also shows Lennon standing in the sunroom. Lennon and Yoko Ono were filmed singing the "Everybody had a hard year" section of the Beatles' song, "I've Got a Feeling", at the side of the house, and made two art films in the grounds in 1968: "Number 5 a.k.a. Smile", and "Two Virgins". Lennon was interviewed several times on audio tape at Kenwood, by people like Ray Coleman, and Kenny Everett. Several photo sessions also took place at Kenwood, the most famous of which provided the cover photo for the Beatles' 1965 album "Rubber Soul".

As Lennon and Cynthia were getting divorced, it became clear that Lennon did not wish to keep Kenwood, and Cynthia could not afford to maintain it on her own, so it was sold in December 1968, for a reputed £40,000 (equivalent to £ in 2019). to Bill Martin, writer of songs such as "Puppet on a String" and "Congratulations". Kenwood has subsequently changed hands several times, and been subject to some major renovation work, such that the interior now little resembles the house that Lennon lived in. The exterior and grounds are still recognisable, although the sunroom has been completely rebuilt. After being displayed at the Liverpool International Garden Festival in 1984, the psychedelic eye mosaic was unclaimed, and left in a field. It was rediscovered and restored by Tom Lorimer, a laboratory technician at the Liverpool John Moores University. The mosaic was then displayed at the Museum of Liverpool Life. Items from Lennon's Kenwood period have also appeared for auction, including towels and cutlery, a caviar jar, and the table that sat in the sunroom. Lennon kept the Kenwood house sign after he left, but gave it to Andy Eccles, who was a gardener at Tittenhurst Park, in 1972. It was sold for US$20,400 in 2003. In October 2006, Kenwood went back on the market, with a price of £5.95 million, and was sold in January 2007 for £5.8 million. It has been claimed that every owner after the Lennons has sold it due to divorce.
In January 2013, Kenwood was again back on the market with a price of £15m.




</doc>
<doc id="2407340" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2407340" title="Bart the Murderer">
Bart the Murderer

"Bart the Murderer" is the fourth episode of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> third season. It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 10, 1991. In the episode, Bart stumbles upon the Mafia bar, Legitimate Businessman's Social Club, after having a terrible day at school. The owner of the bar, mobster Fat Tony, hires Bart to work as its bartender. When Principal Skinner goes missing after punishing Bart in school, Bart is soon accused of having him murdered and is put on trial. As he is about to get convicted, Skinner arrives and explains that he was accidentally trapped in his garage all week, clearing Bart.

The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Rich Moore. Fat Tony (voiced by Joe Mantegna) and his henchmen, Legs and Louie, made their first appearances on "The Simpsons". The episode features cultural references to songs such as "Witchcraft" and "One Fine Day", and the American television series "MacGyver". Since airing, the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics. It acquired a Nielsen rating of 13.4 and was the highest-rated show on the Fox network the week it aired.

After having a particularly bad day at school via Santa's Little Helper eating his homework, Bart missing the bus and having to miss out on what could have been a fun field trip to the chocolate factory because he forgot to bring his permission slip, Bart gets caught in a downpour and loses control of his skateboard. He crashes down the stairwell of the Legitimate Businessman's Social Club, a Mafia bar owned by the Springfield Mafia. Fat Tony, the leader of the Mafia, and his henchmen Legs and Louie are initially inhospitable towards Bart, but they are impressed by his ability to pick the winning horse in a horse race on the radio. When Bart makes up an excellent Manhattan cocktail for the mobsters, Fat Tony hires him as their bartender and errand boy. As Bart adopts more and more gangster-like traits, Marge grows anxious and tells Homer to go and meet the Mafia, but Homer approves of them after they let him win at poker.

When Fat Tony finds out Principal Skinner is giving Bart detention after school, the mobsters go to confront Skinner. The next day, Principal Skinner is missing and is presumed to have been murdered. Bart has a nightmare of Principal Skinner's ghost and his own execution on the chair. He rushes to confront Fat Tony at the bar. When the police burst in, Fat Tony blames Principal Skinner's disappearance on Bart, who is put on trial. During the trial, Fat Tony, Legs, and Louie lie to the court, saying that Bart is Principal Skinner's murderer and the leader of the Springfield Mafia.

Judge Snyder is about to convict Bart when Skinner bursts through the doors, disheveled and unshaven, and explains that neither Bart nor the mobsters assaulted him. Rather, when Fat Tony and his henchmen had come to his office meekly, Skinner had yelled at them to not interfere with student discipline, and they left sheepishly. After he returned to his house, he became trapped beneath tons of old newspapers in his garage, and was stuck there for over a week, until he was able to escape. Bart is cleared of all charges, despite the counsel for the prosecution unsuccessfully trying to convince the Judge to strike Skinner's speech from the record. Fat Tony tells Bart that he did not want to get him into any trouble on his behalf, but Bart decides to resign after learning that "crime doesn't pay".

The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Rich Moore. The writers conceived the idea of the episode before the 1990 film "GoodFellas", which has a similar plot, was released. After it was, the writers incorporated references to the film into the episode. The character Fat Tony makes his first appearance on the show in this episode. He was modeled after the physical appearance of Paul Sorvino's character Paul Cicero in "GoodFellas".

The writers originally wanted American actor Sheldon Leonard to voice Fat Tony, but they were unable to get him, so they went with Joe Mantegna instead. Mantegna was offered the role during the show's second season, and since he had seen the show before and thought it was "funny", he decided to give it a shot. He felt honored that they asked him to do a voice for the show. In an interview with "The A.V. Club", Mantegna said he thinks the reason he got the role was partly due to his performance in the 1990 Mafia film "The Godfather Part III", which opened just prior to when he received the role. He thought the script was smart and clever and that he enjoyed recording it. Mantegna has since appeared many times on the show as Fat Tony, who became a recurring character; it is Mantegna's longest-running role in his acting career. Mantegna commented: "Who knew that Fat Tony was gonna resonate in the hearts and minds of the ["Simpsons" fans] out there? Apparently [the writers] got enough feedback as to how the character was liked that they wrote it in again and again, and I was kind of a recurring guy that they’d tap into at least a couple episodes a season."

Legs and Louie, Fat Tony's henchmen, also made their first appearances in this episode. The character of Louie was based on American actor Joe Pesci, who is known for playing violent Mafia mobsters. Neil Patrick Harris guest starred in the episode as himself, portraying Bart in "Blood on the Blackboard: The Bart Simpson Story", a horribly inaccurate made-for-television film based on Bart's life with the Mafia that the Simpson family watches at the end of the episode.

The sequence of Bart crashing down the stairwell to the Mafia bar is similar to a scene in the film "GoodFellas", in which a young boy is employed by a Mafia as their messenger. All of the horses in the race that Bart bets on are named after a famous animated character's catchphrase: "Ain't I a Stinker?" (Bugs Bunny), "Yabba Dabba Doo" (Fred Flintstone), "Sufferin' Succotash" (Sylvester), "That's All Folks" (Porky Pig), "I Yam What I Yam" (Popeye), and Bart's catchphrases "Eat my shorts" and "Don't have a cow". The Chiffons's song "One Fine Day" is heard when Bart serves drinks to the mobsters during a game of poker. The writers originally wanted to use the song "Be My Baby" by The Ronettes for the scene, but they could not clear the copyrights for it. In his room, Bart stores the Springfield Mafia's loot—a truckload of cartons of Laramie cigarettes. While strutting around the kitchen, he sings Frank Sinatra's song "Witchcraft". The scene in which Bart wakes up screaming after having a nightmare about Skinner is a reference to a scene in the 1972 film "The Godfather", in which Jack Woltz screams after waking up in bed and finding a decapitated horse head by his side. Skinner frees himself from being trapped under the newspapers in a way similar to the character Angus MacGyver's escapes in the American television series "MacGyver".

In its original American broadcast, "Bart the Murderer" finished 31st in the ratings for the week of October 7–13, 1991, with a Nielsen rating of 13.4, equivalent to approximately 12.5 million viewing households. It was the highest-rated show on the Fox network that week. Since airing, the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics. John Orvted of "Vanity Fair" named it the eighth best episode of "The Simpsons" because of the "inspired" Mafia satire and because it "goes deeper into Bart's ongoing conflict with authority figures." Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the authors of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", praised the scene in which Skinner explains his disappearance to the courtroom, calling it Skinner's "finest hour" on the show. Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed named the episode the best in the third season, and commented that there are "many priceless moments" in it, such as Homer's meeting with the Springfield Mafia. Meyers also praised Swartzwelder's script. Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict commented that how an episode that starts with Bart having a bad day can lead to him being tried for murder as the head of the local Mafia "is just one of the amazing monuments to this show's superiority."

DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson thought "Bart the Murderer" was season three's first "truly great" episode because it "starts off strong and gets even better as it moves." Even though he thinks Mafia parodies have been overused, Jacobson thought this one brought "a fresh approach and remains consistently amusing. A great guest spot from Mantegna helps. It also feels like the first episode of this season that really moves the series ahead; it seems like something a little more incisive than most of what came before it." Andy Patrizio of IGN called "Bart the Murderer" his favorite of the season, and praised the episode for its references to "The Godfather" and "MacGyver". The episode's reference to "GoodFellas" was named the 28th greatest film reference in the history of the show by "Total Film"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Nathan Ditum.



</doc>
<doc id="2416726" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2416726" title="Ralphie the Buffalo">
Ralphie the Buffalo

Ralphie the Buffalo is the name of the live mascot of the University of Colorado Buffaloes. Ralphie has been called one of the best live mascots in sports, and she is often erroneously labeled male.

The team of "Ralphie Handlers," who are varsity student-athletes, run Ralphie around Folsom Field, the University of Colorado's football field, in a horse shoe pattern before each half of each home game. It takes five Ralphie Handlers to run her around the field: two up front on each side to steer her around the field, two in the back on each side to help guide her, and one in far back to control her speed, called the "loop" position. Ralphie can reach speeds of 25 miles per hour (40 km/h). Female bison are used because they are smaller and less aggressive, as well as for insurance reasons, although Ralphie has knocked over her handlers on more than one occasion. Because of this, whether or not Ralphie runs is at the sole discretion of her handlers, and her run may be canceled if she is unusually nervous or upset.

In 1934, a contest in the Silver & Gold newspaper determined the school mascot to be the buffaloes. For the final football game of the 1934 season, a group of students paid $25 to rent a buffalo calf to stand on the sidelines. Along with a real cowboy caretaker, it took four students to keep the calf, the son of “Killer,” a famed bison at Trails End Ranch in Fort Collins, calm on the sidelines. As far as luck though, Colorado won 7-0 against the University of Denver on Thanksgiving Day.

Prior to 1934, CU athletic teams were referred to as Arapahoes, Big Horns, Frontiersmen, Grizzlies, Hornets, Silver and Gold, Silver Helmets, and Yellow Jackets. The student newspaper decided to sponsor a national contest in the summer of 1934, with a $5 prize to go to the author of the winning selection. Over 1,000 entries arrived from almost every state. Athletic Director Harry Carlson, Graduate Manager Walter Franklin, and Kenneth Bundy of the Silver and Gold were the judges.

Local articles first reported that Claude Bates of New Madrid, Missouri, and James Proffitt of Cincinnati, Ohio, were co-winners for the prize as both submitted “Buffaloes” as their entry. However, a few days later, the newspaper declared Boulder resident A.J. “Andy” Dickson the winner, after a follow-up investigation revealed his submission of “Buffaloes” had actually arrived several days before those of the original winners. Through the years, synonyms which quickly came into use included Bisons, Buffs, Golden Avalanche, Golden Buffaloes, Stampeding Herd, and Thundering Herd.

Live buffaloes made appearances at Colorado games on and off throughout the early years, usually in a pen on the field or sometimes driven around in a trailer. In the 1940s, the school kept a baby buffalo in a special pen at the University Riding Academy. The first named buffalo was "Mr. Chips," who appeared for the first time at the 1957 CU Days Kickoff Rally and was cared for by a men's honorary society.

In 1966 the Student Body Government decided that the University of Colorado Boulder needed a full time live buffalo mascot. Freshman Class Officer Bill Lowery talked to his father who purchased and donated the original "Ralphie" to Colorado in March of 1966. The Student Body Government planned for it to be the job of the Sophomore Class Officer's to take Ralphie to all home football games."

There are a couple versions of the story on how Ralphie became the name of our beloved mascot. One story says the Student Body Government held a "Name the Buffalo" contest and received many entries. One entry was for "Ralph," in honor of the Junior Class president at the time, Ralph Jay Wallace. Another story says that "Ralph" was chosen as her name by the Student Body Government in reference to the noise made when throwing up. What is known for sure is that the original spelling of her name was "Rraalph" bust was changed to "Ralphie" at the ned of the 1967 football season.

Ralphie first appeared on the sidelines of a football game on October 1, 1966. Colorado beat Kansas State 10-0. Around that same time, head football coach Eddie Crowder was approached with the idea of the buffalo charging out on the field before the game, the team closely following. After much discussion, the debut of this great tradition took place on September 16, 1967. Colorado beat Baylor 27-7. Ever since then Ralphie has been leading the way as the football team takes the field.

After the 1967 football season, the Student Body Government realized it was not smart to have it be the tradition for the Sophomore Class Officers to run with Ralphie, and instead it would be better to have trained individuals with large animal experience take the tradition over.

The Ralphie Live Mascot Program has since evolved, becoming a prestigious athletic endeavor for 15 student athletes and buffalo enthusiasts. It is currently under the direction of Program Manager and Coach John Graves and Assistant Coach Taylor Stratton, both were Handlers when they were students at Colorado.

In March 1966, John Lowery, the father of a Colorado freshman from Lubbock, Texas, purchased a six- month old buffalo calf from Sedgewick, Colorado for $150 and donated her to the University. Lowery bought the calf from rancher Art Kashcke. Bill Lowery (John’s son), John McGill, Don Marturano, and Vic Reinking were the original Ralphie Handlers who trained Ralphie I.

Ralphie first attended a game on October 1, 1966 when Colorado played Kansas State. Ralphie did not run onto the field during the game, but stood on the sideline and slept in her trailer. Colorado won the game 10-0. She attended the remaining three home football games that year, standing on the sidelines.

Around that same time, head football coach Eddie Crowder was approached with the idea of the buffalo charging out onto the field before the game, the team closely following. After much discussion, the debut of this great tradition took place on September 16, 1967, when Colorado played Baylor. Colorado beat Baylor 27-7. Ever since then Ralphie has been leading the way as the football team takes the field. Ralphie’s first bowl game was the Bluebonnet Bowl on December 23, 1967, where Colorado beat Miami (FL) 31-21. The five sophomores that ‘handled’ her appointed themselves as the board of directors of a fundraising effort to bring Ralphie to Houston. By selling “Buffalo Stock,” they raised the necessary funds to send Ralphie to Houston, and help cover other costs associated with the program.

In 1976, the President of The Bank of Boulder, Steve Bosley, proposed to Crowder they would do a fundraiser to send Ralphie to the Orange Bowl game against Ohio State. When a reporter asked Bosley how Ralphie would travel to Miami, he explained that the information was top secret since Colorado was concerned that Ohio State students would try to kidnap, or “buffalo-nap” Ralphie. The story of the potential “buffalo-napping” made newspapers nationwide, featuring a picture of Ralphie in full charge with her Handlers. The story stimulated over $25,000 in donations. Ralphie’s trip to the Orange Bowl cost $2,500, and the balance was put into a fund for Ralphie’s future care.

Ralphie I attended every Colorado home football game for 13 years, including all bowl games, and retired at the end of the 1978 season. The team matured too, selecting and training knowledgeable Handlers. The Handlers wore classic western attire while working with Ralphie, and initially would wear their cowboy boots when running with Ralphie. In 1978 the Handlers began to wear athletic shoes when running with Ralphie instead of cowboy boots, finding that it was easier to run faster and guide Ralphie while in athletic shoes.

Colorado’s first Ralphie achieved national celebrity status, and was even kidnapped in 1970 by some Air Force Academy cadets, as well as being named Colorado’s 1971 Homecoming Queen at the height of the anti-establishment era. In 1968, Ralphie also ran for Student Body President with the slogan of “What’s It To You?” She did not win the election.

During the football season Ralphie lived at the Green Meadows Riding Stable, located near present-day East Campus of the University, owned by C.D. “Buddy” Hays. Hays not only cared for and trained Ralphie, he was also the coach of the Colorado Rodeo Club. The Ralphie Handlers would also practice and work with Ralphie in the arena of Green Meadows Riding Stable. In the off-season Ralphie lived on the pastures at Hidden Valley Ranch, where Hays also kept his herd of buffalo, located north of Boulder. Ralphie I lived at Hidden Valley Ranch until 1981 when she moved to the McKenzie Ranch located in North Boulder. Ralphie traveled in a modified steel, brown, 4-horse trailer, donated by Hays. She used a custom harness and headstall made by Ray Cornell out of Boulder, Colorado that lead ropes were attached to allow the Handlers to run with her and help guide her around the field.

Ralphie I also had four calves, the sire of the claves was a large bull at Hidden Valley Ranch named Barney. In May 1971, Ralphie’s first calf unfortunately died during a strong snowstorm. In April 27, 1972, Buffie, named by Colorado students, was born, but died from pneumonia on October 18, 1972. She made one public appearance on October 14, 1972 at the Colorado Homecoming game against Iowa State, standing on the sidelines. On April 16, 1974, her third calf, Streaker, was born, but died from an accident on the ranch in October 1974. Her fourth and final calf was Spirit who was born in August 1975. Ralphie I’s fourth calf, Spirit made her public debut at the 1975 homecoming parade. She ran during the second half run of the CU vs. Missouri game behind Ralphie I. CU beat Missouri 31-20. She was sold to a local rancher shortly after, not having the correct disposition to become the next Ralphie. Ralphie I’s final game was the first half run on November 18, 1978 against Iowa State. Colorado lost 16-20 to Iowa State. Ralphie I died on May 13, 1982, she was 16 years old.

In 1978, when Ralphie I became ill, Steve Bosley organized a search for a new buffalo headed by Buddy Hays. Hays discovered a yearling buffalo named Moonshine, owned by Gregg C. Mackenzie. Bosley, The Bank of Boulder, and Bank Director Robert Confer bought Moonshine from Mackenzie for $1,000 and donated her to Colorado. Since “Ralphie” had become the well-known name of the buffalo, Athletic Director Eddie Crowder made it permanent.
Ralphie II was originally named Moon as she was born during a lunar eclipse. Her mother unfortunately died during labor, and she was raised by ranch hands on the Broken Spear Ranch. In 1976, Mackenzie purchased Moon from Ron Gregory, owner of Broken Spear Ranch, and raised her for his FFA project at Smoky Hill High School in Aurora, Colorado. Her name changed to Moonshine as a more fitting name for a female buffalo.

Mackenzie continued to train Ralphie II and was an assistant coach when Buddy Hays left in 1979, until 1983. Jim Wright, who was a former Handler, took charge over coaching duties from 1979 – 1987. In 1985, Ken Kramer, a Handler from 1980 – 1983, took over the leadership of the program until 1988 after serving as an assistant coach in 1984. Ralphie II lived at Hidden Valley Ranch until 1981, when she moved to the McKenzie Ranch located in North Boulder. Ralphie II moved to several different ranches after living a few years at the McKenzie ranch, ending up at B-J Acres, north of Erie, Colorado in 1985. In 1985 Johnnie Parker took over the program and the training of Ralphie II as well as housed her at the Parker Ranch in Hudson, Colorado.

Ralphie II made her debut on November 18, 1978, the final home game of the season. Standing on the sideline as Ralphie I made her final run around the field for the first half run, Ralphie II took over for the second half run. Colorado lost 16-20 to Iowa State, but the Ralphie Program and name became a tradition. In 1979, Ralphie took a trip to Steamboat Springs, Colorado for the NCAA Skiing Championships to support the school’s ski team, which Colorado won. In 1985, Colorado selected the homecoming theme of “Ralphie goes to Hollywood.” In 1986, Ralphie made the trip to Oklahoma State University (OSU) and ran at the Colorado vs. Oklahoma State game and stayed at OSU’s veterinary clinic. Students from OSU broke into the clinic that night and spray painted “OSU” in orange letters on her side.

Ralphie II was transported around in the same modified steel, brown, 4-horse trailer that Ralphie I used. Initially Ralphie II used the same custom leather harness that Ralphie I used, but used a different headstall. The harness was modified to fit Ralphie II’s bigger size than Ralphie I’s. In 1986 a new harness and headstall was used by Ralphie, this one was built by Carl W. Pike Saddlery out of Boulder, Colorado, the same company who modified the original harness to fit Ralphie II. The new headstall featured the iconic brass “CU” emblem on the front. While always a part of the Athletic Department, it was not until 1987 when Ralphie Handlers first earned a Varsity Letter for their participation.

Ralphie II was also named an honorary member of the Colorado Wildlife Foundation in 1979. In the fall of 1986 Ralphie II was confirmed to be pregnant, but the calf died during the pregnancy. She was expected to retire at the end of the 1987 season. However, at the age of 12, and after serving the Buffs for 10 years, Ralphie II died on September 19, 1987, following a 31-17 Colorado win over Stanford. Ralphie II was buried in Hudson, Colorado.

On June 3, 1985, Chuck Brackenbury was out mending fences on the Joe Miller Ranch outside of Laramie, Wyoming, when he noticed a buffalo giving birth early in the morning. He checked back later that night and discovered the mom had died during labor, but the calf was still alive just standing there all alone. He brought the calf back to his ranch where she was bottle-fed and raised with horses and a goat. She was originally given the name of Buffy. Brackenbury eventually sold her to Bob Renaud, a buffalo rancher in Hudson, Colorado. In September 1987, Johnnie and Shaaron Parker bought the 2-year old buffalo from Renaud and donated her to the University. Parker also trained and housed her. Ralphie III was a lot bigger and faster than her two predecessors, and was given the name Tequila because of her fiery personality.

Ralphie III was brought into action earlier than anticipated, making her debut run on November 7, 1987 at a home game against Missouri. She did attend the two home games after Ralphie II died, but did not run, instead standing on the sidelines. Ralphie III was being trained for the 1988 season, as Ralphie II was to retire following the 1987 season. When Ralphie II died earlier than anticipated, and after only five weeks of training, Ralphie III finished the 1987 season. The Buffs welcomed her with a 27-10 victory over Missouri. On August 26, 1990, Ralphie III traveled to Anaheim, California when Colorado took on Tennessee in the Pigskin Classic. Though she was in attendance, she did not run onto the field since stadium officials did not allowing it. The game ended in a tie, 31-31.

On October 22, 1988 when Colorado played Oklahoma, Ralphie III and a second buffalo named Vicky, led the football team onto the field to start the game. Vicky used Ralphie II’s old harness for the run, but did not run at the start of the second half. Vicky was born in May 1988 in Wyoming. Though she was originally dubbed Ralphie IV, Vicky did not have the temperament to be the next Ralphie and was subsequently sold to buffalo rancher a short time later. CU lost to Oklahoma 14-17.

In 1991, Ted Davis joined the program as a coach. In 1994, Gail Pederson began helping with the Ralphie Program behind the scenes, overseeing all the logistics, scheduling, and planning for the program. Ralphie III was initially transported in the same modified steel, brown, 4-horse trailer that carried Ralphie I and II, but in 1992, a new custom steel, black stock trailer was purchased for Ralphie through a donation from Coors Brewing Company. Initially she used the same harness and headstall that was used by Ralphie II. In 1989 a new harness and headstall was used, again with a large brass “CU” on the front. The new harness and headstall was built by M. King Saddlery out of Boulder, Colorado.

Ralphie III was the first Ralphie to wear the “Ralphie Blanket.” The blanket is a custom-made banner blanket that reads "Go Buffaloes" on one side, and "Beat [the opposing team]" on the other side, such as "Beat CSU." Shaaron Parker maintained the blanket and updated the opposing team’s name each week.

Ralphie III led the Buffaloes on the field in 73 games, including 62 times in Boulder, eight bowl games, two times in Fort Collins, Colorado, and once in Stillwater, Oklahoma. After 11 years of service, she died on January 20, 1998, at the age of 12. Her final game was against Nebraska on November 28, 1997. Colorado lost 24-27.

After Ralphie's death, the Colorado State Senate passed State Resolution 98–10 by Senator Elsie Lacy, a tribute to Ralphie III, the University of Colorado buffalo mascot, stating: "That the University of Colorado and fans alike have lost a most beloved mascot and are saddened by the occasion of Ralphie III's death." Ralphie III was buried in Hudson, Colorado.

Ralphie IV was born in April 1997 on the Flying D Ranch in Gallatin Gateway, Montana, owned by Ted Turner, who donated her to the University of Colorado. While out checking the herd, Todd Traucht the buffalo manager at Flying D, found a newborn abandoned buffalo with her mother nowhere to be found. After checking out the baby buffalo, he found bite marks around her neck from a coyote attack. Being an abandoned buffalo and just surviving a coyote attack, Traucht took her home to be bottle fed and raised by him and his wife Susie. Traucht named her Rowdy due to her excitable nature. She was released back to the herd, but would not bond with them. She was then donated to Colorado as a yearling in April 1998. Johnnie Parker, who trained and housed both Ralphie II and III, brought her back to Colorado from Montana and supervised her early training. 

Parker retired from the program in May 1999, after 13 years of working with the program, and housing and training Ralphie II, III, and IV. Longtime Colorado supporters Dale and Lynn Johnson housed Ralphie for the following year and coach Ted Davis assumed the program duties for the 2000 season. In the summer of 2001, two former Ralphie Handlers and Colorado graduates, Benny Frei and Kevin Priola, took over the program including the housing of Ralphie IV. Ralphie IV was transported in the same custom steel, black stock trailer that carried Ralphie III. She also used the same harness and headstall that was used by Ralphie III. Ralphie IV also continued to wear the “Ralphie Blanket,” being maintained by Priola’s wife, Michelle, who also updated the opposing team’s name each week.

Ralphie IV weighed about 1,100 pounds, over three times her weight when she made her debut against Colorado State University at Mile High Stadium in Denver on September 5, 1998. Colorado won 42-14. Her final game was also against Colorado State University on August 31, 2008. Colorado won that game 38-17. Ralphie IV retired after 10 years of service and lived out her retirement in Henderson, Colorado. She ran at all four Big-12 Conference Championship games that Colorado played in, and traveled to six bowl games. She also made a historic trip to Atlanta, Georgia in 2006 when Colorado played the University of Georgia. In total, she ran at 75 football games during her career. She died on March 19, 2017, due to liver failure. She would have turned 20 years old the next month, a long life for a buffalo. Ralphie IV was buried in Henderson, Colorado.

Ralphie V was born in October 2006 on the Vermejo Park Ranch located in Cimarron, New Mexico, owned by Ted Turner. Like Ralphie IV, Ted Turner donated Ralphie V to the University. As the darkest calf in the herd, she was named "Blackout" by ranch hands. Ralphie Program Directors Benny Frei and Kevin Priola worked with Barney Coppedge, the Bison Manager at Vermejo Park Ranch, to bring Ralphie V to Colorado. Frei continues to house Ralphie V.

Ralphie V came to Colorado in January 2007, and was introduced at "Ralphie’s Salute to a New Era" on November 17, 2007. A little over one-year-old, she weighed in at 450 pounds. Her debut game run came against Eastern Washington on September 6, 2008. Colorado won that game 31-24. Ralphie V is by far the fastest and largest of all the previous Ralphies.

Ralphie V has now reached maturity, weighing approximately 1,200 pounds and standing about 5 feet tall at her hump. Her growing has stopped, but not her speed or strength. She currently completes her run around Folsom Field, nearly two football fields in length, in less than 25 seconds.

At the end of the 2008 season, Priola retired from the program, and John Graves, a former Ralphie Handler, was brought on as the Assistant Director. In the summer of 2015 Graves was promoted to Program Manager, replacing Gail Pederson who retired after 20 years of helping the program. Graves now oversees the day to day activities of the program and the training of the Handlers and Ralphie. In the spring of 2016 Taylor Stratton, also a former Ralphie Handler, was brought on as the new Assistant Coach.

Ralphie V was initially transported in the same custom steel, black stock trailer that carried Ralphie III and IV. In 2012 a new, highly customized aluminum stock trailer was purchased through donations made to the program, which is now used to transport Ralphie V. In 2016, a new black leather harness and headstall was used for Ralphie, built by Bill Jesser Saddlery out of Longmont, Colorado. The new harness kept the iconic brass “CU” located on the front of her headstall, and the leather color was switched from brown to black. The brass CU logo was made by Ray “Butch” Cornell, the son of Ray Cornell who built the first Ralphie harness. The previous harness that she wore was also worn by Ralphie III and IV. Ralphie V wore the “Ralphie Blanket” for her first two season, but never liked to wear it and has not worn it since.

Ralphie V makes many appearances throughout the school year to support Colorado and the University. During football seasons, she attends the Ralphie’s Corral pre-game party on campus. One hour before kickoff, Ralphie stands on the northeast sideline, ready to welcome the Buffs onto the field.

She rarely travels to away games—bowl games excluded—and only when permitted by the rules of the host stadium. Ralphie IV traveled to the September 23, 2006 game against the Georgia Bulldogs along with an ESPN producer and cameraman who documented the trip and aired a special on that weekend's College Gameday. She also traveled to the 2005 Champs Sports Bowl.

She wears a custom-made banner that reads "GO CU" on one side, and "Beat [the opposing team]" on the other side with the CU Logo, such as "Beat CSU." Ralphie travels to games and appearances in a black custom stock trailer emblazoned with her name in gold. Ralphie and her trailer are pulled through the University Hill neighborhood before games on her way to the stadium.

Ralphie is held in a secret location so that she will not be harassed or harmed by the public, keeping her and the public safe from harm.

A tradition of the Ralphie Handler Team is to eat a large team breakfast or lunch at a local diner prior to game-day events.




</doc>
<doc id="2417479" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2417479" title="John P. Daley">
John P. Daley

John P. Daley (born December 5, 1946) is the 11th Ward Democratic Committeeman in Chicago, Illinois, a member of the Cook County Board of Commissioners (11th District), and the Chair of the Cook County Board Audit and Finance Committee. He has previously served in both the Illinois State Senate and the Illinois House of Representatives, as well as being employed as a school teacher. He is the son of former Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley and brother of former Mayor Richard M. Daley, as well as William M. Daley, former White House Chief of Staff under President Obama and United States Secretary of Commerce under President Bill Clinton. Unlike his brothers, he continues to live in the neighborhood the family was raised in.

Daley is also an insurance broker who earns several hundred thousand dollars a year in this second job. In 2005, the City of Chicago endured a hired truck corruption scandal involving bribe money. The case involved a federal investigation and criminal charges to Daley associates.

Daley was born and raised in the Bridgeport neighborhood on Chicago's South Side. He is the second youngest child of former six-term Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley and Eleanor "Sis" Daley. Daley is an alumnus of St. Ignatius College Preparatory School and Loyola University. He was about eight years old when his father was first elected mayor and grew up at 3536 South Lowe with Chicago Police Department patrol cars famously stationed out front at all times, however the Daley children walked to school unescorted.

When John's wedding to Mary Lou Briatta was announced in the April 24, 1975, edition of the "Chicago Tribune", the headline read: "Daley's son to wed hood's daughter" due to his fiancees' father, Louis Briatta, linked to connections with organized crime. The two have three children: John R., Michael, and Christine.

Daley is currently the only son of the former mayor who still lives in Bridgeport.

Daley serves as the Ward Democratic Committeeman for the same 11th Ward that his father and brother served before him in the same capacity. He assumed the position in 1980 from his brother who left the post to become Cook County's State's Attorney. Daley oversees the ward's 50 precincts and their captains as well as assistants year round. Among the duties of the ward committeemen are to determine Democratic endorsed nominees for office in their region. For example, when a United States Congressman such as Bill Lipinski leaves an unexpired term of office, Daley and other Ward Committeemen from affected districts such as Edward M. Burke and Michael Madigan meet to endorse a new candidate such as Dan Lipinski.

John Vitek resigned from the Illinois House of Representatives on September 19, 1985 due to health reasons, which made way for Daley's appointment. In the Illinois House of Representatives, Daley served the 21st District.

In 1989, when his brother Mayor-elect Richard Daley named Timothy F. Degnan to his cabinet, John was able to move from the Illinois House of Representatives into Degnan's seat in the Illinois Senate that Degnan had assumed when Richard Daley went on to become Cook County states attorney nine years earlier. In 1991, the Republican Party controlled the decennial redistricting and the Illinois State Senate districts were drawn to place John Daley into an unfavorable majority Black district. In 1991, Charles Bernardini vacated a seat on the Cook County Board. On February 3, 1992, after a few months of political dealings, Daley was voted in as the new 10th Chicago member of the Board by the other nine. Pamela Munizzi was Daley's successors in both moves from Illinois General Assembly posts.

When John Stroger, who was first elected to the Cook County Board of Commissioners in 1970 and who served three terms as President beginning in 1994, suffered a stroke on March 14, 2006, Daley was mentioned as a likely fill-in who could be trusted until Stroger's son, Todd Stroger, could run to replace his father as President and William Beavers could run for his seat in the November 2006 elections. "Time" described Daley as the second most powerful person on the board at the time. In 2001, "U.S. News & World Report" felt Daley might rise to the presidency of the board himself on more than an interim basis.

On the Cook County Board, he serves as chairman of the Audit and Finance committees. He is a member of the Health & Hospital, Information Technology & Automation, and Rules & Administration committees.

In 1973 when he was 26, Daley first met with controversy involving his insurance career. At that time, the press made an issue of his father's decision to shift some of the city's insurance business to the Evanston, Illinois insurance firm with which John had business ties.

In 2003, Daley confirmed that he earned US$400,000 annually from insurance commissions. In 2005, a hired truck scandal involved a client of Daley who plead guilty in the bribes-for-work scandal. Several of Daley's 11th Ward organization political operatives were charged or accused of being involved in the situation. Daley, however, escaped direct involvement in the ordeal, which was investigated by United States Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald in a federal investigation.

Daley's business causes him many conflicts of interests in the course of business as a Commissioner on the Cook County Board. He frequently recuses himself or abstains from voting on various matters of business because of his extensive insurance network. Several of his clients do millions of dollars of business with the city and some are active in the city's hired truck program. In addition to his own clients, he is an officer in another insurance company that has no city government business.




</doc>
<doc id="2422976" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2422976" title="Raffi Torres">
Raffi Torres

Raphael Torres (born October 8, 1981) is a Canadian retired professional ice hockey left winger. He was drafted by the New York Islanders fifth overall in the 2000 NHL Entry Draft. He played in the National Hockey League (NHL) for the New York Islanders, Edmonton Oilers, Columbus Blue Jackets, Buffalo Sabres, Vancouver Canucks, Phoenix Coyotes and San Jose Sharks.

Torres was drafted out of the Ontario Hockey League (OHL), where he played three seasons with the Brampton Battalion. He was a two-time OHL Second Team All-Star during his junior career. Beginning in 2001–02, he turned professional with the Islanders' American Hockey League (AHL) affiliate. He spent the better part of two seasons in the AHL before the Islanders traded him to the Oilers in 2003. He played five seasons in Edmonton, becoming a full-time NHL player with the club. He recorded career numbers as an Oiler in 2005–06, while also helping them to the Stanley Cup Finals that year. In the 2008 off-season, he was dealt to the Blue Jackets, where he played the better part of two seasons. After a brief stint with the Sabres in 2009–10, he signed with the Canucks and played one year for them where they reached the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals. Torres then signed with the Phoenix Coyotes and then with the San Jose Sharks. Internationally, he represented Canada at the 2001 World Junior Championships, winning a bronze medal.

Torres, a physical, forechecking forward with offensive capabilities, was suspended five times for illegal hits to opponents' heads. He received the fourth-longest suspension in the history of the NHL at the time for his hit to the head of Marian Hossa in Game 3 of the 2012 Western Conference Quarterfinals. In October 2015, Torres received a 41-game (half-season) suspension for an illegal hit on Anaheim player Jakob Silfverberg. This is the longest suspension ever given by the NHL for a hit on another player. Torres retired from the NHL in November 2016.

Torres played major junior with the Brampton Battalion of the Ontario Hockey League (OHL), beginning in 1998–99. He scored at a point-per-game pace in his rookie season with 35 goals and 62 points, second in team-scoring to Jason Spezza. Improving to a team-leading 43 goals and 91 points in his second junior season, he finished seventh in league scoring and was named to the OHL Second All-Star Team. Qualifying for the playoffs, the Battalion were eliminated in the first round. Torres added seven points in the six-game series.

Going into the 2000 NHL Entry Draft as a top prospect, Torres was selected in the first round, fifth overall, by the New York Islanders. The NHL Central Scouting Bureau described him as a player with some forechecking and offensive skills. The Islanders obtained the fifth overall pick used to acquire Torres from the Tampa Bay Lightning in exchange for goaltender Kevin Weekes and defensive prospect Kristian Kudra.

At the time of the draft, Islanders general manager Mike Milbury told reporters Torres' chances of immediately joining the NHL was questionable. Following his first NHL training camp in New York, Torres was returned to Brampton in late September. Playing his third and final OHL season, Torres recorded 33 goals and 70 points over 55 games in 2000–01 and was named to the league's second all-star team again. The Battalion advanced to the second round of the playoffs, where they were eliminated. Torres had 11 points in eight post-season contests.

After turning professional in 2001–02, Torres was assigned to the Islanders' American Hockey League (AHL) affiliate, the Bridgeport Sound Tigers following his second NHL training camp. Over the course of his professional rookie campaign, Torres was called up on four different occasions to the NHL. He received his first call-up to New York on November 24, 2001, making his NHL debut against the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. Skating on the fourth line, he helped the Islanders to a 5–3 win. He notched his first point during a separate call-up on January 4, 2002, assisting on a goal by Mark Parrish during a 4–2 win against the Pittsburgh Penguins. It was his lone point with the Islanders over 15 NHL games that season.

Later that month, he was reassigned to Bridgeport for the remainder of the season. He finished with 20 goals and 30 points over 55 games with the Sound Tigers. Torres became an integral part of Bridgeport's 2002 playoff run to the Calder Cup Finals, where the club lost in five games to the Chicago Wolves. Over 20 post-season games, Torres ranked third in team-scoring with eight goals and 17 points.

Torres began the 2002–03 season in Bridgeport for the second consecutive year. He received four call-ups to New York over the campaign, recording five assists over 17 games. At the NHL trade deadline, he was traded by the Islanders to the Edmonton Oilers, along with forward Brad Isbister, in exchange for defenceman Janne Niinimaa, as well as second-round and fourth-round selections in the 2003 draft.

Following the trade, the Oilers assigned him to their AHL affiliate, the Hamilton Bulldogs, where he played the final 11 games of the regular season. Between Bridgeport and Hamilton, Torres recorded 18 goals and 40 points over 60 games in his second AHL campaign. For the second consecutive year, he appeared in the Calder Cup Finals and lost. He struggled in his second AHL playoff run, managing six goals and an assist over 23 post-season games as the Bulldogs were defeated in the finals by the Houston Aeros in seven games. On August 1, 2003, Torres was re-signed by the Oilers to a two-year contract.

He began the 2003–04 season in the NHL, earning a roster spot with the Oilers. He scored his first NHL goal on October 9, 2003, against goaltender Evgeni Nabokov during a game against the San Jose Sharks. During the campaign, Torres was chosen to represent the Western Conference at the 2004 NHL YoungStars Game. The following month, he missed two contests due to an ankle injury. He recovered to finish the season with 20 goals and 34 points over 80 games. During the 2004–05 NHL lockout, he played with the Edmonton Road Runners (the Oilers' new minor league affiliate) of the AHL and tied for the team-scoring lead with Tony Salmelainen, recording 46 points in 67 games.

With the NHL set to resume play for the 2005–06 season, Torres re-signed with the Oilers to a two-year deal on August 16, 2005. Returning to the Oilers, he scored a career-high 27 goals and 41 points. The Oilers entered the 2006 playoffs as the eighth and final seed in the Western Conference. During the Western Conference Finals against the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, Torres missed games two and three due to the flu. Following his return the lineup, he scored the series-clinching goal in game five, a 2-1 win, to advance the Oilers into the 2006 Stanley Cup Finals. Against the Carolina Hurricanes, the Oilers faced a 3–1 series deficit before forcing a game seven. They were defeated in the deciding contest to lose the Stanley Cup. Torres notched four goals and 11 points over 22 post-season games.

In 2006–07, Torres recorded 15 goals and 34 points. The Oilers did not qualify for the playoffs. In the off-season, they re-signed him to a three-year, $6.75 million deal. The following season, he missed the last 49 games of the campaign to an anterior cruciate ligament injury. Limited to 32 contests, he recorded 11 points.

Torres was traded in the off-season to the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for forward Gilbert Brulé on July 1, 2008. He missed 10 games to begin the 2008–09 campaign with a separated right shoulder. A month later, on December 2, 2008, he underwent surgery for an injured knee and missed an additional 19 games. With an injury-shortened season for the second consecutive year, he recorded 12 goals and 20 points over 51 games. In the 2009 playoffs, Torres added two assists as Columbus was swept in four games by the Detroit Red Wings.

The following season, on March 3, 2010, Torres was traded to the Buffalo Sabres in exchange for defenceman Nathan Paetsch and a second-round draft pick. He had recorded 19 goals and 31 points over 60 games with Columbus before the trade. In 14 games with Buffalo, he notched five assists. The Sabres entered the 2010 playoffs as the third seed in the Eastern Conference. They were eliminated in the first round by the Boston Bruins. Torres' play struggled against the Bruins and he was benched for the final two games of the series. He recorded two assists over four playoff games.

Leaving Buffalo as an unrestricted free agent, Torres signed a one-year, $1 million contract with the Vancouver Canucks on August 24, 2010. He scored his first goal as a Canuck on October 13, in a 4–3 loss to the Anaheim Ducks. The following month, he registered his first NHL career hat trick on November 2 during a game against the Edmonton Oilers. It marked the first time in Oilers history that a former player scored a hat trick against the club. The hat trick also helped Torres earn First Star of the Week honours as the best player in the NHL for the week ending November 7, 2010. Beginning in January 2011, he underwent a 23-game goalless streak, snapped on February 19 in a game against the Dallas Stars.

Later in the season, Torres was suspended four games for a hit to the head of Edmonton Oilers forward Jordan Eberle during a game on April 6, 2011. Canucks general manager Mike Gillis told media that he "strongly disagree[d] with it", while Torres argued that he did not stick out his elbow or leave his feet to make the hit and that Eberle raised his hand in defence of the oncoming check, indicating that it was not a blindside hit. Eberle was not injured on the play. The suspension ended Torres' regular season as the Canucks had two games remaining. He finished with 14 goals and 29 points in 80 games. Returning for game 3 of the opening playoff round against the Chicago Blackhawks, Torres received further scrutiny around the league for a hit on defenceman Brent Seabrook. Although he received a minor penalty on the play, Torres did not receive further suspension from the league. Later in the game, Torres hit Seabrook a second time, taking the defenceman out of the next two games. Vancouver went on to win the series in seven games, before defeating the Nashville Predators and San Jose Sharks en route to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals. In the opening game of the fourth round, Torres scored the game-winner against the Boston Bruins with 19 seconds remaining in regulation. The Canucks eventually lost the series in seven games.

On July 1, 2011, Torres signed a two-year contract worth $3.5 million with the Phoenix Coyotes. He recorded his first goal nearly a month into the 2011–12 season, in a 3–2 shootout loss to the Dallas Stars on October 25, 2011. Torres continued to build a reputation for targeting opponents' heads. He was fined $2,500 for striking Jan Hejda in the head with his forearm in a December 29, 2011, game against the Colorado Avalanche. Two nights later, he struck Minnesota's Nate Prosser in the head after jumping into the hit, earning a two-game suspension.

In an April 17, 2012, game during Phoenix's first round playoff series against Chicago, Torres jumped into a hit that contacted Marian Hossa's head. Hossa was taken from the ice on a stretcher and sent to hospital by ambulance. While Torres was not penalized on the play, the NHL characterized the hit as violating league rules on interference, charging and illegal contact to the head. Citing his previous history, league disciplinarian Brendan Shanahan suspended Torres for 25 games for the hit—tied for the second-longest suspension for an on-ice incident in modern NHL history—sidelining Torres for the rest of the playoffs. The league reduced Torres' suspension to 21 games on appeal over the summer. He served 13 games of the suspension during the Stanley Cup playoffs and then missed the first 8 games of the 2012–13 NHL season, completing his suspension on February 1, 2013.

On April 3, 2013, Torres was traded to the San Jose Sharks for a third-round draft pick in the 2013 draft. On April 16, 2013, Torres made his first shootout attempt in two years against the Los Angeles Kings to give the Sharks the 3-2 victory. Torres scored the game-winning goal in overtime of game two of round one against his former team, the Vancouver Canucks. The Sharks swept the series.

In game one of the second round of the 2013 Stanley Cup playoffs against the Kings, Torres recorded a hit on Jarret Stoll, injuring him. The hit was an illegal check to the head and Torres was a repeat offender; therefore, on May 16, the NHL suspended Torres for the remainder of the second round, which the Sharks lost. On June 20, 2013 the Sharks announced that they had re-signed Torres to a three-year contract. In the second 2013 preseason game against the Anaheim Ducks, Torres collided with Emerson Etem, causing Torres to injure his ACL, and was out until mid-February. Torres returned to the Sharks on February 27 against the Flyers. Torres recorded three points during the Sharks' opening round, seven game loss to the Los Angeles Kings in the 2014 Stanley Cup Playoffs. He then missed the entire 2014–15 NHL season due to injury.

On October 3, 2015, in a preseason game against the Ducks, Torres was assessed a match penalty for a late, illegal check to the head of forward Jakob Silfverberg. The NHL stated the hit would be under review, and, on October 5, Torres was suspended a record 41 games by the league, half of the regular season. Torres forfeited $440,860.29 in salary, which was deposited into the Players' Emergency Assistance Fund. While the record for longest suspension is held by Billy Coutu, who was suspended for life in 1927, Torres holds the distinction of the longest non-lifetime ban, which was previously held by Chris Simon for an incident in 2007. This is also the longest-ever NHL suspension for a hit on another player. Torres did not appeal the suspension and apologized to Silfverberg. Sharks general manager Doug Wilson supported the suspension, saying Torres' hit was "unacceptable and has no place in our game."

After returning from his suspension, the Sharks assigned him to their AHL affiliate, the San Jose Barracuda on a conditioning loan. He never returned to the Sharks. On February 22, 2016, San Jose sent Torres to the Toronto Maple Leafs along with two second round draft picks in exchange for Roman Polak and Nick Spaling.

On August 30, 2016, Torres signed a PTO with the Carolina Hurricanes but was released on October 6. He officially announced his retirement from hockey on November 5, 2016.

Torres represented Canada with the country's under-20 team at the 2001 World Junior Championships in Moscow. He scored three goals and five points over seven games as Canada won the bronze medal. They lost the semi-final to Finland before defeating Sweden 2–1 in the consolation game. Torres scored the game-winning goal against Sweden 37 seconds into overtime.

Torres was born in Toronto, Ontario, Canada to Juan and Anna Torres. His father emigrated from Mexico City with his family in the early 1970s, while his mother is from Lima, Peru, and is of Greek, Italian, and Serbian ancestry. Juan Torres worked several jobs to support his family, including car inspecting and assembly for General Motors, newspaper delivery for the "Toronto Sun", construction and general contracting. Anna Torres stayed at home until after Torres and his siblings grew up, at which point she became a personal trainer. The two met in Toronto. At one point, Torres' father became unemployed and the family applied to the Toronto Maple Leafs Foundation to financially support Torres' hockey career. Torres is the second youngest among his three brothers.

Torres is married to Gianna and they are residents of Whitchurch-Stouffville. He has two children. On Halloween 2011, Torres' costume prompted criticism as he and his wife donned blackface dressed up as a rapper Jay-Z and Beyoncé.


</doc>
<doc id="2423186" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2423186" title="Jake Long">
Jake Long

Jake Edward Long (born May 9, 1985) is a former American football offensive tackle. He played college football at Michigan, where he was a two-time consensus All-American, and was drafted by the Miami Dolphins first overall in the 2008 NFL Draft. He also played for the St. Louis Rams, Atlanta Falcons and Minnesota Vikings.

In high school, Long was the first player in his high school's history to earn all-state "Dream Team" (all-class state team) honors in football from the "Detroit News". He was a two-time first-team All-Metro League player in both basketball and football, where he was honored both on offense and defense. In baseball, he was a two-time second-team All-Metro League selection. In both basketball and football, he led his team to regular and post season success that had not been seen in many years.

At the University of Michigan, he redshirted for a year and then became a starter at offensive tackle for the football team in the third game of his redshirt freshman season. He earned second-team All-Big Ten Conference recognition and Rivals.com Freshman All-American recognition. In 2006 and 2007, he earned Big Ten Offensive Lineman of the Year and first-team All-Big Ten recognition. In 2006, he was an Outland and Lombardi Trophy watch lists selection and in 2007 he was a finalist for both awards. He was a consensus first-team All-American in 2006 and 2007.

After being drafted by Miami, he became an immediate starter and started every game that the team played. At the conclusion of his rookie season, he was selected to numerous All-Rookie teams and was a substitute Pro Bowl selection. Long followed up on a successful rookie season by earning Pro Bowl roster spots in 2009, 2010 and 2011.

Long was born in Lapeer, Michigan, the son of John and Denise Long. He attended Lapeer East High School, where he was the first player in his high school's history to earn all-state "Dream Team" (all-class state team) honors in football. In baseball, he played first base.

He played basketball, baseball and football in high school. Long was a 2001 Flint, Michigan All-Metro League lineman on both sides of the ball as a defensive end and offensive lineman. And in Lapeer East's final game of the 2001 season, Long rushed for three touchdowns. As a junior that football season, he was listed at , . In Long's first start as a varsity basketball player on December 4, 2001, he led all scorers although he only scored one first half point. That season, he helped lead Lapeer East to an unbeaten 14–0 Metro League record (17–3) overall as they prepared for the Michigan High School Athletic Association (MHSAA) tournament. It was the first unbeaten Metro League season by any team since 1989 and Lapeer East's first unbeaten season since 1980. Long was an All-Metro league first team selection, but his team lost in the 2002 Class A district semifinal on the road. By the end of the basketball season, he was listed at , . As a junior, he was a second-team All-Metro League baseball selection as an infielder. By the end of his junior year, he had already set the school home run record in baseball and was the fifth-ranked high school football prospect in the state of Michigan (future Michigan teammate and co-captain LaMarr Woodley was number one).

After his junior year of high school, he attended the University of Michigan football camp, which ran from June 16–21. At the conclusion of the camp, Michigan Wolverines football head coach Lloyd Carr offered him a scholarship as an offensive tackle. Long, who was a lifelong Michigan Wolverines fan, responded with a verbal commitment. At the time, Long weighed and Michigan hoped he would bulk up to by the time he arrived. Long had made official visits to Michigan, Michigan State, Notre Dame, Ohio State and Purdue.

In his 2002 senior season, Long helped lead Lapeer East to their first season opener win since 1995 and their first state playoff appearance since 1993. That season, the football team set a school record by posting a nine-game winning streak, which started after an October 6, 2001 loss the prior year. The team achieved its first state playoff win in its 27-year history that season. The team's 9–2 record was the best in school history, and Long was again chosen as an All-Metro League selection on both offense and defense. That season, he became the first Lapeer East player selected to the All-state Dream Team in 2002. Although he was All-State as a lineman, Long often lined up at fullback and accumulated four career touchdowns. He finished the season as the number two football prospect in the state behind Woodley according to the "Detroit News". Long led the basketball team to a second consecutive undefeated Metro League championship season, which was the first repeat league champion since 1996 and Lapeer East's first repeat championship since 1982. Long was again first-team All-Metro League, and he was selected as an honorable mention 2003 Associated Press Class A All-State basketball player. Long was again a second-team All-Metro League selection as a first baseman. Following his senior season, Long was selected to play in the 23rd annual Michigan High School All-Star Football Game on July 26 at Michigan State University.

Long accepted an athletic scholarship to attend the University of Michigan, where he played for head coach Lloyd Carr's Michigan Wolverines football team from 2003 to 2007. As a freshman, Long was on the 2003 Michigan Wolverines football team roster, but Tony Pape and Adam Stenavich were the starting offensive tackles. He was redshirted for the year as he bulked up to . Long traveled with the team to the 2004 Rose Bowl, but did not play in the game.

On June 16, 2004, following his freshman year, he was hospitalized in an intensive-care unit for smoke inhalation injuries when a house rented by nine Michigan Wolverine players caught fire. Long, sleeping in his bedroom on the second floor of the house, awoke to the sound of fire alarms. He attempted to exit his room through the door, but was forced back by smoke. Long then knocked out the screen of a window and jumped out of the building. Covered in soot, Long had escaped the fire, landing two stories below on a roommate's parked car. Later at the hospital, Long underwent procedures that required tubes be put down his throat to suction black phlegm from his lungs. The tubes also performed Long's breathing while he lay unconscious for the first few days. He was released from the University of Michigan Medical Center and was able to spend Father's Day (June 20) back in Lapeer.
As a sophomore member of the 2004 Michigan Wolverines football team, Long competed with senior Dave Schoonover and juniors Mike Kolodzieg, Rueben Riley, and Mike Barishaj for the starting position vacated by the graduated Pape. Long impressed the coaches by playing through a turf toe injury. The battle came down to him and Kolodzieg. Long made his Michigan debut on September 4, 2004, in a 43–10 victory over Miami University. He made the travel squad, but he did not play against Notre Dame in the Michigan – Notre Dame rivalry game the following week at Notre Dame Stadium. Kolodzieg started the first two games, but Michigan averaged only 85.5 yards rushing, which ranked 94th nationally among 117 Division I teams. Long became a starter in the third game on September 18 against the San Diego State Aztecs football team. Over the course of the season, he started eight games and Kolodzieg started 4 at right offensive tackle. Kolodzieg also started one game at left tackle. A week after Long was moved into the starting lineup, David Baas was moved from left offensive guard—where he had been a 2003 second team All-American—to center so that Leo Henige, Jr. could enter the starting lineup. After the move, Baas was the co-Rimington Trophy winner that season. The team finished the season as the 2004 Big Ten Conference Co-Champions and were awarded the Big Ten Conference's Bowl Championship Series Bowl game bid. By the time Michigan was preparing for the 2005 Rose Bowl, the team was averaging 156.18 rushing yards per game, which ranked 56th in the nation. Long earned a second team All-Big Ten Conference recognition from the coaches, while linemates guard Matt Lentz, tackle Adam Stenavich and tight end Tim Massaquoi were first-team selections. Baas was Big Ten Offensive Lineman of the Year. Long also received honorable mention All-Big Ten recognition from the media. Long and teammates Chad Henne and Mike Hart were named to Rivals.com's 2004 Freshman All-America first team. Long had post-season shoulder surgery and missed 2005 spring practice. In fact, because of the large number of injured players, the team canceled the culminating spring practice intrasquad scrimmage game and instead held an open practice in which players participated in drills.

In August 2005, Long suffered an ankle injury and was sidelined as the 2005 Michigan Wolverines football team's season began. The injury had been caused in training camp when he was zone blocking alongside center Mark Bihl, who got tangled up with nose tackle Gabe Watson. The two fell against the outside of Long's leg and rolled over it. The injury required surgery. Long did not return to the lineup until October 22 on the third possession against the Iowa Hawkeyes. He was the lead blocker on the game-winning overtime touchdown. He started the game the subsequent week against the Northwestern Wildcats. Two weeks later, following a bye week, Long got injured during the first half against the Indiana Hoosiers, and his foot was put in a protective boot. The second foot injury was expected to end his season. He appeared in the subsequent rivalry game against the Ohio State Buckeyes, and during the first play, he opposed Bobby Carpenter and Carpenter got a broken leg. After the game, Long appeared to need immediate surgery, which would have caused him to miss the 2005 Alamo Bowl. By the time of the game on December 28, though, he was ready to play. As the team prepared for 2006 spring practice, the left-handed Long was moved from right tackle to left tackle where he would be protecting the blindside of right-handed quarterbacks.
Long entered the season for the 2006 Michigan Wolverines football team listed on numerous preseason conference and national teams as well as watchlists for awards such as the Outland Trophy and Lombardi Trophy. He was on the preseason Outland Trophy watch list along with Levi Brown, Joe Thomas, Justin Blalock, and Herbert Taylor. Long was considered the heart of the Michigan offense, and his teammates voted the redshirt junior to be a co-captain along with senior Woodley. Before the season started, Carr replaced offensive coordinator Terry Malone with Mike DeBord who had previously been offensive coordinator from 1997–1999. Following the 7–5 2005 season which was the worst Michigan season since 1984's 6–6-year, there was pressure on Carr to turn things around and he sought a lighter, faster and better conditioned team. During the offseason, Long reduced his weight from to to improve his agility, speed and conditioning. Under the new coordinator and with fitter athletes, the offensive scheme was shifted to concentrate on the zone blocking system. The system was similar to the one used by the Denver Broncos when they won back-to-back Super Bowls and by the Atlanta Falcons to help Warrick Dunn achieve a career-high in rushing yards while the team led the NFL in rushing yards in consecutive seasons. By mid-November, Michigan had flourished under the new system with an 11–0 record, and some of the credit for the success was attributed to Long, the team captain and offensive leader. Long was recognized as a first-team All-Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media and was selected as the Big Ten Offensive Lineman of the Year. Long was also part of a Michigan record-setting three American Football Coaches Association (AFCA) All-America Team selections along with Woodley and Leon Hall. Long was a consensus (meaning at least half of the recognized lists, which are AP, AFCA, FWAA, TSN, and the WCFF selected him) 2006 College Football All-America Team first-team selection by Associated Press (AP), AFCA, Football Writers Association of America (FWAA), Walter Camp Football Foundation, "Sports Illustrated", "Pro Football Weekly", ESPN, CBS Sports, Rivals.com, Scout.com. He was a second-team All-American selection by the "College Football News". Long was the first offensive lineman who was a Michigan high school graduate selected to the first-team by the FWAA since Paul Seymour was selected to the 1972 College Football All-America Team. Long was believed to be a likely mid to high first round selection if he had chosen to declare himself eligible for the 2007 NFL Draft, but he chose to use his last year of collegiate eligibility and stay for a fifth year. His decision to stay was what convinced Hart to stay in college. Michigan opposed the 2006 USC Trojans football team in the 2007 Rose Bowl and the offensive line that had surrendered 18 quarterback sacks in the first 12 games, allowed 6 in the 32–18 loss to finish the season 11–2. Long became a member of senior honorary society Order of Angell.
Long was a co-captain of the 2007 Michigan Wolverines football team, and he again began the season on the Outland Trophy and Rotary Lombardi Award watch lists. He was elected to serve as tri-captain along with Hart and Shawn Crable. Entering the season, the team was picked by the Big Ten media members to win the conference. The season was eagerly anticipated with returning seniors Long, Hart and Chad Henne in key roles, but the season quickly began to fall apart when the team lost to the two-time defending FCS champion Appalachian State Mountaineers in the opening game. The loss put Long in a position of having to defend his coach and teammates to ESPN and the nation. In the second game, the team suffered its worst defeat since 1968 and its first consecutive home losses to start the season since 1959. This presented a leadership challenge to Long as team captain. As Michigan won its next eight games, Long was described in the press as the team's most valuable player and an offensive lineman who should be considered for the Heisman Trophy since he was likely to be the first overall pick in the NFL draft. In early November, Long was named one of four finalists (along with Glenn Dorsey, Chris Long, James Laurinaitis) for the Lombardi award that Woodley had won the year before. He was named as an Outland Trophy finalist along with Dorsey and Anthony Collins. When the win streak ended the week before his final Michigan–Ohio State game, he accepted the blame on behalf of the offensive line although the teams offensive stars were injured. At the conclusion of the Big Ten Conference schedule, he was selected again as first-team All-Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media and as the Big Ten Offensive Lineman of the Year. Long, Michael Crabtree and Darren McFadden were the only unanimous offensive 2007 College Football All-America Team selections by AP, AFCA, FWAA, Walter Camp, "Sporting News", "Sports Illustrated", "Pro Football Weekly", ESPN, CBS Sports, "College Football News", Rivals.com, and Scout.com. In coach Carr's final game before retirement and Long's final game as a Wolverine, the team won the 2008 Capital One Bowl against the Florida Gators in a game that included an attempted Jake Long tackle eligible screen pass. Long declined an invitation to participate in the 2008 Senior Bowl. From February 21–24, 2008, Long attended the NFL Combine, where he excelled.

Regarded as the top offensive tackle available in the 2008 NFL Draft, Long drew comparisons to Ryan Tucker. His 37 repetitions of 225 pounds on the bench press tied Vernon Gholston for the highest total at the 2008 NFL Combine. In addition to being one of eight offensive tackles drafted in the first round that year, Long was only the third offensive tackle ever to be taken with the first overall pick in the NFL Draft, after Hall of Famer Orlando Pace (1997, a 5-time All-Pro and All-Decade team for the 2000s) and Hall of Famer Ron Yary (1968, an 8-time All-Pro and All-Decade team for the 1970s). The Dolphins drafted Long's college teammate, quarterback Chad Henne, in the second round of the draft with the 57th overall pick.

More than two weeks before the 2008 NFL Draft, the Miami Dolphins, who owned the right to make the first selection in the draft determined that they wanted to negotiate with Long to be their pick and met with Tom Condon, Long's sports agent. On April 22, 2008, in advance of the April 26 and 27 draft, Long agreed to a five-year, $57.75 million deal with the Miami Dolphins. The deal included $30 million in guaranteed money and made Long the first overall pick in the 2008 NFL Draft. This made him, as of that date, the highest paid offensive lineman in NFL history. At Dolphins minicamp on May 2, Long was assigned number 79 and he thought he would have to negotiate with Drew Mormino for the number 77 that he had worn since high school. However, after he failed his physical exam, Mormino was released from the team, and before training camp Long was assigned number 77.

Long's ascension with the Dolphins was part of an effort to overhaul the offensive line that had allowed 42 sacks and produced the 29th-rated of 32 offenses the previous season. The Dolphins hired new coach Tony Sparano and employed Bill Parcells as Executive Vice President in charge of football operations. Long was immediately slated to play left tackle. He was the only rookie expected to be a starter for the 2008 Miami Dolphins. According to the "South Florida Sun-Sentinel", at the end of training camp, Long was one of three rookies listed as first-string on the depth chart.
Long was nominated for Rookie of the Week in the tenth week of the 2008 season, but lost out to Broncos WR Eddie Royal. Other players who were nominated for rookie of the week that same week were Matt Ryan, Benjarvus Green-Ellis, and Joe Flacco. At the end of the season, Long was selected to nine All-rookie teams by Pro Football Writers Association, Draft.com, Draftsinders.com, Draftseason.com, Sports Network, Fannation, Sporting News, Scout.com and Ourlads Scouting Service. On January 20, 2009, Long was selected to the 2009 Pro Bowl, replacing Jason Peters for the AFC's squad. Long gave up just 2.5 sacks his rookie season, compared to the 11.5 allowed by Peters in 2008.

In 2009, Long yielded only 4 sacks and was ranked the second best offensive tackle. He was selected as a starter for the 2010 Pro Bowl. He was not selected to the first team All-Pro losing out to Ryan Clady, who gave up 8 sacks, and Joe Thomas, who is ranked the best offensive tackle in the NFL. Long was selected to the second team All-Pro and was named a starter for the AFC Pro Bowl. Long joins Richmond Webb as the only Dolphins offensive tackles to be named starters in the Pro Bowl and is the first Dolphins offensive lineman to be named to back-to-back Pro Bowls since Webb played in seven straight from 1990 to 1996. Long did not participate in the game due to injury and was replaced on the Pro Bowl roster by D'Brickashaw Ferguson. The following season Long was named as a starter for the 2011 Pro Bowl, while Ferguson was named as a reserve.

During the 2011 NFL season, Long's 61 games started streak snapped when he suffered a back ailment. Subsequently, he was placed on injured reserve with a torn right biceps for the final week of the season. The roster move came one day after he was selected to the 2012 Pro Bowl. He was named as a Pro Bowl starter for the third consecutive season. He missed the Pro Bowl for the 2011 season. However, he was named the Dolphins' Ed Block Courage Award recipient. In addition, he was listed as the 59th player on the NFL Top 100 Players of 2012.

During the 2013 NFL offseason, Long became a free agent. He received two contract offers: an extension from the Miami Dolphins, and a contract from the Rams. On March 17, 2013, Long signed a four-year, $36 million contract with the Rams. At the October 6, 2013, contest against the Jacksonville Jaguars, the Rams gave the first 15,000 fans to arrive at the game free Jake Long figurines. On December 22, 2013, Long sustained a torn ACL against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and he missed the last game of the season. On October 26, 2014, Long sustained another torn ACL against the Kansas City Chiefs and he missed the rest of the season. He was released along with center Scott Wells on the eve of free agency on March 9, 2015. Long was coming off of back-to-back seasons with torn ACLs and was about to cost the Rams $10 million against the salary cap.

On September 15, 2015, Long signed a one-year, $1,568,750 contract with the Atlanta Falcons. He played 11 snaps for the Falcons in the 2015 season.

On July 26, 2016, Long agreed on a 1-year deal with the Baltimore Ravens. Due to concerns over his surgically repaired knee, the Ravens requested that Long sign an injury waiver. Long declined the request and never signed the contract, making him a free agent.

On October 11, 2016, Long was signed by the Vikings. He suffered a torn achilles against the Redskins in Week 10 and was placed on injured reserve on November 15, 2016.

On April 24, 2017, Long announced his retirement from the NFL.

After surviving the fire during his second year of college, Long got a tattoo of Saint Joseph on his right bicep. His aunt had placed a card of the saint under his pillow while he was in the hospital in intensive care. He also has a tattoo of the family name on his other arm. Long has two brothers: John and Joseph ("Joe"). Joe Long attended Wayne State University. Jake Long married his college sweetheart, Jacqueline Laurian, on March 10, 2012.



</doc>
<doc id="2430486" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2430486" title="Battle of Great Bridge">
Battle of Great Bridge

The Battle of Great Bridge was fought December 9, 1775, in the area of Great Bridge, Virginia, early in the American Revolutionary War. The victory by colonial Virginia militia forces led to the departure of Royal Governor Lord Dunmore and any remaining vestiges of British power over the Colony of Virginia during the early days of the conflict.

Following increasing political and military tensions in early 1775, both Dunmore and colonial rebel leaders recruited troops and engaged in a struggle for available military supplies. The struggle eventually focused on Norfolk, where Dunmore had taken refuge aboard a Royal Navy vessel. Dunmore's forces had fortified one side of a critical river crossing south of Norfolk at Great Bridge, while rebel forces had occupied the other side. In an attempt to break up the rebel gathering, Dunmore ordered an attack across the bridge, which was decisively repulsed. Colonel William Woodford, the Virginia militia commander at the battle, described it as "a second Bunker's Hill affair".

Shortly thereafter, Norfolk, at the time a Loyalist center, was abandoned by Dunmore and the Tories, who fled to navy ships in the harbor. Rebel-occupied Norfolk was destroyed on January 1, 1776 in an action begun by Dunmore and completed by rebel forces.

Tensions in the British Colony of Virginia were raised in April 1775 at roughly the same time that the hostilities of the American Revolutionary War broke out in the Province of Massachusetts Bay with the Battles of Lexington and Concord. John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, the royal governor of Virginia, had dismissed the colonial legislative assembly, the House of Burgesses, who then established a provisional assembly in Virginia Conventions. The Burgesses authorized existing and newly raised militia troops to arm themselves, leading to a struggle for control of the colony's military supplies. Under orders from Lord Dunmore, British forces removed gunpowder from the colonial storehouse in the capital of Williamsburg, causing a confrontation between royal and militia forces. Although the incident was resolved without violence, Dunmore, fearing for his personal safety, left Williamsburg in June 1775 and placed his family on board a Royal Navy ship. A small British fleet then took shape at Norfolk, a port town whose merchants had significant Loyalist (Tory) tendencies. The threat posed by the British fleet may also have played a role in minimizing Whig activity in the town.

Incidents continued between rebels on one side and loyalists (Tories) on the other until October, when Dunmore had acquired enough military support to begin operations against the rebellious colonists. General Thomas Gage, the British commander-in-chief for North America, had ordered small detachments of the 14th Regiment of Foot to Virginia in response to pleas by Dunmore for military help. These troops began raiding surrounding counties for rebel military supplies on October 12. This activity continued through the end of October, when a small British ship ran aground and was captured by rebels during a skirmish near Hampton. Navy boats sent to punish the townspeople were repulsed by colonial militia in a brief gunfight that resulted in the killing and capture of several sailors. Dunmore reacted to this event by issuing a proclamation on November 7 in which he declared martial law, and offered to emancipate colonist slaves in Virginia willing to serve in the British Army. The proclamation alarmed rebel and loyalist slaveholders alike, concerned by the idea of armed former slaves and the potential loss of their property. Nevertheless, Dunmore was able to recruit enough slaves to form the Ethiopian Regiment, as well as raising a company of Tories he called the Queen's Own Loyal Virginia Regiment (later absorbed into the Queen's Rangers in 1776). These local forces supplemented the two companies of the 14th Foot, and in addition to the naval forces, that were the sole British military presence in the colony. This successful recruiting drive prompted Dunmore to write on November 30, 1775 that he would soon be able to "reduce this colony to a proper sense of their duty."

Lord Dunmore had, on arrival in Norfolk, ordered the fortification of the bridge across the Elizabeth River, about south of Norfolk in the village of Great Bridge. The bridge formed a natural defense point since it was on the only road leading south from Norfolk toward North Carolina, it was bordered on both sides by the Great Dismal Swamp, and the access to the bridge on both sides was via narrow causeways. Dunmore sent 25 men of the 14th Foot to the bridge, where they erected a small stockade fort they called Fort Murray on the Norfolk side of the bridge. They also removed the bridge planking to make crossing it more difficult. The fort was armed with two cannons and several smaller swivel guns. The men of the 14th were augmented by small companies from the Ethiopian and Queen's Own regiments, bringing the garrison size to between 40 and 80 men.

In response to Dunmore's proclamation, Virginia's assembly ordered its militia troops to march on Norfolk. William Woodford, the colonel leading the 2nd Virginia Regiment, advanced toward the bridge with his regiment of 400 and about 100 riflemen from the Culpeper Minutemen. On December 2 they arrived at the bridge and set up a camp across the bridge from the British fort. Upon their arrival the British set about destroying buildings near the fort to ensure a clear field of fire. Woodford was at first unwilling to assault the British position, thinking he lacked enough cannons to overcome an overly generous estimate of the garrison's strength. He therefore began entrenching his position, while more and more militia companies arrived from the surrounding counties and North Carolina. Some cannons eventually arrived with a contingent of North Carolina men, but they were useless because they lacked mountings and carriages. Woodford also became concerned when he heard rumors that a large number of Scottish Highlanders had joined Dunmore's forces. The rumors were partly true: the Highlanders were in fact 120 families, but few of the men were skilled at arms. By December 8, the force in the militia camp had grown to nearly 900, with more than 700 fit for duty.
Dunmore learned that the colonial militia had acquired cannons, but was unaware they were inoperable. Concerned for the safety of the garrison, he decided an attack on their position was necessary. His plan called for a diversionary attack by the Ethiopian companies of the garrison at a spot downriver from the bridge to draw the militia's attention, while the garrison, reinforced by additional troops from Norfolk, would attack across the bridge in the early morning light.

Dunmore's best intelligence had informed him that the rebel forces numbered about 400. On the night and morning of December 8 and 9 Captain Samuel Leslie led reinforcements down to Fort Murray, arriving around 3:00 am. Upon his arrival he learned that the Ethiopian detachment intended for the diversion was not in the fort. They had been dispatched on a routine deployment to another nearby crossing, and Dunmore had failed to send orders ensuring their availability for the operation. Leslie decided to proceed with the attack anyway. After resting his troops until a little before dawn, he sent men out to replace the bridge planking. Once this was finished, Captain Charles Fordyce led a company of 60 grenadiers across the bridge. They briefly skirmished with militia sentries, raising the alarm in the camp beyond the entrenchments. Fordyce's men were then joined by a company of navy gunners who had been brought along to operate the field artillery for the attack, while the Tory companies arrayed themselves on the Norfolk side of the bridge.

The militia leadership in the camp at first thought the early skirmishing was a typical morning salute, and paid it little heed. Shortly after reveille, the severity of the alarm became apparent. While the camp mobilized, a militia company numbering about sixty prepared for the British advance behind the earthworks. They carefully withheld fire until the grenadiers, advancing with bayonets fixed, were within , and then unleashed a torrent of fire on the British column. Fordyce, leading the column, went down in a hail of musket fire just steps from the earthworks along with many of the men in the front ranks. The British advance dissolved as the militia musket fire continued; about half of Fordyce's force was killed, and many were injured. The navy gunners provided covering fire as they retreated back across the bridge, but their small cannons made no impression on the earthworks.
Colonel Woodford had by this time organized the forces in the rebel camp, and they marched out to face the British. After an inconsequential exchange of musket fire at long range, Woodford sent the riflemen of the Culpeper Minutemen off to the left. From this position the riflemen, whose weapons had a much longer range than muskets, began to fire on the British position on the far side of the bridge. The navy gunners, with the only weapons the British had available to contest the riflemen at that range, were now out of position, and were also being threatened by the large militia force approaching the earthworks. They spiked their guns and retreated across the bridge, and Captain Leslie ordered his men to retreat into Fort Murray. In some 25 minutes, Dunmore's attempt to stop the rebel buildup near Norfolk had been emphatically turned back.

Following a truce to permit the British to remove their dead and wounded, the Tory forces sneaked out in the night to return to Norfolk. Captain Fordyce was buried with full military honors by the rebels near the site of the battle. Casualty estimates ranged from Dunmore's official report of 62 killed or wounded to an escaped patriot's report that the British losses totaled 102, excluding militia casualties. The only claimed rebel casualty was one man with a slight wound to the thumb. Colonel William Woodford, reporting on the 2nd Virginia Regiment's service at the battle, wrote in a letter published in Purdie's "Virginia Gazette", December 15, 1775: "This was a second Bunker's Hill affair, in miniature; with this difference, that we kept our post, and had only one man wounded in the hand."

The Virginia militia forces were then reinforced by the arrival of troops from North Carolina under Colonel Robert Howe. Dunmore blamed Leslie for his decision to attack without the accompanying diversion, although the outcome of the battle may not have been different even with the diversion, given the disparity in force sizes. In the following days, Dunmore and his Tory supporters took refuge on ships of the Royal Navy, and Norfolk was occupied by the victorious rebel forces. The danger Dunmore posed to the rebel cause, however, had not been eliminated. General George Washington, commander-in-chief of the Continental Army and a Virginian who knew Dunmore well, wrote a letter to Charles Lee in late December, warning of continued danger despite Dunmore's flight to the navy. He told Lee that "if that Man is not crushed before Spring, he will become the most formidable Enemy America has", and that "nothing less than depriving him of life or liberty will secure peace to Virginia."

After a series of escalations over the rebel's refusal to allow provisions to be delivered to the overcrowded vessels, Dunmore and Commodore Henry Pellow decided to bombard the town. On January 1, 1776, Norfolk was destroyed in action begun by Royal Navy ships and their landing parties, but completed by rebel troops that continued to loot and burn the former Tory stronghold.

Lord Dunmore occupied Portsmouth in February 1776, and used it as a base for raiding operations until late March, when General Charles Lee successfully forced him back to the fleet. After further raiding operations in the Chesapeake, Dunmore and the British fleet left for New York City in August 1776. Dunmore never returned to Virginia.

A highway marker was placed by the state of Virginia in 1934 near the battle site. In response to construction threats to the battlefield, local citizens organized in 1999 to preserve the area.






</doc>
<doc id="2431431" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2431431" title="Hurricane Alice (December 1954)">
Hurricane Alice (December 1954)

Hurricane Alice is the only known Atlantic hurricane to span two calendar years and one of only two named Atlantic tropical cyclones, along with Tropical Storm Zeta of 2005, to do so. The twelfth tropical cyclone and the eighth hurricane of the 1954 Atlantic hurricane season, Alice developed on December 30, 1954 from a trough of low pressure in the central Atlantic Ocean in an area of unusually favorable conditions. The storm moved southwestward and gradually strengthened to reach hurricane status. After passing through the Leeward Islands on January 2, 1955, Alice reached peak winds of 90 mph (150 km/h) before encountering cold air and turning to the southeast. It dissipated on January 6 over the southeastern Caribbean Sea.

Alice produced heavy rainfall and moderately strong winds across several islands along its path. Saba and Anguilla were affected the most, with total damage amounting to $623,500 (1955 USD). There was an earlier hurricane named Alice in the season. Operationally, lack of definitive data prevented the U.S. Weather Bureau from declaring the system a hurricane until January 2. It received the name "Alice" in early 1955, though re-analysis of the data supported extending its track to the previous year, resulting in two tropical cyclones of the same name in one season.

A cold front moved southeastward from the East Coast of the United States on December 23, 1954, and passed over Bermuda two days later. A strong anticyclone developed behind the cold front, and on December 26 a trough extended southward from the cold front. The anticyclone moved southeastward as the trough and cold front moved eastward. The trough gradually decelerated as high pressures altered the upper level flow to that of an easterly flow. Convection increased over the trough as it moved over relatively warm waters, about 1 °C above normal, and began undergoing tropical cyclogenesis after a circulation began to develop along the northern portion of the trough. The system continued to organize as it moved to the west, and based on three ship reports confirming a closed circulation, it is estimated the system developed into a tropical depression on December 31 while located 770 miles (1245 km) east-northeast of Barbuda in the Lesser Antilles.

With a narrow ridge of high pressure to its north, the depression moved west-southwestward. Atmospheric conditions were unusually favorable for the time of the year due to the ridge of high pressure preventing cold air from reaching the central Atlantic Ocean. This allowed the depression to intensify into a tropical storm later on December 30, based on direct observations. There were few direct observations for the following days, but it is estimated the storm intensified into a hurricane on December 31 while located about 475 miles (770 km) east-northeast of Barbuda. On January 1, 1955, a ship within 10 miles (16 km) of the center reported hurricane-force winds and a pressure of 987 mbar. Based on this report and several other ship reports, the system was recognized as a tropical low by the San Juan Weather Bureau Office. The hurricane continued to the southwest, and entered the Caribbean Sea on January 2 after passing between Saint Martin and Saint Barthélemy. A portion of the eyewall moved over Saint Martin and Saba. Based on near-hurricane-force winds from the affected islands, an information bulletin named the system as Hurricane Alice while in the northeastern Caribbean Sea. Throughout its track, Alice was a small tropical cyclone with a diameter of only around 60 miles (95 km).

Reconnaissance aircraft flew into Hurricane Alice on January 3 and confirmed the existence of the tropical cyclone by reporting winds between 60 and 65 mph (95 to 105 km/h) and a warm core center. It is estimated Alice continued to intensify as it tracked southwestward in the Caribbean Sea, and attained peak winds of 80 mph (130 km/h) while located about 95 miles (150 km) west-northwest of Montserrat. While near its peak the hurricane developed a ring of convection around its eye, and Alice maintained peak winds for about 24 hours until cold air from the north weakened it. Extratropical cyclogenesis occurred north of Bermuda on January 3, which weakened the high pressure system to the north of Alice and turned the flow in the Caribbean Sea to that of cold northwesterly winds. Alice turned to the southeast on January 4 and weakened to a tropical storm shortly thereafter. Convection gradually became disorganized, and after weakening to a tropical depression on January 5, Alice dissipated on January 6 while located about 100 miles (160 km) west-northwest of Grenada.

Subsequent to the confirmation of the existence of Hurricane Alice, the U.S. Weather Bureau Office in San Juan, Puerto Rico warned the islands of the northern Lesser Antilles to prepare for strong winds and rough seas. Hurricane Alice produced moderate to strong winds across the islands, peaking at 81 mph (130 km/h) in Saint Barthélemy and 75 mph (120 km/h) in Saba. The hurricane dropped moderate to heavy rainfall across several islands, including a peak of 11.27 inches (286 mm) in 48 hours recorded at Saba. Due to its small size, only a few islands received significant effects from the hurricane. Saint-Barthélemy, Saba, Anguilla, Sint Eustatius, and Saint Kitts reported damage from the hurricane, totaling $623,500 (1955 USD, $4.7 million 2006 USD). Damage was heaviest on Saba and Anguilla, occurring primarily to shipping facilities and crops. 626 houses were destroyed or severely damaged on Anguilla, as well. The damage was caused mostly by heavy rainfall and rough seas, not the direct action of the wind. The passage of Hurricane Alice greatly troubled the economies of the small affected islands. Additionally, the outer rainbands of the storm alleviated dry conditions on Puerto Rico which had persisted since the previous October. No deaths were reported.

This storm formed on December 30; however, in the days before satellites, meteorologists had to rely on reports from ships and islands in the Atlantic to locate and track storms. This information was often sketchy; two cyclones, including a Category 2 hurricane, operationally went undetected in 1954. It was officially recognized as a significant tropical cyclone on January 2, 1955. At the time, the National Weather Service used the same naming list each year, so the name given to this storm was "Alice" and it was designated as a part of the 1955 Atlantic hurricane season. However, it was found during post-storm analysis that the storm had actually formed on December 30, and was instead a part of the 1954 season. Therefore, the season had two storms named "Alice" — the first storm of the season, and the last. Had Alice been discovered before the end of the calendar year, it would have been named Irene, the next name on the 1954 list. Some reports named this storm "Alice2" to avoid confusion with the earlier Alice from June 1954.

Alice formed later in the calendar year than any Atlantic tropical cyclone on record, forming six hours later in the season than Tropical Storm Zeta in 2005. Alice was one of only eight Atlantic tropical cyclones to form in the month of December. Alice was the first of two Atlantic tropical cyclones to exist in two calendar years, the other being 2005's Zeta. The hurricane was also one of only six tropical or subtropical cyclones to exist in the month of January and the strongest to do so.




</doc>
<doc id="2435631" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2435631" title="Presidential Council for Minority Rights">
Presidential Council for Minority Rights

The Presidential Council for Minority Rights (PCMR) is a non-elected government body in Singapore established in 1970, the main function of which is to scrutinize most of the bills passed by Parliament to ensure that they do not discriminate against any racial or religious community. If the Council feels that any provision in a bill amounts to a differentiating measure, it will report its findings to Parliament and refer the bill back to Parliament for reconsideration. The Council also examines subsidiary legislation and statutes in force on 9 January 1970. One member of the PCMR is nominated by the Chairman to the Presidential Elections Committee, which is empowered to ensure that candidates for the office of President have the qualifications required by the Constitution. The President also appoints and dismisses the chairman and members of the Presidential Council for Religious Harmony ("PCRH"), established by the , on the advice of the PCMR, and the PCMR is responsible for determining whether PCRH members who are not representatives of major religions in Singapore have distinguished themselves in public service or community relations in Singapore.

The Council is made up of its Chairman (as of 6 November 2012 the Chief Justice of Singapore, Sundaresh Menon), up to ten permanent members who are appointed for life, and up to ten ordinary members who are appointed for a period of three years and may be re-appointed. Appointments are made by the President on the advice of the Cabinet. If the President does not concur with Cabinet's advice, he may veto appointments. However, he is required to consult the Council of Presidential Advisers ("CPA"), and if the CPA does not concur with his view, Parliament may override his decision with a resolution passed with a two-thirds majority vote. The President has no power to remove current PCMR members.

The Constitution only requires members of the Council to be Singapore citizens residing in Singapore who are at least 35 years old. There is no restriction on Cabinet ministers and members of political parties. Moreover, the Prime Minister may authorize any Minister, Minister of State or Parliamentary Secretary to attend Council meetings. It has been noted that this may have a chilling effect on the Council's deliberations as such a guest might be the author or a vocal proponent of the legislation under scrutiny. On the other hand, it has been suggested that members with political affiliations can often make the biggest contribution towards the Council's discussions. Another criticism of the PCMR's composition is that having judges on the Council may lead to a conflict of interest as they may have to exercise judicial review over Acts of Parliament they have either endorsed or rejected previously.

All proceedings of the Council are conducted in private, and the Council is prohibited from hearing objectors or examining witnesses regarding any bill or law under consideration. Since its establishment, the PCMR has not found any legislation to contain differentiating measures.

The Presidential Council for Minority Rights (PCMR) is a non-elected body established in 1970 under Part VII of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore to fulfil the roles of safeguarding minority rights and advising the Government and the Parliament of Singapore. Its general function, as articulated in the Constitution, is "to consider and report on such matters affecting persons of any racial or religious community in Singapore as may be referred to the Council by Parliament or the Government". To fulfil its role as a safeguard against any parliamentary or executive propensity to majoritarian or sectarian politics, it may constrict the Government's freedom to discriminate against racial and religious communities by obstructing the passage of new laws and regulations that it deems to contain such "differentiating measures".

As a legislative review mechanism, it plays a "limited quasi Second Chamber" role. It has also been called "the closest body [Singapore has] to a Second Chamber for many years". However, the Council has been criticized for lacking teeth to act as a real check on potential legislative abuses. As of 2009, the PCMR had not issued an adverse report regarding any piece of legislation referred to it. Nevertheless, it forms part of the statutory framework for the People's Action Party government's internationally lauded efforts in managing minority issues in multiethnic Singapore. Former Deputy Prime Minister S. Jayakumar, formerly a member of the Council, has noted that the PCMR is also a symbol of the paramount importance placed on racial harmony in a world still rife with racial and communal conflict.

On 18 January 1966, shortly after Singapore's independence, the President of Singapore appointed a Constitutional Commission helmed by Chief Justice Wee Chong Jin to consider how the rights of racial, linguistic, and religious minorities in the nascent nation should be protected. Singapore had just been ejected from Malaysia, and had experienced an extended period of racial and religious tension resulting from the Maria Hertogh riots. This experience reinforced the need for a multiracial society based on equality among races.

The Commission, in its report on 27 August 1966, found that such equality was best protected by giving minority rights equal footing with the fundamental liberties in the Constitution. In addition, it recommended a "Council of State", an advisory body that would inform the Government of the effects its laws would have on minorities. This concept was based on the Kenyan Council of State which was established in 1958 during its phase of transition to African majority rule. The idea of an advisory body which could not significantly impede the legislative agenda was viewed by lawmakers as a promising innovation. In addition, the creation of an advisory council ensuring equal treatment in legislation was very much in line with the idea that, as citizens become increasingly aware of racial and religious issues, national growth will very much depend on an approach to such problems that is not fraught with religious and racial tensions.

Some of the recommendations for the new Council of State included the following:


The Constitution (Amendment) Act 1969 was passed on 23 December 1969 to create the "Presidential Council" based heavily on the proposed Council of State. The amendment took effect on 9 January 1970. This Council was subsequently renamed the Presidential Council for Minority Rights in 1973. Although the proposal of the Commission was accepted by Parliament, it nonetheless made several changes that led to the substantial differences from the original proposal, including the following:


Supporters of the new body heralded the Presidential Council as a step forward in enhancing the country's democratic spirit. Its establishment was seen as putting a limit on possible dictatorial measures in legislation, which is especially important in a one-party dominated Parliament like Singapore's. Even if the new Council's powers were strictly limited to giving advice, this was justified on the basis that it would nevertheless serve to alert the public should the Government proceed to enact an Act which prejudices a class of minorities. Indeed, the Constitutional Commission had intended for the Council of State "to fix the attention of the public on any matter originating from Parliament which may adversely affect the interests of any minority group".

The Presidential Council can consist of no more than 21 persons at any one time. The Council is made up of its Chairman, up to ten permanent members who are appointed for life, and up to ten ordinary members who are appointed for a period of three years and may be re-appointed. The distinction between permanent and non-permanent members was not one of the recommendations of the Constitutional Commission, and the Government did not adopt the Commission's proposal that members should not belong to a political party. It has been suggested that this causes the PCMR's composition to be "somewhat weighted in favour of the Government and to that extent derogates from the concept of an uncommitted council of elders which sits as a watchdog over the rights of individuals".

The Chairman is responsible for convening and presiding at all meetings of the Council, but whenever the office of Chairman is vacant, the Council may elect any member to act as Chairman. The Chairman has an original vote but not a casting vote. No fewer than eight members, including the Chairman or another member appointed to preside in his place, must convene in order for the Council to transact any business. Any motion in the Council fails in the event of a tie.

The members of the Presidential Council are not elected, but appointed by the President on advice of the Cabinet. No public nomination process or vote is stipulated in the Constitution. The President, if he does not concur with the Cabinet, may veto the appointment. However, he is required to consult the Council of Presidential Advisers ("CPA"), a constitutional body that advises the President on appointments of key public officials and matters relating to Singapore's financial reserves. If he exercises his veto without the CPA's concurrence, Parliament may overrule his decision with a resolution passed with a two-thirds majority vote. The President has no power to remove current members.

Members of the Council must be Singapore citizens of at least 35 years of age residing in Singapore. Apart from these qualifications stated in the Constitution, there was an indication in the Parliamentary debates leading to the PCMR's introduction that permanent members of the PCMR are very likely to be drawn from "men of distinction" who hold or have held high public appointments, such as former prime ministers, the Chief Justice, former chief justices, judges, the Speaker of the Parliament of Singapore, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, the Attorney-General and former permanent secretaries. Non-permanent members will probably be mature citizens who have rendered distinguished public service, or are prominent members of their professions.

A member may be disqualified if he is found to be of unsound mind, if he becomes insolvent or is an undischarged bankrupt, if he is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment of not less than one year or a fine of not less than S$2,000, or if he has lost his Singaporean citizenship or declared himself allied to a foreign country. Any questions as to membership or disqualification are determined by a tribunal convened in secret that consists of a Supreme Court judge appointed by the Chief Justice and two members appointed by the Council. The Constitution does not stipulate any procedure for the removal of a member besides disqualification and the member's own resignation.

As of 1 April 2015, there are 19 members on the PCMR, five of whom are permanent members. The Chairman is Chief Justice Sundaresh Menon (who took over from former Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong who retired on 5 November 2012), and prominent members include Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, Attorney-General V. K. Rajah, and the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Singapore William Goh. Former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew and cabinet minister Othman Wok were permanent members of the Council until their respective deaths in 2015 and 2017.

The existence of permanent members; the opacity of appointment; and the inclusion of members of the Government, political parties, and their allies may mean that the PCMR could be used as a tool for the government of the day to remain in power despite its waning popularity in the future.

While the President may block certain appointments to the Council, he cannot remove a permanent member from his seat. In fact, it does not appear that any person has the power to do so. The door may be open for potential abuse with appointments based on some political agenda rather than merit. The counterpoint is that it is precisely those in power who are best placed to scrutinize bills for illegitimate differentiating measures, because "it is often those with political affiliations who can make the biggest contribution to the discussion; if nothing else, from the folly and error of their past ways".

The presence of judicial members on the Council may also pose additional problems. There is a possibility of conflict of interest for judges who sit as members of the Council if they find themselves having to review the very Acts of Parliament that they have either endorsed or rejected previously. This is exacerbated by the fact that the Council, in examining the legitimacy of Bills, plays a quasi-judicial role. There may be confusion as regards the legality of a piece of legislation if, for example, it was initially condemned by the Council but enacted by the Government and later endorsed by the courts upon judicial review. When the potential conflict between the Chief Justice's role as head of the judiciary and as Chairman of the Council was raised in 2010 by Githu Muigai, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Tolerance, he was informed that the Chief Justice would recuse himself from any matter in which a conflict arose.

On the other hand, it has been suggested that the enactment of a statute by Parliament in the face of an adverse report by the PCMR should be taken as a "mere disagreement over the interpretation of the Constitution and thus should not foreclose judicial review". However, this depends on whether the statute in question is a constitutional amendment or an ordinary Act of Parliament. Acts of Parliament may be disputed in court for their lack of compliance with the Constitution, but constitutional amendments may not be.

Further, scrutinizing legislation to determine if it contravenes fundamental liberties is traditionally the function of the judiciary. Even though the PCMR can potentially prevent an unconstitutional piece of legislation from coming into force, there is doubt as to whether the Council's members have sufficient legal training to undertake the burdensome task.

The PCMR may examine bills, subsidiary legislation, and written laws in force on 9 January 1970 for any "differentiating measure", which is defined as any measure "which is, or is likely in its practical application to be, disadvantageous to persons of any racial or religious community and not equally disadvantageous to persons of other such communities, either directly by prejudicing persons of that community or indirectly by giving advantage to persons of another community". All proceedings are conducted in private, and the Council is prohibited from hearing objectors or examining witnesses regarding any bill or law under consideration.

Such privacy means that the Council is denied even a modest "sanction" of publicity. Under the Constitutional Commission's original proposal, the PCMR was meant to hold its meetings publicly in Parliament, and publish reports of such proceedings. These proposals were rejected on the ground that such publicity might have the adverse consequence of giving members a public forum at which to further their own agendas. E.W. Barker, the Minister for Law and National Development, commented in Parliament that having the discussions in private helps to ensure that they are conducted frankly and constructively, and not held with an eye on the press or with a view to scoring political points.

The validity of such measures to promote free discussion may be negated by Article 87 of the Constitution, which provides that any Minister, Minister of State or Parliamentary Secretary specially authorized by the Prime Minister may attend these private meetings. There may be a real chilling effect on the deliberations when a guest might well be the author or a vocal proponent of the legislation being scrutinized.

Moreover, the Council's secrecy has been criticized as contrary to its status as a symbol of racial harmony in Singapore. The discharge of such a role requires that the PCMR projects an image of effectiveness, which the current requirement of secrecy arguably impedes. Secret discussions also prevent the public from being informed about controversial issues that may have arisen in the course of implementing new laws, especially those which may affect the rights of minorities.

The Speaker of Parliament is required to refer all bills, with some exceptions, to the PCMR for consideration immediately after the third reading of the bill in Parliament and obtain the Council's report on it before the bill may be sent to the President for assent.

The Council must make its report to Parliament within 30 days of the passage of any bill that is referred to it, judging if any provisions of the Bill are "discriminatory or inconsistent with fundamental liberties". However, if the bill is particularly complex or of great length, the Speaker has the discretion to extend the deadline upon application by the Chairman. If the Council fails to make a report within the given timeframe, it is "conclusively presumed" that the Council is satisfied that the bill is free from differentiating measures.

The referral of a bill only after its third reading means that Parliament will not have the opportunity of considering the Council's views on the bill prior to the debate. The Wee Chong Jin Commission had advocated for the Council to consider each bill after it had been introduced during its second reading, on the presumption that the Council would express views that would benefit the debate on the bill. Additionally, since Parliament has already passed the bill, Parliament may consider it a "point of honour to maintain its original view ... whatever the merits of the Council's objections" as they have already debated the bill and may decide to "stick to their original guns".

If the Council does make an adverse report, Parliament may amend the bill to rid it of any differentiating measures before sending it back to the Council for inspection. The MP having charge of the bill may give two clear days' notice of the amendments he or she proposes to move in Parliament to the provisions of the bill that were adversely reported upon by the Council. The bill then stands recommitted to a committee of the whole Parliament on those provisions, and the proposed amendments are considered. Parliament then resumes, and the MP having charge of the bill reports whether the amendments were agreed to by the committee. If so, the MP moves that the amended bill should be resubmitted to the Council. There is uncertainty as to whether the Council will have to make another report within any time limit, or if the bill will then be directly presented to the President for assent.

Alternatively, Parliament may effectively ignore the Council's adverse report with a motion passed with an affirmative vote of two-thirds of its members. Again, the MP in charge of the bill must give two clear days' notice of his intention to move that the bill be presented to the President for assent despite the adverse report. Following a debate, MPs vote on the motion by taking a division. If Parliament rejects the adverse report in this way, Parliament may send the bill, notwithstanding any differentiating measures, to the President for assent. These overriding mechanisms against adverse reports present difficulties when seen in the light of Article 12 of the Constitution, which is meant to guarantee equal protection under the law to minorities without discrimination, since bills containing differentiating measures that are presented to the President for assent can be seen as "inconsistent with the fundamental liberties of the subject".

Three types of bills are expressly excluded from the scrutiny of the PCMR:


It has been argued that such exemptions are too wide and may be open to abuse. For instance, it is up to the Speaker to determine whether any bill falls within the definition of a money bill, and once he has certified his opinion on the matter in writing, that is "conclusive for all purposes and shall not be open to question in any court". Moreover, grounds upon which bills may be excluded such as "public safety" and "peace", have been described as "nebulous" with potentially wide definitions that are open to abuse by the government in power. As regards a bill that has been enacted on a certificate of urgency and assented to by the President, the Speaker is required to send the Act of Parliament to the Council as soon as possible for its report, which is then presented to Parliament. However, the Constitution contains no provisions as to any steps that Parliament is required to take to amending the Act if an adverse report is made.

All new subsidiary legislation must be sent to the Council for scrutiny within 14 days of their publication in the "Government Gazette". The Council is then required to make its report to the Speaker and the appropriate Minister within 30 days. However, unlike with bills, there is no provision to extend the original deadline. As with bills, tardiness in sending an adverse report results in a conclusive presumption that the Council finds no differentiating measures in the subsidiary legislation. Where the Council issues an adverse report, the Minister must revoke or amend the offending provision within six months of the report, unless Parliament passes a resolution confirming that provision.

The Council may also make a report on any written law in force on 9 January 1970, but there is no constitutional provision that requires Parliament or the relevant Minister to act on it.

One of the members of the Presidential Elections Committee, which is the body empowered to ensure that candidates for the office of President have the qualifications required by the Constitution, is a member of the PCMR appointed to this post by the Chairman of the Council.

The Council also effectively decides the composition of the Presidential Council for Religious Harmony ("PCRH"), established by the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act. The President appoints the chairman and the members of the PCRH on the advice of the Council, and the Council is responsible for determining whether the members of the PCRH who are not representatives of major religions in Singapore have "distinguished themselves in public service or community relations in Singapore". The President is also required to consult the Council before revoking the membership of any member of the PCRH. However, the President has the discretion to veto any appointment or revocation if he does not agree with the PCMR.

The Singaporean Parliament is unicameral in nature, consisting of a single legislative body tasked with making laws. However, the notion of a second legislative chamber was considered on two separate occasions. In 1954, a constitutional commission headed by Sir George William Rendel rejected a proposal for a second chamber composed solely of minority representatives, citing its unsuitability in a tiny state like Singapore and arguing that it might end up being unnecessarily bureaucratic. It also asserted that such an upper House might potentially be detrimental to social cohesion. This issue was also considered by the Wee Chong Jin Commission, which rejected it on similar grounds.

The PCMR's power to review and block the passage of Bills is regarded by some as an indication of its potential as a second chamber. The Council's functional design, however, makes it only a very weak legislative review mechanism. The Council has no power to investigate alleged breaches of minority rights. The general public has also no right of making their views or complaints known to the Chamber. In addition, the lack of a veto power means that currently the most the Council can do is delay the passage of bills and prompt further parliamentary deliberation of the bills in question. But it has yet to do even this much. On those occasions where the Council might have rightly drawn attention to differentiating measures in proposed Bills, the legislature has pre-empted this by inserting "notwithstanding clauses" in the Constitution. Such clauses declare that laws that contravene a constitutional provision are nevertheless valid.

An alternative view is that it is not the formal structure of the Council – which in theory is capable of exercising judicial, legislative and review functions – but the presence of a practically single-party Parliament that drastically undermines the PCMR's powers, restricting it solely to an advisory capacity. This may not be the case if a strong Opposition exists in Parliament to obstruct the mustering of the required two-thirds voting majority required to push through legislation without the endorsement of the Council.

Besides being criticized for its limited powers, there is also some concern that the Council's responsibilities may go too far. By taking up the function of scrutinizing existing and prospective legislation for differentiating measures and inconsistencies with fundamental liberties, the Council may be encroaching on the functions of constitutional interpretation, which is traditionally the function of courts. Even though the Council has the additional advantage of identifying potentially unconstitutional legislation at an early stage, thereby preventing unnecessary litigation in the future, there is doubt as to the ability of the Council to take on such a task. Given that constitutional interpretation is traditionally the function of lawyers and the courts, the task may be best carried out by the legally trained members of the PCMR.







</doc>
<doc id="2435984" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2435984" title="SMS Elbing">
SMS Elbing

SMS "Elbing" was a light cruiser ordered by the Imperial Russian navy under the name "Admiral Nevelskoy" from the Schichau-Werke shipyard in Danzig in 1913. Following the outbreak of World War I, the ship was confiscated in August 1914 and launched on 21 November 1914 as SMS "Elbing". She had one sister ship, , the lead ship of their class. The ship was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in September 1915. She was armed with a main battery of eight 15 cm SK L/45 guns and had a top speed of .

"Elbing" participated in only two major operations during her career. The first, the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft, occurred in April 1916; there, she briefly engaged the British Harwich Force. A month later, she took part in the Battle of Jutland, where she scored the first hit of the engagement. She was heavily engaged in the confused fighting on the night of 31 May – 1 June, and shortly after midnight she was accidentally rammed by the battleship , which tore a hole in the ship's hull. Flooding disabled the ship's engines and electrical generators, rendering her immobilized and without power. At around 02:00, a German torpedo boat took off most of her crew, and an hour later the remaining men scuttled the ship; they escaped in the ship's cutter and were later picked up by a Dutch steamer.

"Elbing" was long overall and had a beam of and a draft of forward. She displaced at full combat load. Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Marine steam turbines driving two propellers. They were designed to give . These were powered by six coal-fired Yarrow water-tube boilers, and four oil-fired Yarrow boilers. These gave the ship a top speed of . "Elbing" carried of coal, and an additional of oil that gave her a range of approximately at . "Elbing" had a standard crew of twenty-one officers and 421 enlisted men, though this was expanded in wartime.

The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L/45 guns in single pedestal mounts. Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle, four were located amidships, two on either side, and two were side by side aft. She also carried four 5.2 cm SK L/55 anti-aircraft guns, though these were replaced with a pair of two SK L/45 anti-aircraft guns. She was also equipped with a pair of torpedo tubes mounted on the deck. She could also carry 120 mines. The conning tower had thick sides, and the deck was covered with up to thick armor plate.

"Elbing" was ordered by the Imperial Russian Navy as "Admiral Nevelskoy" from the Schichau-Werke shipyard in Danzig. She was laid down in 1913, requisitioned by the German Navy on 5 August 1914, and was renamed "Elbing". She was launched on 21 November 1914, after which fitting-out work commenced. She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 4 September 1915. 

After her commissioning, "Elbing" was assigned to the II Scouting Group, which typically operated alongside the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group. Her first major operation was the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24–25 April. On the approach to Lowestoft, "Elbing" and spotted the Harwich Force, a squadron of three light cruisers and eighteen destroyers, approaching the German formation from the south at 04:50. Rear Admiral Friedrich Boedicker, the German commander, initially ordered his battlecruisers to continue with the bombardment, while "Elbing" and the other five light cruisers concentrated to engage the Harwich Force. At around 05:30, the British and German light forces clashed, firing mostly at long range. The battlecruisers arrived on the scene at 05:47, prompting the British squadron to retreat at high speed. A light cruiser and destroyer were damaged before Boedicker broke off the engagement after receiving reports of submarines in the area.

In May 1916, Admiral Reinhard Scheer, the fleet commander, planned to lure a portion of the British fleet away from its bases and destroy it with the entire High Seas Fleet. "Elbing" remained in the II Scouting Group, attached to the I Scouting Group, for the operation. The squadron left the Jade roadstead at 02:00 on 31 May, bound for the waters of the Skagerrak. The main body of the fleet followed an hour and a half later. At 15:00, lookouts on "Elbing" spotted the Danish steamer "N. J. Fjord"; "Elbing" detached a pair of torpedo boats to investigate the steamer. Two British cruisers, and , were simultaneously steaming to inspect the steamer, and upon spotting the German torpedo boats, opened fire shortly before 15:30. "Elbing" turned to support the destroyers, opening fire at 15:32. She quickly scored the first hit of the battle, on "Galatea", though the shell failed to explode. The British turned to the north back toward the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron, with "Elbing" still firing at long range. She was joined by and , but the three cruisers had to cease fire by 16:17, as the British had drawn out of range. About fifteen minutes later, the three cruisers engaged a seaplane launched by the seaplane tender . They failed to score any hits, but the aircraft was forced off after which its engine broke down and it was forced to land. The three cruisers then returned to their stations ahead of the German battlecruisers.

At around 18:30, "Elbing" and the rest of the II Scouting Group encountered the cruiser ; they opened fire and scored several hits on the ship. As both sides' cruisers disengaged, Rear Admiral Horace Hood's three battlecruisers intervened. His flagship scored a hit on "Wiesbaden" that exploded in her engine room and disabled the ship. "Elbing" and "Frankfurt" each fired a torpedo at the British battlecruisers, though both missed. "Elbing" was briefly engaged by the battlecruisers at very long range, though she was not hit. At around 20:15, "Elbing" lost her port engine due to leaks in her boiler condensers. This limited her speed to for the next four hours.

The II Scouting Group, along with the battlecruisers and had been ordered to take station ahead of the German line for its night cruising formation. "Elbing" was still having problems with her boiler condensers, and was unable to keep up the speed necessary to reach the front of the line, and so she fell in with the IV Scouting Group. At 23:15, "Elbing" and spotted the British cruiser and several destroyers. They used the British recognition signal and closed to before turning on their searchlights and opening fire. "Castor" was hit seven times and set on fire, forcing the British to turn away. As they did, they fired several torpedoes at "Elbing" and "Hamburg". One passed underneath "Elbing" but failed to explode. While this engagement was still on-going, the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron arrived and engaged the IV Scouting Group. "Elbing" was hit once, which destroyed her wireless transmitting station and killed four men and wounded twelve.

Shortly after midnight, the German fleet ran into the British rear destroyer screen. "Elbing" was by this time steaming on the port side of the German line along with "Hamburg" and "Rostock". The dreadnought —the first ship in the German line—opened fire first, followed quickly by "Elbing", the other two cruisers, and the battleships and . The British destroyers launched a torpedo attack, which forced the three cruisers to turn to starboard to avoid them. This pointed the cruisers directly at the German line. "Elbing" attempted to steam between "Nassau" and , but "Posen"s captain wasn't aware of the movement until it was too late to avoid a collision. "Posen" turned hard to starboard, but still collided with "Elbing"s starboard quarter. The cruiser was holed below the waterline, which flooded the starboard engine room first. She initially took on a list of eighteen degrees, which allowed water to spread to the port engine room. With the engines shut down, steam began to condense in the pipes, which disabled the electric generators and caused the ship to lose electrical power. As water spread throughout the ship's engine compartments, the list was reduced. The ship was completely immobilized, though she was not in danger of sinking.

At 02:00, the torpedo boat came alongside and took off 477 officers and men of "Elbing"s crew. Her commander and a small group of officers and men remained on board. They rigged an improvised sail in an attempt to bring the ship closer to shore, but at around 03:00, British destroyers were spotted to the south and the order to scuttle the ship was given. They then lowered the ship's cutter into the water and set off; while steaming back to port, they rescued the surgeon from the destroyer . At around 07:00, a Dutch trawler met the cutter and took the men to Holland. In the course of the Battle of Jutland, "Elbing" had fired 230 rounds of 15 cm ammunition and a single torpedo. Four of her crew were killed and twelve more were wounded.



</doc>
<doc id="2452196" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2452196" title="HMS Resolution (1892)">
HMS Resolution (1892)

HMS "Resolution" was a "Royal Sovereign"-class pre-dreadnought battleship of the Royal Navy. The ship was built by Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company, starting with her keel laying in June 1890. She was launched in May 1892 and, after completing trials, was commissioned into the Channel Squadron the following December. She was armed with a main battery of four 13.5-inch guns and a secondary battery of ten 6-inch guns. The ship had a top speed of 16.5 knots.

"Resolution" served with the Channel Squadron up to 1901; she took part in the Diamond Jubilee Fleet Review and a number of manoeuvres in the Atlantic and the Southwest Approaches. She was recommissioned as a coast guard ship later in 1901 and underwent a refit in 1903, after which she served at Sheerness as a port guard ship, before entering the Fleet Reserve at Chatham in June 1904. She suffered damage while participating in combined manoeuvres in 1906, and was recommissioned into the Special Service Division of the Home Fleet the following year. She was decommissioned in August 1911 and laid up at Motherbank for disposal, before being sold for scrap in April 1914 and towed to the Netherlands to be broken up the following month.

The "Royal Sovereign"-class battleships were based on "Admiral"-class barbette ships, but contained several alterations. The freeboard was raised, the barbettes' armour was extended and an upper belt and secondary armour were added. They could also obtain a higher speed, but were 4,000 tonnes larger. "Resolution" was long overall and had a beam of 75 ft and a draft of 27 ft 6in. She displaced up to 15,580 tonnes at her full combat load. Her propulsion system consisted of two 3-cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eight coal-fired cylindrical boilers. With natural draught, her engines provided a top speed of 15.5 knots at 9,000 indicated horsepower; 16.5 knots at 11,000 indicated horsepower could be obtained with forced draught. She had a maximum complement of 712 officers and enlisted men, although her crew in 1903 amounted to 672 people. When built, ships of the "Royal Sovereign" class rolled too heavily under certain conditions. Bilge keels were added to compensate for the problem, and the ships "proved to be excellent seaboats quite capable ... of maintaining high speeds in a seaway". The ships were well-constructed and probably the most substantial built for the Royal Navy, even if they "suffered ... from excessive weight and fittings." In the view of the maritime historian R. A. Burt, they were "highly successful; at that time, they were probably unequalled in all-round fighting efficiency."

"Resolution" was armed with four breech-loading 13.5-inch guns on two barbettes with armour ranging from 11 to 17 inches in thickness. "Resolution" also carried ten quick-fire (QF) 6-inch guns, four of which were mounted in casemates on the main deck, plus sixteen QF 6-pounder () guns of an unknown type and a dozen QF 3-pounder () Hotchkiss guns. She was also equipped with seven 18-inch torpedo tubes, two of which were submerged. Between 1899 and 1902, the 3-pounder guns were removed from the upper tops; the above-water torpedo tubes were removed in 1902–1905. The remaining 6-inch guns on the upper deck were mounted on 5-inch armoured casemates between 1902 and 1904. All of the armour was supplied by the builders, Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company. The waterline belt was 252 ft long by 8 ft 8in deep, and its armour varied in thickness between 14 and 18 inches; the bulkheads were protected by 14 to 16 inches of armour. The middle deck covering the belt was 3 inches thick and the lower deck forward and aft of the belt was 2.5 inches thick, while the upper belt between the middle and main decks was coated in 3 to 4 inches of armour. The casemates for the 6-inch guns were protected by an equal thickness of armour and the conning tower was protected with 14 inch armour on the forward side, and 3 inches of armour on the aft. The ship's armoured deck was 2.5 to 3 inches thick.

"Resolution" was built by Palmer Shipbuilding and Iron Company, at a cost of £875,522, plus £78,295 for guns. She was laid down on 14 June 1890, launched on 28 May 1892 and completed the following November. She underwent trials in December 1893, and was commissioned at Portsmouth on 5 December of that year for service in the Channel Squadron. In early August 1894, "Resolution" was a unit of "Fleet Red" in the annual manoeuvres held in the Southwest Approaches. She was recommissioned for further Channel Fleet service on 9 April 1895. On 18 July 1896, she collided with her sister ship , suffering slight plating and keel damage. She nonetheless took part in annual manoeuvres from 24 July 1896 to 30 July 1896, this time off the southwest coasts of England and Ireland as part of "Fleet A".

On 26 June 1897, "Resolution" was part of the Fleet Review at Spithead for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria. From 29 July 1899 to 4 August 1899, she participated in annual manoeuvres in the Atlantic as part of "Fleet A". The next summer, she again took part in the annual manoeuvres in the Southwest Approaches in late July and early August 1900, this time as a part of "Fleet A2". She paid off at Portsmouth on 9 October 1901 and was placed in reserve, but on 17 November 1901 she was recommissioned by Captain James Goodrich to serve as a coast guard ship at Holyhead with the officers and crew of the previous guardship, the battleship .

Captain Cecil Burney was appointed in command on 27 May 1902, as flag captain to Rear-Admiral George Atkinson-Willes, Second-in-Command of the Home Fleet during the Coronation Review held at Spithead on 16 August 1902 for the coronation of King Edward VII. After the end of the maneuvers, Captain John Edward Bearcroft was appointed in command on 16 September 1902, when she reverted to her position at Holyhead and Rear-Admiral Atkinson-Willes transferred his flag to the battleship . On 8 April 1903, she paid off into reserve again to undergo a refit.

"Resolution" was recommissioned on 5 January 1904 to relieve the battleship as port guard ship at Sheerness. On 20 June 1904, she was transferred to the Fleet Reserve at Chatham. In the summer of 1906, she took part in manoeuvres during which she suffered slight damage when she collided with her sister ship near the Tongue Lightship on 15 July 1906. Later that year, she underwent another refit at Chatham. On 12 February 1907, "Resolution" transferred to the Special Service Division of the Home Fleet at Devonport. She remained in that service until 8 August 1911. She was then laid up at the Motherbank, awaiting disposal. On 2 April 1914, "Resolution" was sold as scrap for £35,650 to F. Rijsdijk; the following month, she was towed to the Netherlands to be broken up.


</doc>
<doc id="2459760" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2459760" title="Mantled guereza">
Mantled guereza

The mantled guereza ("Colobus guereza"), also known simply as the guereza, the eastern black-and-white colobus, or the Abyssinian black-and-white colobus, is a black-and-white colobus, a type of Old World monkey. It is native to much of west central and east Africa, including Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and Chad. The species consists of several subspecies that differ in appearance. It has a distinctive appearance, which is alluded to in its name; the long white fringes of hair the run along each side of its black trunk are known as a mantle. Its face is framed with white hair and it has a large white tail tuft.

The mantled guereza is diurnal and arboreal, found in both deciduous and evergreen forests. It is an adaptable species that can cope with habitat disturbance and prefers secondary forest close to rivers or lakes. Although previously thought only to eat leaves, it also eats seeds, fruits, and arthropods. It is able to digest plant material with a high fibre content with its specialised stomach and may only eat from a few plant species at a time. It is preyed on by birds of prey and some mammals, such as the common chimpanzee and the leopard.

The mantled guereza lives in social groups of three to fifteen individuals. These groups normally include a dominant male, several females, and the offspring of the females. It has a polygynous mating system and copulation is initiated with vocal communication. After a gestation period of just over five months, infants are born with pink skin and white fur, which darkens to the adult coloration by three to four months. The mantled guereza is well known for its dawn chorus, the males' "roar" is a method of long distance communication that reinforces territorial boundaries. It also makes other vocalization and uses body postures, movements, and facial expressions to communicate.

The mantled guereza is listed as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) because it is widespread – although it is locally threatened in some areas, the decline is not great enough to list it in a higher category of threat. However, one subspecies found in Kenya is listed as Endangered. It can survive well in degraded forests and in some areas it is more common in logged areas than unlogged ones. The mantled guereza is also threatened by hunting for bushmeat and for its skin.

The mantled guereza has many alternative common names including the guereza, the eastern black-and-white colobus, the magistrate colobus, or the Abyssinian black-and-white colobus. The name "mantled" refers to its mantle, the long silky white fringes of hair that run along its body and "guereza" is the native name of the monkey in Ethiopia. The scientific name "Colobus" derives from Greek "kolobus" meaning "mutilated" which refers to its lack of thumbs.

The mantled guereza was discovered by Eduard Rüppell, a German naturalist and explorer, during his trip to Abyssinia between 1830 and 1834. He wrote about the species in "Neue Wirbelthiere con Abyssinien, Saengthiere" in 1835. It was first seen in Europe in 1890 in Berlin Zoological Garden when three individuals were purchased from a dealer from Massawa, Eritrea.

The mantled guereza is in the Colobinae subfamily, also known as the leaf-eating monkeys, a group of Old World monkeys from Asia and Africa. This subfamily is split into three groups, the colobus monkeys of Africa, of which the mantled guereza is a part, the langurs, or leaf monkeys, of Asia, and an "odd-nosed" group. The African colobus monkeys are divided again by distinctions in color, behavior, and ecology. The three genera are the black-and-white colobi, the red colobi, and the olive colobi. There are three black-and-white colobi: the mantled guereza, "Colobus guereza", the king colobus, "C. polykomos", and the Angola colobus, "C. angolensis". Groves lists seven subspecies of mantled guereza in Mammal Species of the World (MSW) (2005). The validity of the Djaffa Mountain guereza, "C. g. gallarum", is uncertain, although not listed by Groves in MSW, it is recognised in his 2007 Colobinae review paper, and by International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) assessors Gippolliti and Butynski in 2008.

The morphological difference between subspecies is most pronounced between the southeastern Kilimanjaro guereza, "C. g. caudatus", and the northwestern western guereza, "C. g. occidentalis". The intermediate subspecies show a gradual change between the two.

The mantled guereza has a distinctive pelage, it is mostly black, with long white fringes of silky hair—known as a mantle or ornamentation—along the sides of its body and tail. The bands that make up the mantle start at the shoulders and extend along the back until they connect at the lower torso. The tail is long and ends in a white tuft which varies in how much it covers the tail. These features vary in color among subspecies, for example the tail of "C. g. guereza" is gray until the white tail tuft which covers half of its length, while the tail tuft of "C. g. caudatus" makes up 80% of the tail. The mantle color ranges from white to cream or yellow. Its face is framed by white hair and it has bushy cheek hairs. The thigh has a white stripe.

Infants are born with pink skin and white hair. The hair and skin darken as they age and by three to four months they attain adult coloration. Male usually gain their coloration before females. The male typically weighs and the female weighs between . The head and body length averages for males and for females. Like most colobi, the mantled guereza has a small thumb that is vestigial. There is dentition sexual dimorphism among the subspecies. In some, the males have larger teeth than females, in others the reverse is true, and some have no significant difference.

The mantled guereza is distributed throughout Equatorial Africa. It ranges from Nigeria and Cameroon in the west to Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, and northern Tanzania in the east. The mantled guereza lives in both deciduous and evergreen forests. It mainly inhabits forest and savannah woodlands and often extend into highland and montane forests. It can be found in other forest habitats, both primary and secondary, such as riparian (near fresh or brackish water), gallery, and upland forests. It is particularly common in forests close to rivers and lakes and at high elevations. It can be found in elevations as high as . This species prefers secondary forests and selects them over old-growth forests if given the choice. It is likely that the mantled guereza prefers these forests due to the increased number of food trees and the weaker chemical defenses of the species within. The mantled guereza is sometimes found in swamps as well as human-made habitats such as "Eucalyptus" plantations, which may be frequented when the monkey has nutritional deficiencies.

The mantled guereza is primarily arboreal, but does sometimes descend on the ground to forage and travel, perhaps more so than most other colobines. It is diurnal and rests for up to half the day. Foraging or travelling are the next most common activity. Sometime after dawn, mantled guereza groups leave their sleeping trees and will return to them at dusk. During the day, the mantled guereza has long rest periods in between periods of moving and feeding. Other activities, including grooming, greeting, playing and being vigilant, are performed to a lesser extent.
Despite its reputation as an exclusive leaf-eater, the mantled guereza is not an obligate folivore. While it mainly eats leaves and fruit, its diet is quite variable. It may eat bark, wood, seeds, flowers, petioles, lianas, aquatic-plants, arthropods, soil, and even concrete from buildings. The amount of each food item in its diet varies by area and time of year. Nutritional factors like protein, tannins, and sodium levels in leaves influence its food choices. It may even intermittently travel longer distances to access plants with higher levels of nutrition. Leaves usually make up over half of its diet, although fruits are occasionally eaten more depending on the season. When foraging for leaves, the mantled guereza prefers young ones over old. With fleshy fruits, the mantled guereza prefers to eat them unripe, which may serve to reduce competition with primates that eat ripe fruits. It consumes a number of plant species but only some make up most of its diet at a specific site.

Like all colobi, the mantled guereza is able to digest leaves and other plant fibers with a large, multi-chambered stomach that contains bacteria in certain areas. Like most colobines, it prefers foods with high fiber content that can be easily extracted with its specialized stomach. The mantled guereza is mostly preyed on by the crowned hawk-eagle, but it is also eaten by other birds of prey such as Verreaux's eagle. The common chimpanzee is known to hunt the guereza. The leopard is another possible predator.

The mantled guereza lives in stable social groups usually containing three to fifteen members. The groups usually contain one male, several females and juveniles. In some populations, groups containing several males are common. In multi-male groups, males tend to be aggressive with one another with one being dominant. Some males may be expelled from these groups. Multi-male groups may contain father-son pairs or unrelated males. Males that are not part of groups either live solitarily or with other outside males in bachelor groups. The females keep the groups cohesive and they are matrilineally related. They rarely disperse from their natal groups, except possibly when they break apart. Males on the other hand, usually leave when they become subadults or adults. They may start out being solitary and or in bachelor groups. They gain entry into a social group either by being on the periphery or displacing a group male.

Because of its low quality diet and the dispersed distribution of its food, the mantled guereza has a resident-egalitarian social structure. Female guerezas living in a group often have an egalitarian dominance style with no formalized rank relations. Relationships are relaxed and friendly with rare signals of dominance or subordinance. Physical aggression within the group is usually not harmful and rarely escalates into a conflict. Allogrooming is an important part of mantled guereza interactions and mostly occurs between females. The adult males rarely groom in the groups. While not strictly territorial, mantled guereza groups can be aggressive towards each other. In some populations, groups may defend core areas (which exist as a small part of the home range), resources, and mates. During intergroup encounters, males can engage in direct or indirect mate defense, like defending a female's resources. It is the males that participate in agonistic inter-group encounters but female may do so as well. Aggressive encounters between groups usually involve chases, displays and vocalizations rather than physical contact.

The mantled guereza has a polygynous harem-based mating system. Mating solicitations are made by both males and females, half of the time for each. To solicit mating, the mantled guereza will walk near its potential partner and make low-intensity mouth clicks or tough-smacks. During copulation, the males hold on the female's ankles and body. Most matings take place between individuals of the same group but copulations outside of the group have been recorded. In multi-male groups, more than one male may mate with the females. The gestation period lasts 158 days with a 16–22 month interbirth interval. The newborn guereza relies on its mother for support and must cling to her. As they grow older, infants can move on their own but keep returning to their mothers. The infants take up most of the attention in the groups. The other females in a group may handle an infant although the latter are only comfortable with their mothers. The males normally don't pay much attention to infants until they are four to five weeks old. Infants can eat solid food at about eight to nine weeks and by fifty weeks they are fully weaned and no longer need to hold on to their mothers.

The most notable vocalization of the mantled guereza is the "roar", which is made mainly at night or dawn by males. The sound of a roar can be carried for up to a mile. It is normally the dominant male who roars when there are multiple males in the group. Roars are used for long distance communication and can regulate inter-group spacing without direct, physical contact while foraging. When one male starts roaring, neighboring males will start to roar as well. Often, the mantled guereza will respond to calls regardless of "caller identity," focusing more on the collective vocal displays and not the familiarity of the caller. There is variation in the roars of males which could signal the status of their group and fighting ability. With a roar, a male can advertise his body size; both actual and exaggerated. Other vocalizations are made as well. Males may snort, possibly as an alarm call. "Purrs" are made before group movements. Females and infants may "caw" when under mild distress. When in more serious distress, like if an infant is in danger, females and sub-adults will squeak or scream. "Tongue-clicking" is made during mild aggression. In addition to vocalizations, the mantled guereza communicates with several different body postures and movements, displaying of fringe fur, facial expressions, and touches.

Because it can live in both dry and gallery forests and move on the ground, the mantled guereza is less threatened than many other colobine species. The IUCN lists it as Least Concern because "although locally threatened in parts of its range, this widespread species is not thought to be declining fast enough to place it in a higher category of threat." However, some of the subspecies are classified under different categories. The Mt Uaraguess guereza, "C. g. percivali", is listed as Endangered due to its small range and its risk from hunting, while the Dodinga Hills guereza, "C. g. dodingae", the Djaffa Mountains guereza, "C. g. gallarum", and the Mau Forest guereza, "C. g. matschiei" are all listed as Data Deficient.

The Dodinga Hills guereza hasn't been recorded since the 1960s. Unlike most other primate species, the mantled guereza can survive habitat degradation and can even thrive in degraded forests. Sometimes, logging may increase the number of preferred food trees for the mantled guereza and it is more abundant in logged areas than unlogged ones. However, complete forest clearance causes dramatic declines in numbers. In Uganda complete forest clearings caused a decline of 50% over eight years. The mantled guereza is also threatened by hunting for meat and its skin. Mantled guereza meat sells as bushmeat for $4–9 US. The skins have been sold for fashion or in the tourist trade.



</doc>
<doc id="2475809" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2475809" title="New York State Route 149">
New York State Route 149

New York State Route 149 (NY 149) is an east–west state highway that runs for through the Capital District of New York in the United States. It begins at exit 20 on the Adirondack Northway (Interstate 87 or I-87) in the Warren County town of Queensbury and intersects U.S. Route 9 (US 9), US 4, and NY 22, among other routes, as it progresses eastward to its eastern end at the Vermont state line in the Washington County village of Granville. Here, the highway becomes Vermont Route 149 (VT 149) and continues for an additional to an intersection with VT 30 in Rutland County. Both NY 149 and VT 149 traverse mostly rural areas.

NY 149 was assigned in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York and initially extended from NY 9L in Queensbury to NY 22 south of Granville by way of an east–west highway built during the first two decades of the 20th century. It was cut back to US 4 , but extended westward back to NY 9L in the mid-1950s. It was extended further west to US 9 in the late 1950s and to I-87 exit 20 . In the mid-1960s, NY 22 was rerouted to bypass Granville to the west. NY 149 was then extended to Vermont by way of NY 22's former routing into the village and East Main Street. The short continuation of Granville's East Main Street in Vermont, designated as Vermont Route 30B since 1935, was renumbered to VT 149 in December 1966 to match the New York number.

NY 149 officially begins at exit 20 on the northbound Adirondack Northway (I-87) in the town of Queensbury, from where it follows a ramp eastward to US 9. As signed, however, NY 149 begins at the southbound portion of I-87 exit 20 and follows County Route 23 (CR 23, named Gurney Lane) east to US 9, where it turns to follow US 9 northward. The signed and official routings join at the exit's northbound ramps. While concurrent with US 9, NY 149 passes the Adirondack/Lake George Factory Outlet Mall and several other businesses located on both sides of the highway. At the end of the factory outlets in the hamlet of French Mountain, NY 149 turns off US 9 and proceeds in a generally eastward direction toward the village of Fort Ann.
After passing under a bike path overpass and a recreational vehicle park, the route runs through an area of rural residential dwellings and wooded areas situated north of Glen Lake. At the northern tip of the lake, NY 149 intersects Oxbow Hill Road, a connector to CR 63 (Moon Hill Road) that is maintained by Warren County despite not being a numbered Warren County route. East of this junction, the highway turns to the northeast and crosses the Blue Line into Adirondack Park ahead of an intersection with CR 7 (Bay Road). NY 149 continues on, curving back to the east as it passes the Queensbury Country Club and meets NY 9L. The route enters Washington County and the town of Fort Ann roughly later.

The first several miles of NY 149 in Washington County pass through isolated, rural areas as it curves to the north and south while following a generally east–west alignment. In West Fort Ann, the only community along the route between the county line and the village of Fort Ann, NY 149 intersects with Old State Route 149, a loop route of NY 149 that was created when the highway was realigned. The route continues east from the community, exiting Adirondack Park and crossing over Halfway Creek on its way into the village of Fort Ann, where it becomes Ann Street. Within the village, NY 149 passes the Fort Ann Cemetery and two blocks of homes before intersecting with US 4 at George Street. NY 149 turns to the south, joining US 4 along George Street through downtown Fort Ann. After passing the town park, US 4 and NY 149 leave the village and become nameless as they head south into the town of Kingsbury.

In Kingsbury, US 4 and NY 149 head through an open area dotted with farms and ponds. The routes proceed southward to a junction known as Baldwin Corner, where US 4 and NY 149 split. While US 4 heads to the southeast, NY 149 continues due south, paralleling the Champlain Canal to an area known as Smith's Basin. Here, NY 149 turns east and crosses both a railroad line and the canal—which NY 149 had been following since joining US 4 in downtown Fort Ann—to enter the town of Hartford. Here, the route winds its way eastward through a rural, mostly undeveloped area of Washington County as it intersects several county roads on its way to the hamlet of Hartford.

In Hartford, NY 149 intersects both Christian Hill Road and CR 23 (the main street of the community) ahead of a junction with NY 40 south of the community. The two routes converge here as NY 149 follows NY 40 northward around the small community to a junction east of the hamlet's center, where NY 149 turns off to the east and begins to pass through more rural areas of the town of Hartford and the adjacent town of Granville. Upon crossing into Granville, the open areas along the route give way to dense forests. NY 149 continues generally northeastward through the town, passing through the isolated hamlet of Hillsdale before curving to the southeast toward South Granville. At the center of the community, NY 149 turns to the northeast at an intersection with CR 27 and CR 28.
The route leaves South Granville, passing patches of trees and a smattering of homes as it heads toward the border village of Granville. Just south of the village limits, NY 149 intersects with NY 22. NY 22 and NY 149 briefly overlap before NY 22 forks off to bypass Granville to the west. NY 149 continues into Granville, becoming Quaker Street upon entering the village limits. The route proceeds through the village to its center, where NY 149 forks northeastward onto West Main Street and crosses over the Mettawee River. At an intersection with Church Street (CR 26), NY 149 becomes East Main Street and turns to the southeast on its way to the Vermont state line, where the roadway becomes VT 149.

VT 149 heads southeastward away from the built up village of Granville into a more rural region of the Rutland County town of Pawlet, paralleling the Mettawee River as it progresses onward. It heads past homes and through a dense forest as it intersects with Bull Frog Hollow Road just after the border. After Bull Frog Hollow Road, the route proceeds eastward through an area dominated by quarries. VT 149 continues on, entering a more open area and passing only a few homes before ending at an intersection with VT 30 in Blossom Corners, a small, largely unpopulated community within the town of Pawlet.

Several portions of NY 149 were constructed during the early 20th century when the state of New York assumed ownership over thousands of highways across the state. The earliest known constructed portion of modern NY 149 is the segment between the southern end of the NY 22 overlap and the southern village limits of Granville. The state let a $10,850 (equivalent to $ in 2019) contract to improve the highway, legislatively designated as part of State Highway 104 (SH 104), on May 12, 1902. The highway was added to the state highway system on October 6, 1902, following the completion of the project. The portion of NY 149 that overlaps US 9 in Queensbury, designated as part of SH 417, was improved under the terms of a $82,700 (equivalent to $ in 2019) contract awarded on July 10, 1906. It was added to the state highway system on January 10, 1907.

Other portions of modern NY 149 were constructed over the course of the next decade. In 1911, work began on the section of current NY 149 between Smith's Basin and the northern junction with NY 40 in Hartford. The contract for the portion in the town of Fort Ann (SH 942) was let on June 15 while the contract for the section in Hartford (SH 802) was awarded three months earlier on March 30. The two projects were carried out simultaneously over the next two years. SH 802 was added to the state highway system on February 9, 1914, while SH 942 was included in the system on May 5, 1914. In all, the improvement of the two state highways cost $69,577.20 (equivalent to $ in 2019).

In 1913, construction began on the portion of what is now NY 149 in Granville south of North Street, internally designated as SH 5404. The $77,684.89 (equivalent to $ in 2019) contract was awarded on September 5, 1913. The necessary improvements were made over the course of the next year and the highway was incorporated into the state highway system on October 29, 1914. The last portion of NY 149 with a known construction date is the section concurrent to US 4 in Fort Ann (part of SH 1224). A contract for its improvement was let on January 8, 1915 at a cost of $43,778.92 (equivalent to $ in 2019). The improvements were made over the next year and the roadway was added to the state highway system on January 10, 1916.

When the first set of New York state routes were assigned in 1924, SH 417 became part of NY 6 while SH 104 and SH 5404 were included in NY 24 and SH 1224 was designated as part of NY 30. NY 6 was replaced by US 9 while NY 30 was co-designated as US 4 between Glens Falls and Whitehall in 1927 following the creation of the U.S. Highway System in late 1926. The remainder of modern NY 149 was unnumbered prior to 1930.

In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York, the NY 30 designation was reassigned elsewhere, leaving just US 4 on the portion of highway that US 4 now shares with NY 149. At the same time, all of NY 24 south of Middle Granville became part of NY 22 while NY 149 was assigned to the portion of its modern alignment between NY 9L in Queensbury and NY 22 south of the village of Granville. In July 1935, several floods devastated many highways in the state of New York. One highway affected was NY 149, as a bridge carrying the highway in the hamlet of South Granville was washed out. With the bridge out, drivers were detoured onto a town highway (now maintained by Washington County as CR 27) to access NY 22 and Granville from South Granville and to access NY 40 from Granville. NY 22 was also affected by the flood as a bridge in the town of Cambridge was washed out as well.

NY 149 was truncated eastward to the southern terminus of its overlap with US 4 south of Fort Ann. The change lasted for roughly 15 years before the highway was reextended westward to NY 9L in the mid-1950s. It was extended again in the late 1950s to follow a pre-existing, unnumbered roadway west to US 9 in the Queensbury hamlet of French Mountain. NY 149 was altered once more to meet the new I-87 at exit 20, resulting in a short overlap with US 9.
In Granville, NY 22 was originally routed on Quaker, Main, and North streets. It was rerouted in the mid-1960s to bypass Granville on a new highway west of the village. NY 149 was then extended northward along NY 22's former routing to the junction of Main and North streets in Granville. From there, it continued eastward on Main Street to reach the Vermont state line, where it connected to VT 30B, a spur route of VT 30 that had been in place since 1935. Vermont renumbered VT 30B to VT 149 in December 1966 to match the highway it now connected to in New York.

On July 2, 2005, the Hadlock Pond Dam north of West Fort Ann failed, washing out four sections of NY 149 near that community. As a result, the portion of the route between NY 9L in Queensbury and US 4 in Fort Ann was closed to all traffic. After one week, the highway was reopened, but only for local traffic and construction crews. It was reopened to all traffic on July 24. The impromptu repair project cost the New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT) $1.5 million (equivalent to $ in 2019).
In 2007, the "Times Union" of Albany received letters from readers requesting that all of NY 149 be widened from two to four lanes. The letters were forwarded to NYSDOT, who responded that although the route was an important recreational route between New York and Vermont, the amount of traffic that the route carries was not high enough to warrant a four-lane divided highway. Additionally, the state would also have to take a significant number of properties along the roadway in order to widen it, which would affect the character of the area.

On July 10, 2008, a tanker truck full of water crashed into a tree along a portion of NY 149 between Bay Road (CR 7) and Ridge Road (NY 9L) that features a sharp curve. After the first accident occurred at 3:10 a.m., a second tractor-trailer, who had stopped because of the tanker, rolled in reverse, jackknifing across the road and hitting a car. The road was shut down for the accident, where the driver of the tanker was taken to Glens Falls Hospital. The drivers of the car and the tractor-trailer that jackknifed were not hurt. The route was reopened by 11:40 a.m. This accident was one of many tractor-trailer accidents that has occurred on this stretch of NY 149.

NY 149 between Martindale Road in the town of Queensbury and the Washington County line was upgraded by New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT) in the late 2000s. Construction began on February 9, 2009 to upgrade the long segment. The project consisted of repaving the roadway in areas, but also included widening the shoulder to wide, reconstructing and straightening NY 149 near Martindale Road along with a spot near the Queensbury Country Club. Culverts would be replaced, drainage systems would be upgraded and they would create a new wetland mitigation area aside of NY 149. Finally, left turn lanes would be constructed at NY 9L and CR 7 (Bay Road). Announced alongside of a project to reconstruct NY 372, the project would cost $8 million (2009 USD) and given to Kubricky Construction Corporation, based in Queensbury, with a slated completion date of June 2010. However, by July 2010, construction had not been completed, as they just had shut down NY 149 between NY 9L and CR 7.

On December 19, 2012, NYSDOT announced a project to reconstruct NY 149 and its junction with US 4 in Fort Ann. The project would upgrade the intersection by doing an overall expansion, requiring the condemnation of one property. This new widening would help make turns from US 4 south to NY 149 west. The intersection would be repaved and drainage basins on US 4 and NY 149, which would tie into the system on Clay Hill Road. NYSDOT's website notes that announced that bids of the new project were announced in Fall 2013 with construction beginning soon after. The slated date of completion for the $1.3 million project would be in Fall 2014.



</doc>
<doc id="2479142" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2479142" title="Get Your Number">
Get Your Number

"Get Your Number" is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey. It was written by Carey, Jermaine Dupri, Johntá Austin and Bryan-Michael Cox, and produced by the former two and LRoc. It was released as the third international single from Carey's tenth studio album, "The Emancipation of Mimi" (2005). The song is built around a sample of "Just an Illusion" (1982) by British band Imagination. Due to the inclusion of the sample, several other writers are credited as songwriters. Lyrically, the song features the protagonist persistently asking for the phone number of an individual at a club.

The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics at the time of its release, with many both praising and criticizing the inclusion of the sample, as well as the song's production and lyrical content. "Get Your Number" was released as the third single throughout Europe, where it peaked within the top-ten in Finland, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, where it was sold as a double A-side along with "Shake It Off". Similarly, the song found release in Australasia in early 2006, as the fifth single from the album, and peaked in the top-twenty in Australia, and at number thirty-four in New Zealand.

The single's music video was directed by Jake Nava, who also directed Carey's video for "Shake It Off". It was filmed in Los Angeles on September 1 and 2, 2005 and features Jermaine Dupri as the video's secondary artist, while Michael Ealy, plays Carey's love interest at the club. The main setting is a nightclub where Carey slips her phone number to a man, one digit at a time. Carey is shown in a variety of locations wearing, amongst other outfits, a yellow latex dress. Dupri makes a guest appearance as a man receiving the numbers of three girls in the club.

"Get Your Number" is a mid-tempo song lasting three minutes and fifteen seconds, while drawing influence from pop and R&B music genres. Written by Carey, Jermaine Dupri and Johntá Austin, and produced by the former two and LRoc, the song samples the hook from British band Imagination's "Just an Illusion" (1982), and derives its production from "‘80s-esque synthesizers" and several computerized musical instruments. Due to its sampling, additional writers such as John Phillips, Steve Jolley, Tony Swain, Ashley Ingram and Leee John are credited as songwriters. On "Get Your Number", Dupri performs several ad-libs and sings part of the chorus, earning him a place as a featured artist on the track. According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing, the song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 126 beats per minute.

The song is composed in the key of F minor, with Carey's vocal range spanning from the low-note of B to the high-note of A. Aside from Dupri's verses, Carey's longtime background singer Trey Lorenz makes a notable impression on the song, and earned credits for providing background vocals. Lyrically, the song is written in a female perspective, where they ask the man for their number at a club. In an interview with MTV News, Carey jokingly addressed the lyrics, claiming Dupri "really wanted it to be coming from the girl, like 'can I get your number' to the guy. But in all honesty that would never be me!" Aside from her signature vocals, Carey adopts a breathy rap for parts of the song, which read "I got a pimp penthouse / With a sick hot tub / We can watch a flat screen / While the bubbles filling up." According to Jozen Cummings from PopMatters, the lyrics and Carey's vocal switch make the song "fun and comedic".

"Get Your Number" received generally mixed reviews from music critics, with many complimenting the song's inclusion of the "Just an Illusion" hook, however, drawing criticism at some of its lyrics, and Dupri's verses. "The Guardian" editor Caroline Sullivan outed "Stay the Night" and "Get Your Number" as "the first Mariah Carey tunes in years I wouldn't have to be paid to listen to again." Barry Walters from "Rolling Stone" complimented her vocal performance, writing "Carey's belabored voice finds a pleasurable medium", however criticizing the song's production. Jozen Cummings from PopMatters called Dupri's verses "annoying gangster twang", and described the song's production as "annoying". Stylus Magazine's Todd Burns called the duet "ill-advised" and wrote "Carey does all in her power to save from Jermaine Dupri’s machinations. It barely comes off, despite every attempt from Dupri to sound like Lil Jon and Pharrell along the way." Editor Sal Cinquemani writing for Slant Magazine branded "Get Your Number" a "Summer-anthem-in-the-make", while Michael Paoletta from "Billboard" described it as "bouncy and silly". Jim Abbott from the "Orlando Sentinel" described the track as a "sexy, slinky dance number", while a writer from "Newsweek" claimed it to be a song that "worked".

"Get Your Number" was released throughout Europe and Asia as the third single from "The Emancipation of Mimi" in late 2005, and as the fifth single in Australasia in early 2006. In the United Kingdom, it was released as a double A-side along with "Shake It Off", the third single serviced to the United States at the same time. In Australia, "Get Your Number" entered the singles chart at number nineteen during the week dated March 12, 2006. Spending ten weeks fluctuating in the chart, it exited on May 14, 2006. On the Ö3 Austria Top 40, it peaked at number forty-one, although spending eleven weeks within the Austrian charts. In both the Flemish and Wallonian territories in Belgium, "Get Your Number" peaked at number twenty-five and eighteen, while spending fourteen and thirteen weeks in the charts, respectively. The song debuted at number five on Finland's Official List on October 12, 2005. The following week, it moved up two spots to its peak of number three, before exiting the chart two weeks later. On the Dutch Top 40, it made its debut at number ten on November 15, 2005, and spent a total of twelve weeks within the top 40 chart. In both New Zealand and Sweden, "Get Your Number" saw relatively low peaks, placing at numbers thirty-four and forty-nine, for only two and three weeks. In Switzerland, the song entered the Swiss Singles Chart at its peak of number fourteen, while spending twenty-one weeks in the chart until exiting on April 9, 2005. On the UK Singles Chart, the song debuted at number nine during the week of October 15, 2005. Dropping to number ten the following week, the song lasted a total of eight weeks in the singles chart before making its descent.

The single's music video was directed by Jake Nava, who also directed Carey's video for "Shake It Off". It was filmed in Los Angeles on September 1, 2, 12 and 13, 2005 and features Jermaine Dupri as the video's secondary artist, while Michael Ealy, plays Carey's love interest at the club. The original shoot was scheduled to finish on September 2, but shooting for several of Carey's scenes on the second day was delayed for several days due to her being ill.

The main setting is a nightclub where Carey slips her phone number to a man, one digit at a time. Carey is shown in a variety of locations wearing, amongst other outfits, a yellow latex dress. Dupri makes a guest appearance as a man receiving the numbers of three girls in the club. The video begins with shots of Carey as the star of a club, wearing a yellow latex mini and gold necklace. As the music plays, Carey is seen on a variety of large props, the first of which is a large red phone. As Dupri scouts the club for females, Carey in a different ensemble passes the number '5' to Ealy on a card, while making eye contact with him.

As other scenes of Carey in the latex mini and by the large red hone prop are interspersed, the club scene alters to a poker table, where Ealy reveals three of his card, '556', completing four of the seven digits of Carey phone number. The next scene finds Carey sitting on a large pink sofa in an empty room in the club, sporting only a white man's suit jacket and stilettos. As the song reaches the bridge, Carey is shown back in the club's main room dancing, as she leaves a number '4' on a nearby table for the man to find. As Carey once again is shown in the yellow latex dress, she walks down a small aisle, placing another card with the number '4' into Ealy's jacket pocket, before storming through the club by several followers. As the video ends, the number '555-6464' are shown lying on a small table, while Carey sits on the large pink sofa, and Ealy is seen on the other side gazing at her. The video concludes with Ealy slowly approaching Carey on the large sofa, as she winks and smiles to the camera.

European CD single

European CD maxi-single

UK CD single

Australian/European CD maxi-single

UK CD maxi-single
Credits for "The Emancipation of Mimi" adapted from the album's liner notes.


</doc>
