<doc id="30483842" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30483842" title="Harry Kane">
Harry Kane

Harry Edward Kane (born 28 July 1993) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for club Tottenham Hotspur and captains the England national team. 

Born and raised in Walthamstow, Kane began his professional career at Tottenham Hotspur, where, after fast progression through the team's youth academy, he was promoted to the senior team in 2009, at age 16. He did not initially feature for the side, and was loaned out several times to clubs across the English football pyramid, including Leyton Orient, Millwall, Leicester City, and Norwich City.

Kane's involvement at Tottenham began to increase following the appointment of Mauricio Pochettino as head coach in 2014. In his first full season at the club, Kane scored 31 goals across all competitions, and finished as the league's second highest goalscorer, winning the PFA Young Player of the Year award. After the following campaign, at age 23, Kane finished as league's top goalscorer, and guided the club to UEFA Champions League qualification. In the 2016–17 season, Kane also completed the season as the league's top goalscorer, and helped the club finish as the competition's runners-up, while he won the PFA Fans' Player of the Year award. In the 2017–18 season, Kane registered his best campaign statistically to date, with 41 goals scored in 48 games in all competitions. 

Kane holds the record for most Premier League Player of the Month awards (six; shared with Steven Gerrard) and has been selected for the PFA Team of the Year four times. He established himself as Tottenham's fourth all-time scorer in official competitions in January 2019, and holds the best strike-rate (0.70 goals per game) in Premier League history. 

An English international, Kane has scored 22 goals in 37 games for his country. He appeared and scored at every youth level, and made his senior debut in March 2015 at age 21, where he scored on his debut. Kane featured and scored at UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying, before he was selected as the squad's captain from May 2018, prior to the 2018 FIFA World Cup. In the tournament, Kane led England to fourth-place, their highest finish since 1990, by finishing as the top goalscorer, and won the Golden Boot.

Harry Edward Kane was born in Walthamstow, London to Kim and Patrick Kane and has one older brother, Charlie. He has Irish ancestry through his father who is from Galway. The family moved to Chingford where he attended Larkswood Primary Academy until 2004, followed by Chingford Foundation School (also attended by David Beckham). He played football from a young age, joining a local club, Ridgeway Rovers, when he was six in 1999. Kane talked about footballing in the family:

Kane also said: "Most of my family were Spurs fans and I grew up 15 minutes from the ground, so I was always going to be a Spurs fan". He named former Spurs striker Teddy Sheringham his childhood idol, and saw him as a "great finisher" and a role model in his ability to get in the box and score goals. Other childhood sporting influences he cited include David Beckham and Jermain Defoe. Kane has also spoken of his admiration for the former Brazil forward Ronaldo, adding that he loved to watch footage of him on YouTube: "He was one of the first ones I looked at and thought, 'Wow. He's a goalscorer, I want to be a goalscorer.'"

Kane first played for a local club, Ridgeway Rovers, and joined the Arsenal youth academy when he was eight years old. He was released after one season for being "a bit chubby" and not "very athletic", according to Liam Brady who was then in charge of Arsenal's academy. Manager Arsène Wenger stated in November 2015 that he was disappointed that Arsenal chose to release Kane. He also had a trial at Tottenham Hotspur but was not initially successful, and he returned to his old club Ridgeway Rovers. In 2004, at the age of eleven, he joined Watford academy for a four to six-week trial, and was then given another chance at Tottenham after he impressed playing for Watford against Tottenham. He first played at Tottenham as a midfielder – initially in a holding position, then as an attacking midfielder. In his early days at the club, he did not stand out as a player as he was not big nor was he particularly quick, but those who worked with him noted his constant desire to improve various aspects of his game. In the 2008–09 season, he played in the under-16s side that competed in the Copa Chivas tournament in Mexico, and the Bellinzona tournament in Switzerland, scoring three goals. In July 2009, on his 16th birthday, he signed a scholarship contract with Tottenham.

In the 2009–10 season, Kane played 22 times for Tottenham's under-18s, scoring 18 goals. Kane appeared on the first-team bench twice during the 2009–10 season. Both matches were in home domestic cup victories: one the League Cup fixture against Everton on 27 October 2009 and the other in the FA Cup fourth-round replay against Bolton Wanderers on 24 February 2010. He signed his first professional contract with the club in July 2010.

On 7 January 2011, Kane moved to Leyton Orient on loan until the end of the 2010–11 season. Manager Russell Slade was "happy" at his arrival and said, "I'm sure he will have an impact with us over the coming months". He made his first-team debut for Orient on 15 January, coming on as a substitute for Scott McGleish in the 73rd minute of a 1–1 draw away to Rochdale. A week later, Kane scored his first first-team goal against Sheffield Wednesday; making his first-ever start, "unmarked" Kane scored from a Dean Cox freekick in the 57th minute as Orient eventually won 4–0. Slade said that he was "delighted" that Kane scored a goal on his first league start. On 12 February, he scored twice in a 4–1 win over Bristol Rovers, after coming on as a substitute for McGleish in the 70th minute. He ended the season scoring five goals in 18 matches.

On 25 August 2011, Kane made his first appearance for Tottenham, starting in the second leg of their UEFA Europa League qualification round against Hearts, with Tottenham making changes after winning the first leg 5–0. His debut was a goalless match, although he won a penalty after being fouled by goalkeeper Jamie MacDonald, who then saved the penalty which Kane took himself. He went on to make six appearances in the Europa League that season, scoring his first Tottenham goal in the 4–0 win away to Shamrock Rovers on 15 December 2011.

On 29 December 2011, Kane and Tottenham teammate Ryan Mason agreed to join Championship club Millwall on loan from 1 January 2012 until the end of the season. After making his debut against Bristol City, manager Kenny Jackett said that he had "very good debut" but was "unlucky not to score". He also said that Kane would "be a good addition" for the club in the second half of the season. He went on to score seven goals in the final 14 matches of the season. Kane scored nine goals in 27 matches which resulted in him being named Millwall's Young Player of the Year for 2011–12. His run of goals scored towards the end of the season has been credited with helping to raise Millwall in the table away from the threat of relegation that season.

Kane spent pre-season 2012–13 season with Tottenham, scoring a hat-trick in a 6–0 away win against Southend United on 10 August 2012. On 18 August, he made his Premier League debut, against Newcastle United. Coming as an 86th-minute substitute for Sandro, Tottenham lost the match 2–1.

On 31 August 2012, Kane joined Premier League team Norwich City on a season-long loan, making his debut as a substitute against West Ham United. Kane suffered an injury, breaking a metatarsal bone, in the League Cup tie against Doncaster Rovers in only his second appearance. The 19-year-old underwent his rehabilitation at Tottenham but returned to action for Norwich on 29 December 2012, coming off the bench at half time as Norwich lost 3–4 to Manchester City. However, with Tottenham having been unable to add to their attacking options during the January transfer window, they opted to recall Kane on 1 February 2013, four months before he was due to return.

Twenty days after he was recalled to Tottenham, Kane joined Leicester City for the remainder of the season to aid in the club's push for automatic promotion from the Championship. He marked his home debut with a goal against Blackburn Rovers, in a 3–0 win on 26 February 2013. He made 13 appearances for the East Midlands club, eight from the bench, and they reached the play-off semi-final before being eliminated by Watford.

Kane scored his first Tottenham goal of the 2013–14 season at White Hart Lane in a League Cup tie against Hull City, scoring the equaliser in extra time, the match finished 2–2. Tottenham won 8–7 on penalties, with Kane taking and converting the fifth of the nine sets of spot-kicks.

On 7 April 2014, Kane was given his first Premier League start for Tottenham, in a 5–1 win against Sunderland, and scored his first Premier League goal in the 59th minute of the match. He also scored in the following match, helping Tottenham to recover from a 3–0 deficit against West Bromwich Albion before eventually drawing 3–3. He scored for the third match in a row on 19 April, this time helping Tottenham to a 3–1 London derby win at home over Fulham.

Kane made his first appearance of the 2014–15 season as a substitute against West Ham on the opening day of the Premier League season, providing an assist for the match-winning goal by Eric Dier. He scored in both match against Cypriot opposition AEL Limassol in Tottenham's UEFA Europa League play-offs, scoring an 80th-minute winner in the first leg, and opening the scoring in the 3–0 second leg victory after missing a penalty. He scored a late goal against Nottingham Forest in the League Cup to secure a 3–1 victory for Tottenham on 24 September 2014. On 23 October 2014, Kane scored his first professional hat-trick for Tottenham in a 5–1 win over Asteras Tripoli in the group stage of the UEFA Europa League. Kane was forced to play in goal for the final three minutes of the match, after Hugo Lloris had been sent off with no substitutions remaining, and conceded a goal when he dropped a free-kick from Jerónimo Barrales.

On 2 November 2014, Kane came on as a second-half substitute in Tottenham's 2–1 win over Aston Villa and scored his first Premier League goal of the season to win the match in the 90th minute. A week later, Kane was selected in Spurs' starting line-up for the first time in the Premier League season, as the team lost 2–1 at home to Stoke City. He retained his place in the first XI for Spurs' 2–1 win away to Hull City on 23 November, scoring the team's equalising goal. Between 14 and 26 December, Kane scored in three consecutive 2–1 wins for Tottenham, against Swansea City, Burnley and Leicester City respectively. On 1 January 2015, Kane scored twice and won a penalty as Tottenham defeated rivals and league leaders Chelsea 5–3, and he scored a further two in a 3–0 away win against West Bromwich Albion on 31 January, including one from a penalty. Kane set up Christian Eriksen's late equaliser against Sheffield United on 28 January 2015, a goal which put Tottenham into the 2015 League Cup Final. His performances led to him being named as the Premier League Player of the Month for January 2015.

On 2 February 2015, Kane signed a new five-and-a-half-year contract with the club. Five days later, he scored both of Tottenham's goals as they came from behind to defeat Arsenal in the North London derby, his 21st and 22nd goals of the season across all competitions. After scoring against Arsenal, Liverpool and West Ham United, Kane was again named as the Premier League Player of the Month for February 2015, becoming only the fourth player to win the award in consecutive months. Tottenham lost the League Cup Final 2–0 to rivals Chelsea on 1 March 2015, which Kane described as the "worst feeling in the world". Twenty days later, he scored his first Premier League hat-trick in a 4–3 home win over his former loan club Leicester; this brought him to 19 league goals in the season, making him the division's top scorer.

On 5 April, Kane captained Tottenham for the first time in a 0–0 draw with Burnley at Turf Moor. Two weeks later, he scored his 30th goal of the season in a 3–1 win against Newcastle United at St James' Park, making him the first Tottenham player to reach that milestone since Gary Lineker in 1991–92. Later that month, he was included as one of two forwards in the PFA Team of the Year, alongside Chelsea's Diego Costa. He was also voted the PFA Young Player of the Year. On 24 May 2015, he headed in an Eric Dier cross for the only goal of an away win over Everton on the final day of the season to confirm fifth place for Tottenham, thus qualifying them to the group stage of the following season's UEFA Europa League. It was his 21st goal of the league campaign, equalling a Premier League club record alongside Teddy Sheringham, Jürgen Klinsmann and Gareth Bale. At the end of the season, Kane remarked that he had done more in the single campaign than he had expected to do in his whole career.

On Tottenham's pre-season tour of Australia, Kane attracted numerous fans while visiting the Westfield Sydney shopping centre, resulting in the club sending a minibus to escort him away. On 29 July 2015, Tottenham were the guests in the 2015 MLS All-Star Game at Dick's Sporting Goods Park in Commerce City, Colorado. They lost 2–1 to the MLS All-Stars, with Kane scoring their consolation goal in the 37th minute after beating a challenge from Omar Gonzalez, and he was later substituted in the 77th minute.

Kane's squad number was changed from 18 to 10, previously worn by Emmanuel Adebayor. In an interview with "The Daily Telegraph", he said that he changed the number "to become a club legend". With Adebayor and Roberto Soldado having been put up for sale, he began the season as the club's only forward, and the third-choice captain behind Hugo Lloris and Jan Vertonghen. After a 748-minute drought, he scored his first goal of the season on 26 September 2015 as Tottenham came from behind to defeat leaders Manchester City 4–1. Eight days later, he scored an own goal from Jonjo Shelvey's corner kick away to Swansea City, but Tottenham fought back to a 2–2 draw.

On 25 October 2015, Kane scored a hat-trick, including a penalty which he won himself, as Tottenham came from conceding a first-minute goal to triumph 5–1 away to Bournemouth at Dean Court. Eight days later, he recorded his fifth goal of the season with the final goal in a 3–1 win at home to Aston Villa. On 8 November 2015, he gave Tottenham a half-time lead against Arsenal at the Emirates Stadium, albeit in a 1–1 draw; this goal past Petr Čech was from his first touch of Danny Rose's long pass.

Eighteen days after that, he recorded his ninth goal in six matches, the only one of an away match against Qarabağ FK, qualifying Tottenham to the knockout stages of the season's UEFA Europa League. On 19 December 2015, Kane made his 100th appearance for the club in a 2–0 win away to Southampton, and scored his 10th goal in his last 10 matches. A week later, he added two more in a 3–0 win over former loan employers Norwich, putting him on 27 Premier League goals for the year 2015, breaking Sheringham's club record. On 10 January 2016, he scored his 50th goal for Tottenham in a 2–2 draw against Leicester in the third round of the FA Cup.

Kane was Premier League Player of the Month for the third time in March 2016, after scoring five goals in four games, including one in the North London derby. After scoring his 22nd league goal of the season in a 1–1 draw against Liverpool at Anfield on 2 April, Kane became the club's highest goalscorer in a single Premier League season, with six games of the season remaining.

Kane ended the season winning the Premier League Golden Boot, finishing one goal ahead of Sergio Agüero and Jamie Vardy with 25 goals. He was named in the PFA Team of the Year for the second consecutive season, as he helped Tottenham to a third-place finish, and UEFA Champions League qualification.

In the absence of Hugo Lloris, Kane captained Tottenham in their opening home match of the 2016–17 season, assisting Victor Wanyama's winning goal as Spurs beat Crystal Palace 1–0 in a London derby at White Hart Lane. He opened his scoring account in the fourth matchday of the Premier League season, providing the final goal in a 4–0 win away to Stoke City.

On 14 September 2016, Kane made his UEFA Champions League debut in Spurs' 2–1 loss to Monaco at Wembley Stadium. Four days later, he scored the winning goal against Sunderland in the Premier League, but had to be helped off the field after twisting his right ankle attempting a tackle of Papy Djilobodji. Reports indicated that the ligaments in Kane's ankle were damaged, ruling him out for six-to-eight weeks. After missing five league matches and three in the Champions League group phase, Kane made his return at rivals Arsenal on 6 November, scoring from the penalty spot to equalise in a 1–1 draw. On 22 November, he scored his first Champions League goal in the return fixture against Monaco at the Stade Louis II, a game which saw Spurs eliminated from the competition with a 2–1 loss.

On 1 December 2016, Kane signed a new contract with Tottenham, keeping him at the club until 2022. On 1 January 2017, made his 100th Premier League appearance, scoring the first Premier League goal of the new year against Watford on the 27-minute mark, which he extended to a brace after scoring again in the 33rd minute. In his first match after the birth of his daughter, Kane scored a hat-trick in a 4–0 win against West Brom on 14 January. In the fifth round of the 2016–17 FA Cup on 19 February 2017, Kane scored all three goals as Tottenham beat Fulham 3–0. This meant his fifth career hat-trick, and his second in 2017. On 26 February 2017, Kane once again scored a hat-trick as Tottenham beat Stoke 4–0, his third hat-trick in nine games, and his second in consecutive domestic games. The first of these goals was his 100th in club football. He was named Player of the Month for the fourth time in his career in February 2017.

In March 2017, he injured his ankle in an FA Cup match against former loan club Millwall. On 15 April, Kane scored his 20th Premier League goal of the season against Bournemouth on his first start in a month after returning from injury. This made him the fourth player in Premier League history to achieve 20 goals in three consecutive seasons, after Alan Shearer, Thierry Henry and Ruud van Nistelrooy.

On 20 April, Kane was named in the PFA Team of the Year for the third consecutive season. He was also included in the six player shortlists for the PFA Players' Player of the Year and PFA Young Player of the Year awards. Two days later, he scored in Tottenham's 4–2 FA Cup semi-final loss to rivals Chelsea at Wembley Stadium. In the last ever match at White Hart Lane on 14 May, Harry Kane scored the 2–0 goal as Tottenham beat Manchester United 2–1. With two games remaining of the season, Kane stood on 22 goals, two fewer than Romelu Lukaku. With a combined seven goals in the last two fixtures however, a 6–1 win over reigning champions Leicester City and a 7–1 win against Hull City, Kane finished as the top scorer of the Premier League on 29 goals, and thus won his second consecutive Golden Boot, becoming only the fifth player to do so.

After not finding the back of the net in Tottenham's first three games, Kane scored a brace in three of his next four appearances for the club across all competitions. His opening goal against Everton on 9 September was his 100th overall for the club, coming in his 169th appearance. On 26 September, Kane scored his first UEFA Champions League hat-trick in a 3–0 group stage win against Cypriot champions APOEL. He was awarded Premier League Player of the Month for the fifth time, and named September 2017 – in which he scored 13 goals in 10 club and international games – as the best month of his career.
On 23 December, Kane equalled Alan Shearer's record of 36 Premier League goals in a calendar year, having scored a hat-trick in a 0–3 away win to Burnley. He surpassed Shearer's record the following game with another hat-trick in the 5–2 home win against Southampton, ending the year with 39 Premier League goals. The hat-trick, his sixth of the year in the Premier League (eighth in all competitions), also made him the first player in Premier League history to score six hat-tricks in a year. With a total of 56 goals scored in all competitions for the year, he also became Europe's top goal scorer of 2017, breaking the seven-year dominance of Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo as Europe's top goalscorer in a calendar year.

In January 2018, he scored twice in the 4–0 home win against Everton, and became Tottenham's top goalscorer in the Premier League era, breaking Teddy Sheringham's record of 97 Premier League goals for the club. On 4 February, Kane scored an added-time penalty to equalise in a 2–2 draw with Liverpool at Anfield for his 100th Premier League goal; he achieved the century of league goals in 141 games, beaten only by Alan Shearer's 124. He was named in the PFA Team of the Year for the fourth consecutive season in April 2018, alongside fellow forwards Mohamed Salah and Sergio Agüero. On 8 June, Kane signed a new contract to keep him at the club until 2024.

Kane started the season opener against Newcastle United without scoring, before opening his account against Fulham the following weekend. In doing so he ended his hoodoo of failing to score a Premier League goal in the month of August. He also scored for the first time at Old Trafford in the following game as Tottenham won 3–0 in what was only their third away win against Manchester United since 1992, as well as the biggest away win against the club in 46 years. He scored the opening goal against Cardiff on 1 January 2019, and with that goal, he became the first player to have scored a goal against every Premier League team he has faced. On 13 January 2019, in a match against Manchester United, Kane injured his ankle ligaments late in the game, thereby missing some crucial games including the Champions League last-16 home game.

He returned to the first team squad on 23 February 2019, in a match against Burnley, and was immediately placed in the starting XI. He scored the equalizing goal in the 65th minute to tie the score 1-1, although the match ended a 1-2 defeat. He scored the only goal in the Champions League last-16 away tie against Borussia Dortmund to ensure a 4–0 win on aggregate and progress to the club's second quarterfinal in the Champions League. The goal also made him the club's top goalscorer in European competitions with 24 goals scored.

In January 2010, Kane was called up to play for the England under-17 team for the Algarve Tournament in Portugal. Kane missed the 2010 UEFA European Under-17 Championship due to illness, with England going on to win the tournament in his absence. He later moved up to the under-19s and scored twice in a 6–1 victory over Albania on 8 October 2010. Kane played a large role in the England under-19s progression to the semi-finals of the 2012 UEFA European Under-19 Championship in Estonia. Kane scored the winner against France in the final group stage match to ensure the team a safe passage through to the semi-finals. In total Kane appeared 14 times for England U19s and contributed 6 goals during that period.

On 28 May 2013, he was named in manager Peter Taylor's 21-man squad for the 2013 FIFA U-20 World Cup. He made his debut on 16 June, in a 3–0 win in a warm-up match against Uruguay. He assisted Luke Williams' goal in the opening group-stage match on 23 June 2013 against Iraq. He then scored in the following match against Chile, collecting a pass after work by Ross Barkley and firing in from the edge of the penalty area. On 13 August 2013, Kane made his debut for the under-21s against Scotland. In that match, he came on as a substitute in the 58th minute, and England won 6–0. On 10 October, he scored a hat-trick for England under-21s against San Marino during 2015 UEFA European Under-21 Championship qualification. He continued to score prolifically, with his brace against France marking 13 goals in 12 matches for the under-21s.

Kane was named in the England under-21 squad for the 2015 UEFA European Under-21 Championship in the Czech Republic, despite opposition from his club manager Mauricio Pochettino. He played every minute of England's campaign at the tournament, which ended with them eliminated in last place in their group.

Kane was also eligible for the Republic of Ireland through his father, who was born in Galway, but in August 2014 he ruled out switching allegiance, saying that he wanted to break into the England senior team.

After a good run of form with Tottenham and being the third top goal scorer in the Premier League with 16 goals, on 19 March 2015 Kane was named by manager Roy Hodgson in the England squad to face Lithuania in a UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying match and Italy in a friendly. He made his international debut at Wembley Stadium, replacing Wayne Rooney in the second half against Lithuania, and scored just 80 seconds later with a header from a Raheem Sterling cross. On 30 March 2015, the day before the Italy match, Hodgson announced that Kane would start alongside Rooney, and he played the full 90 minutes of the 1–1 draw at Juventus Stadium.

In his next appearance on 5 September 2015, substitute Kane scored the fifth of England's six goals in a win over San Marino which qualified them for UEFA Euro 2016. Kane scored his third England goal against Switzerland in another qualifier three days later, which they won 2–0. On 12 October 2015, as England finished their qualification campaign with a 10th win from 10 matches, Kane's shot hit the post for an own goal by Lithuanian goalkeeper Giedrius Arlauskis in a 3–0 away victory.

On 22 May 2016, Kane opened the scoring in a 2–1 friendly win over Turkey at the City of Manchester Stadium, but later missed a penalty. He was the first England player to fail to score from the penalty spot during a game since Frank Lampard in 2010, and the first to miss the target since Peter Crouch in 2006. At the European Championship in France that June, Kane was assigned to take corner kicks, a tactic which was criticised by pundits, but defended by Hodgson, who said that Kane was the best for the role.

On 10 June 2017, Kane captained England for the first time in their 2018 FIFA World Cup qualifier with Scotland at Hampden Park, scoring an added-time equaliser to rescue a 2–2 draw. On 5 October, he scored an added-time winner against Slovenia which confirmed England's qualification to the 2018 FIFA World Cup.
Kane was named in the 23-man England squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup and was made captain. On 18 June, Kane scored both of England's goals in a 2–1 win over Tunisia, his winning goal coming deep in injury time, in the team's opening group game of the World Cup. In the next group game on 24 June, Kane scored a hat-trick in England's 6–1 win over Panama, which was England's largest ever World Cup victory. With his three goals against Panama, Kane became the third England player to score a hat-trick in a World Cup match, after Geoff Hurst against West Germany in the 1966 final and Gary Lineker against Poland in 1986.
Kane scored his sixth goal of the finals as England overcame Colombia in the Round of 16. Scoring a penalty in a match that finished 1–1 after 120 minutes, also scoring in the penalty shoot-out as England prevailed 4–3; this was the first time that England had managed to win a penalty shoot-out at the World Cup. Kane didn't score again for the rest of the tournament as England finished in fourth place after losing 2–0 Belgium in the third place playoff. However, his six goals in the tournament earned him the Golden Boot as the top goalscorer of the World Cup, the first England player to win the award since Gary Lineker became the first to do so in the 1986 tournament.

The September International Break saw the introduction of the UEFA Nation's League. England's first match was on 8 September 2018 against Spain, which Kane captained for the full 90 minutes in a game which saw England lose 2–1. On 15 October England played Spain for the second time in the group, this time running out 3–2 winners with Kane assisting one of Raheem Sterling's two goals. On 14 November, prior to a friendly against the United States (US), Kane presented Wayne Rooney with England's Golden Boot in recognition of Rooney's 53 England goals, a record that makes him England's all-time top goal scorer. In an interview following the match, which ended in a 3–0 win for England, Rooney revealed that he wanted Harry Kane to present him the award as he believed that Kane will one day beat it. Three days after the US match, Kane captained England in their final Nation's League group match against Croatia as England won 2–1. Kane first assisted Jesse Lingard's equaliser then scored the winning goal which saw England top the group and qualify for the finals in June 2019.

Kane's former youth coach Alex Inglethorpe has said of him:When he first came into the under-18s as a 15 year old, he stood out in the sense he looked a bit gangly. He moved slightly awkwardly, he was a bit cumbersome. But look closer, he had a lot of ability, a great technique. I think he surprised people how good he was. Tactically he was very flexible. He often played in midfield. I remember seeing him once playing as a holding midfielder.

While a teenager, Kane initially struggled in Tottenham's academy, as partially due to his date of birth in July, he was not as physically developed as other players, nor was he as quick. However, he gained the respect of coaches with his technique and desire for self-improvement.

When profiling Kane in February 2013, Talksport said that he was best as a second striker, despite also having ability as a centre forward or in a wide position. They wrote that he preferred to place his shots, although he could also score from distance. The report also noted that he had good pace, but was weak in the air and had not scored on his loan at Norwich. Initially a back-up to £26 million Spanish import Roberto Soldado and frequently loaned out, Kane was eventually made Tottenham's starting forward by manager Mauricio Pochettino. Under Pochettino, Kane said that his game has improved through the tough training techniques instituted by the manager. He also strives to achieve marginal gain in order to maximise his potential by tweaking various aspects of his training and preparations as well as nutrition.

Former Tottenham manager David Pleat described Kane as an "old-fashioned traditional centre-forward". Clive Allen, who coached him at Tottenham, stated that "one thing I'd say about him, which unfortunately you don't say about a lot of young footballers, is that he had a passion for the game. He loves football, he loves playing, he loves scoring goals". His former Tottenham under-21 coach Les Ferdinand likened Kane's movement to their former forward Teddy Sheringham, and the power and accuracy of his shots to Alan Shearer.

Kane's style of play has been compared to that of former Tottenham forward Jürgen Klinsmann, a comparison Kane called flattering in February 2015. In March 2015, Football Association chairman Greg Dyke named Kane as the benchmark for clubs producing young English players. Shearer said that month that the three best strikers playing in the league were Kane, Diego Costa and Sergio Agüero.

After Tottenham's victory over Chelsea in January 2015, blogger Chris Miller wrote, "Nobody thought he was the guy who was going to give that performance against Chelsea". In February 2015, BBC Sport wrote that Kane was best as a lone striker, with his "hold-up play and close control" making him apt in other positions as well. Also that month, "Match of the Day" pundit Danny Murphy said that the England team should be built around Kane, stating, "I'm struggling to see a weakness in the lad's game". ESPN reporter Michael Cox stated that "Kane was initially considered a pure goal scorer, he's actually a good all-round player, often playing as an attacking midfielder", pointing out that during the 2018 FIFA World Cup "Kane's contributions in deeper positions were outstanding, his back-to-goal work as impressive as ever".

Kane has a sponsorship deal with sportswear and equipment supplier Nike: he wears Nike Hypervenom football boots. Following his 100th Premier League goal in February 2018 Nike launched the special-edition Hypervenom 3 HK. In 2018 he featured in a Nike commercial, 'Nothing Beats A Londoner', along with other sports stars based in the city, including quadruple Olympic champion Mo Farah and Chelsea playmaker Eden Hazard, highlighting London's diversity. Ahead of UEFA Euro 2016, Kane featured in advertisements for Mars Bars and Beats by Dr. Dre headphones, the latter alongside Antoine Griezmann, Mario Götze and Cesc Fàbregas.

Kane features in EA Sports' "FIFA" video game series: he was named in the Team of the Year in "FIFA 18", joining Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo in attack. Kane and Camila Cabello announced the winner of the "Best International Male Solo Artist" award at the 2018 Brit Awards at the O Arena on 21 February, namely Kendrick Lamar.

In an interview given in February 2015, Kane said that he was in a relationship with Katie Goodland, whom he has known since childhood. He told "Esquire" magazine, "We went to school together, so she's seen my whole career. Of course, she's finding it a little crazy. I think she's even been in the papers a couple of times taking the dogs out." Kane and Goodland announced the birth of their first child, Ivy Jane Kane, on 8 January 2017. On 1 July, Kane announced his engagement to Goodland on his Twitter account. In January 2018, Kane announced that he and Kate were expecting their second child. The birth of their second daughter, Vivienne Jane Kane, was announced on 8 August 2018.

Kane and Goodland have two Labrador retrievers, Brady and Wilson, named after Tom Brady and Russell Wilson, quarterbacks of the NFL's New England Patriots and Seattle Seahawks, respectively. Kane has cited "The Brady 6", a documentary about Brady, as an inspiration for his development.

Kane abstains from alcohol during the football season, and starting from 2017, he hired a full-time chef to optimise his nutrition. He plays golf in his free time.

Kane was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2019 New Year Honours for services to football.

Tottenham Hotspur

Individual

Orders



</doc>
<doc id="30528536" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30528536" title="Brown Betty (Fringe)">
Brown Betty (Fringe)

"Brown Betty" is the 20th episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series "Fringe", and is the only one of the series performed as a musical. The episode was written by co-showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman, and consulting producer Akiva Goldsman. It was directed by filmmaker Seith Mann. As the episode begins with Peter's continued disappearance, Walter consoles himself by smoking a strain of marijuana called "Brown Betty." Most of the episode is then told from his drug-addled perspective, in which Olivia is a 1940s noir detective and Peter is a conman who ran away with Walter's glass heart.

The episode first aired in the United States on April 29, 2010 on the Fox Broadcasting Company and was seen by 5.551 million viewers in the United States. The episode was part of the network's "Fox Rocks" campaign, in which musical elements were incorporated into various shows in their lineup for a week, a concept that was panned by critics before the episode aired. Nevertheless, "Brown Betty" garnered mostly favorable reviews, with many noting the musical element as a strong point. Various cast members also stated that they enjoyed the musical aspect of the episode. It was ranked the fourth best episode of the entire series by "Entertainment Weekly".

The episode begins with Dr. Walter Bishop (John Noble) smoking his own strain of marijuana called "Brown Betty" while Olivia Dunham (Anna Torv) attempts to find his son, Peter (Joshua Jackson), who disappeared at the end of the previous episode after learning Walter stole him from a parallel universe. Because Dunham's sister Rachel (Ari Graynor) is unavailable, she brings her niece Ella (Lily Pilblad) to the lab for Walter and Astrid Farnsworth (Jasika Nicole) to look after. To pass the time, Walter tells Ella a detective noir story in which Olivia is a private investigator.

In the story, Rachel approaches Olivia to find her boyfriend, Peter, who has gone missing. During the investigation, Detective Phillip Broyles (Lance Reddick) leads her to Massive Dynamic, where the CEO Nina Sharp (Blair Brown) informs her that Peter is a conman and industrial spy. Later, Rachel is found murdered, with her heart taken. Olivia finds a check signed by Walter Bishop, who in the story, is an inventor that has created "everything that is wonderful in the world" in order to benefit humanity (hugs, rainbows, bubblegum, singing corpses). Questioning Walter, Olivia learns that Peter worked with Walter, who treated him like a son. One day, Walter made a glass heart but Peter later stole it. Were the heart not to be found, Walter and his ideas would die. To help find Peter, Olivia calls her assistant, "Esther Figglesworth" (Farnsworth).

Later, Olivia follows Nina Sharp, only to find herself kidnapped by a "watcher" (the Observer, played by Michael Cerveris) working for Sharp. The watcher attempts to kill Olivia by placing her in a wooden crate and sending it out to sea. Fortunately, Olivia is rescued by Peter. After taking her to his hideout, he reveals that the glass heart was his by nature of having been born with it, and that after working with Walter, Peter loved him enough to donate it to him. However, he took it back after learning a terrible secret behind his inventions: they were stolen from children's dreams and replaced with nightmares. Later, the house is under attack by an army of watchers. Olivia fights them off, but not before they manage to take Peter's heart with them. After placing batteries in his heart cavity to act as a temporary measure, Olivia discovers that Walter set up the attack. In the confrontation, Walter apologises for his misdeeds and promises to change. However, Peter does not forgive Walter and leaves him, ending the story.

Ella is disappointed by the ending, as that is not how she believes stories ought to end, so she proposes an alternate ending: when Walter says he can change, Peter believes him and splits the glass heart in two, and together they "lived happily ever after." At the episode's end, Olivia returns, having found no leads on Peter's location. Farnsworth returns Walter to his home, where the Observer watches from a distance and notes Peter's disappearance.

The episode was originally called "Overture", but was later changed to "Brown Betty" as a reference to Walter's marijuana habit. It was written by executive producers Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman along with consulting producer Akiva Goldsman. Seith Mann served as the director, his only directional credit for the series. For Sweeps Week, the Fox network announced the "Fox Rocks" campaign, in which various shows within their lineup were encouraged to produce musical episodes in the same vein as the sophomore show "Glee". Along with "Fringe", "Family Guy", "Bones", "The Simpsons", and a few other Fox series took up the musical theme. The episode was already in development before Fox's announcement. Jeff Pinkner stated that the music was not in the original plan for the episode, but was added to fit into Fox's sweeps stunt. As the episode occurred after the big reveal of Peter's true identity ("The Man from the Other Side"), the writers knew they wanted "Brown Betty" to explore the aftermath from Walter's damaged psyche. Fox did not ask for a full-blown musical, but requested that some music be integrated into the episode in any shape or form. Pinkner elaborated: 
"We came up with a narrative device to really explore Walter's feelings. We had largely all the elements of the episode in place and Fox called and said, 'Hey, how would you guys feel about if we asked you to have some musical element in the show? Anything, like just feature a song playing.' They didn't ask us to do "Glee". And we instantly, before we got off the phone, said, 'Well, this is what we're thinking for the episode and here's an idea how that could work for us.' We turned their request into what felt like a positive for us and really deepened and sort of blew the episode out even further in the direction we were already taking it".
The episode begins with Walter smoking his own strain of marijuana while listening to "Roundabout" by the band Yes. The scene was originally removed out of concern it would be airing on network television, but was later reinserted because "the story itself had so many different genres playing. We had a noir element. We had a musical element. and it just really played funnier coming from an altered state of Walter", according to co-producer Tanya Swerling. Jeff Pinkner added "We set out to do an episode that explored Walter's state of mind — he's dealing with some very upsetting news. When we realized that the way Walter would deal with such news would be to try to anesthetize himself with copious amounts of marijuana, well, singing and dancing became a natural outcome." Music supervisor Charles Scott IV and J.R. Wyman are big Yes fans, and consequently chose the song that appeared in the opening scene. As the episode was done with a 1940s aesthetic, every department had to act accordingly. Torv's normally straight hair was placed into a curl hairdo fashionable for the time period, and lighting changes were made to reflect the period as well. New furniture was brought in for various sets, such as Walter's lab and Nina's office at Massive Dynamic, which was then removed in preparation for the following week. The ending was a challenge for the producers, as it was supposed to end with Ella's version of the story conclusion and Walter still feeling upset over Peter's absence, but they felt this ended making viewers feel depressed. They debated ways to make it a happier tone, so Wyman added the Observer scene to change the feeling of the episode, and prepare viewers for next week.

As guest actor Leonard Nimoy, who plays William Bell, was unavailable to shoot the brief conversation with Blair Brown's Nina Sharp, the producers knew they wanted to do something a little more creative for the scene. They talked to cartoonist Frank Miller and hired a special effects school to do all the modeling, which they accomplished based on photos of Nimoy, because the actor could not come in to have his head scanned; he did some voicework however. The finished scene included an animated version of Nimoy's head, shown through the same window as the one used in "Peter".

Pinkner thought the added musical element improved the episode, because it gave insights into each of the characters' psyches. According to Wyman and Pinkner, the "episode was supposed to be a fantastical episode in the first place, and so the music supports the storytelling". Wyman continued in a different interview with the "Los Angeles Times" that "Noirs traditionally are morality tales, and that's kind of what we're doing. We felt that that was a great way to get across Walter's mind frame and where his head is at right now, with his son missing". Other cast members also praised the added music. John Noble wrote "It really deepened and blew the episode out even further in the direction we were already taking. We get [Walter's] fractured take on the world and his condition now that Peter has left. The music really supports the storytelling". He added, "It is like a mind-trip of Walter's. It is Walter trying to grapple with the fact that his son is gone". Jasika Nicole continued: "I have a musical theater background, so I've been waiting for some moment in some realm of where I am in TV and film for this to happen and, you know, of course, when "Glee" came on the air I was like, 'Great, that was my chance,' and I'm in this show, which I love this show, but I'm never going to sing and dance in this show. And I did! It's so awesome!" Swerling called it "the longest and possibly most difficult episode of the season" to create.

As with other "Fringe" episodes, Fox released a science lesson plan for grade school children focusing on the science seen in "Brown Betty", with the intention of having "students learn about fingerprints and how they can be collected and used as evidence to identify an individual."

The co-music supervisor, Billy Gottlieb, called the episode a "little mini feature film in the sense that we had a lot of camera performances with the music." In order to get the best performances out of the cast and be able to shoot the scenes in various different ways, the producers had the actors go into a music studio in Vancouver and record their respective musical numbers. According to Gottlieb, the actors were very nervous about singing in the episode, despite their parts being around a mere 40 seconds. Actor Joshua Jackson, who plays Peter Bishop, was adamant that he not sing in the episode, despite the fact he frequently sings on set, causing him to be one of the few cast members with no musical part. As the original script contained no musical number for Jasika Nicole, she emailed Jeff Pinkner specifically asking him to let her sing, which he then approved. Some critics noted their surprise that Tony Award-winning actor Michael Cerveris did not sing in the episode. The producers were initially going to have him sing Django Reinhardt's "Blue Moon", but changed their minds because they thought it would be better to keep the Observer out of the musical aspect of the episode. Despite the pre-recordings, the audio used in the episode was taken from the actors actually singing on set. Tanya Swerling believed the recordings were not a wasted effort however, as it helped make the actors more comfortable about singing on set. At the end of shooting, Gottlieb believed "everybody was great... they could jump on stage and do Broadway and it wouldn't be a problem for any of them". He and other crew members called Jasika Nicole "probably the most accomplished" musical person of the cast. As one of the episode writers, Akiva Goldsman chose the Stevie Wonder song "For Once in My Life".

On composing the episode's score, Chris Tilton cited "Chinatown" as a big influence, and commented "the idea was to have this noir feel but still not be totally away from "Fringe"".

The episode featured excerpted music from the following tracks:


"Brown Betty" was watched by 5.551 million viewers in the United States, with a 3.4 share out 5 among all households and a 2.0/6 share of the audience aged 18–49. The episode fell five percent from the previous week.

The episode premiered to generally positive reviews. Although initially cringing over the musical premise, Ramsey Isler of IGN called the episode "admittedly fun" because it "gave us an indirect window to view how Walter feels about himself". In a review of the DVD, another critic from IGN later called it the "worst overall episode" of the season however, asking the question "Musical numbers and Olivia Dunham: who thought this would be a good idea?" Ken Tucker of "Entertainment Weekly" was also initially irritated after hearing Fox's musical plans, and consequently gave "Fringe a lot of credit for pulling off this hour so cleverly" Jennifer Walker from "TV Fanatic" thought the episode was "bizarre" to watch; it "held our interest for the entire 60 minutes, but really failed to introduce any new information about Peter and the unknown man that has crossed into our dimension". "MTV"'s John Wigler loved the "noir" element, and thought "each and every participating "Fringe" cast member exhibited great musical ability. Overall, it was a very solid effort on everyone's part". Jane Boursaw of "TV Squad" loved the scenes between Walter and Ella, and thought "it was downright brilliant to create a story within a story". While he praised the episode's production and the singing abilities of the cast, Kurt Anthony Krug of "Mania.com" wrote a negative review: "All in all, what was supposed to be a fun filler episode before the question of where Peter went at the end of the last episode when he found out he was the Peter from an alternate reality – one of the turning points in the show’s mythology – fell flat". Sarah Stegall of SFScope enjoyed it, writing "There was just enough music, and just enough dance, to season this story without overburdening it". She praised the risktaking it took to make the episode "edgy and whimsical, casting aside the concrete conventions of television storytelling...Not only was it entertaining, but it moved the storyline forward on some important emotional fronts, as the characters deal with Peter's disappearance in ways that protect them, but reveal as well".

Andrew Hanson from the "Los Angeles Times" also was impressed with the cast's singing abilities, and praised the writers' risk-taking: "that just goes to show how well thought out, creative, and just plain fun tonight’s “Fringe” really was. A lot of people would have pegged a 1940s film noir musical episode as a big risk, but the bigger the risk, the bigger the pay out". Rhee Dee of "Pinkraygun.com" commented "After the revelation in the last episode, and Peter running away, this episode was a great way to express Walter’s grief and guilt about this whole situation without actually watching Walter talk about how sad and guilty he feels about everything. Walter’s story serves as a powerful metaphor for how he actually feels". Tim Grierson of "New York Magazine" thought the episode turned out to be simply mediocre because "its noir elements weren’t incorporated in a really interesting way, and as for the musical numbers, they tended to be throwaway bits, save for “fictional” Dunham crooning “For Once in My Life” to the seemingly dying “fictional” Peter near the episode’s end". Grierson continued that "If a show is going to completely throw away its usual rulebook for a fun onetime-only episode, it would be great if the writers could come up with a story as audacious as their premise. But aside from some Chinatown references, fancy threads, and mildly clever mirroring of the show’s mythology — Massive Dynamic is up to no good in this story-land world as well — 'Brown Betty' wasn’t all that enjoyable because it didn’t do a great job of capturing what generally makes Fringe enjoyable".

Noel Murray of "The A.V. Club" graded the episode an "A-", while "Television Without Pity" gave it a "C+". Jeff Jensen of "Entertainment Weekly" named it the fourth best episode of the series, explaining "The late season lark that officially launched a tradition for similar stunts, the musical film noir homage 'Brown Betty'... was an offbeat gem that expressed all of "Fringe"s core themes — redemption, connection, rehumanization — and encapsulated the key relationships (the slow-moving Walter-Peter reconciliation; Peter and Olivia's carefully tended soul-deep romance) more poignantly than most on-point episodes of "Fringe", and it left fans wanting the show to keep pushing the innovation. It could never do it enough." In a similar list, Den of Geek named it the ninth best episode of the series, explaining that "it shouldn’t work, and yet it does, because although technically nothing happens, the episode shows us just how deep Walter has sunk into a metaphorical pit of despair and guilt, making himself the villain in his own story and despairing of ever being forgiven. It also gives the audience a refreshing break from some of the high level angst of the end of the season, allowing Peter and Olivia to act out a properly romantic storyline while their characters in the ‘real’ world have been torn apart. Also, there are singing corpses in it. Only on "Fringe"."

"Brown Betty," along with Music Editor Paul Apelgren, was nominated for Best Sound Editing: TV Short Form Music in a Musical by the Motion Picture Sound Editors for the 2011 Golden Reel Awards. "The Box", a season three "Fringe" episode, was also nominated for Best Sound Editing: TV Short Form Music. "Brown Betty" lost to an episode of "Glee".



</doc>
<doc id="30542186" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30542186" title="Malpuech facial clefting syndrome">
Malpuech facial clefting syndrome

Malpuech facial clefting syndrome, also called Malpuech syndrome or Gypsy type facial clefting syndrome, is a rare congenital syndrome. It is characterized by facial clefting (any type of cleft in the bones and tissues of the face, including a cleft lip and palate), a caudal appendage (a "human tail"), growth deficiency, intellectual and developmental disability, and abnormalities of the renal system (kidneys) and the male genitalia. Abnormalities of the heart, and other skeletal malformations may also be present. The syndrome was initially described by Guilliaume Malpuech and associates in 1983. It is thought to be genetically related to Juberg-Hayward syndrome. Malpuech syndrome has also been considered as part of a spectrum of congenital genetic disorders associated with similar facial, urogenital and skeletal anomalies. Termed "3MC syndrome", this proposed spectrum includes Malpuech, Michels and Mingarelli-Carnevale (OSA) syndromes. Mutations in the "COLLEC11" and "MASP1" genes are believed to be a cause of these syndromes. The incidence of Malpuech syndrome is unknown. The pattern of inheritance is autosomal recessive, which means a defective (mutated) gene associated with the syndrome is located on an autosome, and the syndrome occurs when two copies of this defective gene are inherited.

Malpuech syndrome is congenital, being apparent at birth. It is characterized by a feature known as facial clefting. Observed and noted in the initial description of the syndrome as a cleft lip and palate, facial clefting is identified by clefts in the bones, muscles and tissues of the face, including the lips and palate. The forms of cleft lip and palate typically seen with Malpuech syndrome are midline (down the middle of the lip and palate) or bilateral (affecting both sides of the mouth and palate). Facial clefting generally encompasses a wide range of severity, ranging from minor anomalies such as a bifid (split) uvula, to a cleft lip and palate, to major developmental and structural defects of the facial bones and soft tissues. Clefting of the lip and palate occurs during embryogenesis. Additional facial and ortho-dental anomalies that have been described with the syndrome include: hypertelorism (unusually wide-set eyes, sometimes reported as telecanthus), narrow palpebral fissures (the separation between the upper and lower eyelids) and ptosis (drooping) of the eyelids, frontal bossing (prominent eyebrow ridge) with synophris, highly arched eyebrows, wide nasal root and a flattened nasal tip, malar hypoplasia (underdeveloped upper cheek bone), micrognathia (an undersized lower jaw), and prominent incisors. Auditory anomalies include an enlarged ear ridge, and hearing impairment associated with congenital otitis media (or "glue ear", inflammation of the middle ear) and sensorineural hearing loss.

Another feature identified with Malpuech syndrome is a caudal appendage. A caudal appendage is a congenital outgrowth stemming from the coccyx (tailbone). Present in many non-human animal species as a typical tail, this feature when seen in an infant has been described as a "human tail". This was observed by Guion-Almeida (1995) in three individuals from Brazil. The appendage on X-rays variously appeared as a prominent protrusion of the coccyx. On a physical examination, the appendage resembles a nodule-like stub of an animal tail.

Deficiencies such as mental retardation, learning disability, growth retardation and developmental delay are common. Psychiatric manifestations that have been reported with the syndrome include psychotic behavior, obsessive–compulsive disorder, loss of inhibition, hyperactivity, aggression, fear of physical contact, and compulsive actions like echolalia (repeating the words spoken by another person). Neuromuscular tics have also been noted.

Urogenital abnormalities, or those affecting the urinary and reproductive systems, are common with the syndrome. Malpuech et al. (1983) and Kerstjens-Frederikse et al. (2005) reported variously in affected males a micropenis, hypospadias (a congenital mislocation of the urinary meatus), cryptorchidism (ectopic or undescended testes), bifid (split) and underdeveloped scrotum, and an obstructive urethral valve. An affected boy was also reported by Reardon et al. (2001) with left renal agenesis, an enlarged and downwardly displaced right kidney, cryptorchidism and a shawl scrotum. Other malformations that have been noted with the syndrome are omphalocele and an umbilical hernia.
Congenital abnormalities of the heart have also been observed with Malpuech syndrome. From a healthy Japanese couple, Chinen and Naritomi (1995) described the sixth child who had features consistent with the disorder. This two-month-old male infant was also affected by cardiac anomalies including patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and ventricular septal defect. The opening in the ductus arteriosus associated with PDA had been surgically repaired in the infant at 38 days of age. A number of minor skeletal aberrations were also reported in the infant, including wormian bones at the lambdoid sutures.

Malpuech syndrome, as with the other disorders within the 3MC syndrome consideration, is caused by mutations in the "COLLEC11" and "MASP1" genes. In an investigation by Rooryck et al. (2011), eleven families affected by 3MC syndrome were studied, which resulted in the identification of these two mutations. Both genes encode proteins of the lectin complement pathway, which plays a role in the complement system of innate, or non-specific immunity in humans and other species.

The "COLLEC11", or "CL-K1" gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 2 (2p25.3) in humans. The CL-K1 protein is a C-type lectin, and belongs to the collectin family of these proteins. Other than its role in innate immunity, the protein is thought to be involved in the development of tissues including craniofacial cartilage, the heart and kidney during embryogenesis. This function in facial development was corroborated through study of the zebrafish, where mutations in its version of "CL-K1" contributed to craniofacial abnormalities possibly associated with errors in neural crest cell migration.

The "MASP1", or "Mannan-binding Serine Protease I" gene is located on the long arm of human chromosome 3 at 3q27-q28. The protein is a type of connectin called a mannan-binding lectin, which plays a role in innate immunity by binding to pathogens such as viruses including HIV.

As described by Sirmaci et al. (2010), three Turkish individuals from two consanguineous families (the children of relatives such as cousins are said to be in a consanguineous family) with various characteristics of 3MC syndrome, including facial dysmorphism and a caudal appendage, were evaluated. Investigation of homologous chromosomes through gene mapping revealed an autozygous region (a location on a chromosome where both alleles of a gene originate from a common ancestor) at chromosome 3q27 in both families. In one family, a missense mutation in "MASP1" at this location resulted in the replacement of the amino acid glycine by arginine at position 687 in the gene sequence. The mutation cosegregated with the observed phenotype. In individuals from the second family, DNA sequencing of "MASP1" showed a nonsense mutation that resulted in a deactivation of tryptophan at position 290 in the gene, that also cosegregated with the phenotype. Both mutations occur in a form of "MASP1" known to process IGFBP5; loss of this function associated with mutation of "MASP1" causes disruptions in the availability of insulin-like growth factor during craniofacial and musculoskeletal development during the embryonic period. These results indicate that mutations in "MASP1" are responsible for an array of features found with malformation disorders including Malpuech syndrome.

The syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. This means the defective gene(s) responsible for the disorder ("COLLEC11", "MASP1") is located on an autosome (chromosomes 2 and 3 are autosomes), and two copies of the defective gene (one inherited from each parent) are required in order to be born with the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive disorder both carry one copy of the defective gene, but usually do not experience any signs or symptoms of the disorder.

It is suggested that the diagnostic criteria for Malpuech syndrome should include cleft lip and/or palate, typical associated facial features, and at least two of the following: urogenital anomalies, caudal appendage, and growth or developmental delay. 
Due to the relatively high rate of hearing impairment found with the disorder, it too may be considered in the diagnosis. Another congenital disorder, Wolf-Hirschhorn (Pitt-Rogers-Danks) syndrome, shares Malpuech features in its diagnostic criteria. Because of this lacking differentiation, karyotyping (microscopic analysis of the chromosomes of an individual) can be employed to distinguish the two. Whereas deletions in the short arm of chromosome 4 would be revealed with Wolf-Hirschhorn, a karyotype without this aberration present would favor a Malpuech syndrome diagnosis. Also, the karyotype of an individual with Malpuech syndrome alone will be normal.
Malpuech syndrome has been shown to have physical, or phenotypical similarities with several other genetic disorders. A report by Reardon et al. (2001) of a nine-year-old boy exhibiting facial, caudal and urogenital anomalies consistent with Malpuech syndrome, who also had skeletal malformites indicative of Juberg-Hayward syndrome, suggests that the two disorders may be allelic (caused by different mutations of the same gene).

Along with several other disorders that have similar, or overlapping features and autosomal recessive inheritance, Malpuech syndrome has been considered to belong under the designation "3MC syndrome". Titomanlio et al. (2005) described a three-year-old female known to have Michels syndrome. In their review of the physical similarities between Michels, Malpuech and Mingarelli-Carnevale syndromes—particularly the facial appearance including instances of cleft lip and palate, and ptosis, and a similarity of congenital abdominal and urogenital anomalies—they believed the syndromes may represent a spectrum of genetic disorders rather than three individual disorders. They initially suggested this spectrum could be named 3MC (Michels-Malpuech-Mingarelli-Carnevale) syndrome. This conclusion and the name 3MC syndrome was supported by Leal et al. (2008), who reported a brother and sister with an array of symptoms that overlapped the various syndromes. Further assertion of 3MC syndrome was by Rooryck et al. (2011) in an elaboration of its cause.

Many of the congenital malformations found with Malpuech syndrome can be corrected surgically. These include cleft lip and palate, omphalocele, urogenital and craniofacial abnormalities, skeletal deformities such as a caudal appendage or scoliosis, and hernias of the umbillicus. The primary area of concern for these procedures applied to a neonate with congenital disorders including Malpuech syndrome regards the logistics of anesthesia. Methods like tracheal intubation for management of the airway during general anesthesia can be hampered by the even smaller, or maldeveloped mouth of the infant. For regional anesthesia, methods like spinal blocking are more difficult where scoliosis is present. In a 2010 report by Kiernan et al., a four-year-old girl with Malpuech syndrome was being prepared for an unrelated tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. While undergoing intubation, insertion of a laryngoscope, needed to identify the airway for the placement of the endotracheal tube, was made troublesome by the presence of micrognathia attributed to the syndrome. After replacement with a laryngoscope of adjusted size, intubation proceeded normally. Successful general anesthesia followed.

A rare follow-up of a male with Malpuech syndrome was presented by Priolo et al. (2007). Born at term from an uneventful pregnancy and delivery, the infant underwent a surgical repair of a cleft lip and palate. No problems were reported with the procedure. A heart abnormality, atrial septal defect, was also apparent but required no intervention. At age three years, mental retardation, hyperactivity and obsessive compulsive disorder were diagnosed; hearing impairment was diagnosed at age six, managed with the use of hearing aids. Over the course of the decade that followed, a number of psychiatric evaluations were performed. At age 14, he exhibited a fear of physical contact; at age 15, he experienced a severe psychotic episode, characterized by agitation and a loss of sociosexual inhibition. This array of symptoms were treated pharmocologically (with prescription medications). He maintained a low level of mental deficiency by age 17, with moments of compulsive echolalia.

The incidence of Malpuech syndrome has not been determined. A 1999 report by Crisponi et al. suggested that only about 12 individuals worldwide were affected by the disorder at that time. The syndrome was first reported by Guilliaume Malpuech and colleagues in 1983, observed in four children of unspecified gender in what was described as a gypsy family. The children included three siblings and their first cousin; the family was known to be highly consanguineous.


</doc>
<doc id="30627252" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30627252" title="Lauren Zizes">
Lauren Zizes

Lauren Zizes is a recurring fictional character from the Fox musical comedy-drama series, "Glee". The character is portrayed by actress Ashley Fink, and has appeared in "Glee" since the season one episode "Wheels", first broadcast on November 11, 2009. Lauren was developed by "Glee" creators Ryan Murphy, Brad Falchuk, and Ian Brennan. She is a member of New Directions, the glee club at the fictional William McKinley High School in Lima, Ohio, where the show is set. Her storylines have seen her interact with other members of the glee club and form a relationship with Noah Puckerman (Mark Salling). Lauren is also the president of the AV club, and a member of the school's wrestling team. She joins the glee club in the show's second season, putting her in close contact with some of the shows main characters.

Following the character's significantly expanded role in the second season, Fink's portrayal has received predominantly positive reviews. Rosie O'Donnell criticized the character, saying that Fink was unattractive and therefore a bad representation of fat people, but later apologized for these remarks. Lauren made her solo musical debut in the second season, performing The Waitresses' "I Know What Boys Like" in the episode "Comeback". The song was well received by critics, and was released as a single, available for download; it was subsequently included on the EP released in September 2011 through the Target chain, "Glee: The Music, Dance Party". Although Lauren also appears in ensemble musical performances, Fink is not credited as a vocalist on the series' soundtrack albums. Lauren's role was reduced in the beginning of the third season, and she made a final, non-speaking appearance in the third episode, "Asian F". After this, it was confirmed she would appear once again in Glee and doing so in the fourth season's episode "Sadie Hawkins", which premiered on 24 January 2013. After this, she made numerous appearances in flashbacks before appearing one final time in the series finale, "Dreams Come True", during the performance of OneRepublic's "I Lived" by the glee club's alumni.

Throughout the first season of "Glee", Lauren makes numerous guest appearances. She is a member of the McKinley High wrestling team, as well as president of the AV club. She first appears in the episode "Wheels", where she unsuccessfully tries out for a spot on the cheerleading team. She reappears in "Hell-O", when cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester assembles a group of unpopular, lonely students, whom she dubs the "Old Maid's Club". Lauren later helps glee club co-captain Rachel Berry (Lea Michele) to rig hidden microphones in the choir room to prove that the rest of the glee club are not pulling their weight in rehearsals. She is later seen as the leader of a group of goths who idolize "Twilight" character Edward Cullen.

Lauren's role becomes more prominent in the second season. Glee club member Puck (Mark Salling) asks her to join New Directions so they will have enough members to qualify for a show choir competition. Lauren accepts, on the condition that she gets seven minutes in heaven with him, though it is later revealed that she became bored with Puck's kissing style after three minutes. In the Valentine's Day-themed episode "Silly Love Song", Puck reveals that he has fallen in love with Lauren, and serenades her with Queen's "Fat Bottomed Girls". She finds his song choice insulting and stands him up on a pre-Valentine's date, but eventually agrees to spend Valentine's Day with him as friends. Lauren makes her solo debut in the following episode, where she performs a rendition of "I Know What Boys Like." Puck helps her, by advising her to picture the other members in their underwear, which she does in her timid-turned-confident performance. In the episode, "Sexy", Lauren enlists Puck to make a sex tape with her, as she believes the publicity will make her a star, but they give up the idea when they learn it would constitute child pornography, as both are underage.

In "Born This Way", Lauren reveals to Puck that she'd been a child beauty queen, "Miss Tiara Toddler", before she gained weight and became ineligible; Puck tells her he will run a campaign for her to become prom queen, and be her king. When Quinn, who is prom queen frontrunner, sees Lauren putting up posters for her own candidacy, she confronts Lauren, and the ensuing encounter is heated. Lauren decides to dig up dirt on Quinn as a campaign tactic, and aided by Puck, discovers that Quinn used to be overweight and unpopular before slimming down and transferring to McKinley; Lauren then plasters the school with pictures of the old Quinn, humiliating her. But the tactic backfires, making Quinn more popular, and hurting Lauren's candidacy. Lauren apologizes to Quinn, Quinn says she respects Lauren, and the two reach an understanding. Neither Lauren nor Puck win the race for prom queen and king, but they remain a couple; they fly with the rest of New Directions to the nationals competition in New York City, where the glee club comes in twelfth out of fifty teams. This defeat leads Lauren to quit the glee club at the beginning of the third season and break up with Puck.

Lauren is portrayed by actress Ashley Fink. She made routine guest appearances throughout the first season, and became a member of the McKinley High glee club in the episode "Special Education". Upon receiving the script in which Lauren joins the club, Fink initially reacted with disbelief. She commented, "I didn't quite believe it at first, I thought I was getting "Punk'd"." She said that being cast in "Glee" makes her feel like "the luckiest girl in the world". Fink's favorite element of "Glee" is how series creator Ryan Murphy manages to take the underdogs and make them shine. She said, "In life, there's so much diversity, and it's not necessarily represented on television. I think "Glee" is one of the few shows that actually displays the diversity and it’s just so inspirational." When asked about her casting process, Fink said:

Fink does not know how long her character will be featured on "Glee". When asked about what she likes about her character, Fink said: "I think what I love about Lauren is she's so strong and so confident and she knows what she wants and I feel very blessed to play a role model for people who have ever felt other or different. I remember how I used to feel watching TV and seeing Sara Rue on "Popular" because she was an inspiration to me. It's funny because what I love about Lauren is that she's unapologetic and she's confident and she's making Puck work for it and she's not just looking for a roll in the hay. I think that they are very sweet together, there is this vulnerability when they are both such bad asses and you put them together and I think there is something really special there. What I appreciate about Lauren is that she's like I don't need to give it to you, you're going to work for it, and I think that's a great message to send to young girls. I think that he is smitten and she is probably a little smitten too but I think she has enough self esteem not to give everything up for the charming cute boy that's kind of after her." Kevin Fallon, a writer for "The Atlantic", reacted favorably to the casting of Fink: ""Glee" hit the trifecta this year with its three major cast additions. First there were Darren Criss—who's exploded with popularity—and Chord Overstreet. Now there's Ashley Fink's Lauren. And while the tough-only-on-the-outside Lauren can deliciously out-sass Santana Lopez, it's her straight-talking that really has me sold."

In her first episode, it is revealed that Lauren is a member of William McKinley High's wrestling team. "TV Squad" has said that "Lauren can deliver a zinger with the bite of Sue Sylvester and the humor of our beloved Brittany Pierce." Seth Abramovitch of "TV.com" expressed his dissatisfaction with her attitude: "Zizes isn't just a heavy, supremely confident girl. She's also extremely violent. She’s on the wrestling team, speaks regularly of injuring Puck, and, in one hallway smackdown against the jealous Santana Lopez, proved she was a lot more than just bark. And you did catch that part about Zizes wanting to be famous for famous' sake, right? That she was willing to give herself up to Puck purely in pursuit of a reality show and fragrance line? There’s a word for people who do things like that in the real world: It's 'asshole'." He went on to add: "Zizes has been hailed by feminists groups (well, by "Bust Magazine") as a new kind of plus-sized heroine—an obese female role model who for once doesn't hate herself. On the contrary, she thinks she's the bee's knees. When 'Puck serenaded her with Queen's "Fat-Bottomed Girls," she rebuffed him, saying, 'I look like America looks, and just like America, I need more than just a song to get my juices flowing'."

Journalist James Poniewozik of "Time" magazine commented of the episode "Silly Love Songs": "It was the kind of twist "Glee" can sell, partly because of the way the characters are established (in retrospect, you can see how a really strong woman who rejects him is a turn-on for Puck) and because of how well its cast (Ashley Fink has been killing it as Lauren, and sells her confidence and abrasiveness in a way that makes her a person, not an engineered positive-body-image model). And while "Glee" sometimes stretches to pick on-the-nose song choices, "Fat Bottomed Girls" was just a perfect choice and performance—not just on topic but actually in Puck's musical wheelhouse."

Over the course of "Glee" second season, Lauren forms a relationship with local bad boy and football star Noah Puckerman. As the season progresses, Lauren and Puck's relationship continues to grow stronger. Their relationship begins to form in the ninth episode of the second season titled "Special Education". After Puck attempts to recruit new members for the William McKinley High School glee club, members of the football team lock him in a port-a-potty. After being discovered by Lauren, he convinces her to join New Directions, despite her belief that show choir is stupid. Ashley Fink said of their relationship: "I think Ryan Murphy has a master plan and we're all kind of along for the ride. I know what you mean, but I wouldn't count us out just yet on that front. We all have to laugh at ourselves but it's going somewhere. Ultimately, it comes down to whether audiences will buy a relationship between Puck and Lauren. I think there's a really hilarious chemistry between Puck and Lauren. I think he's a badass, she's a badass. I don't know, I think they're funny together. There's something about the two of them together that I like, so I hope it's not outside the realm of possibility."

Television critics have responded positively to the pairing. Robert Canning of IGN said of the episode "Silly Love Songs": "The absolute best part of "Silly Love Songs" was Puckerman's unexpected longing for Lauren Zizes. Actress Ashley Fink has been fantastic in her small role, delivering great one-liners with ease. She was equally strong in this, the first episode to truly give Lauren a larger role and fill out her character more. Heck, it was nice to even see her smile a few times. The casting on "Glee" has either been very smart or very lucky since so many background characters have shined as they've been given bigger parts. The Lauren and Puck pairing came with a lot of laughs, but just as much heart. Puck singing Queen's "Fat Bottomed Girls," induced a chuckle at first, then some toe tapping. But it was Lauren's reaction that truly made the moment: 'That's the first song you've sung to me and it made me feel like crap.' I can't decide if I want to root for this couple, but I certainly know I'm going to be rooting for Lauren." Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" commented: "For me, the episode's highlight was the very sweet, funny courtship between Puck and Lauren. This may be because the writers have trouble writing for a self-professed bad boy, even though his escapades are straight out of Archie comics and not actually all that “bad” at all. But it’s always fun to watch Salling sing, and it’s always fun to watch him be smitten. Fink ends up being a good match for him, chemistry-wise, as she projects a confidence and certainty that makes it immediately obvious just what Puck sees in Lauren. The storyline also played out like both characters had something approaching real feelings." In the following episode, VanDerWerff found her relationship with Puck "a lot less assured" than before, but "Entertainment Weekly" Sandra Gonzalez deemed their scenes "as endearing as they are unrealistic", and E! Online's Jenna Mullins wrote that "the ice around [her] heart melted just a bit when Puck mouthed Lauren that little bit of encouragement at the start of her solo."

Lauren has received mostly positive reviews from television critics. Canning praised Fink's performance in the episode "Silly Love Songs", as well as Lauren's dialog. Lisa Respers France of CNN commented that she is beginning to really like Lauren, noting: "for me Lauren represents how Ryan Murphy is able to take the concept of the outcast, flip it on its ear and shove it back in our faces with a side order of fabulousness." Reiter felt that in "Comeback", new characters Lauren and Sam "managed to shine".

Rosie O'Donnell reacted negatively to Fink's casting and first solo musical performance. In an interview with Access Hollywood, she deemed her rendition of "I Know What Boys Like" underwhelming, and stated that it failed to meet her expectations. She called Lauren "so unlikable," and questioned why the producers had not cast a "pretty heavy girl". Fink brushed off O'Donnell's comments. O'Donnell later apologized, and said, "Oh, Ashley – I love your swagger – your acting – your face – your heart – as a famous fat person – I am often asked about the issue… I love the story line – I love the show – and if in any way something I said hurt you – I apologize MORE. You are so talented, and I can't wait to hear you belt it…as I know you can—the often misquoted Rosie." Fink was defended by Justin Thompson of "Socialite Life", who commented: "I've loved her character and how they've developed her and she's just become a source of great comedy – is that because she's full-figured? No. Is it because her character is well-written? Yes. It’s kind of sad to see Rosie lambaste what the show is trying to do."

Raymund Flandez of "The Wall Street Journal" called Lauren's performance of "I Know What Boys Like" the highlight of "Comeback". Gonzalez was less than enthused. She graded it "C−", after "deductions", and said the only reason it started with a "C" was due to it being interspersed with shots of the cast in their underwear. Patrick Burns of "The Atlantic" was also unimpressed, and questioned Lauren's spot in the glee club, commenting "her brazen character never ceases to please, but it's just not believable that she would join the glee club if she cannot sing."


</doc>
<doc id="30643087" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30643087" title="St Deiniol's Church, Llanddaniel Fab">
St Deiniol's Church, Llanddaniel Fab

St Deiniol's Church, Llanddaniel Fab, is a small 19th-century parish church in the centre of Llanddaniel Fab, a village in Anglesey, north Wales. The first church in this location is said to have been established by St Deiniol Fab (to whom the church is dedicated) in 616. He was the son of St Deiniol, the first Bishop of Bangor. The current building, which is in Early English style, incorporates some material and fittings from an earlier church on the site, including the font and an 18th-century memorial in the porch. The vestry door has medieval jambs and the keystone of its arch, which is also medieval, is a carved human face. Some parts of the nave walls may also come from a previous building here.

The church is no longer used for worship, and the village is now served by a church in Llanfairpwll. As of 2011, the building (without the surrounding grounds) was for sale. It is a Grade II listed building, a national designation given to "buildings of special interest, which warrant every effort being made to preserve them", in particular because it is regarded as "a good example of a simple 19th-century rural church".

St Deiniol's Church is near the centre of Llanddaniel Fab, a village in the south of Anglesey, north Wales. It is reached from the street by passing through a lychgate by the local war memorial. The village takes its name from the church; the Welsh word "" originally meant "enclosure" and then "church", and "-ddaniel" is a modified form of the saint's name.

The date of first construction of a Christian place of worship in the area is uncertain, but it is said by 19th-century writers that a son of St Deiniol (the first Bishop of Bangor) established a church here in 616. The son, also a saint, was known as "Deiniol Fab" (Welsh for "Deiniol the son"), to distinguish him from his father. No part of a building from that time survives. A later edifice, dating from the 16th century or perhaps earlier, was replaced in the 19th century. Some parts of that structure may have been reused in the current church, as the 1937 survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire considered that sections of the walls of the nave may be from the older building.

In 1833, the antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described the old church as "a very ancient and dilapidated structure", which had "some good specimens of the architecture of a very remote period". Writing in 1846, the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones described it as one "so much altered by successive reparations, that little of its original architectural character has been preserved". Repairs were carried out to the new church, and a vestry added to the north side, in 1873. The work was overseen by Henry Kennedy, architect of the Diocese of Bangor.

St Deiniol's is no longer in use; in 2006, a guide to the churches of Anglesey noted that no services had been held for a number of years, and added that ivy was growing across the building. The church's former parish has been merged with that of the adjoining village of Llanfairpwll, served by St Mary's, Llanfairpwll. As of January 2011, the church (without the grounds) was on sale for £50,000; it was suggested by the estate agents handling the sale that it could be used as a studio or for storage, subject to necessary consents being obtained.

People associated with St Deiniol's include the clergymen Henry Rowlands and Isaac Jones. Rowlands, who wrote a history of Anglesey ("Mona Antiqua Restaurata") in 1723, served as priest here and in nearby parishes from 1696 onwards. Jones, a translator, was curate of St Deiniol's from 1840 until his death in 1850.

The Gothic Revival church is in the Early English style. It is built from rubble masonry dressed with limestone and has a slate roof. The vestry is partially built from material used in the old church. The door in the vestry's north wall has medieval doorjambs, and the keystone of the pointed arch, which is also medieval, is a carved human face.

The nave of the church (where the congregation sat) has no aisle. The chancel (site of the altar) is at the east end of the nave. There is a porch, which contains an 18th-century memorial, on the south side of the nave towards the west end, and a vestry to the north. Each section is steeply gabled, with the west end terminating in a bellcote surmounted by a cross and containing a single bell. The windows in the nave have two lights (sections of window separated by mullions), save for one to the west of the porch, which has one light. The east end of the chancel has three adjoining lancet windows, the tallest in the middle.

Internally, the walls have panelling at the bottom and painted plasterwork above. The roof has exposed timbers. There is a pointed chancel arch and three steps between the nave and chancel, with a further step to the sanctuary, which has a mosaic floor. The east windows and those on the north have stained glass. Fittings include the rectangular pulpit, the pews, and the altar table, which are all made of pine wood, and the octagonal font, made of granite with carvings on each side. The 1937 Royal Commission survey recorded that the church owned a plain silver cup, dated 1796–1797. A visual inspection of the church in 2006 determined that there were many cobwebs inside, but also that the pews and organ remained in place.

St Deiniol's has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II listed building – the lowest of the three grades of listing, designating "buildings of special interest, which warrant every effort being made to preserve them". It was given this status on 30 January 1968 and has been listed because it is regarded as "a good example of a simple 19th-century rural church". Cadw (the Welsh Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists) states that it is "coherently designed in an early Gothic style which is apt for its scale".



</doc>
<doc id="30662258" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30662258" title="Flu Season (Parks and Recreation)">
Flu Season (Parks and Recreation)

"Flu Season" (sometimes referred to as "The Flu") is the second episode of the third season of the American comedy television series "Parks and Recreation", and the 32nd overall episode of the series. It originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 27, 2011. In the episode, a flu outbreak leaves Leslie ill, but she insists on making a public presentation about her proposed harvest festival. Meanwhile, Andy and Ron bond, and a hospital-bound April torments the nurse Ann.

The episode was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by Wendey Stanzler. The episode included major development of the characters Ann, Ron and Ben, the latter of whom becomes extremely impressed with Leslie, starting a season-long romance subplot between the two characters. Brent Briscoe made a guest appearance as J.J., owner of J.J.'s Diner, a restaurant that has appeared in previous "Parks" episodes.

According to Nielsen Media Research, "Flu Season" was seen by 5.83 million household viewers, a six percent decline from the previous episode, third season premiere "Go Big or Go Home". The episode received positive reviews, with many commentators calling it one of the show's best episodes. Critics also praised the performance of Rob Lowe during the scenes when Chris is stricken by the flu. Reviewers said the relationship between Chris and Ann made her character much more interesting and funny.

Amy Poehler submitted this episode for judging for her nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series in 2011.

The flu season has hit Pawnee hard, leaving nurse Ann (Rashida Jones) caring for many sick citizens at the hospital. Among them are April (Aubrey Plaza), who constantly mistreats Ann in retaliation for kissing Andy (Chris Pratt). April asks Ron (Nick Offerman) not to tell Andy she is in the hospital, and Ron is anxious not to get involved in their personal affairs. Leslie (Amy Poehler) also has the flu, but will not admit it because she wants to give an important presentation to the Pawnee Chamber of Commerce about the planned Harvest Festival, which she hopes will restore the dwindling budget of the parks department. Ben (Adam Scott) finally takes a reluctant Leslie to the hospital, where she is admitted with a dangerously high fever and dehydration. Ben and Tom (Aziz Ansari) decide to do the presentation themselves, much to the chagrin of Leslie, who does not trust anyone but herself to do it. Tom immediately abandons Ben to hang out with a group of older men at the spa.

To Ann's surprise, Chris (Rob Lowe) has also been admitted to the hospital with the flu. The two have been dating and, although Ann really likes Chris, she fears he is too perfect. However, because the extremely health-conscious Chris has a poor immune system and nearly no body fat, he suffers a complete physical breakdown, which makes Ann feel less intimidated about dating him. Meanwhile, Leslie escapes the hospital and heads back to city hall to deliver the presentation herself. Tom returns from the spa, revealing his spa friends are the owners of several car dealerships, which have agreed to lend vehicles to the festival. Although delirious with fever and an excess of flu medication, Leslie delivers a flawless presentation, wildly impressing Ben. She is immediately brought back to the hospital, where Ben tells her 110 businesses have agreed to help with the festival, surpassing the minimum 80 needed.

At the department, with April absent from work, Ron asks Andy to fill in as an assistant because the anti-government oriented Ron believes Andy will be ineffective. The two bond over the course of the day, and Andy begins to tell Ron about his problems with April, for whom he still harbors romantic feelings. Although initially not wishing to get involved, Ron reluctantly tells Andy she is at the hospital and he should visit her. Meanwhile, Ann remains pleasant throughout her nursing shift despite April's constant abuse. The second her shift ends, however, Ann immediately loses her temper and curses at April. Ann apologizes for kissing Andy, but insists it was a mistake and that April should stop taking it out on Andy. Later, Andy visits April, who pretends to be asleep but smiles, revealing she is happy he came.

At the end of the episode, Chris tells Ben they have been called back to Indianapolis for a new assignment, but both agree to seek an extension to stay in Pawnee longer. Although both claim they want to help organize the Harvest Festival, it is hinted they really want to stay because of Leslie and Ann.

"Flu Season" was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by Wendey Stanzler. Like all six of the first third season episodes, it was written and filmed almost immediately after the second season ended as part of an early shooting schedule needed to accommodate Amy Poehler's pregnancy. However, although finished early in anticipation of a September 2010 release date, "Parks" was ultimately placed on hiatus until early 2011, many months after production on "Flu Season" was already finished. Although initially titled "The Flu" in original press releases, and referred to as such by several news articles, the episode title was later formally changed to "Flu Season". "Flu Season" continued the subplot of restoring the parks department budget through a harvest festival, which will continue to be a major story arc throughout the first six episodes of the season. Brent Briscoe makes an appearance in "Flu Season" as J.J., the owner of J.J.'s Diner. Although the restaurant appears in the previous episode "The Reporter", "Summer Catalog" and "The Master Plan", "Flu Season" marked the first appearance of J.J. himself.

Michael Schur, co-creator of "Parks and Recreation", said the episode included development of several of the protagonist characters, including Ben Wyatt, Ann Perkins, and Ron Swanson. One of the major story arcs of the season entails Ben, who had never had a firm sense of home, gradually falling in love with the town of Pawnee due to the optimism and enthusiasm Leslie Knope shows for the town and her job. Commentators suggested this transition appeared to begin in "Flu Season", when Ben is visibly, extremely impressed by Leslie's perfect deliverance of a public presentation despite her illness. Steve Kandell of "New York" magazine wrote: "This is obviously the moment when Ben’s begrudging respect for her becomes something else", and "The Atlantic" writer Scott Meslow wrote: "Parks and Recreation has allowed Ben to develop in the background so far, but his affection for Pawnee is clearly growing."

"Flu Season" also demonstrated a departure in the way Ann's romantic relationships were handled compared to past seasons. The character previously dated Andy Dwyer and Mark Brendanawicz (Paul Schneider), who was written out of the show at the end of the second season. In both cases, Ann was primarily in control of the relationship due to Andy's immaturity and Mark's lack of experience in long-term romances. Schur said of Ann's relationship with Chris, "This is the first time that Ann just completely loses herself and really falls for a guy super hard. And the relationship goes in a lot of funny, unexpected directions." Intimidated by her inability to find a flaw in the extremely positive and physically perfect Chris, Ann acts more awkwardly and nerdy around him than her character has been in the past. "Flu Season" also demonstrated deeper levels to Ron Swanson, who adamantly insists "I'm not interested in caring about people", yet reveals he cares about both Andy and April, and tries to help the two reconcile. Schur said Ron takes on a sort of father figure role, "and he ends up revealing in a tiny, tiny, tiny way that's still true to the character that he has genuine feelings of caring for the people who work around him in the Parks office".

In the episode, Ben compares Leslie's delivery of a perfect presentation despite having the flu to basketball player Michael Jordan's showing during the 1997 NBA Finals. During the of the series, Jordan lead the Chicago Bulls to victory despite suffering from a serious case of the flu. Ben also compares Leslie's speech to the famous home run baseball player Kirk Gibson hit off of pitcher Dennis Eckersley during the 1988 World Series, despite Gibson suffering from injuries to both legs at the time. While bonding, Ron and Andy discuss the draft history of the Indianapolis Colts, the NFL football team of Indiana. When Andy suggests Ron eat a burrito called the "Meat Tornado", Ron says, "You had me at Meat Tornado," a reference to the line "You had me at hello" from the romantic drama film "Jerry Maguire" (1996). While deluded by the flu, Leslie mistakenly refers to the chamber of commerce as the "Chamber of Secrets", a reference to the fantasy novel "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets". At one point, while practicing her speech delirious with the flu, Leslie turns to a wall poster and says, "Good evening everyone, I'm Leslie Monster and this is "Nightline"," a reference to the NBC newsmagazine program. Later, while still delirious, Leslie introduces Ben to the presentation audience as "Scott Bakula from "Quantum Leap"".

In its original American broadcast, "Flu Season" was seen by an estimated 5.83 million household viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research, with an overall 3.0 rating/8 share, and 3.2 rating/5 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49. It marked a six percent decline compared to the previous episode, "Go Big or Go Home", which itself was the highest overall "Parks" rating for since the premiere episode. The night "Flu Season" was broadcast, almost all of the comedy shows in NBC's Thursday lineup lost viewership compared to the prior week: while "Community" remained flat, "Perfect Couples" was down 19 percent, while "The Office" and "30 Rock" were down 11 percent.

"Flu Season" received generally positive reviews, with many commentators praising the performance of Rob Lowe, whose character is usually physically fit to almost superhuman proportions but becomes extremely ill and hallucinatory when infected with the flu. Tim Goodman of "The Hollywood Reporter" said Lowe's character now seemed well-integrated into the cast, adding "If you've never believed Lowe can make you laugh out loud, pay attention to that episode." Steve Kandell of "New York" magazine said Lowe stole the show from the usual "Parks" powerhouses of Offerman and Pratt, and called one scene, when Lowe tries to will away his flu by yelling to himself in the mirror "Stop...pooping!", the "single greatest self-effacingly comic moment of his long, handsome career". "The Atlantic" writer Scott Meslow said after two episodes, the pairing of Chris and Ann was already more interesting that Ann's entire relationship with Mark Brendanawicz in the second season, and that the new romance subplot allowed the normally "straight (wo)man" Rashida Jones to display her comedic talents. "Entertainment Weekly" writer Hillary Busis said Chris "really came into his own" in the episode, and also said that Ann's relationship with Chris made her character more interesting and gave Jones greater comedic material to work with.

HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall declared "Flu Season" the one episode he would suggest to newcomers seeking to become familiar with "Parks and Recreation" because it spotlights so many different characters, includes both warm and comedic moments, and includes commentary on small town government. He praised the performances of Lowe and Poehler, the latter of whom was especially effective because there were real stakes to Leslie making her presentation. Matt Fowler of IGN also said Lowe's character, which he feared would get old fast, had proven to be a strong asset to the show, and Ann's character was at her strongest opposite him. But Fowler also said "Flu Season" was a strong ensemble with great character moments for everyone, including Ron and Andy's bonding and Ben's admiration of Leslie. The A.V. Club writer Steve Heisler said "Flu Season" gave the entire cast the chance to be a bit sillier than usual and demonstrate their wide comedic ranges. Heisler said Ben and Chris felt like they belonged among the other characters, and he praised the performance of Aubrey Plaza, claiming April's character seemed more fleshed out than in past episodes.

Zap2it writer Rick Porter called "Flu Season" one of the best episodes of "Parks and Recreation", particularly praising the "outstanding teamup" of Ron and the "different shades of Ann" displayed in the show. Porter said he simultaneously loved both Lowe's over-the-top performance while sick, and Poehler's more subtle performance. Matt Richenthal of TV Fanatic said the way Chris has become so well integrated into the show demonstrates how well the writers keep seemingly ridiculous characters grounded. Richenthal said Poehler made her sick scenes seem like strong character moments rather than just slapstick comedy, and praised the scenes with Ron and Andy, as well as Tom's scenes at the spa. Joel Keller of TV Squad said the episode strongly developed the characters Ben and Chris, and served as a showcase for the comedic talents of Poehler, who he complimented for not going too over the top. Hollywood.com writer Eric Sundermann said the episode showcased "Parks and Recreation" at its finest, and said both Poehler and Lowe gave some of their best performance to date. Sundermann praised the pairing of Offerman and Pratt, and said although he had reservations about a Ben and Leslie romance, he believed it got off to a charming start in "Flu Season".



</doc>
<doc id="30748368" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30748368" title="Blame It on the Alcohol">
Blame It on the Alcohol

"Blame It on the Alcohol" is the fourteenth episode of the second season of the television series "Glee", and the thirty-sixth overall. The episode was written by Ian Brennan, directed by Eric Stoltz and first aired in the United States on Fox on February 22, 2011. This episode mainly centers on the issues of underage drinking, as the students of McKinley High School are coming drunk to school in increasing numbers. Principal Figgins (Iqbal Theba) plans an assembly to warn the students about the dangers on underage drinking, and asks glee club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) to have his students perform a song that sends positive messages about avoiding alcohol. Rachel Berry (Lea Michele) throws a party for the glee club students where almost everyone gets drunk; the partygoers wake up to hangovers, and must perform various songs about alcohol while still under the influence. The assembly ends abruptly when a song that seems to glorify alcohol is interrupted by two of the singers vomiting over the others, which scares the entire high school into avoiding drunkenness.

"Blame It on the Alcohol" was given a positive reception by many reviewers, though there was disagreement over the show's messages, including with regard to drinking alcohol. Rachel's party was lauded, as was the song performed during it, "Don't You Want Me"; the assembly song, Kesha's "Tik Tok", was also well received. This episode featured cover versions of four songs, which were all released as singles and made available for digital download. Three of the singles debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100. The show's first original song appeared in this episode: "My Headband", sung by Michele as Rachel, which was not released.

Upon its premiere, the episode was watched by over 10.58 million American viewers, and it earned a 4.4/12 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic. The episode's total viewership and ratings were slightly up from the previous episode, "Comeback", which was watched by 10.53 million American viewers, and acquired a 4.2/12 rating/share in the 18–49 demographic upon first airing on television.

Concerned about recent underage drinking incidents at McKinley High, Principal Figgins (Iqbal Theba) schedules a cautionary assembly and commissions the glee club to perform a song about the dangers of alcohol. Lead singer Rachel (Lea Michele) sings a song she has written, about her headband, to Finn (Cory Monteith); she realizes that she needs inspiration to write a song for Regionals, so she throws a house party for the club, which is also attended by former member Kurt (Chris Colfer) and his crush Blaine (Darren Criss). The attendees—except for Kurt and Finn—get drunk, and Rachel and Blaine share a long kiss during a game of Spin the Bottle, after which they perform "Don't You Want Me" as a karaoke duet. Blaine spends the night in Kurt's bed, fully clothed. Kurt's father Burt (Mike O'Malley) is not pleased about this level of intimacy under his roof and tells Kurt to ask for permission first next time. Kurt grudgingly agrees, but asks Burt to educate himself on gay relationships so Kurt can come to him for advice in the future.

On Monday, the glee club members arrive at school hung over, and perform the song "Blame It". Club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) is impressed with their "realistic acting", but thinks the song is inappropriate for the assembly as it glorifies drinking. Football coach Shannon Beiste (Dot-Marie Jones) prevails on Will to join her in a night out at a cowboy bar to reduce their stress; they perform the song "One Bourbon, One Scotch, One Beer". Will gets drunk and once home, his intoxication is such that he marks all his students' papers with an "A+", and then drunk dials the school's guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays) and leaves a sexually tinged message.

Rachel asks Blaine out, and to Kurt's dismay he accepts. They argue, as Blaine suggests he might be bisexual, while Kurt denies the existence of bisexuality. Kurt visits Rachel after the date, and warns Rachel that Blaine is indeed gay, if temporarily confused. At the assembly, New Directions perform Kesha's "Tik Tok", but the song comes to an abrupt end when Brittany (Heather Morris) and Santana (Naya Rivera) throw up from intoxication. Figgins later rewards the club for their performance's success in scaring their fellow students into sobriety, in the belief that the glee club had been acting during the assembly. Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) publicly humiliates Will by playing the message he left on her voice mail—not Emma's, as he had meant to do—over the school's public address system while classes are in session. Will realizes that it is hypocritical to tell the students not to abuse alcohol when he does so himself, and convinces the entire club to pledge not to drink until after their upcoming Nationals competition. He tells them he will also abstain, and urges them to call him for a ride home if they do drink, regardless of where they are or how late it is.

At the Lima Bean, Rachel kisses a sober Blaine, which makes him realize he is indeed gay, but instead of being disappointed she is elated: she tells Kurt that her relationship with a man who turned out to be gay is "songwriting gold".

"Blame It on the Alcohol" was written by co-creator Ian Brennan and directed by Eric Stoltz in his second time as a "Glee" director, his first outing having been the acclaimed fourth episode of the season, "Duets".

A blind item about a "popular gay character" wondering if he might be bisexual after an "encounter" was published on February 10, 2011, by Michael Ausiello, Editor in Chief of the entertainment news website "TVLine". A "firestorm of speculation" was set off, and centered on Blaine. "Glee" showrunner and co-creator Ryan Murphy sent an email to the Perez Hilton website, published on February 14, that stated, "Blaine is NOT bi. He is gay, and will always be gay. I think it's very important to young kids that they know this character is one of them."

Within a couple of hours, Michael Jensen of the gay website AfterElton.com took note of Murphy's statement, and also of the then-current cover article on Criss in "Out" magazine, in which Murphy was quoted as saying, "Blaine will openly question whether bisexuality is real. I think that some people will love that discussion and some will not love it." Jensen pointed out that Murphy does not say that Blaine will not question his own sexuality, but clearly "decides he is, in fact, gay". Ausiello posted at about that time that Blaine was indeed who he was referring to in his original story, quoted from the same "Out" article as Jensen, and added a new one-sentence summation from Murphy on the coming episode: "I guess the moral of the story is don’t play spin the bottle while drunk on wine coolers."

The show's first original song was included in the episode: "My Headband", sung by—and ostensibly written by—Rachel. In actuality, the song was written by Brennan, who wrote the episode, and composer James Scott Levine.

The episode featured cover versions of "Don't You Want Me" by The Human League, sung by Criss and Michele; "One Bourbon, One Scotch, One Beer" by Rudy Toombs, as recorded by George Thorogood, sung by Morrison and Jones; "Tik Tok" by Kesha, performed by Morris and New Directions, and "Blame It" by Jamie Foxx and T-Pain in a rendition by New Directions with Amber Riley and Kevin McHale as leads. "One Bourbon" marked Jones's singing debut on "Glee".

Recurring guest stars who appear in the episode include glee club members Mike Chang (Harry Shum, Jr.), Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet) and Lauren Zizes (Ashley Fink), cheerleader Becky Jackson (Lauren Potter), football coach Shannon Beiste (Jones), Principal Figgins (Theba) and Kurt's friend from Dalton Academy, Blaine Anderson (Criss).

"Blame It on the Alcohol" was first broadcast on February 22, 2011 in the United States on Fox. It received over 10.58 million American viewers upon its initial airing, according to the Nielsen ratings. The episode garnered a 4.4/12 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, tied for the highest of the night with "NCIS". The episode's total viewership and ratings slightly increased from the previous episode, "Comeback", which was watched by 10.53 million American viewers and received a 4.2/12 rating/share in the 18–49 demographic during its original airing.

With its Canadian broadcast, also on February 22, 2011, "Blame It on the Alcohol" drew 1.89 million viewers and placed fourteenth in the weekly program rankings. This was an improvement on "Comeback", which aired the week before, ranked eighteenth and was watched by 1.75 million viewers. In Australia, the episode was watched by 1.02 million viewers on March 7, 2011, which made "Glee" the sixth most-watched show of the night and twentieth of the week. In the UK, the episode was broadcast on April 11, 2011. It attained 2.53 million viewers—2.05 million on E4, and 483,000 on E4+1—and was the most-watched show on cable for the week. Viewership was marginally down from "Comeback", attracting 40,000 fewer viewers.

Reaction to the episode was split. While the majority of reviewers were favorably impressed, some very much so, a significant minority were disappointed at the message the episode conveyed and the storytelling decisions. Among the former were Kevin Fallon of "The Atlantic", who described it as ""Glee" at its best: cartoonish, outlandish, and loud—but still oh-so true to life." IGN's Robert Canning gave the episode a "great" rating of 8 out of 10, and called the main storyline "comical and human". Candace Bulter of "ScreenCrave" also gave the episode an 8 out of 10, and wrote, "This week's "Glee" puts on the beer goggles to put alcohol-related issues in perspective. The result is humorous and ironic, but leaves something to be wanted." Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club", wrote that "the underpinnings of the episode aren't terrible, just overstuffed" and gave it a "B−". MTV's Aly Semigran stated that the episode "left something of a sour taste", and added that while the show "always combines humor with serious life lessons, it seems there were none to be found here"; she called the episode "a wasted opportunity". "BuddyTV" Jen Harper was also disenchanted by the episode, and concluded, "Geez Louise, Glee. What's happened to you?" Amy Reiter of the "Los Angeles Times" saw the show's message differently from Semigran, and wrote, "Leave it to "Glee" to tackle a potentially joyless, didactic topic like teenage drinking and somehow manage to entertain and surprise and get its important life lessons across." "Time" Richard Corliss called it a "breezy, sharply written episode" and rated it in the "high-middle range" for the show. He concluded, "Last night’s hour of "Glee" was of the level a superior series sticks in mid-season between its 'important' episodes. If this is coasting, take me along for the ride."

The scenes that featured Rachel's party were acclaimed by most reviewers. Fallon called them "a parade of the funniest sight gags, most uninhibited acting, and—interestingly enough—most relatable scenes "Glee" has produced in a while", and described Michele as "an "acting" stand out" who "handled the entire arc like a seasoned comedienne". His colleague Meghan Brown said it "showed "Glee" at its best", and added: "The dialogue was snappy, the group dynamic was clean and specific, and the kids seemed like actual kids." VanDerWerff also pointed out that the club members "really felt like kids, not like miniature 30-somethings", and said the party was the "best part" of the episode. Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" praised Finn's breakdown of "the five drunk girl archetypes, as demonstrated by the glee girls". Harper wrote that the party scenes "left a lot to be desired", and Patrick Burns, the third reviewer from "The Atlantic", "waited for the Glee party to get out of control, or for someone to get hurt so that America's youth could be shocked and appalled by the dangers of drinking", but "the worst thing that happened was that Rachel tried to flip a gay guy".
Kurt's scenes with Blaine and with his father evoked very divergent opinions from reviewers. Canning made mention of "a great conversation between Blaine and Kurt that felt very real for kids in this situation" and noted he was "glad it wasn't an easy talk for either of them". "The Houston Chronicle" Bobby Hankinson agreed, and said of their "debate over the existence of bisexuality" that "it was refreshing to see "Glee" portray a conversation like it really goes down in reality. It’s also good to see them not treat Kurt like such a saint all the time." Semigran wrote that Kurt showed "an unflattering side of himself", and Gonzalez stated that she "was completely on Blaine's side here": Kurt "wasn't fair" and "was sort of unlikable" for once, though she did add that "he's allowed to be flawed". Blaine's "sudden confusion over his sexual orientation" was deemed a "false note" by Reiter, who called his "overwrought speech" at the Lima Bean "off-key". Harper was unhappy that "major plot points like a gay character thinking he might be bi or straight get instigated, sorted out and wrapped up within an hour", and said she thought it was "hurtful" for Blaine to "accept a date with Kurt's friend" after he and Kurt had "agreed to sort of work on a potential relationship between the two of them" in the "Silly Love Songs" episode.

There were similar reactions to Kurt's scene with Burt, though reviewers agreed that Burt was being reasonable and Kurt was not. Gonzalez characterized Kurt as "more flawed in this episode than he has been, especially in that scene with his dad when he kept taking offense to his dad's miscommunicated guidelines for sleepovers", and Semigran described "Kurt's overreaction" as "even more unsettling" than his argument with Blaine. Corliss wrote that Kurt's "smackdown of his father has the odor of propaganda from the gayest show in TV history". Canning said he was "moved by Kurt asking his father to step out of his comfort zone and educate himself about what is gay men do when [they're] together", and Gonzalez enjoyed "the very realistic tension that exists between them as father and gay son".

Harper was harshly critical of "the inane story line" where Sue regularly accused Will of being an alcoholic, to which Semigran also took exception. Reiter characterized "Sue throwing Aural Intensity's 'chipper homosexual' choir director down the stairs, twice" as a "false note" and said it was "particularly difficult to take", though VanDerWerff called it "kind of funny". Semigran was one reviewer who noted that Mercedes was wrong when she "complains that there are no songs that convey alcohol is bad". She suggested "Pink's 'Sober' or Pearl Jam's haunting cover of 'Last Kiss' or Simple Plan's moving '(Untitled) How Could This Happen to Me? as songs that New Directions could have done for the assembly.

The musical covers and performances for the episode were given a mostly positive reception by reviewers. Rachel and Blaine's duet of "Don't You Want Me" was called "the best number of the episode" by VanDerWerff. Semigran went further and said it was the "best number by far", and Hankinson went beyond that: "it may be one of my favorite Gleeformances of all time". Futterman called it "fun" and "flirty", and noted that "it pits "Glee" most well-rounded pop vocalists against each other". Anthony Benigno of "The Faster Times" and Gonzalez both gave the performance an "A"; Benigno wrote that "it sounds like a modernized version of an old song and it totally, 1000% works", and Gonzalez declared that "Blaine needs to join New Directions so we can get more duets between him and Rachel". Harper, while she characterized it as a "really cute duet", said she was "not super-keen on seeing them pair up again". Brett Berk of "Vanity Fair" was even less enthusiastic, and gave it two stars out of five.

Berk was more enthusiastic about "Blame It" and gave it four stars out of five; he wrote, "This should be the song they sing at Nationals". Gonzalez called it "one of the better R&B performances we've seen from the Glee gang in a while", and gave it an "A". "Billboard" Katie Morgan thought that "this version might be better than the original", while Harper was quite sure, and declared that it was "way better than the Jamie Foxx version". Futterman, though she described it as a "very informed rendition", said that "the song was too clean-scrubbed to pass for a dirty club hit". Benigno, while he liked "the harmonies in the hook", said the song was "very skippable" and gave it a "B". VanDerWerff said it was "one of the least enjoyable numbers of this season".

Benigno gave a "B+" to "One Bourbon, One Scotch, One Beer". He noted that ""Glee" can slum with the best of 'em when the occasion calls for it", and added "it's the total lack of irony that ends up making this one so good". Gonzalez was "prepared to hate" the song, but that Jones and Morrison clearly "had fun recording this song", and since "country is 70 percent attitude", she ultimately gave it a "B". Bulter wrote that she "can’t wait for more of Beiste’s alto country vibes to be showcased".

Morris as Brittany was lauded for her performance in "Tik Tok", which Bulter called the "performance of the night" and praised her "mad dance skills and awesome vocals". Reiter wrote that Brittany "owned that rendition", and CNN's Lisa Respers France gave "kudos to Brittany for her awesome performance". Benigno gave the song an "A−", noted that Morris has a better voice than the original artist, Kesha, and the rendition was a case of "a bunch of really talented kids making a simple song better". Futterman praised the "dance-centered performance", but said she wished Rachel or Mercedes had sung lead. VanDerWerff ""really" liked" Morris on the number, but said he "didn't buy" that it was the song selected for the assembly.

Of the four cover versions released as singles—the original song "My Headband" was not released—three debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and appeared on other musical charts. On the Hot 100, the show's rendition of "Don't You Want Me" debuted at number forty-nine; it was at number fifty on the "Billboard" Canadian Hot 100. The other two songs on the Hot 100 were "Blame It" at number fifty-five, which also made number sixty-one on the Canadian Hot 100, and "Tik Tok" at number sixty-one, which also made number fifty-six on the Canadian Hot 100. "Don't You Want Me" was also featured on the sixth soundtrack album of the series, "". "One Bourbon, One Scotch, One Beer" did not chart.



</doc>
<doc id="30761658" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30761658" title="Northwest Passage (Fringe)">
Northwest Passage (Fringe)

"Northwest Passage" is the 21st episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series "Fringe", and the 41st episode overall. The episode follows Peter (Joshua Jackson) as he continues to stay away from Boston after learning his true parallel universe origins; his travels take him to a small town, where he helps the local police investigate mysterious disappearances.

The episode was written by Ashley Edward Miller, Zack Stentz, Nora Zuckerman, and Lilla Zuckerman. Joe Chappelle served as the episode director. It featured a guest appearance by actress Martha Plimpton. Pearl Jam musician Mike McCready helped write the music for the episode.

"Northwest Passage" first aired in the United States on May 6, 2010 to an estimated 5.82 million viewers. It received generally positive reviews, as many critics praised the writers' decision to focus on Peter in a new location. Others noted references to the television series "Twin Peaks".

After learning his true origins in "The Man from the Other Side", Peter (Joshua Jackson) leaves Boston and travels to a small town in the state of Washington. At a diner, Peter makes plans for a date with a local woman named Krista, but before they can meet she is kidnapped and murdered. Initially, the police suspects Peter is involved in the disappearance until told he was at his hotel all night. Peter decides to aid them in the investigation after catching a glimpse of Thomas Jerome Newton (Sebastian Roché), believing the shapeshifters are responsible and are coming after him; however, he does not wish Walter to be involved, asking Agent Broyles (Lance Reddick) to keep his location secret.

During the autopsy, Peter explains to Sheriff Mathis (Martha Plimpton) how removing a part of a brain could provide information to the killers. Mathis' partner, deputy officer Bill Ferguson (Patrick Gilmore), soon disappears. After they go to the scene of Krista's murder, Peter encounters Newton, but he escapes. Peter becomes suspicious of Mathis when he sees blood on her jacket; however, he believes her when she shows him her cut from a fall, which is bleeding normal blood, not the mercury typical of shapeshifters; he then explains the concept of shapeshifters to her.

Peter begins to doubt the shapeshifters' motives after another body is found, but eventually comes up with an idea to read and track the victims' adrenaline spikes, which allows him to find where the murders took place: a dairy farm. They find the owner, who confesses to killing the women because they rejected him, and kidnapped and tortured Mathis's partner when he discovered the culprit. Repeatedly at the hotel, Peter receives calls with static, strange noises, and clicks, which he suspects are coming from Newton. In the end, Peter decides and prepares to head back to Boston, but is approached by Newton, who has brought "Mr. Secretary", the man from the Other Side, to see Peter. The man is revealed to be his actual father from the parallel universe, "Walternate".

Meanwhile, back in Boston, a distraught Walter (John Noble) suffers a small mental breakdown at a supermarket. Olivia (Anna Torv) and Astrid (Jasika Nicole) escort him home, discovering his house is in disarray. After they ask why he didn't come to them for help, Walter replies he needs to learn to care for himself if Peter fails to return. He discovers a way to find Peter using his unique energy signature, but changes his mind after worrying that Peter will not forgive him. However, Olivia learns Peter's whereabouts from Broyles; they prepare to fly to Washington.

"Northwest Passage" was co-written by producers Ashley Edward Miller, Zack Stentz, staff writers Lilla Zuckerman and Nora Zuckerman. Co-executive producer Joe Chappelle served as episode director.

Miller later noted that unlike other episode scenes such as in "Grey Matters", Walter's breakdown at the supermarket "came largely out of nowhere. It was a thought experiment that took on a life of its own." Miller continued that at the time, he and Stentz thought they were writing Olivia-focused episodes, but "In retrospect, we really wrote a four-part story about Walter, his relationship to children, and the struggle between Walter-who-was and Walter-who-is. If you look at it that way, his decision at the end of 'Northwest Passage' becomes the moment where he reconciles those things. He doesn't resolve them, but he comes to grips with them. Once again in retrospect, I think that's what the supermarket breakdown was really about. This happens — you think a scene is about one thing when you're in the middle of it, and realize it's something else entirely when you look back. Characters can be sneaky motherfuckers that way."

A fan of "Fringe", Pearl Jam musician Mike McCready talked with series composer Chris Tilton about writing some music for "Northwest Passage". McCready said he started "throwing ideas back and forth. And I think they just wanted a northwest guy to do it, because they were shooting it in the northwest". He elaborated that "My role was smaller than someone who wrote all the music for it, but I think I was none the less integral in there. I mean, it was fun. Chris sent me his cues, and I just kind of rearranged them into guitar ideas".

The episode featured guest actress Martha Plimpton as Sheriff Tracy Mathis. On her role, she later commented "That episode turned out really well; I was really pleased with it, and where else but on "Fringe" would I get to play the sheriff of a small town?"

The crew shot an alternate ending in which Mathis questions Peter about his faith with the FBI. This was available on the DVD special features. As with other "Fringe" episodes, Fox released a science lesson plan for grade school children focusing on the science seen in "Northwest Passage", with the intention of having "students learn about the scientific method and how it can be used to collect data through experimentation and observation in order to formulate and test a hypothesis."

Many critics noted the similarities between the episode and the David Lynch television series "Twin Peaks", with one reviewer writing there was a "definite Peaks-y vibe to tonight's episode, from the setting—Noyo County, Washington, home of a diner with "famous pies"—to the off-kilter camera angles and hushed tone". "Twin Peaks" was originally titled "Northwest Passage" before its pilot, and both focused on solving a murder mystery in Washington state. Other reviewers felt the "Mulder/Scully"-like investigation and the line "You want to believe" was a homage to "The X-Files".

A song by Leonard Cohen, "Anthem" is quoted in this episode. "Anthem" lyrics are: ""There is a crack in everything/ 
"That's how the light gets in"." The Sheriff played by Martha Plimpton has a pen with "find the crack" printed on it, she states to Peter Bishop "that's how the light gets in."

The first airing of "Northwest Passage" was watched by an estimated 5.82 million viewers in the United States. It earned a 3.7/6 ratings share among all households and a 2.2/6 share among viewers 18–49. This was a ten percent jump from the previous week. SFScope writer Sarah Stegall speculated that the episode's "standalone mystery", combined with the recent "Fringe" season renewal, helped contribute to the ratings gain.

The A.V. Club writer Noel Murray graded the episode with a B+, explaining "It was the atmosphere that sold me on "Northwest Passage", an episode with a fairly middling mystery and only minimal advancement of the master-plot. (Though the end-point of that advancement was a doozy, and has me eating a little crow.) At times tonight the show almost felt like a backdoor pilot for a new series, with Peter tooling around the Pacific Northwest meeting local law enforcement and cracking cases. And while that's a show I'd definitely watch, I confess I'm anxious to jump ahead to next week, when there'll be inter-dimensional conflict and doppelgangers galore". Murray considered the ending with the appearance of Walternate a "strong finish to a mostly strong episode". IGN's Ramsey Isler gave it 7.8/10, writing that ""Fringe" sophomore season is building up to an epic 2-part finale. This episode doesn't reveal much in terms of overall "Fringe" mythology until the very awesome ending, and even then it just confirms what we already knew or suspected. Still, this installment deserves credit for using a different formula and giving Joshua Jackson some much-deserved time in the spotlight all by himself".

SFScope's Sarah Stegall praised the writers for showcasing Peter, believing Jackson gave "a solid, convincing performance that teaches us more about Peter than we learned in the first half of this season". She also was pleased with Peter's reactions to the obstacles thrown in his path, but criticized the writing for having another man behind the murders ('Too much coincidence. "Way" too much coincidence. From a plotting standpoint, it was clumsy'). Stegall concluded her review by praising all of the actors' performances, explaining that other than the "clumsy" killer plot twist, "I had no complaints at all about this episode. The supporting cast was top notch". Ken Tucker from "Entertainment Weekly" enjoyed how the episode mystery was processed from Peter's point of view, and loved the revelation at the end about Walternate. MTV columnist Josh Wigler praised the episode's "pretty mature storytelling" for not making Peter "go on an angry rampage" or become "an angsty ball of self-loathing" after the previous episode's events. He continued, "You can see that he's hurting, but he's still not quite sure how to process everything. Excellent work from the writers and Joshua Jackson".

After trying various science fiction shows after "Lost", the "Los Angeles Times" Andrew Hanson felt the episode made "him feel like [he] picked a winner". Like other critics, Hanson loved the twist ending, writing that ""Fringe" is making it more and more difficult for me to pick my favorite episode". Television Without Pity called Walternate's sudden appearance one of 2010's "Most Memorable TV Moments", explaining "We knew we'd meet him eventually, but the way they surprised us with him at the end of a stand-alone episode was a fitting introduction for such an ominous and shadowy character, and we knew even then that it marked a new and improved era for the show." At the time, TV Fanatic called "Northwest Passage" the best "Fringe" episode to date, giving the series' its first "five out of five stars".



</doc>
<doc id="30825716" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30825716" title="Ron &amp; Tammy: Part Two">
Ron &amp; Tammy: Part Two

"Ron & Tammy: Part Two" (sometimes referred to as "Ron and Tammy II") is the fourth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series "Parks and Recreation", and the 34th overall episode of the series. It originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 10, 2011. In the episode, Tom tries to make Ron jealous by dating Ron's ex-wife Tammy, causing the two to resume their unhealthy and destructive relationship. Meanwhile, Leslie and Ben ask the police to provide security for the harvest festival, and April is assigned to be Chris's secretary.

Written by Emily Kapnek and directed by Tucker Gates, the episode is considered a sequel to the second season episode "Ron and Tammy". Megan Mullally, the real-life wife of actor Nick Offerman, reprises her role as Tammy. Mullally and Offerman were permitted a great deal of improvisation during their scenes, the both of them admitting in the audio commentary that their graphically intimate scenes together actually made other cast members uncomfortable. "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" also features guest appearances by Eric Pierpoint as Pawnee Police Chief Trumple and Jama Williamson in the last of several guest performances as Tom's ex-wife, Wendy.

When the episode first broadcast, NBC ran a commercial advertising "April and Andy's wedding registry" on the official "Parks and Recreation" website. Although apparently a mistake intended to refer to Ron and Tammy's registry, some commentators suggested it could be indicative of future events in the series. According to Nielsen Media Research, "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" was seen by 5.03 million household viewers, a slight increase from the previous episode, "Time Capsule". It received critical acclaim, with several commentators praising the re-pairing of Ron and Tammy, as well as Nick Offerman's performance.

Ron's (Nick Offerman) ex-wife Tammy (Megan Mullally) continues her efforts to sabotage his life, but the normally susceptible Ron easily resists her seductions because he is now in a solid relationship with Tom's (Aziz Ansari) ex-wife Wendy (Jama Williamson), much to Tom's jealousy. Later, however, Wendy and Ron break up after she announces she is moving back to Canada. Meanwhile, Leslie (Amy Poehler) and the parks department throw a party for the Pawnee police department, where they hope to ask them to provide security for the upcoming Harvest Festival. During the party, Ben (Adam Scott) awkwardly fails to get Chief Trumple's (Eric Pierpoint) favor. Tom, unaware of Ron and Wendy's breakup, arrives at the party with Tammy to make him jealous. After bickering loudly, Ron and Tammy both decide to leave the party together to talk and try to make amends. However, a night filled with drunken sex and mayhem ensues, ending with the two getting remarried and ending up in jail.

After getting Ron released, the parks department holds an intervention for him about Tammy, even playing a previously recorded tape of Ron warning himself to stay away from her. Ron ignores the warnings and prepares to take Tammy to his cabin for a sex-filled honeymoon after her bridal shower. Leslie blames Tom for the dilemma and, although he initially claims to be unfazed, Tom later arrives at the bridal shower to stop Ron from going on the honeymoon. He reveals the whole marriage is a ploy by Tammy to once again make him miserable. Tammy attacks and mercilessly beats Tom, prompting Ron to remember what a monster she truly is and dump her. He literally carries Tom away, and the two later make amends. Despite the bad impression he made the day before, Ben asks Trumple for the Harvest Festival favor. The chief unconditionally agrees out of respect for Leslie, who he said always helps everyone, and because Leslie once dated his friend Dave (Louis C.K.). Ben seems relieved Leslie and Dave are no longer together, and he later asks Leslie out to eat.

In the B story, April (Aubrey Plaza) is working as Chris' (Rob Lowe) assistant until he goes back to Indianapolis. April's cynical personality clashes with Chris' relentless optimism and happiness. In an attempt to get fired, April purposely neglects to tell Ann (Rashida Jones) that Chris cannot make a lunch date. When Ann arrives to confront Chris, she quickly realizes April's ploy. Ann reveals she is very happy dating Chris, and would even probably move with him to Indianapolis if asked. Andy (Chris Pratt), who is still trying to win back April's affections, gives Chris an obviously forged letter from the FBI claiming April must immediately return to the parks department. Chris sees through the ruse and tells April she can go back, but that remaining his assistant may provide her career opportunities. He invites her to return with him to Indianapolis and she seems interested, leaving both Ann and Andy stunned and jealous.

"Ron & Tammy: Part Two", sometimes informally referred to as "Ron and Tammy II", was written by "Parks" consulting producer Emily Kapnek and directed by Tucker Gates, who has previously directed episodes of "The Office", another comedy series created by "Parks" co-creator Greg Daniels. Like all of the first six third season episodes, it was written and filmed almost immediately after the second season ended as part of an early shooting schedule needed to accommodate Amy Poehler's pregnancy. However, although finished early in anticipation of a September 2010 release date, "Parks" was ultimately placed on hiatus until early 2011, many months after production on "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" was finished. The episode is considered a sequel to the second season episode "Ron and Tammy", which introduced the character of Ron Swanson's ex-wife, Tammy, and their unhealthy relationship with each other. Megan Mullally, the real-life wife of actor Nick Offerman, reprises her role as Tammy. "Ron and Tammy" was one of the most well-received episodes of the second season, so the writers immediately started contemplating ways to bring the character back.

Offerman said he worked well with Mullally, and that the two both enjoy "pushing the envelope and testing our boundaries, both of physical ability and good taste". He jokingly said of filming the episode:

"They tell me it's quite something. I honestly don't remember much of what took place during the filming of that episode because it was like a crazy peyote fever dream. I remember there was lots of howling, and I came away very sore and scarred. Parts of my anatomy were alarmingly chafed. They say it turned out well. I'm excited to see it."

Offerman and Mullally were allowed to improvise a great deal during filming. The episode features a montage of various clips showing how Ron and Tammy gradually go from fighting with each other to getting married over the course of a particularly wild night. Long sequences of footage were shot — including Ron and Tammy loudly arguing on the sidewalk and the two making out atop a police car — but little more than a few seconds ultimately made the final episode. Offerman said it took about a half hour for the hair department to give him his cornrows haircut. He said he enjoyed the process, saying it "felt like a stiff head massage".

Mullally said Tammy is expected to appear again in future episodes: "It seems like it's sort of a once a season-ish kind of event. When Tammy shows up, it pretty much brings Ron to a screeching halt." Mullally and "Parks" co-star Adam Scott also starred together in the Starz comedy series "Party Down". "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" featured the last of several guest performances of Jama Williamson as Wendy, who revealed she was returning to her home country of Canada to care for her aging parents. Pawnee Police Chief Trumple was portrayed by Eric Pierpoint, who has played several police officers throughout his career, including an alien police officer in the science fiction series "Alien Nation" and a police chief in the superhero drama series "The Cape."

Immediately after "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" first aired on February 10, 2011, NBC ran a commercial advertising "April and Andy's wedding registry" on the official "Parks and Recreation" website. This seemed inconsistent with the show's storyline because, although April and Andy had previously expressed romantic interest in each other, the two had separated and were not yet reconciled at the time of the episode. Shortly after the episode aired, HitFix television reviewer Alan Sepinwall wrote that the commercial mistakenly used the wrong names and was actually referring to Ron and Tammy's wedding registry, which was mentioned in "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" and was indeed featured on the "Parks and Recreation" website. However, while images of both April and Andy were featured in the commercial, Tammy herself was not, and some commentators suggested the error could be indicative of future events in the series. Andy and April eventually did marry in the episode "Andy and April's Fancy Party". Afterward, "Parks" co-creator Michael Schur admitted the commercial was intended to run with that episode, but ran with "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" due to an error by NBC employees:

"In an effort to undo the spoiler, we publicly stated, in a number of interviews, that NBC had just accidentally gotten the character names wrong, and that there was no upcoming Andy-April wedding. We sincerely hope that fans of the show are cool with us gently lying to them, in an effort to maintain the surprise nuptials as much as we could. Now if you'll excuse us, we have to go shoot the season finale surprise Jerry-Donna wedding scene."

In its original American broadcast, "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" was seen by an estimated 5.03 million household viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research, with an overall 3.0 rating/5 share, and a 2.5 rating/7 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49. It marked a slight increase in viewership compared to the previous episode, "Time Capsule". The night "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" was broadcast, "Parks and Recreation" was outperformed in its timeslot by the CBS crime drama series "", which was seen by 12.78 million households; the ABC medical drama series "Grey's Anatomy", which was seen by 10.4 million household viewers; and the Fox comedy-drama series "Bones", which was seen by 9.5 million households.

"Ron & Tammy: Part Two" received highly positive reviews, with several commentators praising the repairing of Ron and Tammy, Nick Offerman's performance and, in particular, the line in which Ron explains how part of his mustache became shaved off: "It rubbed off... from friction." "Entertainment Weekly" writer Hillary Busis said she feared Megan Mullally could not live up to her performance in "Ron and Tammy", but she said the follow-up episode "gave "Parks and Rec" fans everything they could hope for and more". Busis also praised the pairing of the enthusiastic Chris and the apathetic April. Alan Sepinwall of HitFix enjoyed that the script did not simply rehash the original "Ron and Tammy" story, but instead played it well off the Tom, Wendy and Ron love triangle. Sepinwall also praised the Chris/April pairing and the fact that Adam Scott got to do more than play his usual straight man role. He added that he hoped each season would have a Ron and Tammy-centric episode, but limit it to once a year in the style of "Cheers" Bar Wars episodes.

The A.V. Club writer Steve Heisler said the episode was "just about as good as it gets", with several great moments revolving around Nick Offerman's deadpan comedic delivery. Heisler also said making the police department part of the script was a good way to better flesh out Pawnee and its townspeople. "New York" magazine writer Steve Kandell praised the performances of Offerman and Aubrey Plaza, and referred to Tammy as Pawnee's equivalent of Sideshow Bob in "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> Springfield. Kandell also liked that the episode "had heart" because the Tammy subplot was resolved by Ron standing up for Tom. TV Squad writer Joel Keller said the episode did not reach the level of the original "Ron and Tammy", but that "it still had more than enough funny, cringeworthy and downright gross moments to be very satisfying". He declared Mullally "one of the best sitcom creations this side of Colonel Flagg on "M*A*S*H"". "The Atlantic" writer Scott Meslow praised Ron Swanson as the show's "breakout character", and said "Ron & Tammy: Part Two" was so good that he hoped for another sequel episode in the next season.

Rick Porter of Zap2it said the episode featured several great scenes between Ron and Tammy and called it a "tour de force" for Nick Offerman, but also appreciated that the episode featured strong moments outside that main plotline. He called it the best comedic showcase for Adam Scott so far in the season, and praised both the pairing of April and Chris, and the way that subplot led to Ann's confusion about her future with Chris. Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com said the subplot with April and Chris demonstrated how "Parks" often succeeds in pairing two characters that often seem to have little connection to each other. Sundermann also enjoyed how Ben's awkwardness around the police chief illustrated how "the show is becoming more and more clear on who understands and fits in Pawnee, versus who doesn't". TV Fanatic writer Matt Richenthal said the dynamic between Ron and Tammy worked well not only due to their real-life relationship, but also because of the balance between "the couple's over-the-top antics and the heart it showed in other areas". Richenthal also complimented the performance of Chris Pratt as the "sweet, well-intentioned, air-headed Andy".



</doc>
<doc id="30861510" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30861510" title="65th Infantry Regiment (United States)">
65th Infantry Regiment (United States)

The 65th Infantry Regiment, nicknamed "The Borinqueneers" from the original Taíno name of the island (Borinquen), is a Puerto Rican regiment of the United States Army. The regiment's motto is "Honor et Fidelitas", Latin for "Honor and Fidelity". The Army Appropriation Bill created by an act of Congress on March 2, 1898, authorized the creation of the first body of native troops in Puerto Rico. On June 30, 1901, the "Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry" was organized. On July 1, 1908, Congress incorporated the regiment into the Regular Army as the Puerto Rico Regiment of Infantry, United States Army. On May 14, 1917, the Regiment was activated and additional men were assigned, with the unit being sent to serve at Panama. On June 4, 1920, the Regiment was renamed 65th Infantry. During World War II, the Regiment saw action throughout Europe, especially France and Germany, participating in Naples-Foggia, Rome-Arno and Rhin. Several Purple Hearts were handed posthumously to members of the 65th Regiment.

The 65th Infantry Regiment participated in World War I, World War II, the Korean War, and in what is known in the United States as the War on Terror. On April 13, 2016, the 65th Infantry was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal.

Puerto Ricans have participated in many of the military conflicts in which the United States has been involved. For example, they participated in the American Revolution, when volunteers from Puerto Rico, Cuba, and Mexico fought the British in 1779 under the command of General Bernardo de Gálvez (1746–1786), and have continued to participate up to the present-day conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. Puerto Rico became a U.S. Territory after the 1898 Treaty of Paris which ended the Spanish–American War. The United States appointed a military governor and soon the United States Army established itself in San Juan.

On March 2, 1899, the Army received an assignation of funds and authorization meant to formally organize troops in Puerto Rico. On March 24, 1899, the General Commander of the Puerto Rico Department, Mayor General Guy V. Henry ordered the creation of the Porto Rico Battalion of Volunteer Infantry. Formed by four companies named A through D and assigned to San Juan, Mayagüez and Ponce, the unit was activated on May 20, 1899, led by Major Lorenzo Davinson. Shortly afterwards, each company received additional men for a total of 112. Major Ebon Swift replaced Davison as commander. The formalization of this move was notified in General Order 65, issued by the new General Commander Gen. George Davis. On February 12, 1900, the Mounted Battalion was organized and both were later designated Porto Rico Regiment, U.S. Volunteers. The following year, the units were renamed Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry. The Band and First Battalion were sent to Washington on March 4, 1901, to participate in the inauguration of McKinley.

On July 1, 1901, the United States Senate passed a bill which would require a strict mental and physical examination for those who wanted to join the regiment. It also approved the recruitment of native Puerto Rican civilians to be appointed the grade of second lieutenants for a term of four years if they passed the required tests. On April 23, 1904, Congress authorized the recruitment of the local population as Second Lieutenants, leading to the recognition of Jaime Nadal, Henry Rexach, Pedro Parra, Eduardo Iriarte, Teofilo Marxuach, Eugenio de Hostos, Luis Emmanuelli and Pascual López. In 1905, one of its battalions was sent to March along the First a Brigade of the First Division of the Regular Army during Roosevelt's inauguration. An act of Congress, approved on May 27, 1908, reorganized the regiment as part of the "regular" Army and the "Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry" was renamed "Porto Rico Regiment of Infantry". Since the native Puerto Rican officers were Puerto Rican citizens and not citizens of the United States, they were required to undergo a new physical examination to determine their fitness for commissions in the Regular Army and to take an oath of U.S. citizenship with their new officers oath. By 30 January 1917, the Porto Rico Regiment of Infantry was training in Camp Las Casas which was located in Santurce, a section of San Juan in what is now Residencial Las Casas.

Different units of the regiment were stationed at other forts throughout the island under the command of William P. Burnham. Lieutenant Teófilo Marxuach, the officer of the day, was stationed at El Morro Castle at San Juan Bay on March 21, 1915. The "Odenwald", built in 1903 (not to be confused with the German World War II war ship which carried the same name), was an armed German supply ship which tried to force its way out of the San Juan Bay and deliver supplies to the German submarines waiting in the Atlantic Ocean. Marxuach gave the order to open fire on the ship from the walls of the fort. Sergeant Encarnación Correa then manned a machine gun and fired warning shots with little effect.

Marxuach fired a warning shot from a cannon located at the Santa Rosa battery of "El Morro" fort, in what is considered to be the first shot of World War I fired by the regular armed forces of the United States against a ship flying the colors of the Central Powers, forcing the "Odenwald" to stop and to return to port where its supplies were confiscated.

The Odenwald was confiscated by the United States and renamed "SS Newport News". It was assigned to the U.S. Shipping Board, where it served until 1924 when it was retired.

Puerto Ricans were unaccustomed to the racial segregation policies of the United States which were also implemented in Puerto Rico and often refused to designate themselves as "white" or "black". Puerto Ricans of African descent were assigned to all-black units. In 1916, the Third Battalion and the companies of service and machine-guns were integrated into the regiment.

When the United States declared war against Germany, the regiment was transferred to the regular Army and on 3 May 1917, recruited 1,969 men, considered at that time as war strength.

On May 14, 1917, the regiment was sent to Panama in defense of the Panama Canal Zone. The regiment returned to Puerto Rico in March 1919 and was renamed "The 65th Infantry Regiment" by the Reorganization Act of June 4, 1920. During this period a young Puerto Rican officer of the Regular Army, Major Luis R. Esteves, was sent to Camp Las Casas to serve as an instructor in the preparation of Puerto Rican officers. In the future, Esteves would become known as the "Father of the Puerto Rican National Guard". In 1923, the 65th provided personnel to the newly created 42nd Infantry Regiment.

In 1942 the 65th Infantry underwent an extensive training program and in 1943, it was sent to Panama to protect the Pacific and the Atlantic sides of the isthmus. On November 25, 1943, Colonel Antulio Segarra, succeeded Col. John R. Menclenhall as commander of the 65th Infantry, thus becoming the first Puerto Rican Regular Army officer to command a Regular Army regiment. In January 1944, the regiment was embarked for Jackson Barracks in New Orleans and later sent to Fort Eustis in Newport News, Virginia in preparation for overseas deployment to North Africa.

They also served in Casablanca after the Naval Battle of Casablanca, where the regiment underwent amphibious training. This enabled the 3rd Battalion to move on to Corsica, where it was attached to the 12th Air Force and tasked with guarding airfields. Between March and April 1944, the 65th was reassigned to North Africa. On May 3, 1944, the Third Battalion arrived at Napoles. The Battalion was then moved to Corsica and then to France. Salvador Roid commanded the 65th during this period in Europe, which earned him the Combat Infantryman Badge.

During this time, rumors swirled that the Regiment would be sent to live combat, while officers had already been moved to act as observers. On 22 September 1944, the 65th Infantry landed in France. The Regiment was then moved to Peira Cava in the Maritime Alps, where it entered in action on December 13, 1944, the first time a Puerto Rican unit saw action in Europe. The first offensive attack came the following day in response to enemy fire, with Lieutenant Colonel Juan César Cordero Dávila allowing Capt. Efraín Sánchez and Company L to return fire.

In November 1944, Company C provided security to the headquarters of the Seventh United States Army. The rest of the First Battalion was assigned other tasks, such as defending the Command Center of the Sixth United States Army Group. The Second and Third Battalions were assigned to defend communications. In 1948, seven members received the Bronze Star for their service in World War II. On December 13, 1944, the 65th Infantry, under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Cordero Dávila, relieved the 2nd Battalion of the 442nd Infantry Regiment, a regiment which was made up of Japanese Americans under the command of Col. Virgil R. Miller, a native of San Germán, Puerto Rico and former member of the 65th Infantry Regiment.

In December 1944, the 3rd Battalion faced the German 34th Infantry Division's 107th Grenadier Regiment. They suffered a total of forty seven battle casualties. The first two Puerto Ricans to be killed in action from the 65th Infantry were Pvt. Sergio Sánchez-Sánchez and Sgt. Ángel Martínez, from the town of Sabana Grande. Upon arriving in the freezing and isolated outposts in the Maritime Alps, the unit's morale dropped severely. In an apparent effort to boost the unit's morale, its new commander, West Pointer Colonel George A. Ford, personally led a patrol towards the German lines on January 4, 1945. Upon reaching the forward German outposts, Colonel Ford was immediately shot and killed. In the firefight that followed, one of the enlisted man already mentioned was killed and several other were wounded, forcing the patrol to abandon the colonel's body.

On March 18, 1945, the regiment was sent to the District of Mannheim, Germany and assigned to Military Government activities, anti-sabotage and security missions. In all, the 65th Infantry participated in the campaigns of Rome-Arno, Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, and Central Europe. On October 27, 1945, the regiment sailed from France arriving at Puerto Rico on November 9, 1945.

The 65th Infantry Regiment distinguished itself when the United States conducted a military exercise on the island of Vieques, on the eve of the Korean War. This exercise was code named "Operation PORTREX," an acronym for "Puerto Rico Exercise." The objective was to see how the combined forces of the Army, Marines, Navy, and Air Force would do as "liberators" of an enemy captured territory (Vieques) against the "aggressors." The core of the aggressor ground forces were made up of Puerto Rican soldiers, most of whom belonged to the 65th Infantry Regiment.

The liberators consisted of 32,600 combat troops from the 82nd Airborne Division's 504th Airborne Infantry Regiment and the Marine Corps, who received support from the Navy and Air Force. Despite the large number of troops deployed, the 65th Infantry (the aggressor) was able to halt the offensive forces on the beaches of the island. Colonel William W. Harris, the commanding officer of the 65th, stated: 

The successful military maneuvers during PORTREX prompted the Army's leadership to deploy the 65th Infantry to Korea.
On August 27, 1950, the 65th Infantry, with 3,920 officers and men organized into three infantry battalions, one artillery battalion and a tank company departed from Puerto Rico and arrived in Pusan, Korea on 23 September 1950. It was during the long sea voyage that the men nicknamed the 65th Infantry as the "Borinqueneers." "That was the name of the more peaceful of the two original Indian tribes that inhabited the island of Puerto Rico "Borinquen", and many of the men were direct descendants of that industrious race of people." 

The men of the 65th, now attached to the Army's 3rd Infantry Division, were among the first infantrymen to meet the enemy on the battlefields of Korea. After November 1950, they fought daily against units of the Chinese People's Liberation Army after the Chinese entered the war on the North Korean side. The 296th Regiment took its place at Puerto Rico. In Korea, the regiment covered the retreat of the 1st Marine Division during the Battle of Chosin Reservoir.

One of the hardships suffered by the Puerto Ricans was the lack of warm clothing during the cold, harsh winters. "Born in a semitropical climate- most of them had never seen snow- they had lived and fought through it all without complaint."
The enemy made many attempts to encircle the regiment, but each time they failed because of the many casualties inflicted by the 65th. Because the 65th held their positions, that enabled the U.S. Marines to withdraw from the Chosin Reservoir in December 1950.
When the Marines were surrounded by the Chinese Communist troops close to the Manchurian border, they were ordered to retreat and work their way back to Hungnam. The men of the 65th rushed to their defense and were ordered to stay behind and fight the enemy. As a result, the Marines were able to withdraw to their ships with the 65th holding the rear guard. The 65th, attached to the 1st Marine Division, was awarded the Navy Unit Commendation for their defense and were among the last units to embark from Hungnam. Among the battles and operations in which the 65th participated was "Operation Killer" in January 1951, becoming the first regiment to cross the Han River in South Korea during the operation.

In April 1951, the regiment participated in the Uijonbu Corridor drives and in June 1951, the 65th was the third regiment to cross the Han Ton River. The 65th took and held Chorwon and they were also instrumental in breaking the Iron Triangle of Hill 717 in July 1951. In November 1951, the regiment fought off an attack by two regimental size enemy units. Colonel Juan César Cordero Dávila of the 296th Regiment requested a transfer to active service in Korea. In December 1951, Chief of Staff J. Lawton Collins visited Puerto Rico and granted the request, reassigning him to the 65th, replacing him with Lt. Col. Sepúlveda. Col. Cordero was formally named commander of the 65th Infantry on 8 February 1952, thus becoming one of the highest ranking ethnic officers in the Army. Brigadier William Warner Harris (USMA 1930) published a book that captured the distinguished history of the 65th while under his command. When asked if the Puerto Ricans would fight when the time came, then Colonel William Warner Harris' answer was just as direct: "My Puerto Ricans will fight anyone, anywhere."

On July 3, 1952, the regiment defended the main line of resistance (MLR) for 47 days and saw action at Cognac, King, and Queen with successful attacks on Chinese positions. In September 1952, the 65th Infantry defended a hill known as "Outpost Kelly." Chinese Communist forces overran the hill in what became known as the Battle for Outpost Kelly. On two occasions, the 65th Regiment was overwhelmed by Chinese artillery and driven off.

In October 1952, the regiment also saw action in the Chorwon Sector and on Iron Horse, Hill 391, whose lower part was called "Jackson Heights" in honor of Capt. George Jackson (see: Col. Carlos Betances Ramírez). Company G of the 65th fought a desperate battle to hold on to Hill 391. After enduring days of artillery bombardment with limited artillery support of their own, Company G withdrew to avoid being overrun by a numerically superior foe.

In June 1953, the 2nd Battalion conducted a series of successful raids about two and a half miles southeast of Jackson Heights and in November the regiment successfully counter-attacked enemy units in the Numsong Valley and held their positions until the was reached.

Many non-Puerto Rican Hispanics served in the 65th Infantry during the war. Among those who distinguished themselves in combat and who served in the conflict as a member of the 65th Infantry was a young first lieutenant of Mexican American descent whose name is Richard Edward Cavazos. Cavazos entered the military in Texas and served as Company Commander of Company E of the 2d Battalion. Cavazos, who in 1982, became the first Hispanic to become a four-star general in the United States Army, was the recipient of the Distinguished Service Cross, the Silver Star Medal, and the Bronze Star Medal.

Col. Cordero Dávila was relieved of his command by Col. Chester B. DeGavre, a West Point graduate and a "Continental," an officer from the mainland United States, and the officer staff of the 65th was replaced with non-Hispanic officers. DeGavre, upset over the fact that "G" company did not hold on to Hill 391, ordered that the unit stop calling itself the "Borinqueneers," cut their special rations of rice and beans, ordered the men to shave off their mustaches, and had one of them wear a sign that read: "I am a coward." The language barrier, an NCO shortage, and poor leadership were factors that influenced some of the men of Company L in their refusal to continue to fight.

One hundred and sixty-two Puerto Ricans of the 65th Infantry were arrested. Between November 23 and December 26, 1952, ninety-five soldiers were tried by General Court-Martial in fifteen separate trials. Ninety-one were found guilty and sentenced to prison terms ranging from one to 18 years of hard labor. It was the largest mass court-martial of the Korean War. According to cultural historian Silvia Álvarez Curbelo, the government of Puerto Rico, caught in the middle of a potentially damaging affair that could jeopardize its political agenda, kept silent for nearly two months. Finally, the incidents were made known by a local newspaper alerted by letters written by the imprisoned soldiers to their families. Secret negotiations between the U.S. and Puerto Rican governments took place and the Secretary of the Army Robert T. Stevens moved quickly to remit the sentences and grant clemency and pardons to all those involved.

The breakdown of the 65th resulted from a number of factors: a shortage of officers and non-commissioned officers, a rotation policy that removed combat-experienced leaders and soldiers, tactical doctrine that led to high casualties, a shortage of artillery ammunition, communication problems between largely white, English-speaking officers and Spanish-speaking Puerto Rican enlisted men, and declining morale. The report also found bias in the prosecution of the Puerto Ricans, citing instances of Continental soldiers who were not charged after refusing to fight in similar circumstances, before and after Jackson Heights. Though the men who were court martialed were pardoned, a campaign for a formal exoneration was launched.

Master Sergeant Juan E. Negrón was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his courageous actions while serving as a member of Company L, 65th Infantry Regiment, 3d Infantry Division during combat operations against an armed enemy in Kalma-Eri, Korea April 28, 1951. His award was upgraded to the Medal of Honor on March 18, 2014.

Negrón's Medal of Honor citation
A total of 61,000 Puerto Ricans served in the military during the Korean War. And around 90% of the Puerto Ricans that saw action in Korea were volunteers. The 65th Infantry was awarded battle participation credits for the following nine campaigns: UN Defense-1950, UN Offense-1950, CCF Intervention-1950, First UN Counterattack Offensive-1951, UN and CCF Spring Offensive-1951, UN Summer-Fall Offensive-1951, 2nd Korean Winter 1951–52, Korean Summer-Fall-1952 and 3rd Korean Winter-1952-53. They are credited with the last battalion-sized bayonet charge in U.S. Army history.

Ten Distinguished Service Crosses, 256 Silver Stars and 606 Bronze Stars for valor were awarded to the men of the 65th Infantry. Of the ten Distinguished Service Crosses that were awarded to the members of the 65th Infantry, five were awarded to Puerto Ricans:

According to "El Nuevo Día" newspaper, May 30, 2004, a total of 756 Puerto Ricans were killed in Korea, from all four branches of the U.S. armed forces. However, according to "All POW-MIA Korean War Casualties", the total amount of Puerto Rican casualties in the Korean War was 732. However this total may vary slightly since some non-Puerto Ricans such as Captain James W. Conner were mistakenly included. Out of the 700 plus casualties suffered in the war a total of 121 men were listed as missing in action. The Battle of Outpost Kelly accounted for 73 of the men missing in action from the total of 121. Out of the 73 MIAs suffered by the regiment in September 1952, 50 of them occurred on the same day, September 18. For a list of names of those who were declared MIA, see: List of Puerto Ricans missing in action in the Korean War. According to the TAGOKOR Korean War Casualty File and the American Battle Commission site the members of the 65th who fought in Korea were awarded a total of 2,771 Purple Heart Medals. On February 12, 1951, General Douglas MacArthur, wrote in Tokyo:

The 65th Infantry was relieved from assignment to the 3d Infantry Division on November 3, 1954, and, returning to Puerto Rico, it was assigned on December 2, 1954, to the 23rd Infantry Division, which encompassed geographically-separated units in the Caribbean region. On April 10, 1956, it was inactivated at Losey Field, Puerto Rico, and relieved from assignment to the 23d, which itself was inactivated.

On February 6, 1959, the regiment was deactivated from the Regular Army but the Puerto Rican Army National Guard soon adopted "65" as the identifying number for their existing 296th Regimental Combat Team at Losey Field, mainly composed of reserve component personnel.

On February 15, 1959, it was organized to consist of the 1st Battle Group, 65th Infantry, an element of the 92nd Infantry Brigade. On February 21, 1960, commemorated as National Guard Day, the 65th Infantry Regiment was formally transferred from the Regular Army to the PRNG, in an activity where Gen. Cesár Cordero handed the units colors to Col. Rafael Rodríguez. That same year, Company B of the 65th Regiment created Employer's Day ("Día del Patrono" in Spanish) where the employers of the volunteers that serve in the PRNG are instructed about the job that their employees do with the entity and participate in training of their own. The idea behind the initiative was facilitating the processing of the request of leave-of-absence to train for two weeks during the summer. On May 1, 1964, it was reorganized to consist of the 1st Battalion, 65th Infantry, and remained assigned to the 92nd. It was reorganized again on April 1, 1971, to consist of the 1st Battalion and the separate Company E. This was followed by another reorganization on September 1, 1978, to consist of the 1st and 2nd Battalions within the 92nd, as well as the separate Company E. Less than two years later another reorganization on February 29, 1980, eliminated the separate Company E while retaining the 1st and 2nd Battalions.

On October 27, 1987, the regiment was withdrawn from CARS and reorganized under the United States Army Regimental System with headquarters at Cayey. It was reorganized on September 1, 1992, to consist of the 1st Battalion, 65th Infantry, and remained assigned to the 92nd Infantry Brigade.

On February 14, 2003, it was ordered into active federal service at home stations and released on February 12, 2005, reverting to territorial control. On October 1, of that year it was reorganized as the 65th Infantry Regiment in which only the 1st Battalion was active.

The separate Company E was a Ranger unit given federal recognition effective April 1, 1971, and had a total authorized strength of 198 personnel. It was added to the PR ARNG on that date while the 755th Transportation Company (Medium Truck, Cargo) was deleted. Co E (Ranger), 65th Infantry relocated from Vega Baja to San Juan on February 2, 1976, and was inactivated as federal recognition was withdrawn effective February 29, 1980. This resulted in the allocation of an ARNG ranger company being transferred from the PR ARNG to the Texas ARNG, in which Company G (Ranger), 143rd Infantry was activated in Houston from elements of the 2d Battalion (Airborne), 143rd Infantry, 36th Airborne Brigade, which was being inactivated effective April 1, 1980.

The 65th Infantry Regiment's 1st Battalion, along with its sister battalion, the 1–296th Infantry, was transferred to the 92nd Infantry Brigade, PRARNG (now the 92nd Maneuver Enhancement Brigade). Both battalions have served in what the United States and its allies call the War against Terrorism and Operation Iraqi Freedom/Enduring Freedom.

In 2009, Company C, 1st Battalion, 65th Infantry Regiment was deployed to the Horn of Africa and stationed at Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti, after completing a 14-month deployment at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Company C carried the crew-served weapons to protect the camp. It also operated the entry control checkpoints, protected U.S. and allied ships at the massive Djibouti Port, and guarded the U.S. Embassy there. By mid-2009, the rest of the battalion deployed there in case a larger combat maneuver element was needed to operate from the base. The area is considered to be the most unstable part of Africa, and the Somali border is less than 10 miles from Camp Lemonnier.

During the Korean War, the Borinqueneers were awarded 10 Distinguished Service Crosses (Juan Negrons was upgraded to the Medal of Honor), 256 Silver Stars, 606 Bronze Stars, and 2,771 Purple Hearts.

Puerto Rico honored the unit by naming one of its principal avenues "Avenida 65 de Infantería" in San Juan. The names of those killed in combat are inscribed in "El Monumento de la Recordación" (Monument of Remembrance), which was unveiled on May 19, 1996 and is situated in front of the Capitol Building in San Juan, Puerto Rico.

In November 1999, Governor Pedro Rosselló, along with the Senate of Puerto Rico, chartered the 65th Infantry Honor Task Force and appointed Anthony Mele as chairman to work with Major General Nels Running, Director, Committee of the 50th Anniversary of the Korean War to commemorate the 65th Infantry Regiment. The 65th Infantry Honor Task Force is a coalition of individuals, veterans organizations, and groups dedicated to advocate and preserve the legacy of the 65th Infantry Regiment. The group organized tree planting and plaque commemoration ceremonies around the US, to include Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia; Fort San Felipe del Morro in San Juan, Puerto Rico; and Fort Logan National Cemetery in Denver.

On May 20, 2001, the government of Puerto Rico unveiled a monument honoring the 65th Infantry Regiment. The monument was made by artist Sonny Rodríguez, and is called "Mission Accomplished". It contains a statue of a soldier wearing a poncho with his rifle in one hand and the regiment's flag in the other hand.

On June 7, 2007, PBS aired "The Borinqueneers", a documentary about the 65th Infantry written and directed by Noemí Figueroa Soulet with Raquel Ortiz as co-director. The narrators were Héctor Elizondo (English) and David Ortiz-Anglero (Spanish).

On November 30, 2012, an entire stretch of Southern Boulevard in the South Bronx, New York was co-named "La 65 de Infantería Boulevard".

On October 1, 2013, the 65th Infantry Honor Task Force organized veterans from the 65th and their families to attend a salute to the regiment by the 3d US Infantry [The Old Guard] at Fort Myer, Virginia, a tour of the Tomb of the Unknown Soldiers, and wreath laying ceremony at the Korean War Combat Veterans Memorial in Washington, DC. Video credits to Jose R. Guerra:

March 22–23, 2014, the 65th Infantry Honor Task Force organized the salute of the first Medal of Honor awarded to a Borinqueneer; MSG Juan E. Negron in New York with Iris Negron, daughter of MSG Negron, and BG Jose Burgos. In attendance were New York State Senators William E. Larkin, a Korean War combat veteran, and David Carlucci who presented a proclamation from the New York State Senate.

In 2014 the National Puerto Rican Day Parade, which is attended by nearly two million people and broadcast live on Fox TV, was dedicated to the Borinqueneers.

A Congressional Gold Medal is an award bestowed by the United States Congress and is, along with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States. It is awarded to persons "who have performed an achievement that has an impact on American history and culture that is likely to be recognized as a major achievement in the recipient's field long after the achievement." Congressional Gold Medals have also been awarded to: Native American code talkers; the Japanese American 100th Infantry Battalion and 442nd Infantry Regiment; the Tuskegee Airmen; the Montford Point Marines; the 1st Special Service Force (Devil's Brigade) and the Women Airforce Service Pilots (WASP).

S. 1726, the bill that would confer the Congressional Gold Medal on the 65th Infantry Regiment, was introduced in Congress. It was signed by President Barack Obama at a ceremony on June 10, 2014, becoming Public Law 113-120. A decision on designs for a congressional gold medal being awarded in 2015 to the Borinqueneers of the 65th Infantry Regiment was selected by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee on June 16, 2015. For the 65th Infantry Borinqueneers congressional gold medal, the CCAC recommended for the obverse a design depicting a close-up portrait of a unit staff sergeant, with three soldiers traversing rocky ground in the background. The recommended reverse features an historic sentry box in Old San Juan, Puerto Rico, an olive branch, the 65th Infantry insignia patch and unit's motto, HONOR ET FIDELITAS (Honor and Fidelity). On April 13, 2016, leaders of the United States House and Senate awarded the Congressional Gold Medal to the 65th Infantry Regiment.

Amongst the notable Puerto Ricans who served in the "65th Infantry Regiment" and/or its predecessor the "Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry":

The 65th Infantry has been awarded the following citations:

Other military articles related to Puerto Rico:

Notes
Citations
Bibliography

Further reading



</doc>
<doc id="30866008" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30866008" title="The King of Limbs">
The King of Limbs

The King of Limbs is the eighth studio album by the English rock band Radiohead. It was self-released on 18 February 2011 as a download, followed by CD and 12" vinyl versions on 28 March through XL Recordings in the UK, TBD Records in the US, and Hostess Entertainment in Japan.

Following the protracted recording and more conventional instrumentation of "In Rainbows" (2007), Radiohead and their longtime producer Nigel Godrich developed "The King of Limbs" by sampling and looping. Singer Thom Yorke described the album as "an expression of wildness and mutation". The artwork, by Yorke and longtime collaborator Stanley Donwood, depicts nature and spirits inspired by fairy tales. 

Radiohead released no singles from "The King of Limbs", but released a music video for "Lotus Flower" featuring Yorke's dancing that spawned an internet meme. In 2012, they began an international tour, with several festival appearances. The European tour was postponed after the temporary stage collapsed in Toronto’s Downsview Park, killing a technician and injuring three others.

"The King of Limbs" was named one of the best albums of the year by publications including "The Wire", "NME" and "PopMatters". It was nominated for five categories at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards, including the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album. The download version sold an estimated 300,000 to 400,000 copies in two months, and the vinyl became a bestseller in the UK. The retail edition debuted at number seven on the UK Albums Chart and number six on the US "Billboard" 200. "The King of Limbs" was followed by a remix album, "TKOL RMX 1234567", and a live video, "".

Radiohead worked on "The King of Limbs" with longtime producer Nigel Godrich intermittently from May 2009 to January 2011. It was recorded in Los Angeles, at the home of actress Drew Barrymore. 

Radiohead wanted to avoid repeating the protracted recording process of their previous album "In Rainbows" (2007). According to singer Thom Yorke, the band felt that "if we are gonna carry on, we need to do it for a new set of reasons". Cover artist Stanley Donwood said that whereas "In Rainbows" was "very much a definitive statement", the band wanted to make an album that was more "transitory". Multi-instrumentalist Jonny Greenwood said: "We didn't want to pick up guitars and write chord sequences. We didn't want to sit in front of a computer either. We wanted a third thing, which involved playing and programming."

Whereas Radiohead developed "In Rainbows" from their live performances, "The King of Limbs" developed from studio experimentation. Yorke sought to move further from conventional recording methods. After he and Godrich became interested in DJing during their time in Los Angeles, Godrich proposed a two-week experiment whereby the band used turntables and vinyl emulation software instead of conventional instruments. According to Godrich, "That two-week experiment ended up being fucking six months. And that’s that record, the whole story of all of it."

Much of the album is constructed from samples of the band's playing, which were looped and edited. Radiohead used sampling software written by Greenwood, which he described as a "wonky, rubbish version" of Ableton Live. Radiohead used this to create sequences of music to which Yorke wrote melodies and lyrics, a process he likened to editing a film. Guitarist Ed O'Brien told "Rolling Stone": "The brick walls we tended to hit were when we knew something was great, like 'Bloom', but not finished ... Then [Colin Greenwood] had that bassline, and Thom started singing. Those things suddenly made it a hundred times better."

On 24 January 2010, Radiohead suspended recording to perform at the Henry Fonda Theatre, Hollywood, to raise funds for Oxfam responding to the 2010 Haiti earthquake. The show was released free online in December 2010 as "Radiohead for Haiti", and included a solo performance of the future "King of Limbs" track "Lotus Flower" by Yorke on acoustic guitar. 

According to "Rolling Stone", "The King of Limbs" saw Radiohead move further from conventional rock music and song structures in favour of "moody, rhythm-heavy electronica, glacially paced ballads and ambient psychedelia". It makes prominent use of sampling, looping, and ambient sounds, including samples of natural sounds such as birdsong and wind. "Pitchfork" described its music as "aggressive rhythms made out of dainty bits of digital detritus, robotically repetitive yet humanly off-kilter, parched thickets of drumming graced with fleeting moments of melodic relief". Several critics noted dubstep influences. According to O'Brien: "Rhythm is the king of limbs! The rhythm dictates the record. It's very important." 

The first track, "Bloom", was inspired by the BBC nature documentary series "The Blue Planet". It opens with a piano loop and features horns and complex rhythms. "Morning Mr Magpie" has "restless guitars". "Little by Little" features "crumbling guitar shapes" and "clattering" percussion. "Feral" features scattered vocal samples and "mulched-up" drums. "Lotus Flower" features a driving synth bassline and Yorke's falsetto. "Codex" is a piano ballad with "spectral" horns and strings and a Roland TR-808 drum machine. "Give Up the Ghost" is an acoustic guitar ballad with layered vocal harmonies. The final track, "Separator", has guitar and piano, a "brittle" drum loop, and echoing vocals.

Yorke said he felt "The King of Limbs" was a "visual" album, with lyrics and artwork about "wildness" and "mutating" inspired by his environmental concerns. The album title may refer to the King of Limbs, an ancient oak tree in Wiltshire's Savernake Forest, near Tottenham House, where Radiohead recorded "In Rainbows".

At eight tracks and 37 minutes in length, "The King of Limbs" is Radiohead's shortest album. O'Brien explained that Radiohead felt the ideal album was around 40 minutes long, and cited Marvin Gaye's "What's Going On" (1971) as a classic record shorter than "The King of Limbs".

The "King of Limbs" artwork was created by Yorke with longtime Radiohead collaborator Stanley Donwood. Donwood intended to paint oil portraits of the Radiohead members in the style of Gerhard Richter, but abandoned the idea as "I'd never painted with oils before and I'm not Gerhard Richter so it was just a series of painted disasters". As with previous Radiohead albums, Donwood worked on the artwork as the band recorded nearby; the music made Donwood think of "immense multicoloured cathedrals of trees, with music echoing from the branches whilst strange fauna lurked in the fog". Donwood and Yorke drew trees with eyes, limbs, mouths, and familiars, creating "strange, multi-limbed creatures that are neither malevolent or benevolent", inspired by Northern European fairy tales.

For the special "newspaper" edition of "The King of Limbs", Donwood wanted to create something "in a state of flux". He chose newspaper, which fades in sunlight, for "its ephemeral nature"; this reflected the album's nature themes, mirroring the natural decay of living things. To design the newspaper, Donwood took inspiration from weekend broadsheets and radical 1960s newspapers and magazines. The special edition was nominated for the Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package in the 54th Grammy Awards.

Radiohead announced "The King of Limbs" on their website on 14 February 2011. It was released on 18 February, a day ahead of schedule, as the website was ready and Radiohead saw no reason to withhold it. The download version was sold for £6, with a special edition of the album, released 9 May 2011, sold for £30. The special edition contains the album on CD and two 10-inch vinyl records, additional artwork, a special record sleeve, and a "colour piece of oxo-degradable plastic package". "The King of Limbs" was released on CD and vinyl on XL in the United Kingdom, TBD in the United States, and Hostess Entertainment in Japan.

On 16 April 2011, Radiohead released two tracks not included on "The King of Limbs" but worked on during the same sessions, "Supercollider" and "The Butcher", as a double single for Record Store Day. They later released the tracks as free downloads for those who had purchased "The King of Limbs" from the Radiohead website. In June 2011, Radiohead announced a series of "King of Limbs" remix singles by various artists. The remixes are compiled on the remix album "TKOL RMX 1234567", released in September 2011. Radiohead performed "The King of Limbs" in its entirety for "", broadcast in July 2011 and released on DVD and Blu-ray in December 2011. On February 11, 2014, Radiohead released the "Polyfauna" app for Android and iOS; it is an "experimental collaboration" between the band and the British digital arts studio Universal Everything, and uses musical elements and imagery from "The King of Limbs".

In 2017, Radiohead collaborated with film composer Hans Zimmer to record a new version of "Bloom" for the BBC nature documentary series "Blue Planet II". The new track, "(ocean) Bloom", features new vocals by Yorke recorded alongside the BBC Concert Orchestra. In a press release, Yorke said: "'Bloom' was inspired by the original "Blue Planet" series so it's great to be able to come full circle with the song."

Before the album announcement, Radiohead planned a broadcast on February 18, 2011, in Hachikō Square in Shibuya, Tokyo, but the event was canceled due to security concerns. On February 18, Radiohead released a music video for "Lotus Flower" on YouTube, featuring black-and-white footage of Yorke dancing. It was directed by Garth Jennings and choreographed by Wayne McGregor. The video inspired the "Dancing Thom Yorke" internet meme, whereby fans replaced the audio or edited the visuals, and "#thomdance" became a trending hashtag on Twitter.

To promote the retail release of "The King of Limbs", Radiohead distributed a free newspaper, the "Universal Sigh", at independent record shops across the world on 28 March 2011. Donwood and Yorke distributed copies in person at a record shop in east London. Influenced by free newspapers such as "LA Weekly" or "London Lite", the "Universal Sigh" is a 12-page tabloid printed using web-offset lithography on newsprint paper and features artwork, poetry, and lyrics along with short stories by Donwood, Jay Griffiths and Robert Macfarlane.

Radiohead did not perform "The King of Limbs" live until several months after its release, as Yorke wanted to continue studio work, and it took some time to arrange the album for live performance. To perform the complex rhythms, they enlisted a second drummer, Clive Deamer, who had worked with Portishead and Get the Blessing. Selway said: "That was fascinating. One played in the traditional way, the other almost mimicked a drum machine. It was push-and-pull, like kids at play, really interesting." Deamer has joined Radiohead for subsequent tours.

On 24 June 2011, Radiohead played a surprise performance on the Park stage at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival, performing songs from "The King of Limbs" before an audience for the first time. In September, they played two dates at New York City's Roseland Ballroom and made American TV appearances including a one-hour special episode of "The Colbert Report" and the season premiere of "Saturday Night Live". In 2012, Radiohead toured Europe, North America, and Asia, with appearances at the Bonnaroo, Coachella and Fuji Rock festivals.

On June 16, 2012, the stage collapsed during the setup for a show at Toronto's Downsview Park, killing drum technician Scott Johnson and injuring three other members of Radiohead's road crew. The show was canceled and Radiohead's tour dates in Europe were postponed. After rescheduling the tour, Radiohead paid tribute to Johnson and their stage crew at their next concert, in Nîmes, France, in July. In June 2013, Live Nation Canada Inc, two other organisations and an engineer were charged with 13 charges. Following a delay caused by mistrial, the case was dropped in September 2017 under the Jordan ruling, which puts time limits on cases. An inquest into Johnson's death began in March 2019.

On the Radiohead website, where it was exclusively available for nearly two months prior to its retail release, "The King of Limbs" sold between 300,000 and 400,000 download copies. Radiohead's co-manager Chris Hufford estimated that Radiohead made more money from "The King of Limbs" than any of their previous albums, as most sales were made through their website without a record company.

The retail edition of "The King of Limbs" debuted at number seven on the UK Albums Chart, selling 33,469 copies in its first week. The retail vinyl edition, excluding special edition sales, sold more than 20,000 copies in the UK in the first half of 2011, 12% of all vinyl sold in that period, and became the bestselling vinyl album of 2011. , it was the decade's second-bestselling vinyl in the UK. 

In the US, the retail edition of "The King of Limbs" debuted at number six on the "Billboard" 200, with first-week sales of 69,000 copies. The following week, it peaked at number three, selling 67,000 copies. By April 2012, "The King of Limbs" had sold 307,000 retail copies in the US, making it Radiohead's first album to fail to achieve gold certification there.

At Metacritic, which aggregates scores from mainstream critics, "The King of Limbs" has an average score of 80 based on 40 reviews, indicating "generally favourable reviews". Michael Brodeur of the "Boston Globe" praised "the tense calm these eight songs maintain—a composure that feels constantly ready to crack", and wrote that "where "In Rainbows" was mellow but brisk — an album that felt on its way somewhere — these songs are eerie and insidious, creeping like shadows". "PopMatters" Corey Beasley wrote: ""The King of Limbs" is a beautiful record, one that begs more of a conscious listen than its predecessor, but one that provides equal – if different – thrills in doing so." 

François Marchand of the "Vancouver Sun" said that the album "bridges Radiohead's many different styles" and was "worth embracing". Critic Robert Christgau awarded the album a two-star "honourable mention" and recommended the songs "Little by Little" and "Bloom". "Quietus" critic Ben Graham felt it could be Radiohead's best work, writing: ""King of Limbs" revisits the "Kid A" / "Amnesiac" period that alienated so many fans of "OK Computer" but does so with a greater maturity and weight of experience that enriches both the songs and the process."

Some felt "The King of Limbs" was less innovative than Radiohead's prior albums. Mark Pytlik of "Pitchfork" called it "well-worn terrain for Radiohead, and while it continues to yield rewarding results, the band's signature game-changing ambition is missed". AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine described it as "Radiohead doing what they do ... without flash or pretension, gently easing from the role of pioneers to craftsmen". Luke Lewis of the "NME" felt it was "a record to respect for its craft, rather than worship for its greatness". In a retrospective 2015 article for "Stereogum", Ryan Leas concluded that "The King of Limbs" was "very good, occasionally great music by a pivotal band that nevertheless felt like something of a letdown because it wasn't, ultimately, some genius stroke none of us expected". He argued that "" was superior: "You hear muscle and movement and bodies existing where the now tapped-out ingenuity of Radiohead’s electronic impulses has begun to make their recorded music brittle." 

"Los Angeles Times" writer Ann Powers wrote that "The King of Limbs" had divided listeners, with some finding it too low-key, abstract, or "doomy", or too similar to Radiohead's previous work. Some fans, having waited three and a half years for the follow-up to "In Rainbows", were disappointed by an album of only eight tracks that felt "relatively dashed together", and unfounded theories spread of a second album soon to be released. 

"The King of Limbs" was named one of the best albums of 2011 by several publications: the "Wire" and the "Guardian" named it the 27th best of the year, "Mojo" the 47th, "NME" the 20th, "PopMatters" the tenth, "Uncut" the seventh and "Rolling Stone" the fifth. It was nominated for five categories in the 54th Grammy Awards: Best Alternative Music Album, Best Boxed or Special Limited Edition Package, Best Short Form Music Video (for "Lotus Flower"), Best Rock Performance ("Lotus Flower") and Best Rock Song ("Lotus Flower").

Radiohead


Additional musicians

Production

Imagery



</doc>
<doc id="30872824" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30872824" title="You Don't Know Jack (2011 video game)">
You Don't Know Jack (2011 video game)

You Don't Know Jack is a 2011 video game of the party genre released by various home consoles and handhelds based on the series of You Don't Know Jack games. The game was developed by Jellyvision Games and published by THQ, and was released in North America on February 8, 2011, for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii and Nintendo DS platforms. It is the first title in the series released by Jellyvision after an eight-year hiatus, taking advantage of online connectivity and other features of modern gaming consoles. A single player iOS port was released about two months later, but was later pulled in anticipation of a more robust client based on the Facebook version of the game.

The game is structured around a fictional game show emceed by Cookie Masterson (voiced by Tom Gottlieb), in which the players answer ten multiple-choice questions, and then compete in a final "Jack Attack" round. Answering quickly and correctly earns virtual money to track the players' scores, while incorrect answers are penalized. As per the game's motto, "the irreverent trivia party game", the questions often combine general knowledge with popular culture references and verbal wordplay to determine the correct answer. Unlike the earlier releases which randomly presented questions, the 2011 game provides more than 73 episodes with a predefined set of questions, and with further episodes to be made available as DLC, only available on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 through both consoles' respective online stores.

The game, on consoles, supports both offline and online play (with the exception of the Wii which lacks online multiplayer) with up to four players, while the Microsoft Windows and Nintendo DS versions only support two local players and lack features such as online play and access to download various DLC Packs. "You Don't Know Jack" was generally well-received, seen as a humorous return to form for the series, though the lack of online play or additional content for the Microsoft Windows version was criticized.

"You Don't Know Jack" is played out as a fictional trivia game show for one to four players, with the goal to win the most virtual money at the end of the game. Each game uses a pre-defined set of ten questions from over seventy episodes, titled by the name of the show's fictional sponsor. Most questions are multiple choice, providing one correct and three incorrect answers, along with a short timer that starts once the question has been completely presented. All players play at the same time, entering their choice of answer before the 20 second timer runs out. If a player is correct, they get a base dollar amount plus a bonus defined by how quickly they answered, while if they miss the question, they lose a similar amount of money. Failing to answer does not cost the player any money.

Each player in multiplayer games is also given a single opportunity to "screw" another player, forcing them to answer the question in a much shorter time period. If the selected player answers incorrectly or fails to answer the question, they lose money which is gained by the player using the screw. However, if the selected player answers correctly, they gain additional money taken from the player using the screw.
The game's trivia is based on general knowledge from several fields including science, history, and geography, combined with contemporary entertainment, celebrities, and other news items; the game, as well as the series, is often described as "high culture meets pop culture". For example, one question asks the players to identify which Jennifer Aniston film title would most likely have been suited for a hypothetical romantic comedy penned by Albert Einstein about the interactions between neutrons and electrons, the answer being ""He's Just Not That Into You"". In addition to the usual questions, each episode typically features a "Dis or Dat" question. This question gives the players seven words or phrases which they have to identify as one of two possible classifications, or in some cases, both. For example, one Dis or Dat series asks the players to identify terms that would be features of a Nexus One phone, Nexxus shampoo, or both. In offline play, only one player participates, while other players try to steal by getting it right if the main player gets it wrong. In online play, all players play the Dis Or Dat simultaneously. Players are also urged to look for the "Wrong Answer of the Game", which is hinted at by the show's sponsor; for example, in an episode sponsored by a baby crib company, the answer "Cat's Cradle" is the Wrong Answer of the Game. Choosing the correct Wrong Answer does not penalize the player but instead rewards them with a large monetary bonus. Other questions are presented in the standard multiple choice format but use recurring concepts, such as questions based on a fortune cookie message, or ones read through Cookie's ventriloquist dummy incorporating a speech impediment that may make the question harder to understand.

After ten questions are completed, the final round of the game is the "Jack Attack" where all players compete against each other. Prior to the round, a brief clue is shown to the players to describe a relationship that they must match, for example "BFF" (Best friends forever). The game then shows one word or phrase, and then cycles through other phrases which the players must match. If players respond to the wrong phrase, they lose money; only the first player to buzz in at the correct time wins and earns money. After seven such phrases, the total scores are added and the winner is determined.

"You Don't Know Jack" was developed by Chicago-based company Jellyvision. The "You Don't Know Jack" ("YDKJ") series, though popular in the 1990s during the rise of gaming on personal computers, had not had an official full release since 1998 with "You Don't Know Jack: The Ride". Though Jellyvision offered some web-based "You Don't Know Jack" games in the interim years, the developers left the gaming market after seeing the rise of home gaming consoles in the early 2000s. Though they had considered adapting the game for consoles, and had produced two titles for the original PlayStation, they could only realize "You Don't Know Jack" games with players at the same keyboard for input. During this time, Jellyvision reinvented itself as Jellyvision Labs, offering its services in business-to-business communication including for tax software from H&R Block and interviews for Equifax.

Around 2008, the company saw that gaming consoles had developed features for connectivity and social play. They also recognized that the market for such trivia games was slim at the time and saw a possible opportunity to revitalize the series. Near this time, Jellyvision Labs was spun out to its own company, Jellyvision Games, LLC, which would later be reincorporated in 2011 as Jellyvision Games, Inc. Harry Gottlieb, the founder of Jellyvision, recognized that many of the same people that worked on the original games were still in the company, and proposed the idea of a new "You Don't Know Jack" title to publishers. After securing THQ as a publisher, full-time development for the game started in February 2010. Steve Heinrich, the game's producer, said the development process was "insanely quick", allowing them to work concurrently on writing, art, sound, and programming, and had the flexibility to make design decisions to keep the game simple and funny. However, the question writing staff found some of the deadlines to be too short, preventing them for doing extensive audience feedback.

Jellyvision Games did not want to change much of the older games for the 2011 version. They sought to keep as many of the old game question types, such as the Jack Attack and Dis Or Dat questions, updating the games to support online play. To counterbalance other types that would not be playable on consoles, such as Gibberish Questions that required players to type in a phrase, the developers added new features to the game, such as the Wrong Answer of the Game. The developers took advantage of other features of the newer consoles: they were able to use rumble features of console controllers to emphasize the effect of Screwing other players, and wrote several humorous titles for the in-game achievements.

Allard Laban of Jellyvision Games noted that compared to 1995, where the pop culture was "fragmented", the onset of the Internet and social media made it easier to develop questions for the game. At the same time, with more information and entertainment available, the writers had to be selective about what parts of culture would remain relevant; an example given by Heinrich was that while questions about "Seinfeld" were okay, questions about "Mad About You" were not. Jellyvision Games sought comedy writers, including from local comedy clubs such as Second City and I.O., narrowing down the pool of applicants from hundreds to six, including Second City comedian Tim Sniffen, who had worked on previous iterations of the "You Don't Know Jack" series. A weekly training process was employed to bring the new writers up to speed and review previously written dialog for possible improvements. Heinrich also assured that material was not repeated throughout the game's script. Heinrich estimates that each question in the game was a result of about two hours of work.

The majority of the game's dialogue is provided by Tom Gottlieb, brother of Harry, who had voiced the emcee "Cookie" Masterson in the earlier games, and had been considered one of the more popular emcees by players. Lacking any professional studio, most of the 100-200 hrs of game dialog were recorded in a makeshift soundproofed closet. Tom Gottlieb was also involved in the writing process, as Jellyvision Games credits much of the "Cookie" persona to his own performance of the character. Other sound effects include fake commercials that are heard before and after a game; some of these include commercials used in previous iterations of the "You Don't Know Jack" series. Prior to each questions, the game includes short musical interstitials with animated numbers to introduce the question via its number. These were designed as to get the music for these stuck in the players' heads as something they would remember throughout the day; to avoid making these become too routine, certain episodes featured variations on the interstitial that would be unexpected, keeping players on their toes throughout playing the game.

The game was released in North America on February 8, 2011. Jellyvision Games has stated they considered further international releases, but these would be too expensive at the present time. The company does not rule out future iterations of the game being released to a wider market based on the success of this title.

An initial version of this version of "You Don't Know Jack" was released for iOS systems in April 2011. It featured twenty 10-question episodes, but was limited to a single-player mode. Jellyvision Games later pulled the application, in anticipation of release of a more robust client for both iOS and Android that will mimic the Facebook application, featuring cross-platform multiplayer between iOS, Android, and Facebook versions, and downloadable episodes from the Facebook game.

"You Don't Know Jack" was positively received by critics who were delighted not only with a new entry in the series, but one that kept the same humor and wit as the earlier games. Seth Schiesel of "The New York Times" praised the "triumphant, hilarious and even enlightening return" of the series, citing the creativity of the writing and voice work. John Teti of "The A.V. Club" called the title an "astonishingly good game", and was impressed that the writing of the game was as witty as the previous games in the series despite the years of dormancy. Though Teti lamented about the lack of keyboard-bases questions, he praised the new question types and gameplay as the overall change "minimizes blowouts and keeps the pace brisk". Greg Miller of IGN considered the game a great value, attributing it to the game's "great sense of humor, clever rounds and enough questions to keep you busy for a while".

Kevin Kelly of G4 TV praised the voice work, particularly that for "Cookie", as "Without Cookie, this game would quickly be just another forgettable trivia game". Jeff Cork of "Game Informer" considered the game "proof that games don’t need to be excessively complex in order to be fun", complimenting the "top-notch" writing. Chris Watters of GameSpot commented that the structure of each episode can become repetitive, and that commonly the Jack Attack round would decide the winner of the game, negating the previous questions, but still considered the "large amount of legitimately clever and surprisingly funny writing" a key aspect of making "You Don't Know Jack" as "one of the most entertaining trivia games on the market". Gamepro's Nathan Grayson was more critical of the game's lack of features, considering the number of questions "painfully short" compared to the "Buzz!" trivia game series, the "absolute bare-bones basics" presentation, and the game's somewhat juvenile sense of humor. Though the "Toronto Sun"s Steve Tilley generally praised the game's humor, he noted the lack of variety of gameplay modes, and that playing with people online may be spoiled by those that had already run through all the game's episodes.

Both the Microsoft Windows and Nintendo DS versions were criticized for limiting the number of players to two. The Windows version was particularly criticized as it did not allow for online play, a feature available on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 releases, nor would receive the downloadable content for the game. The lack of multiplayer in the pulled iOS version was lamented though the other facets of the game's humor remained.



</doc>
<doc id="30930869" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30930869" title="A Meeting by the River">
A Meeting by the River

A Meeting by the River is an album recorded by Ry Cooder and Vishwa Mohan Bhatt; it was recorded in September 1992 and released in April 1993 through the record label Water Lily Acoustics. This improvised, collaborative album features Cooder on slide guitar and Bhatt on the "Mohan veena", a stringed instrument created by Bhatt. "A Meeting by the River" was produced by Kavichandran Alexander and Jayant Shah, engineered by Alexander, and mastered by Kevin Michael Gray and Paul Stubblebine. It peaked at number four on "Billboard" Top World Music Albums chart, and earned Cooder and Bhatt Grammy Awards for Best World Music Album at the 36th Grammy Awards (1994). The album is included in Tom Moon's 2008 book "1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die".

"A Meeting by the River" was recorded in September 1992; it features Cooder solely on slide guitar and Bhatt on the "Mohan veena", a stringed instrument he created. Allmusic's Daniel Gioffre described the instrument as a hybrid between a guitar and a "vichitra veena"; it is played with a metal slide moving across steel rods along the neck. Cooder had heard a recording of Hindustani classical music performed by Bhatt and was impressed by his playing and the "haunting clarity" of the "Mohan veena". Cooder and Bhatt met for the first time less than one hour before recording began; they improvised much of the set; the album's liner notes state, "this recording was unplanned and unrehearsed". The album was produced by Kavichandran Alexander, founder of Water Lily Acoustics, and Jayant Shah. It was engineered by Alexander, and was mastered by Kevin Michael Gray and Paul Stubblebine. Cooder and Bhatt are accompanied by Cooder's fourteen-year-old son Joachim on "dumbek", a Middle Eastern drum, and by Sukhvinder Singh Namdhari on "tabla".

The collaboration between Cooder and Bhatt is Alexander's first attempt to record musicians of different cultures together, one of his goals when he founded the record label. Author George Plasketes described Bhatt's playing as "highly nuanced" and said, Cooder performs in a more "loose-jointed, slip 'n' slide style". According to Gioffre, Cooder and Bhatt use improvisation and "voice-like" phrasing, showing melodic performances in an alternating fashion and in unison. The album contains four tracks, three of which are credited to Cooder and Bhatt; tracks range in duration from approximately seven-and-a-half minutes to twelve minutes. "Longing" has a structure similar to a "raga". Author Tom Moon said Cooder takes the lead on the hymn "Isa Lei" as Bhatt contributes "elaborate squiggling asides" and "swooping nosedives". In 2011, Bhatt performed "A Meeting by the River" at a music festival in honor of guru Kelucharan Mohapatra. Bhatt said of the song, "Music has no religion and no geographical or linguistic barrier. It speaks a universal language. My composition – 'A Meeting by the River' – aims at explaining this." Bhatt has said he considers working with Cooder his "most special" collaboration.

Gioffre wrote a positive review of the album and called Cooder and Bhatt "genuine masters" of their respective instruments. He described the musical interplay between the musicians as "nothing short of astounding" and the album as a rare instance in which a combination of genres works. Gioffre also wrote, "this album is masterfully recorded; each instrument is clear, distinct, and three-dimensional sounding. "A Meeting by the River" is a must-own, a thing of pure, unadulterated beauty, and the strongest record in Cooder's extensive catalog." Peter Margasak of the "Chicago Tribune" awarded the album four stars out of four, describing Cooder's performance as "arresting" and Bhatt's as "haunting". Margasak wrote that the fusion revealed a "rare, often transcendental beauty" as the two artists "gently and intuitively" found common ground. "Rolling Stone" called the album "fruitful" and awarded it three stars out of five.

"A Meeting by the River" reached a peak position of number four on "Billboard" Top World Music Albums chart. In 1994, the album earned Cooder and Bhatt Grammy Awards for Best World Music Album. Bhatt became one of a few Indian musicians to have received a Grammy Award until A. R. Rahman won at the 52nd Grammy Awards in 2010. Previous Indian award winners had been recognized jointly with Western artists. The February 25, 1995, issue of "Billboard", which featured the annual "Indies Spotlight" and covered independent music between the January 29, 1994, and January 21, 1995, issues of the magazine included "A Meeting by the River" at number ten on its list of the "Top Indie World Music Albums". The album is included in Tom Moon's 2008 book "1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die: A Listener's Life List".

All tracks by Ry Cooder and Vishwa Mohan Bhatt unless noted otherwise.


Track listing adapted from Allmusic.

Credits adapted from Allmusic.



</doc>
<doc id="30942641" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30942641" title="Erhalt uns, Herr, bei deinem Wort, BWV 126">
Erhalt uns, Herr, bei deinem Wort, BWV 126

An unknown librettist retained four of these seven combined stanzas, using the first and the two last unchanged as customary, and expanding the third by adding text for a recitative. He paraphrased the other stanzas for two arias and another recitative. Bach structured the cantata in six movements and scored it for three vocal soloists, a four-part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of trumpet, oboe, strings and continuo. The first movement is a chorale fantasia dominated by the trumpet. In the unusual third movement, Bach has an alto and a tenor voice alternate for the recitative, while they sing the lines from the third hymn stanza in a duet. The fourth movement is a dramatic bass aria, accompanied by a restless continuo. Due to the compiled hymns, the melody of the closing two stanzas is different from the one used in movements 1 and 3.
Bach held the position of "Thomaskantor" (director of church music) in Leipzig from 1723. During his first year, beginning with the first Sunday after Trinity, he wrote a cycle of cantatas for the occasions of the liturgical year. In his second year he composed a second annual cycle of cantatas, which was planned to consist exclusively of chorale cantatas, each based on one Lutheran hymn.
As part of this cycle, Bach composed "Erhalt uns, Herr, bei deinem Wort" for Sexagesima, the second Sunday before Lent. The prescribed readings for the Sunday were taken from the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, "God's power is mighty in the weak" (), and from the Gospel of Luke, the parable of the Sower (). The cantata is based on the hymn "" by Martin Luther. At Bach's time, it included the three stanzas of Luther's chorale, followed by two stanzas of Justus Jonas, Luther's German version of (Give peace, Lord, 1531), and a second stanza to it, paraphrasing (1566).

The result are seven stanzas:

A line in the epistle, "For the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword" (), possibly prompted the choice of the hymn. The unknown poet of the cantata text kept stanzas 1, 3, 6 and 7 unchanged, expanding 3 by recitative, and reworded 2, 4 and 5 for the respective movements of the cantata. The topic of the gospel is God's word, as Jesus explains in verse 11, "Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.", which is mentioned in the first line of the hymn, "bei deinem Wort" (close to your word). Instead of relating closely to the parable, the poet concentrates on a general request to God: to keep his people faithful to his word, to protect them from enemies and to provide peace.

Bach first performed the cantata on 4 February 1725, only two days after the cantata , for the Purification of Mary on 2 February. The autograph of the cantata is lost, but the parts which Bach used are extant. The cantata is the third-to-last chorale cantata in Bach's second cantata cycle.

Bach structured the cantata in six movements. In the typical format of Bach's chorale cantatas, the first and last movement on the first and stanza of the hymn are set for choir, as a chorale fantasia and a closing chorale. They frame alternating arias and recitatives with the librettist's text. Bach scored the work for three vocal soloists (alto (A), tenor (T) and bass (B)), a four-part choir, and a Baroque instrumental ensemble: trumpet (Tr), two oboes (Ob), two violins (Vl), viola (Va), and basso continuo (Bc). The duration of the piece has been stated as 22 minutes.

In the following table of the movements, the scoring follows the Neue Bach-Ausgabe. The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr, using the symbol for common time (4/4). The instruments are shown separately for winds and strings, while the continuo, playing throughout, is not shown.

The opening chorus, "" (Sustain us, Lord with your word,), is a chorale fantasia. A characteristic feature of the instrumental concerto is a four-note trumpet signal, which is derived from the beginning of the chorale melody, as if to repeat the words "" (Sustain us, Lord) again and again. The motif consists of the three notes of the A minor chord in the sequence A C A E, with the higher notes on the stressed syllables, the highest one on "Herr". The cantus firmus of the chorale is sung by the soprano, while the other voices sing in imitation, embedded in the independent concerto of the orchestra. The Bach scholar Christoph Wolff notes that the trumpet fanfare "underlines the combative, dogmatic character of this late devotional song of Luther's".

The first aria, sung by the tenor, "" (Send Your power from above), is a prayer, intensified by two oboes. In the middle section the words "" (delight) and "" (scatter) are illustrated by runs in the voice.

Movement 3 presents two text elements interwoven, the recitative "" (The wish and will of mankind are of little use), and the interspersed four lines of the hymn's third stanza, "" (God, Holy Spirit, worthy Comforter). The recitative lines are sung by alternating voices alto and tenor, while the interspersed chorale lines are rendered by both voices in duet. In this duet, the voice that enters sings the embellished hymn tune, while the other accompanies.

The second aria, "" (Hurl to the ground the pompous proud!), is dramatic, especially in the restless continuo. John Eliot Gardiner quotes William G. Whittaker: Bach’s "righteous indignation at the enemies of his faith was never expressed more fiercely than in this aria". The Bach scholar Alfred Dürr describes the movement as an "aria of genuinely baroque dramatic force", expressing "Old Testament zeal".

A tenor recitative, "" (Thus Your word and truth will be revealed), changes the topic and leads to peace, implored in the final movement.

Movement 6 combines the two stanzas from different chorales, Luther's "" (Grant us peace graciously), and Walter's "" (Give our rulers and all lawgivers peace and good government), in a four-part setting. These two stanzas have a different melody.

The selection is taken from the listing on the Bach-Cantatas website. Instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green under the header "".

"Scores"

"Books"

"Online sources"



</doc>
<doc id="30944164" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30944164" title="Cortinarius vanduzerensis">
Cortinarius vanduzerensis

Cortinarius vanduzerensis is a species of mushroom in the family Cortinariaceae. Described as new to science in 1972, it is known only from the Pacific Northwest region of North America, where it grows under conifers such as spruce, hemlock, and Douglas-fir. The fruit bodies of the fungus, or mushrooms, have a slimy dark chestnut-brown cap that becomes deeply radially grooved or corrugated in maturity, and reaches diameters of up to . The gills on the underside of the cap are initially pinkish-buff before becoming pale brown when the spores mature. The stem is lavender, measuring long and thick. The mushroom produces a rusty-brown spore print, with individual spores measuring 12–14 by 7–8 micrometers. The edibility of the mushroom has not been determined, and it has been described as "much too slippery to be of value".

The species was described in 1972 by mycologists Alexander H. Smith and James M. Trappe, based on specimens they found in Cascade Head in Tillamook County, Oregon, in October and November 1970. The species had also been called "Cortinarius elatior", but that name refers to a European species. Within the genus "Cortinarius", "C. vanduzerensis" is classified in the subgenus "Myxacium". This subgenus includes species in which both the cap and stem are sticky as a result of a glutinous universal veil. Based on the nucleic acid sequence similarity in the internal transcribed spacer region, "C. vanduzerensis" is closely related to the European and North American "C. mucifluus" and the Costa Rican species "C. costaricensis".

A common name for the species is the "pointed Cortinarius", while the specific epithet "vanduzerensis" refers to the H.B. van Duzer Forest where the species was originally collected.

Young fruit bodies of "C. vanduzerensis" are covered with a slimy universal veil; the slime layer persists on the cap of young mushrooms, or in moist weather. The shape of the cap is oval to conical with the margin initially appressed, expanding to broadly conic or somewhat flattened in maturity, eventually reaching diameters of . The cap color is initially chestnut-brown to black, but becomes paler brown as it matures. The surface is radially wrinkled or corrugated, especially near the margin. The flesh is pallid but soon pale cinnamon-buff. The odor and taste are not distinctive. A drop of FeSO solution (a reagent commonly used in mushroom identification) applied to the surface of the cap will turn olive-green.

The gills are pinkish-buff when young (in unopened caps), dull cinnamon-brown at maturity when the spores mature. They are packed close together, and are adnate or adnexed. The stem is long, thick, narrowed slightly to the base. It is pallid within but slowly cinnamon buff at least near the base. The stem surface has a thick slime-veil, and is lavender to light purple on the upper portion, but darker on the lower portion. Sometimes the universal veil breaks up into concentric zones over the lower third of the stem.

The edibility of the mushroom is not known. David Arora notes that it is "much too slippery to be of value".

The spore print is a rusty-brown color. In face view, the spores are broadly elliptic to ovate (egg-shaped), while in profile they appear broadly inequilateral; they have dimensions of 12–14 by 7–8 μm. The spore surface is roughened with warts, and they lack an apical pore. The spores contain two nuclei. The basidia (spore-bearing cells in the hymenium) are four-spored, broadly club-shaped, and have contents that are often in the form of yellow masses or granules when stained in Melzer's reagent. The cheilocystida (cystidia on the gill edge) are club-shaped, sometimes with an abruptly tapering point, and measure 17–26 by 9–15 μm. There are no pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face). The gill tissue is made of hyphae that are arranged in a roughly parallel fashion (subparallel); there are also brownish to orange-brown fat-containing hyphae present. The epicutis (outer layer of tissue) of the cap is made of a turf of gelatinous hyphae that measure 2.5–6 μm wide; clamp connections are absent to rare in the hyphae. The veil hyphae are 4–8 μm wide, and hyaline (translucent) to yellow when mounted in a dilute solution of KOH. The hyphae of the cortex of the stem are subparallel, and clamps are present.

Smith and Trappe noted a similarity to the European "Cortinarius elatior", but this species has violet gills at first. "C. collinitis" has a lighter brown slimy cap, with glutinous bands on the stem that are rarely tinged purple. A third species in this group, "C. cylindripes" has a lighter colored, sometimes wrinkled cap, and gills that are pale purple when young with fringed edges. "C. stillatitius" is a related European species found in coniferous (sometimes in mixed) forests. Another glutinous, dark-brown capped species with which "C. vanduzerensis" might be confused is "Phaeocollybia spadicea", but this species has pseudorhiza (a subterranean elongation of the stem) at the stem base and gills that are free from attachment to the stem.

"Cortinarius vanduzerensis" is a mycorrhizal mushroom that grows in association with conifer trees. The fruit bodies grow solitarily, scattered, in rings or in groups under spruce, hemlock, and Douglas-fir. The mushroom is known only from the Pacific Northwest region of North America, including the Queen Charlotte Islands on the north Coast of British Columbia, Canada. It fruits in the autumn and early winter, or in the late summer in western Canada. Its frequency of occurrence has been described variously as "very common", to "fairly common", or "rare" everywhere except Oregon".


</doc>
<doc id="30959104" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30959104" title="SMS Augsburg">
SMS Augsburg

SMS "Augsburg" was a light cruiser of the German "Kaiserliche Marine" (Imperial Navy) during the First World War. She had three sister ships, , , and . The ship was built by the "Kaiserliche Werft" in Kiel; her hull was laid down in 1908 and she was launched in July 1909. "Augsburg" was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in October 1910. She was armed with a main battery of twelve 10.5 cm SK L/45 guns and had a top speed of .

After her commissioning, "Augsburg" spent her peacetime career first as a torpedo test ship and then as a gunnery training ship. After the outbreak of World War I, she was assigned to the Baltic Sea, where she spent the entire war. On 2 August 1914, she participated in an operation that saw the first shots of the war with Russia fired, and she later took part in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 and Operation Albion in October 1917, as well as numerous smaller engagements throughout the war. She struck a mine, once, in January 1915, though the ship was again operational in a few months. After the end of the war, "Augsburg" was ceded to Japan as a war prize, and was subsequently broken up for scrap in 1922.

"Augsburg" was long overall and had a beam of and a draft of forward. She displaced at full combat load. Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Parsons steam turbines driving four propellers. They were designed to give . These were powered by fifteen coal-fired Marine water-tube boilers. These gave the ship a top speed of . "Augsburg" carried of coal that gave her a range of approximately at . "Augsburg" had a crew of 18 officers and 349 enlisted men.

The ship was armed with twelve 10.5 cm SK L/45 guns in single pedestal mounts. Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle, eight were located amidships, four on either side, and two were side by side aft. These were replaced in 1916–1917 with six 15 cm SK L/45 guns. She also carried four SK L/55 anti-aircraft guns, though these were replaced with a pair of two SK L/45 anti-aircraft guns in 1918. She was also equipped with a pair of torpedo tubes submerged in the hull. Two deck-mounted torpedo tube launchers were added in 1918 She could also carry 100 mines. The conning tower had thick sides, and the deck was covered with up to thick armor plate.

"Augsburg" was ordered as a replacement for under the contract name "Ersatz Sperber" and was laid down in 1908 at the "Kaiserliche Werft" shipyard in Kiel. She was launched on 10 July 1909, after which fitting-out work commenced. She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 October 1910. After her commissioning, "Augsburg" was used as a torpedo test ship. In 1912, she was transferred to gunnery training. On 20 May 1914 she visited Dundee on a courtesy visit. Captain Fischer and his crew were welcomed by the Lord Provost and "the greatest friendliness was displayed". 

Following the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, she was assigned to the Baltic Sea, under the command of Rear Admiral Robert Mischke. On 2 August, "Augsburg" laid a minefield outside the Russian harbor of Libau, while shelled the port. The Russians had in fact already left Libau, which was seized by the German Army. The minefield laid by "Augsburg" was poorly marked and hindered German operations more than Russian efforts. "Augsburg" and the rest of the Baltic light forces then conducted a series of bombardments of Russian positions. On 17 August, "Augsburg", "Magdeburg", three destroyers, and the minelayer encountered a pair of powerful Russian armored cruisers, and . The Russian commander, under the mistaken assumption that the German armored cruisers and were present, did not attack and both forces withdrew.

In September, the light forces in the Baltic were reinforced with the IV Battle Squadron, composed of the older and s, and the large armored cruiser . Starting on 3 September, the combined German force conducted a sweep into the Baltic. During the operation, "Augsburg" spotted the Russian cruisers and . She attempted to draw them closer to "Blücher", but the Russians refused to take the bait and withdrew. On 7 September, "Augsburg" and the torpedo boat steamed into the Gulf of Bothnia and sank a Russian steamer off Raumo. By the 9th, the German fleet had returned to port. On the night of 24–25 January, "Augsburg" ran into a Russian minefield off Bornholm and struck a mine. The crew kept the ship afloat, and she was towed back to port for repairs.

"Augsburg" was back in service by April 1915, ready for a major operation against Libau. The German Army planned to seize the port as a distraction from the main Austro-German effort at Gorlice–Tarnów. They requested naval support, and so the Navy organized a force comprising the coastal defense ship , three armored cruisers, three light cruisers, including "Augsburg", and a large number of torpedo boats and minesweepers. In addition, the IV Scouting Group, consisting of four light cruisers and twenty-one torpedo boats, was sent from the North Sea to reinforce the operation. The German Army captured Libau in May, and it was subsequently turned into an advance base for the German Navy. Later that month, the Navy assigned a mine-laying operation to "Augsburg" and ; they were to lay a minefield near the entrance to the Gulf of Finland. A submarine attack on the cruiser , however, prompted the German naval command to cancel the operation.

On 1 June, "Augsburg", "Roon", "Lübeck", and seven torpedo boats escorted the minelaying cruiser while she laid a field off Bogskär. "Augsburg" served as the flagship of Commodore Johannes von Karpf, the commander of the operation. After finishing laying the minefield, Karpf sent a wireless transmission informing headquarters he had accomplished the mission, and was returning to port. This message was intercepted by the Russians, allowing them to intercept the Germans. Four Russian armored cruisers, with the powerful armored cruiser steaming in support, attempted to ambush the German squadron. Karpf dispersed his force shortly before encountering the Russians; "Augsburg", "Albatross", and three torpedo boats steamed to Rixhöft while the remainder went to Libau. Shortly after 06:30 on 2 June, lookouts on "Augsburg" spotted the Russian force; Karpf ordered the slower "Albatross" to seek refuge in neutral Swedish waters, while "Augsburg" and the torpedo boats used their high speed to escape the Russians. In the engagement that followed, "Albatross" was badly damaged and ran aground in Swedish waters. The Russians then turned to engage the second German force, but were low on ammunition after the engagement with "Augsburg" and "Albatross" and broke off the engagement.

The Russian fired two torpedoes at "Augsburg" on the night of 28 June, though both missed. "Augsburg" was assigned to the forces that took part in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915. A significant detachment from the High Seas Fleet, including eight dreadnoughts and three battlecruisers, went into the Baltic to clear the Gulf of Riga of Russian naval forces. "Augsburg" participated in the second attack on 16 August, led by the dreadnoughts and . On the night of 19 August, "Augsburg" encountered a pair of Russian gunboats— and ; "Augsburg" and "Posen" sank "Sivutch", though "Korietz" managed to escape. The Russian surface forces had by this time withdrawn to Moon Sound, and the threat of Russian submarines and mines still in the Gulf prompted the Germans to retreat. On 13 October, an unknown submarine fired a torpedo at "Augsburg", though it did not hit her. In September 1916, "Augsburg" participated in an attempt to force the Irben Strait into the Gulf of Riga in September 1916. Heavy Russian resistance, primarily from the old battleship , forced the Germans to retreat from the Gulf.

In November 1917, "Augsburg" participated in another attack on the Gulf of Riga, Operation Albion. By this point, she had been assigned to the VI Scouting Group along with and her sister . At 06:00 on 14 October 1917, the three ships left Libau to escort minesweeping operations in the Gulf of Riga. They were attacked by Russian coastal guns on their approach and were temporarily forced to turn away. By 08:45, however, they had anchored off the Mikailovsk Bank and the minesweepers began to clear a path in the minefields. Two days later, "Augsburg" joined the dreadnoughts and for a sweep of the Gulf of Riga. While the battleships engaged the Russian naval forces, "Augsburg" was tasked with supervising the occupation of Arensburg.

According to the Armistice that ended the war, "Augsburg" and the rest of the German fleet not interned in Scapa Flow were to be returned to the main German ports and disarmed. In the subsequent Treaty of Versailles that formally ended the conflict, "Augsburg" was listed as a warship to be surrendered to the Allied powers; she was to be disarmed in accordance with the terms of the Armistice, but her guns were to remain on board. After the end of World War I, "Augsburg" was surrendered to Japan as a war prize on 3 September 1920, under the name "Y". The Japanese had no use for the ship, and so she was broken up in Dordrecht in 1922.



</doc>
<doc id="30988103" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30988103" title="Seara (newspaper)">
Seara (newspaper)

Seara (, meaning "The Evening") was a daily newspaper published in Bucharest, Romania, before and during World War I. Owned by politician Grigore Gheorghe Cantacuzino and, through most of its existence, managed by the controversial Alexandru Bogdan-Pitești, it was an unofficial and unorthodox tribune for the Conservative Party. Its involvement in politics sparked numerous scandals, the longest of which came during the neutrality period (1914–1916). Strongly anti-Slavic, "Seara" stood out in that context for supporting the German Empire and Central Powers, and was widely alleged of having been financed by a German propaganda machine. In 1914, it was purchased by German businessmen, but continued to register mediocre success in comparison with its pro-Entente competitors. In late 1916, after Romania decided in favor of the Entente, "Seara" was disestablished.

Noted for publishing the biting satirical pieces and art chronicles of Tudor Arghezi, "Seara" was closely associated with the Romanian Symbolist movement. Through Arghezi, Bogdan-Pitești and other contributors, it campaigned in favor Symbolism and, after 1913, popularized modern art. Although paying tribute to political conservatism throughout its existence, "Seara" was also home to anti-establishment contributors, allies in the anti-Entente cause. The newspaper sympathized with the Social Democratic Party, regularly hosting opinion pieces by socialists and anarchists.

Like the daily "Minerva", "Seara" was originally a creation of G. G. Cantacuzino, the Romanian magnate. Cantacuzino, who supported the Conservative Party inner faction of Alexandru Marghiloman, refrained from attaching his name to "Seara", later entrusting Bogdan-Pitești with the position of manager. In 1910, the year of its foundation, "Seara" also followed the Conservative doyens Petre P. Carp and Nicolae Filipescu, supporting Carp's strict monarchism and suggesting that the "Carpist–Filipescan" line was one of moral superiority.

Early in its existence, "Seara" reported on various events agitating public opinion, such as the Romanian Orthodox Church division between the traditionalists and those who supported communion with Rome. In one of its first issues, it hosted a disclaimer by Roman Catholic chanoine Joseph Baud, who calmed enraged Orthodox believers by assuring them that their Metropolitan Bishop Iosif Gheorghian had not died a Catholic. Later, "Seara" gave significant coverage to what it called "scandals in the Vatican", particularly so in the 1911 controversy surrounding Father Verdesi's conversion to Methodism; this prompted the Romanian Catholic press to list "Seara" among those newspapers "at odds with Christian ideas". 

At that stage in its history, "Seara" was also sympathetic to the cause of ethnic Romanians living abroad, in Transylvania and other regions of Austria-Hungary: in August 1911, it sent special correspondents to cover the congress of Romanian activist groups in Blußendref (Blaj). The newspaper also reported with disapproval on the growth of nationalism among the Hungarians, covering for a Romanian public the division of Hungarian Socialists along pro- and anti-nationalist politics, and accusing the Károly Khuen-Héderváry administration of subverting the Romanian National Party (PNR). "Seara"s articles gave exposure to the PNR's official reaction, as voiced by that party's speaker Alexandru Vaida-Voevod. It called Vaida-Voevod "one of the [PNR's] brilliant leaders", responsible "to a great extent for the rescue of party discipline and national solidarity". 

In March of the next year, "Seara" published an homage to journalist and ideologue Constantin Stere, noted for having brought back together the two factions of the PNR, and concluded: "Mr. C. Stere, although involved in our country's partisan politics, [...] has transmitted to our quarrelsome brothers a peace message from all of us, proving that the foremost preoccupation of our minds is and will be national solidarity, the pure love for the holy cause of Romaniandom." It later discussed the conflict between PNR politicians and Khuen-Héderváry's successor, László Lukács. In his reply to the PNR (paraphrased by "Seara"), Lukács equated the Romanians' political emancipation in Transylvania with militant irredentism, and prophesied that Transylvania was in real danger of being invaded by the Kingdom of Romania. "Seara" retorted by accusing Lukács of supporting "preemptive" Magyarization in "the multilingual Kingdom of Hungary".

The paper was also taking an interest in the political affairs of the Balkans. Shortly before the Balkan Wars, it published the appeal of Simion, a Greek Romanian politician and editor of Bucharest's "Patris" gazette, who gathered support for a Greco–Romanian alliance against the South Slavs. Simion posited that Romania and the Kingdom of Greece would eventually reach an understanding over the litigious issue of Aromanian nationhood, and blamed the conflict on "shrewd" Slavic meddling.

"Seara" also made known its artistic credo, placing itself in the margin of Romanian Symbolism. According to art historian Dan Grigorescu, its awareness of European literature and its cultural effervescence, like those of "Facla", "Viitorul" and other Romanian periodicals with special cultural pages, were impressive. Up to April 1911 (when he was made director of the National Theater Bucharest), Ioan Bacalbașa was "Seara"s theater columnist. According to his colleagues in the Transylvanian press, Bacalbașa's columns for "Seara" and "Epoca" were a courageous defense of national literature. 

During his time at "Seara", Bacalbașa was seconded by poet Dumitru Karnabatt, later a political chronicler for the same newspaper. Karnabatt introduced the stage work of Henry Bataille (Issue 271/1910) and the Aestheticism of Oscar Wilde (editorial piece, Issue 52, 1910). Elsewhere (Issue 425/1911), "Seara" covered the hitherto supposed discovery of an unknown novel by Honoré de Balzac. Around that time, Karnabatt's own literary contributions for "Seara" were samples of Symbolist, Decadent and Impressionist travel writing, sometimes written together with his novelist wife Lucrezzia. 

Lucrezzia stopped writing for the paper in 1911, probably as a result of conflicts she had with Bogdan-Pitești, her marriage to Dumitru on the brink of failure. Sometimes signing as "Don Ramiro", Dumitru remained affiliated with "Seara", and in charge of its artistic policies. The newspaper's traditional conservatism was still being reflected in its artistic choices. During late 1910, Karnabatt gave poor reviews to the more rebellious Symbolist painters to emerge from the "Tinerimea Artistică" salon, and deemed the primitivist sculptor Constantin Brâncuși a madman. 

In January 1911, the same author used the newspaper to publicize his dislike of Futurism, a modern art and anti-establishment current originating in Italy. Reviewing the "Futurist Manifesto", he called for "demented" author Filippo Tommaso Marinetti to be "tied down". Karnabatt further proposed that Marinetti's exacerbated modernism was an atavistic manifestation of the Barbarian Invasions: "an absurd heredity within the Italian people, this people of art and of idealism". Closely following similar developments in French culture, "Seara" supported Jean Richepin's protest against "excessive modernism" and the division of labor. The pro-Richepin article, signed by Prince Constantin de Brancovan, saw print in Issue 53/1911. 

In Decadent spirit, Karnabatt's essays in "Seara" advocate a reevaluation of Rococo and "fête galante" aesthetics. He was revolted by "the horrors of contemporary painting"—Pissarro, Monet, etc.—, citing as his reference "the fine and erudite art critic, the independent and courageous" Sâr Péladan (who was, incidentally, Bogdan-Pitești's mentor). In a September issue, "Don Ramiro" Karnabatt declared himself horrified that some were proposing to honor the inveterate gambler Avrillon with a public monument, announcing that France had given in to "vice". By then, he was giving positive reviews to "decadent poets" of the "dead cities" (Georges Rodenbach, Dimitrie Anghel), and enthusiastic about the establishment of community theaters to promote a "noble and pure art", away from "the platitudes and pettiness of modern life".
In "Seara", "Don Ramiro" was also contributing to the publicity campaigns mounted by Symbolist doyen Alexandru Macedonski and by Macedonski's painter son, Alexis. For Karnabatt, their contribution to Symbolism was a horizon "of violent and tormented passion". "Seara"s support for Macedonski's cosmopolitanism earned Karnabatt criticism from the anti-Symbolist Transylvanians.

During spring 1913, Cantacuzino formally liquidated his business, and Bogdan-Pitești was officially installed as manager of "Seara". According to the rival satirical magazine "Furnica", although "Seara" was "stillborn" when it came to commercial success, the move was intriguing for the reading public. The conservative principles stated by Cantacuzino seemed largely incompatible with the radical activism that had made Bogdan-Pitești a mistrusted public figure. Bogdan-Pitești, whose background was in French anarchism, announced that the new editorial line centered on some of Cantacuzino's bugbears: universal suffrage, feminism, land reform, Jewish emancipation etc. In March of that year, "Seara" was also joined by a most fervent contributor, the poet and lampoonist Arghezi. 

Although supporting the Conservative Party before and after that moment, "Seara" was focusing its efforts on attacking the Conservative-Democratic Party of Take Ionescu, with whom the Conservative Premier Titu Maiorescu had formed a coalition (one resented by Cantacuzino and Bogdan-Pitești). In this context, critic Ion Vianu notes, "Seara" became "an aggressive publication, with a history of base attacks and blackmail." The anti-Ionescu discourse was notably outlined in an Arghezi article of September 11, 1913. It collectively and disparagingly identified the Conservative-Democrats (or "Takists") as "ciocoi" ("upstarts"), accusing them of having repressed in blood the 1907 peasant revolt: "They are the symbol of 1907, when, his arms, chest, shoulders and back loaded with ravens, with "ciocoi", the peasant tore himself away from his field, split himself, fought to chase them away and [...] fell down murdered by the claws that clutched down, tore down into his flesh and reached inside to his soul and killed it as well. These "ciocoi", we will eradicate." In a 1913 issue, Romanian Land Forces General Ștefan Stoica referred to Ionescu's men as "craii de Curtea-Veche" ("the Old Court rakes"), another colloquialism for "upstarts".

One of "Seara"s prime targets was Public Works Minister Alexandru Bădărău, called "filthy con man", accused of taking massive bribes from American investors in Romanian oil and of employing in his staff some 150 women in exchange for sexual favors. Nicolae Titulescu, the young Conservative Democrat politician and bureaucrat, was ridiculed for having acquired, through his foreign connections, an original tapestry from the Gobelins Manufactory. Notably, senior politician Nicolae Fleva lent his pen to these allegations, writing in "Seara" that Bădărău had serious psychiatric problems. Documenting Bogdan-Pitești's Catholic faith and Arghezi's anticlericalism, "Seara" lampooned the Orthodox Church, and was discredited as the offshoot of "Papist propaganda".

According to literary critics such as Barbu Cioculescu and Vianu, "Seara" may have had for its informant the Symbolist writer Mateiu Caragiale—a client of Bogdan-Pitești's, he had become a chief of staff for Bădărău. In diaries he kept after his split with Bogdan-Pitești, Caragiale himself alleged that "Seara"s publisher was being paid to harass "without pity, in biting manner, all those whom Cantacuzino would grace with his unfriendliness or antipathy", in particular the Conservative-Democrats. Although he never signed articles for "Seara", Caragiale was by then receiving regular payments from its patrons.
At the peak of Cantacuzino's negative campaign against the Conservative-Democrats, "Seara" also attacked private enterprises, including the Marmorosch Blank Bank. Bogdan-Pitești was taken to court by owner Aristide Blank, and N. Fleva organized his defense. According to the records kept by Caragiale, Blank effectively set a "trap" with the cooperation of Romanian Police, and Bogdan-Pitești, found guilty of blackmail, was sentenced to nine months in prison. "Seara" fared badly during the period, and was out of print by autumn 1913.

Before and after the 1913 hiatus, with Bogdan-Pitești and Arghezi at its helm, "Seara" expanded its range, encouraging the development of modernist literature, and playing a part in the transition from Romanian Symbolism to 20th century avant-garde. Its art chronicles celebrated the international success of modern artists Constantin Brâncuși and Pascin, both of whom, "Seara" argued, were culturally tied to Romania. Revising its stance, the newspaper published Arghezi's account of the new "Tinerimea Artistică" modern art exhibit (April 1913), mentioning Bogdan-Pitești's role as an art patron and instigator of change. The two intellectuals also promoted the works by young artist Theodor Pallady, most notably with a series of articles in which Arghezi spoke about Pallady paintings in the Bogdan-Pitești collection. The magazine, already noted for publishing political cartoons by Nicolae Petrescu Găină, was also joined by Marcel Janco, known later for his work as a Dada and Constructivist artist.

During those years, "Seara" also enlisted two poets formerly affiliated with "Simbolul" review: the Imagist Adrian Maniu and the experimental Symbolist Ion Vinea. By summer 1914, the latter's articles included jibes against the moderate Symbolist figure Ovid Densusianu, ridiculing his disciples at "Versuri și Proză" magazine (the beginning of a dispute which Vinea would pursue in more depth during his time at "Chemarea" magazine). In addition to poetry and prose fragments, Vinea was assigned a regular column about life in Bucharest. Joining them as a contributor on film and theater, Mihail Sorbul (also known as "G. Șoimaru") denounced screenwriter Haralamb Lecca for plagiarism. Also published by "Seara" was the Symbolist George Bacovia, with poetry pieces such as "Winter Lead", "Autumn Nerves" and "Poem in the Mirror"—generally second editions, previously published in "Noua Revistă Română" and other reviews; they were later included in Bacovia's lionized collection "Plumb".

Himself a literary chronicler, Tudor Arghezi investigated the cultural phenomena of the day. One of his articles denounced Edmond Rostand as a kitsch author, suited to the tastes of "chromolithograph buyers." He also reviewed Wilde's comedy "An Ideal Husband" (Issue 1/1914) and, unusually, ridiculed the Symbolist poetry of Mateiu Caragiale. Under Arghezi, "Seara" popularized international modern art, notably by publishing the Fauvist drawings of André Derain.

Arghezi's main focus was on satire, which he often directed at traditionalists and ethnic nationalists, particularly those arriving in from Transylvania. One such text attacked the poet laureate Octavian Goga, accusing him and other Transylvanian refugees of hoarding bureaucratic positions in the Kingdom of Romania. In a 1913 piece, Arghezi targeted scholar Ioan Bianu for allegedly mismanaging the Romanian Academy Library: "From his longjohns and his cleated boots, Mr. Bianu has jumped straight into the aristocracy and [...] turned our library [...] into his own, Transylvanian, empire. [...] An impertinent voice submits one to a detailed interrogation. It is Mr. Bianu, a jaundiced liver with a moustache, with the evil gaze of a man who collects many salaries but is aware of his own voidness and dullness".

As part of its emancipation agenda, "Seara" expressed sympathy for the Romanian Jews, and, in contrast to the antisemitism of more traditionalist reviews, accepted works sent in by Jewish writers. In October 1913, "Seara" obtained and published a confidential order which gave Romanian Land Forces officers a free hand to discriminate against Jewish recruits. In September 1914, it hosted the journalistic debut of Jewish avant-garde author Jacques G. Costin, who was, with Vinea, caretaker of the cultural pages. Like Arghezi and Vinea, Costin experimented with satirical genres, his sketch story techniques borrowed from 19th century classic Ion Luca Caragiale (Mateiu's father). Some of the poems published in "Seara" were authored by Arghezi's Jewish wife, Constanța Zissu. "Seara" was also receiving contributions from Grigore Goilav, the Armenian Romanian ethnographer and art historian.

A final period in "Seara"s history coincided with the start of World War I and Romania's neutrality period. As public opinion divided itself between supporters of the Entente Powers and those who favored the Central Powers, "Seara" and "Minerva" stood for the latter group, the "Germanophiles". The two papers reputedly entered this competition for the public eye with a handicap. An Ententist daily, "Adevărul", claimed that, together, "Seara" and "Minerva" had consumed 481 tons of paper in printing from January 1 to August 31, 1914 (for itself and "Dimineața", it claimed a figure of 1,284 tons). 

Like other samples of Germanophile media, "Seara" is widely alleged to have been the recipient of special propaganda funds from the German Empire and Austria-Hungary. According to historian Lucian Boia, Germanophile newspapers had little room for maneuver, given their unpopular agenda: "of little interest, boycotted and with their offices once in a while assaulted by the 'indignant' public, [they] could never have supported themselves without an infusion of German money." Similarly, researcher Carmen Patricia Reneti argues: ""Seara" would [never] have been the paper most useful to German propaganda. [...] "Minerva" and "Seara" were read by just about no one." Claims of German payments focus on Bogdan-Pitești's shady political dealings, the target of controversy since 1915. Boia notes that the patron, who had no reason for refusing German bribes, may have been genuinely committed to the Germanophile cause, regardless of such additional benefits. Boia also claims that, keeping in with a Romanian tradition of the "baksheesh", the Francophile press may also have received funds from the Entente. Contrarily, historian Ion Bulei argues that "fraudulent wheeler-dealer" Bogdan-Pitești and his "money obsessed" patron were merely directing their support toward the highest bidder. According to various accounts, Bogdan-Pitești was diverting much of his own political payments into increasing his prestigious art collection or supporting his retinue.

In contrast to other Germanophile mouthpieces, "Seara" stated its support for the Central Powers early on, before such financing could occur—even before its patron Cantacuzino decided which side he supported. In the months of strife which preceded the actual war, the Romanian daily published telegrams and concerned commentary about the effects of nationalism in Central Europe and the Balkans. These accused the Greek Kingdom and Northern Epirote militias of decimating the Aromanian community in Korçë during April 1914, and urged Romanians to express their indignation. A month later, "Seara" was taking a stand against Romanian irredentism over Transylvania, as analyzed by the Transylvanian Germanophile Ioan Slavici. Slavici's texts scandalized the nationalist press for supporting Vasile Mangra, the pro-Hungarian priest and suspected agent of influence. However, the newspaper was also criticizing the Hungarian authorities for demanding the extradition of university student Măndăchescu. The latter, "Seara" reported, was wrongly accused of a bomb attack on the Diocese of Hajdúdorog, when the act was more likely attributable to the revolutionist Ilie Cătărău.

During June, "Seara" also circulated a rumor about secret talks between King Carol I and Nicholas II of the Russian Empire, in Constanța. "Seara" claimed that the two royals had agreed to oversee a shift of power, forcing a union between the Serbian and Montenegrin kingdoms against the Central Powers' express wishes. Shortly after the Sarajevo Assassination, which offeered the Central Powers a "casus belli", "Seara" circulated rumors about the contradictions between Austrians and Hungarian subjects of the double monarchy. It alleged that, instead of mourning, the Hungarian colony of Ploiești had organized "a very merry celebration" at the consulate.

In the weeks and months following the assassination, Arghezi's articles blamed the push toward war on Serbian nationalism and the Balkans question at large: "Until such time as when Europe shall incorporate and enslave the Balkans, they will endure as the nest where all of Europe's assassinations are being organized"; "the Serbs have staged an attempt on Austria[-Hungary]'s existence, in dastardly manner." Arghezi had set his mind on continued neutrality, arguing that it could turn Romania into an arbiter and broker of peace. A similar position was held by Karnabatt.

In autumn 1914, "Seara" and "Minerva" were both purchased by a German consortium, although Bogdan-Pitești was probably still the former's (uncredited) manager. The two papers were brought under a single umbrella, the publishing house "Tiparul". Its board of directors included Bogdan-Pitești, publicist Josef B. Brociner, banker Roselius, and investor Josef Hennenvogel. The acquisition, which reputedly followed an increase in German propaganda and espionage all over Romania, was described as scandalous by "Acțiunea", an Ententist newspaper owned by Take Ionescu. In a September 24 piece called "La mezat" ("On Public Sale"), it claimed that "Minerva" cost the Germans 3 million lei, and "Seara" only 400,000 lei. This allegation was confirmed during later inquiries. 

One account has it that the Germans paid Bogdan-Pitești the cost of paper and printing, which had been hitherto provided, for free, by Cantacuzino. Bogdan-Pitești (and German funds) were probably involved in financing a new platform, "Cronica", launched by Arghezi and Gala Galaction in February 1915. In October of that year, with probable German support, Bogdan-Pitești, Arghezi and Galaction set up another Germanophile newspaper, "Libertatea" ("Freedom"), presided upon, for a short while, by N. Fleva. According to one account, Fleva had earlier been approached to take over as "Seara" manager by German envoys Brociner and Hilmar von dem Bussche-Haddenhausen, but, realizing the implications, had refused.

Cantacuzino ended his period of reflection in January 1915, when he openly supported Alexandru Marghiloman in creating a pro-German subgroup within the Conservative Party. Jeopardizing their standing in the party, both men cited irregularities in the Conservative caucus.

With many of its articles, "Seara" popularized Marghiloman's views on conservatism and geopolitics. Conservative in outlook, the Russophobic and anti-Slavic Karnabatt outlined his political vision in some detail, discussing the Entente's imminent "bankruptcy". Ilie Bărbulescu, a Slavist and Marghiloman Conservative who advocated pro-German neutralism, also published articles in "Seara" during 1915. Beyond this conservative core, "Seara" colored its pages in various shades of left-wing advocacies, from socialism and social democracy to anarchism. According to literary historian Paul Cernat, the ideological ambiguity and conjectural alliances between socialists and conservatives was motivated by a common enemy, the pro-Entente and "plutocratic" National Liberal Party.

The independent socialist Felix Aderca, later known as a novelist, expanded on his earlier theoretical articles for "Noua Revistă Română", depicting the German Empire as the "progressive" actor in the war. Through the voice of another contributor, the old anarchist scholar Zamfir Arbore, "Seara" was focusing its criticism on Russia's Tsarist autocracy, against whom Arbore had been fighting for decades. Similar ideals inspired Alexis Nour, who arrived to "Seara" from the home-grown leftist current, Poporanism. Bogdan-Pitești wrote with noted passion about his socialist allies, using the pseudonym "Al. Dodan". On October 6, 1914, Dodan saluted the Social Democratic Party of Romania for organizing internationalist peace rallies, as "emerging from the mind and soul of the entire Romanian people". According to legend, the "Seara" patron privately declared himself a Catholic anarchist, and was rather hostile to communism.

Avram Steuerman-Rodion, a socialist based in Iași, contributed a special series of articles documenting the growth of Germanophila in that city, and throughout Moldavia region. Titled "Scrisori din Iași" ("Letters from Iași"), it notably chronicled the conflicts between the enthusiastically Ententist University of Bucharest professors and their more skeptical University of Iași colleagues. "Seara" also enlisted contributions from physician Ottoi Călin, a member of the PSDR Executive Committee and author of its Zimmerwald pacifist manifesto. Despite this agenda, Ottoi was not employed as a political panelist, but, as a practicing physician, held "Seara"s advice column.

The national dilemma confronting Romanians during the neutrality period was not just a choice of sides, but also one of irredenta: while the National Liberal overtures toward the Entente were supposed to grant Romania Transylvania and some other Romanian-inhabited regions of Austria-Hungary, the Conservatives wished to recover Bessarabia, occupied by the Russian Empire—in 1916, the two options seemed mutually exclusive. "Seara" and "Minerva" followed the principles of Marghiloman, who had reached the conclusion that the Entente did not in fact support the disestablishment of Austria-Hungary, and who postulated that Russification in Bessarabia was more serious than Magyarization in Transylvania. Ilie Bărbulescu's "Seara" articles, deemed "erudite and indigestible" by Boia, focused on the supposed indestructibility of Austria-Hungary, and consoled Transylvanian Romanians with the option of greater devolution ("see United States of Greater Austria"). Writer Ion Gorun, who hailed from an anti-Hungarian community but was also a Habsburg loyalist, was a distinct presence at "Seara". His articles favored the term "Austria" instead of "Austria-Hungary", and claimed that Romania could only find "triumph" as an Austrian ally. Gorun spoke of any alliance with Russia as dangerous and absurd; the implication of such a move, he argued, caught Transylvanian Romanians in a pincer and also meant Romania's subjugation to the Russian Empire.

The cause of Bessarabia was championed by Arbore, who at the time rejected all notion that the region could ever witness a Russian devolution, and expressed distress that Romanian intellectuals were more interested in the fate of France than in the freedoms of Bessarabian Romanians. Bogdan-Pitești's various articles also show his interest in the Bessarabian cause. Expressing regret that "most civilized" France stood by the world's "most savage, most ignorant and bloodiest oligarchy", "the Russia of pogroms and assassinations", he deemed Romania's overtures toward the Tsarist regime a "national crime". Additionally, "Dodan" suggested that Austria-Hungary was preferable as a friend, as Romania's only guarantee against the "Slavic deluge". Later, he argued that the cause of Transylvania was settled by, and within, Austria-Hungary. He mapped out an alternative strategy: neutral until the end of the war, Romania would eventually march its troops into Bessarabia, with Austrian acquiescence. In October 1915, Aderca added his voice to the Bessarabian chorus. He postulated that the Transylvanian cause was doomed, and, since the Germans were poised to win the war, constituted "a union of the losers"; instead, he urged Romania to take Bessarabia as the spoils of war. Karnabatt's own articles began by stating a minimalist objective in "the reincorporation of Bessarabia". Later, he advocated the extension of Romanian territory eastward, into Transnistria and down to the Dnieper River (as counterbalance to a foreseeable Greater Bulgaria).

An unusually vast and, according to Boia, naïve project was sketched by the Bessarabian-born Nour, who claimed that, even if granted a military victory, Austria-Hungary would still crumble into "developed nations". Nour was confident that, with the return of peace, Romania would still have an option to annex its Austrian irredenta: Transylvania, Bukovina, the Banat, Crișana and Maramureș. He speculated that a late entry into the war could also bring Romania possession of Bessarabia, large swathes of the Ukraine, and Odessa harbor; and even that, once victorious against the Entente, the Central Powers would award her an extra-European colonial empire.

On separate occasions in 1916, Bogdan-Pitești and Karnabatt toured the German Empire. Bogdan-Pitești was the first to travel there, together with his concubine Domnica and his favorite Mateiu Caragiale. During his own journey, Karnabatt described Germany as unified by civic order and the determination to win, in several letters that were published by "Seara" in June 1916. The newspaper's wrong bet on a German victory on the Western Front was strained by Alexis Nour who, in April 1916, wrote that a French capitulation would inevitably follow the Battle of Verdun. 
"Seara" disappeared, together with "Minerva", "Libertatea", "Steagul" and most other Germanophile papers, in late summer 1916, shortly after Romania declared war on the Central Powers. When the German and Austrian troops invaded southern Romania, forcing the Ententist government to flee for Iași, some of "Seara"s former staff remained in Bucharest and chose the path of collaborationism. This was notably pursued by Arghezi, Galaction, Bărbulescu and Karnabatt, all of whom wrote for the propaganda tribune "Gazeta Bucureștilor". According to popular rumors, Bogdan-Pitești fell out of favor with the occupiers, who eventually discovered that he had been squandering their grants.

In contrast, several former "Seara" contributors silenced their criticism of the Entente throughout the rest of the war. Nicolae Petrescu Găină made some contributions to the Entente's propaganda effort during the second half of 1916. He was captured by the Germans in Bucharest, allegedly after being turned over to them by Bogdan-Pitești. Avram Steuerman-Rodion was drafted into the Romanian Land Forces as a medic, earning distinction, but returned to Germanophile journalism after Romania sealed the separate peace of 1918; the victim of clinical depression, he committed suicide in autumn. An Order of the Star of Romania for his work as a military physician, Călin died of typhus in early 1917. Aderca too saw action on the front, and preserved his socialist-inspired neutralism—it later surfaced in his various fiction writings.

After the November 1918 Armistice with Germany changed Romania's fortunes, leading to the creation of Greater Romania, several former "Seara" journalists were prosecuted for treason. In March 1919, a military tribunal sentenced Karnabatt to ten, Arghezi to five years imprisonment. They were however pardoned by King Ferdinand I, in winter 1920. Bogdan-Pitești had joined them in prison: according to some accounts, he was also held for collaborationism, while others record, in more detail, that he was serving an earlier sentence for fraud. A while after, some of "Seara"s former contributors were retelling their encounters with Bogdan-Pitești and his brand of journalism by the means of autofiction. The "Seara" affair is notably retold in novels by Lucrezzia Karnabatt ("Demoniaca", 1922) and Ion Vinea ("May Venom", 1971). 

Arghezi's texts for "Seara" were largely unknown to later generations. They again saw print in 2003, in a critical edition co-edited by daughter Mitzura Arghezi (Domnica Theodorescu) and Traian Radu. According to philologist Gheorghe Pienescu, who collected and reedited the texts for printing in the 1960s, the copies were taken from him under false pretense by Mitzura Arghezi, and never returned. As an additional contribution to Romanian literature, "Seara"s popularization of the expression "craii de Curtea-Veche" may have inspired Mateiu Caragiale in writing his celebrated 1929 novel.



</doc>
<doc id="31059907" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31059907" title="Super Mario 3D Land">
Super Mario 3D Land

"Super Mario 3D Land" and its sequel are unique from other games in the "Mario" series, as they combine elements from both traditional 2D "Mario" side-scrolling games and modern free-roaming 3D "Mario" games. It also introduces elements into the series, including power-ups and gameplay mechanics. The main story is similar to previous "Super Mario" titles, centering on Mario's efforts to rescue Princess Peach, who has been kidnapped by Bowser.

The game was released to critical acclaim, with gaming critics praising the amount of creativity and technical design presented within the game, though the utilization of 3D in the gameplay was met with a more mixed reception. The game was a commercial success, and has sold 12.41 million copies worldwide as of December 2018, making it the sixth best-selling game for the 3DS. It was also the first 3DS game to sell over five million copies. Nintendo re-released the game as a downloadable title via Nintendo eShop in 2012.

"Super Mario 3D Land" is a platform game that has been described by game designer Shigeru Miyamoto as a "3D Mario that plays as a 2D Mario game". As such, "Super Mario 3D Land" combines the elements of traditional side-scrolling video game titles, such as linear-based levels, with those of the modern open world titles, such as moving Mario in three dimensions and performing a variety of actions. Similar to the older side-scrolling "Mario" games, the health system revolves around Mario shrinking upon taking damage from enemies or hazards, there is a dedicated "Dash" button as opposed to using analog input to determine travel speed, and damage as "Small Mario" results in losing a life. Mario has also learned two new moves: a barrel roll and a roll jump, the former of which can be used to break blocks in a similar manner to jumping at blocks from below or ground pounding, and the latter allowing Mario to cover much horizontal ground in one jump. "Super Mario 3D Land" utilizes a similar level objective to the aforementioned side-scrolling games, in which the point of each level is to reach and grab the "Goal Pole" at the end of the level, within the time limit.

The game offers a number of traditional "Mario" items, such as the Super Mushroom, Fire Flower and Starman, along with new power-ups that bestow special suits onto Mario and grant him new abilities. Returning from "Super Mario Bros. 3" is the Super Leaf power-up, which gives Mario the Tanooki suit, allowing him to float in the air and attack with his tail, with a later variant also allowing him to transform into a statue upon performing a ground pound. The player is able to reserve an extra power-up, which can be retrieved by tapping the item visible on the touchscreen.

Other items include the Boomerang Flower, which allows Mario to throw boomerangs that can collect out-of-reach items and attack enemies; the Propeller Box, which allows Mario to reach high places; and the rare Prize Box, which gives Mario extra Coins while walking around in it. The Invincibility Leaf, which appears after the player dies five times in a level, gives Mario invincibility and Tanooki Suit abilities; while the P-Wing, which appears after the player dies ten times in a level, sends the player right to the end of the level, near the Goal Pole. (The invincibility leaf and the P-wing are only available in regular worlds) Each course contains three hidden Star Medals that are required to unlock certain levels. The map screen also contains Toad Houses where players can visit Toad and receive additional items, and Mystery Boxes where more Star Medals can be earned. After clearing the game once, a set of "Special" levels are unlocked, some of which contain additional challenges, such as a 30-second time limit. Clearing the S1 castle unlocks Luigi as a playable character, who has slightly different handling to Mario.

"Super Mario 3D Land" utilizes the Nintendo 3DS's autostereoscopic technology, allowing players to perceive depth when viewing the game screen. While the game is designed to not require the 3D effect, some obstacles or points of interest are deliberately more noticeable or easier when the 3D is switched on. "Super Mario 3D Land" also utilizes optional use of the 3DS gyroscope, which can be used to control cannons and binoculars. The game also features StreetPass functionality, allowing players to exchange Mystery Boxes containing bonus items. StreetPass also gives players another Toad house so they can get items.

During a storm, a tail-like branched tree called the "Tail Tree", which stands on Princess Peach's castle grounds, is stripped of all its leaves. The leaves, which turn out to be Super Leaves, were in reality taken by Bowser who is using them to bestow Squirrel Tails on his minions granting them new abilities such as limited flight. Unaware of this situation at first, when Mario and the Toads go to inspect the tree the next day they discover a letter from Bowser, learning that he has kidnapped the princess. Mario sets off in pursuit to locate and rescue the princess, learning in the process of Bowser's intentions for using the aforementioned stolen Super Leaves. After rescuing her, the Toads and Mario return to the Mushroom Kingdom with Tanooki Suits while Mario carries the princess. Mario's actions lead to the restoration of the Tail Tree. However, a photo falls to the ground revealing Luigi behind bars with a Koopa Troopa and Peepa, beginning Mario's quest into the Special World 1.

After rescuing Luigi, Mario and Luigi go on his quest in completing the other 7 Special worlds. After Luigi and Mario complete the Special 8 Castle level, a new letter falls to the ground far away in an open plain. The three Toads who helped Mario earlier on investigating the letter and discover that Bowser has kidnapped Peach once again. After Peach is rescued once again by Luigi and Mario, another photo is found with Peach in a Tanooki Suit.

"Super Mario 3D Land" is just like "Super Mario Galaxy" and "Super Mario Galaxy 2", with assistance from Brownie Brown, another subsidiary of Nintendo. 1-Up Studio "Super Mario Galaxy 2" game director Koichi Hayashida directed the game, and the game music was composed by Takeshi Hama, Mahito Yokota and Asuka Hayazaki (formally known as Asuka Ohta). "Super Mario 3D Land" took two years to develop, starting from a development team of two people and ending with a team of 30. The game was first announced by Shigeru Miyamoto in November 2010, stating that both the 3D "Mario" game as well as a 2D "Mario" title were in the works for the Nintendo 3DS. Miyamoto described the 3D game as "completely original" and a cross between "Super Mario Galaxy" and "Super Mario Galaxy 2."

"Super Mario 3D Land" was designed to bridge the gap between 2D "Mario" games and 3D "Mario" games, and influenced by Miyamoto's philosophy of keeping the games fun in nature and making sure the player had the utmost opportunity to enjoy the experience of the game. A main concern during development was making a game that would appeal to fans of the 2D "Super Mario" games as well as the 3D games; levels were designed so that the player would not get lost, moving Mario in one general direction towards each level's goal.

One of the inspirations behind the creation of the game was technological advances that made it possible to implement certain elements that could not be done in previous "Mario" games. Satoru Iwata explained that "since 1996, when Mario appeared in 3D in "Super Mario 64", it's always been hard for players to judge how to jump and hit a block floating in a 3D space," musing that the Nintendo 3DS autostereoscopy allowed for this issue to be fixed. The development team, which only had experience developing on consoles rather than handhelds, first tried playing "Super Mario Galaxy 2" on a small television monitor. When it was found that Mario was too small to see and thus difficult to control, "3D Land"s camera system and level terrain needed to be designed for viewing on the small Nintendo 3DS screen, making it easier for players to keep track of Mario. Certain aspects of gameplay were inspired by Nintendo's "The Legend of Zelda" franchise, including the way that the camera functioned during certain moments. Ideas that were ultimately not incorporated into "3D Land" included a pro skater suit for Mario, the ability to change Mario's size to the extreme, and a feature that replaces Princess Peach's face with a photographed face. The game's title was chosen as an homage to the "Super Mario Land" games released on the Game Boy.

"Super Mario 3D Land" development was heavily affected by the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami that occurred on March 11, 2011. The disaster caused public transportation to shut down, preventing Nintendo staff from being able to commute to work, and the Tokyo office remained closed for about a week. Hayashida was inspired by the disaster to encourage his team to communicate more, setting up the office such that staff members could easily see and discuss each other's work. The team also started holding group meetings to play-test "3D Land"s levels. Hayashida later mentioned that the team expressed hope that the game would inspire joy in spite of the tragedy.

Satoru Iwata revealed the game at the 2011 Game Developer's Conference and pointed out that the game's tentative logo sported a tail, stating that its purpose would be revealed at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2011. Miyamoto later stated that "it's what you think it is", alluding to the Tanooki Suit, a power-up originally from "Super Mario Bros. 3". While no exact release date was announced, Miyamoto stated that he hoped to release the game during 2011. The game was showcased at Nintendo's press conference at E3 2011, where a 2011 release date was confirmed, along with the appearance of the Tanooki Suit. While the power-up allows Mario to float down gently, unlike "Super Mario Bros. 3" he cannot fly.

"Super Mario 3D Land" was first released in Japan on November 3, 2011. It was then released in North America on November 13, Europe on November 18, and in Australia on November 24.

"Super Mario 3D Land" received critical acclaim. It received an aggregated score of 90.09% on GameRankings and 90/100 on Metacritic. The game sold over 343,000 copies in its first week in Japan, helping to move over 145,000 Nintendo 3DS units. "Famitsu" awarded "Super Mario 3D Land" a score of 38/40, praising level design, accessibility for beginners and the use of 3D. IGN gave the game a score of 9.5 and an Editor's Choice award, calling it "brilliant and addictive" and stating that "3D gaming has never been fully realized before this". GamesRadar gave the game a score of 9/10, praising its wealth of content, although criticising the inclusion of a run button and some easy difficulty. "Game Informer" gave "3D Land" a 9.5/10, saying "it lives up to the level of quality set by previous entries and is easily the best reason to own a 3DS". They also complimented the use of both a run button and the 3D effects while criticising the "lack of variety in boss battles".

1UP.com's Jeremy Parish gave the game a less favorable review, noting that certain aspects of the game were too easy in nature, musing a "moderately skilled player is never in danger of running out of lives in "Super Mario 3D Land"". He however noted that the game was creative in its presentation, and offered "clever new twists on the familiar to the knuckle-biting intensity of the final stages." Justin Haywald of "GamePro" gave the game 5/5, writing that Nintendo successfully captured the nostalgic aesthetic of the series, while still maintaining technical innovation. He reported, "for every familiar bit of music or a level background that reminds you of "Mario" games past, you have new abilities to use and deviously designed platforming sections that feel completely unique", while stating that the inclusion of 3D was mostly a gimmick.

GameSpot stated that the game lacked some of the more creative aspects of the best of the series, stating that the 3D was mostly optional, though praised the gameplay as entertaining and fast-paced. X-Play's Russ Frushtick felt that "Super Mario 3D Land" was the best game yet released for the 3DS, praising the content as surprisingly vast in nature and claiming that the game was twice as long as initially gauged. The game won the "Best Handheld Game" award in the 2011 Spike Video Game Awards. "Super Mario 3D Land" was awarded the "Best Platform Game Award", and Nintendo 3DS Game of the Year 2011 by GameTrailers.

"Super Mario 3D Land" sold 3.09 million units in the U.S. as of August 2014. In Japan, the game has sold over 1.66 million units as of August 1, 2012. The game was released to commercial success and has sold 12.41 million copies worldwide as of December 31, 2018.

"Super Mario 3D Land"s release prompted criticism from animal-rights organization PETA, who created a browser game titled "Mario Kills Tanooki" alleging that the "Tanooki suit" powerup promoted the live skinning of animals for fur. PETA received negative attention for the game, which led to a response claiming it was a "tongue-in-cheek, a fun way to call attention to a serious issue".



</doc>
<doc id="31090538" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31090538" title="Aboriginal title statutes in the Thirteen Colonies">
Aboriginal title statutes in the Thirteen Colonies

Aboriginal title statutes in the Thirteen Colonies were one of the principal subjects of legislation by the colonial assemblies in the Thirteen Colonies. With the exception of Delaware, every colony codified a general prohibition on private purchases of Native American lands without the consent of the government. Disputes were generally resolved by special interest legislation or war. "Mohegan Indians v. Connecticut" (1705–73), a lawsuit that proceeded for 70 years under special royal enabling acts only to be dismissed on non-substantive grounds, was the first and only judicial test of indigenous tenure.

Aboriginal title remained a central political and economic issue and was listed as one of the enumerated grievances in the Declaration of Independence. Regardless, colonial land law relating to indigenous peoples became the foundation for aboriginal title in the United States during the Articles of Confederation-era and after the ratification of the United States Constitution. The colonial-law prohibition was codified at the federal level by the Confederation Congress Proclamation of 1783 and the Nonintercourse Acts of 1790, 1793, 1796, 1799, 1802, and 1834.

Pre-Revolutionary land transactions remained the subject of political and legal disputes well after Independence. However, in sharp contrast to post-1790 transactions, no Indian tribe has yet succeeded in litigating or receiving compensation for a pre-1790 transaction. The prevailing view remains that the colonial governments, and the state governments that succeeded them during the Confederation era, had the power to authorize the alienation of indigenous lands within their borders.

The British monarchy made two attempts to regulate aboriginal land transactions in British North America by Royal Proclamation: first, the Royal Proclamation of 1622; second, the Royal Proclamation of 1763.

The Connecticut Colony (est. 1636) and the New Haven Colony (est. 1637) merged in 1662.

In 1637, the Connecticut Colony authorized a military expedition to Pequot lands to "maynteine our right that God by Conquest hath given to us." Soon after, the colony decided to hold sachem's liable for the trespass of any Indian. The conquered Pequot land's were "dispose[d] . . . with lest prejudice to others that may hereafter succeed them."

The first prohibitions on transactions prohibited leases, either to or from Indians. The first prohibition on taking Indian property did not arise until 1660. This was explicitly extended to land acquisitions in 1663. The prohibition was strengthened in 1680. The penalties were increased again in 1687.

"Gold Hill" was the first Indian reservation in the colony, established in 1659 and confirmed in 1678. Indians were also explicitly permitted to use public lands for hunting. In other instances, the colony resolved land disputes between competing Indians. Other reservations were established for the Mohegans in New London in 1718 and others in 1726 (which were exempted from the application of adverse possession), including the Pequot's before 1731.

The power to purchase Indian lands was delegated to townships in 1702. In 1706, the colony offered amnesty for those who had purchased in violation of previous prohibitions as long as they provided a "true account." In 1717, the colony declared "all lands in this government are holden of the King of Great Britain as the lord of the fee," barred the introduction of private purchases as evidence, and established a committee to "settle this whole affair." Noting that the prohibition was among the most "ancient laws" of the colony, the fine was increased in 1722, and treble damages were imposed. No compensation was provided in the case of eminent domain.

Prior to merging with the Connecticut Colony, the New Haven Colony also prohibited private purchases of Indian lands unless "in the name and for the use of the whole plantation."

Delaware appears to have passed no laws concerning Indian lands.

In 1758, Georgia passed a prohibition of private purchases of Indian lands:
[I]f any person or persons whosoever shall attempt to purchase or contract for, or cause to be purchased or contracted for, or shall take or acept of a grant or conveyance of any lands or tracts of lands from any Indian, or body of Indians, upon any prtence whatsoever, (except for the use of the crown and that by permission for this purpose first had and obtained from his majesty, his heirs or successors, or his or their governor or commander in chief of the said province for the time being) every such purchase, grant, contract and conveyance, shall be, and is and are hereby declared to be null and void, to all intentts an purposes whatsoever . . . .

In 1639 Maryland codified separate prohibitions on land purchases from Indians and non-English Europeans, set to expire at the end of the next session of the general assembly; the latter provided:
Neither Shall [a subject of the King] obteine procure or accept of any Land within this Province from any Indian to his own or the use of any other than the Lord Proprietarie or his heirs[,] nor shall hold or possess and land . . . and upon pain that every person offending . . . Shall forfeit and lose to the Lord Proprietarie and his heirs all Such Lands so accepted or held without Grant of the Lord Proprietarie under him.

This forfeiture provision was renewed in 1649. Indian reservations were established in 1666. Their boundaries were modified in 1698, and enlarged in 1711. Indian reservation boundaries were re-surveyed in 1721. The Nanticoke reservation was extinguished in 1768.

Unlike many colonies, Maryland provided limited legal remedies for the violation of Indian property rights. In 1704, the colony provided that non-Indians who took timber from Indian lands would be "lyable to Action or Actions of trespass[,] And the persons grieved shall and may recover their Damages accordingly." It later authorized specific proceedings for "Indian-English" disputes; in the third such authorization, jurisdiction was extended to "punishing Trespasses committed on their Lands," claims arising from the renting of Indian lands, and "Trespasses and Wastes on such of the said Indian Lands, which have not been granted to any of the Inhabitants of this Province."

The Plymouth Colony (est. 1620) and the Massachusetts Bay Colony (est. 1628) merged in 1691. After the combination of the two colonies, in 1701, a new prohibition was codified:
[A]ll deeds of bargain, sale, lease, release, or quitclaim, titles and conveyances whatsoever, of any lands . . . within this province . . . had, made, gotten, procured or obtained from any Indian or Indians by any person or persons whatsoever at any time [since 1633] without the license or approbation of the respective general courts of the said late colonys [or the current colony for purchases after 1701] shall be deemed and adjuded in the law to be null, void and of none effect.

The law validated all titles in Martha's Vineyard and the Island of Nantuckett and all other titles preceded by a grant from the colony. Henceforth, any violator would be subject to a fine of twice the value of the land and 6 months in prison. In 1719, the Mashpee's lands were exempted, and their sale was authorized in 1777.

In 1723, the Hassanimscoe were exempted from property tax. In 1736, they were granted a 6 miles square reservation, whose borders were amended several times in 1737 and 1739. Indian lands within the township of Edgartown on Chappaquiddick were protected for 3 years in 1774.

A 1643 Plymouth statute acknowledged the "constant custome from our first beginning That no person or persons have or ever did purchase Rent or hire any lands . . . of the Natives but by the Majestrates consent" and proscribed:
[I]f any person or persons do hereafter purchase or rent or hyre and lands . . . of any of the Natives in any place within this government with the consent and assent of the Court Every such person or persons shall forfait [fives times the value plus five pounds for every acre].

In 1652, the colony legislated an exception to this prohibition, for those who had failed to satisfy the conditions of their land grants resulting in the lands being re-granted to other non-Indians. The exception was only to last for 14 months from the end of the Court session, but was extended until June 1656. The colony later retroactively validated some purchases made in violation of this prohibition. In 1660, the prohibition was interpreted to apply to gifts of land. In 1663, the prohibition was extended to mere use. In 1668, the prohibition was extended to "mount hope or Cawsumsett necke or any other neckes or tracts of land as there is a body of Indians upon"; as amended, the lands would be forfeited to the colony if the purchaser could not afford the fine.

In 1674, the colony established a one-year statute of limitations "concerning Indian claimes that are or shalbe made to any lands within this Government; which are now orderly possessed by the English those which doe lay claime to them shall orderly comence and prosecute theire claime as farr as hee or they are able; wihtine one yeare after they be of age; and noe longer and that care be taken that the Indians have notice of it."

The Massachusetts Bay colony codified its first prohibition on private purchases of Indian lands in 1634: "[N]oe person whatsoever shall buy any land of any Indean without leave from the Court." The first land recording law, instructed Steven Winthrope to record, inter alia, "all the purchases of the natives."

The Code of 1648 codified the prohibition such: "It is ordered by Authoritie of this Court; that no person whatsoever shall henceforth buy land of any Indian, without licence first had and obtained of the General Court: and if any shall offend heerin, such land so bought shall be forfeited to the Countrie." A 10-pounds-per-acre forfeiture was ordered in 1687.

In 1652, the colony acknowledged aboriginal title, in a statute that made reference to several biblical verses:
[W]hat lande any of the Indians, within this jurissdiction, have by possession or improvement, by subdueing of the same, they have just right thereunto, according to that Gen: 1: 28, chap: 9: 1, Psa.: 115, 16. And… if any of the Indians shalbe brought to civillitie… such Indians shall have allotments… according to the custome of the English in the like case.
Only if the Indians were evicted from "planting groundes or fishing places," were the Indians to "have reliefe in any of the Courts of justice amongst the English, as the English have."

In 1681, the Dedham Indians were confined to the towns of Nanticke, Punkapauge. and Wamesti. In 1685, the colony confirmed 5,800 acres of land to Indians in Marlborough and voided all deeds to the contrary.

New Hampshire codified a rather weak prohibition against private purchases in 1641: "[W]hoever buys the Indian Ground by way of purchase is to tender it first to the town [of Exeter] before they are to make proper use of it in particular to themselves." In 1677, the colony ordered the resettlement of the Piscataqua Indians. The colony's instructions to Edmund Andros in 1686 included instructions to purchase Indian lands.

New Hampshire codified a more serious prohibition in 1687:
In 1719, penalties were added, retroactive to violations from 1700: forfeiture, a fine of the value of the land, and 6 months in prison.

In May 1683, the colony authorized a Commissioner to buy lands from Indians and resell the lands in plots not to exceed 5000 acres each. In September 1683, the colony codified a prohibition against private purchases:
[N]o Person or Persons, shall presume to buy any Tract or Tracts of Land, of, or from the Indians within this Province, without special Order and Authority to him and them given by the Governor and Commissioners, or the major Part of them for the time being.

Any purchase to the contrary would be "null and void" and subject to a fine of 5 shillings per acre. The prohibition was included in the colony's instructions to Lord Cornbury. In 1703, the prohibition was made more specific, to include "Gift of Purchase in Fee, take a Mortuage or Lease for Life or number of Years"; the authorization method was changed to "Certificate, under the hand of the Proprietors Recorder"; the fine was raised to 40 shillings per acre; and the forfeiture provision was applied to "Purchasers, their Heirs and Assigns shall forever hereafter be incapable to hold Plea for the said Land in any Court of Common Law or Equity."

In 1758, the colony appropriated for the Commissions "such Sum and Sums of Money, as they may find necessary to purchase the Right and Claim of all or any of the Indian Natives of this Colony, to and for the Use of the Freeholders in this Colony, their Heirs and Assigns, for ever"; the maximum appropriation was to be 1600 pounds, no more than half of which was to go to the Delawares near Cranbury. As recounted by later, unrelated, judicial opinion:
In 1758 the State of New Jersey purchased the Indian title to lands in that State, and as a consideration for the purchase, bought a tract of land as a residence for the Indians, having previously passed an act declaring that such lands should not be subject thereafter to any tax by the State, any law or usage, or law then existing, to the contrary notwithstanding. The Indians, from the time of purchase, lived upon the land until the year 1801, when they were authorized, by an act of the Legislature, to sell the land.

The Director and Council of New Netherland passed a law holding citizens liable for damages to Indian crops in 1640. In 1652, the colony legislated to ""hereby dissolve, annul and make void all claimed or occupied purchases, sales, patents and deeds signed." Previous purchases were confirmed in 1670.

The General Assembly of New York codified a prohibition on private purchases of Indian lands in 1684:
[H]enceforward noe Purchase of Lands from the Indians shall bee esteemed a good Title without Leave first had and obtained from the Governour signed by a Warrant under his hand and Seale and entered on Record in the the Secretaries office att New Yorke and Satisfaction for the Purchase acknowliged by the Indians from whome the Purchase was made which is to bee Recorded likewise with purchase soe made and prosecuted and entered on Record in the office aforesaid shall from that time be Vallid to all intents and purposes.

North Carolina defined its boundaries with the Meherrin Indians in 1729. In 1748, the colony passed a prohibition on private purchases which applied only to Tuscarora lands, and imposed a fine of 10 pounds for every 100 acres:
[N]o Person, for any Consideration whatsoever, shall purchase or buy any Tract or Parcle of Land, claimed, or in Possession of any Indian or Indians, but all such Bargains and Sales shall be, and are hereby declared to be null and void, and of none Effect.

The colony authorized the leases of Tuscarora lands in 1766.

The colony passed its first prohibition on private purchases of Indian lands in 1683:
[I]f anie person shall presume to buy any Land of the Natives in the Limits of this Province or territories thereof, without Leave from the Proprietary and Governor therof, or his desputy, Such person shall Lose the said Land, and pay [fine of 10 shilings per 100 acres].

The statute was abrogated by the crown in 1683, but re-enacted the same year. A similar law was passed in 1700 and supplemented in 1730 by more specific legislation (and exempted from any statute of limitations).

The colony passed legislation to clear title to all land grants from the colony in 1712; the act declared such grants "free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise well and sufficiently saved harmless and indemnified by the said proprietary, his heirs and assigns, of and from all Indian claims, and all other [claims of non-Indians]."

In 1768, the colony proscribed violations of the Royal Proclamation of 1763; the punishment was to be "death without the benefit of clergy." In 1769, the punishment was set at a 500-pound fine, 1 year in prison without bail or mainprise, plus a moiety paid to the poor.

Early Rhode Island laws restricted Indians from certain areas. Later laws were also passed in this vein.

In 1651, the colony passed its prohibition on private purchases of Indian lands:
[N]o purchase shall be made of any Land of the natives for a plantation without the consent of this State, except it bee for the clearinge of the Indians from some particular planatations already sett down upon; and if any shall so purchase, they shall forfeit the Land so purchased to the Collonie . . . .

A 20-pound fine was added in 1658. The wording of the prohibition was broadened and a 100-pound fine was added in 1727. The colony repealed its prohibition on private purchases of Indian lands in 1759. Certain sachems were prohibited from selling land in 1763.

A 1663 law purported to commemorate the "surrender of [the Narragansetts], their subjects and their lands" to the protection of the King. The colony authorized the acquisition of certain Narragansett lands in 1672. In 1696 and 1713, laws were passed to void the purchases of various Narragansett lands. Leases were permitted in 1718 and extended in 1738.

The colony established the Palawanee Island as a reservation for the "Cusaboe" Indians in 1712. In contrast, the colony appropriated Yamasee lands in 1716.

In 1739, the colony passed its prohibition on private purchases of Indian lands:
[N]o person or persons whatever shall buy, bargain or treat for, or by any way or means whatever, procure, hold, obtain, or get any lands . . . from any Indian or Indians whatever.

Early colonial laws removed or permitted settlers on Indian lands on an ad hoc basis. The first Indian reservations were established in 1649. A Totopotomoi reservation was confirmed in 1653; a "Wiccomocco" reservation in 1659; an "Accomack" reservation in 1660; a "Chickaominy" reservation in 1661 and 1662.

Prohibitions on private purchases of Indian lands were passed in 1649, 1652, and 1656. A new prohibition was passed in 1752. The right of pre-emption was delegated to Northampton County in 1654.

Title clearing acts were passed in 1660 and 1676. Reservation boundaries were tightened in 1705. Various sales ad leases were authorized or retroactively confirmed in the 1720s through 1770s.






</doc>
<doc id="31159079" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31159079" title="SMS Friedrich Carl (1867)">
SMS Friedrich Carl (1867)

SMS "Friedrich Carl"  was an ironclad warship built for the Prussian Navy in the mid-1860s. The ship was constructed in the French "Societé Nouvelles des Forges et Chantiers" shipyard in Toulon; her hull was laid in 1866 and launched in January 1867. The ship was commissioned into the Prussian Navy in October 1867. The ship was the third ironclad ordered by the Prussian Navy, after and , though the fourth ship to be acquired, , was ordered after but commissioned before "Friedrich Carl".

"Friedrich Carl" served with the fleet from her commissioning in 1867 until 1895, when she was removed from front-line service to serve as a training ship. During the Franco-Prussian War in 1870–1871, the ship formed part of the main German squadron commanded by Vice Admiral Jachmann. Engine trouble, however, plagued the ship and two of the other three vessels in the squadron; as a result, they made only two sorties from the port of Wilhelmshaven to challenge the French blockade. Neither resulted in combat.

"Friedrich Carl" was also deployed to Spain during an insurrection in 1873, during which she assisted in the seizure of three rebel vessels in two engagements. The ship was refitted at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven in the 1880s. She was renamed "Neptun" in 1902 and used as a harbor ship until June 1905, when she was removed from the naval register. The following year, she was sold to ship breakers in the Netherlands and dismantled for scrap.

"Friedrich Carl" was long at the waterline and long overall. She had a beam of and a draft of forward and aft. The ship was designed to displace at a normal loading, and up to with a combat load. The ship's hull was constructed with transverse and longitudinal iron frames. It contained eight watertight compartments and a double bottom that ran for 76 percent of the length of the vessel.

"Friedrich Carl" was an excellent sea boat; the ship was responsive to commands from the helm and had a moderate turning radius. She was somewhat unbalanced, however, and a 6 degree rudder to port was required to keep the ship on a straight course. The ship's crew numbered 33 officers and 498 enlisted men, and while serving as a flagship, the crew was augmented with a command staff of 6 officers and 35 enlisted men. "Friedrich Carl" carried a number of smaller boats, including a large tender, two launches, a pinnace, two cutters, two yawls, and one dinghy.

A horizontal two-cylinder single expansion steam engine powered the ship. It drove a four-bladed screw in diameter. Six trunk boilers, divided into two boiler rooms with 11 fireboxes in each, supplied steam to the engine at . The propulsion system was rated at and a top speed of , though on trials "Friedrich Carl" managed to make and . The ship carried of coal, which enabled a maximum range of at a cruising speed of . A barque rig with a surface area of 2,010 square meters supplemented the steam engine, though in service they added little to the ship's performance. Steering was controlled with a single rudder.

As built, "Friedrich Carl" was equipped with twenty-six rifled 72-pounder cannon. After her delivery to Germany, these guns were replaced with a pair of L/22 guns and fourteen 21 cm L/19 guns. The L/22 gun could depress to −5 degrees and elevate to 13 degrees, which provided a range of . The shorter barreled L/19 guns had a wider range of elevation, from −8 to 14.5 degrees, but the shorter barrel imposed a lower muzzle velocity, which correspondingly reduced the range of the gun to . The two types of gun fired the same shell, of which the total supply numbered 1,656 rounds of ammunition. The fourteen L/19 guns were placed in a central battery amidships, seven on either broadside. The L/22 guns were placed on either end of the ship. Later in her career, six revolver cannon and five torpedo tubes were added. Two of the tubes were placed in the bow, two on the ship's sides, and one in the stern on the port side. All were placed above water, and were supplied with 12 torpedoes.

"Friedrich Carl"s armor consisted of wrought iron backed with heavy teak planking. The waterline armored belt consisted of of iron backed with of teak. The central battery was protected by 114 mm of sloped iron plating on of timber. The battery's roof was protected by thick iron plating. The ship's conning tower had 114 mm thick iron armor mounted on of teak.

The Prussian Navy ordered "Friedrich Carl" from a French shipbuilder in 1865. She was laid down at the "Societé Nouvelles des Forges et Chantiers La Seyne" shipyard in Toulon the following year. The ship was launched on 16 January 1867; fitting out work was completed rapidly, and the ship was completed before the end of the year. "Friedrich Carl" was delivered to Prussia in October 1867 and commissioned into the fleet on the 3rd of the month.

At the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, the greatly numerically inferior Prussian Navy assumed a defensive posture against a naval blockade imposed by the French Navy. "Friedrich Carl" and the broadside ironclads and , along with the small ironclad ram , had been steaming in the English Channel before the French declared war; they had left Plymouth on 10 July with the intention of steaming to Fayal in the Azores. On the 13th, however, they put into port and learned of the rising tension between France and Prussia. The ships therefore returned to Wilhelmshaven immediately, arriving on 16 July. France declared war on Prussia three days later on 19 July. "Friedrich Carl", "Kronprinz", and "König Wilhelm" were concentrated in the North Sea at the port of Wilhelmshaven. They were subsequently joined there by the turret ship , which had been stationed in Kiel.

Despite the great French naval superiority, the French had conducted insufficient pre-war planning for an assault on the Prussian naval installations, and concluded that it would only be possible with Danish assistance, which was not forthcoming. The four ships, under the command of Vice Admiral Jachmann, made an offensive sortie in early August 1870 out to the Dogger Bank, though they encountered no French warships. "Friedrich Carl" and the other two broadside ironclads thereafter suffered from chronic engine trouble, which left "Arminius" alone to conduct operations. "Friedrich Carl", "Kronprinz", and "König Wilhelm" stood off the island of Wangerooge for the majority of the conflict, while "Arminius" was stationed in the mouth of the Elbe river. On 11 September, the three broadside ironclads were again ready for action; they joined "Arminius" for another major operation into the North Sea. It too did not encounter French opposition, as the French Navy had by this time returned to France.

In early 1873, the First Spanish Republic was beset with the Cantonal Revolution. "Friedrich Carl", under the command of Vice Admiral Reinhold Werner, steamed to Spanish waters along with a pair of unarmored vessels. The ships joined a British squadron that had been patrolling the southern Spanish coast. A rebel faction of the Spanish Navy had seized four of the country's seven ironclads. Admiral Werner, the senior commander in the group, was given command of the Anglo-German force. The squadron blockaded two rebel ironclads in the port of Cartagena after they had bombarded a coastal town. While steaming off Alicante, "Friedrich Carl" encountered the rebel armed steamer "Vigilante", seized the vessel, and returned it to the national government.

"Friedrich Carl" and the British ironclad attacked two of the rebel ships—"Vitoria" and "Almansa"—without authorization from London or Berlin. The rebel vessels had attempted to extort the port of Almería. In the brief engagement, the Anglo-German force overwhelmed the rebels and seized both ships, which were subsequently turned over to the Spanish government. The rebels considered declaring war on Germany over the affair, but eventually decided against it. A captured rebel leader was briefly held on board "Friedrich Carl". Admiral Werner's blockade eventually forced the rebels to surrender, after which "Friedrich Carl" returned to Germany. Chancellor Otto von Bismarck ordered a court-martial for Admiral Werner, whose actions Bismarck considered to be excessive. Bismarck prohibited the Imperial Navy from conducting "gunboat diplomacy" in the future.

In 1885, "Friedrich Carl" had torpedo nets installed; these remained on the ship until 1897. In 1895, the ship was disarmed; she was placed into service as a torpedo test ship on 11 August of that year. She served in this capacity until 21 January 1902, when she was renamed "Neptun" and used as a harbor ship. Her name was then freed to be reused on the new armored cruiser , which was launched on 22 June 1902. "Neptun" was formally stricken from the naval register on 22 June 1905 and sold to a Dutch ship-breaking firm in March 1906 for 284,000 gold marks. The ship was then towed to the Netherlands and broken up for scrap.



</doc>
<doc id="31169666" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31169666" title="2011 Vacansoleil–DCM season">
2011 Vacansoleil–DCM season

The 2011 season for the cycling team began in January at the Tour Down Under and ended in November at the Amstel Curaçao Race. As a UCI ProTeam, they were automatically invited and obligated to send a squad to every event in the UCI World Tour; Vacansoleil-DCM became a ProTeam for the first time ahead of the 2011 season.

Improving upon 14 victories in the 2010 season, Vacansoleil-DCM managed 22 victories during the season. Having previously been invited to the 2009 Vuelta a España, Vacansoleil-DCM contested the other Grand Tour events – the Giro d'Italia and the Tour de France – for the first time. Despite rumours that the team faced exclusion to the doping scandals involving team members Riccardo Riccò and Ezequiel Mosquera, they were included pursuant to UCI rules. The team rarely featured in the Giro, while the team was more successful at the Tour de France. Johnny Hoogerland held the lead of the mountains classification on two occasions, while Romain Feillu finished in the top five on four stages during the first half of the race. Hoogerland also made headlines when he and 's Juan Antonio Flecha were sideswiped by a car while they rode in a breakaway. Outside of the Grand Tours, Thomas De Gendt took World Tour stage victories at Paris–Nice and the Tour de Suisse, with Borut Božič also taking a stage win in Switzerland.

The team were also successful in single-day races, with six different riders all achieving a victory. Despite all the victories, the team finished last in the UCI World Tour rankings, since the majority of their victories came during UCI Europe Tour races. ProTeams, though eligible to participate in the races, were not eligible to earn points toward the Europe Tour ranking (just as Professional Continental teams could not earn points toward the World Tour ranking).

Ages as of January 1, 2011.


The team started the single-day season with a third-place finish for Feillu at the Grand Prix d'Ouverture La Marseillaise in January, and first-year professional Ligthart taking a similar placing in February's Clásica de Almería. In March, Westra took his first victory since the 2009 Tour de Picardie, by winning the Classic Loire Atlantique, in France. After creating a four-man breakaway with Anthony Geslin of , 's Jean-Marc Marino and rider Frédéric Amorison, they were joined by five other riders within the last ; one of the five, Amorison's teammate Bert Scheirlinckx attacked in the closing stages but Westra followed and outsprinted him to the line, eventually winning by two seconds. Four days later, Marcato finished sixth in Dwars door Vlaanderen. Ligthart won his first race as a professional in April, by winning Hel van het Mergelland in a sprint finish of 26 riders.

The following day, Leukemans was in contention for victory at the Tour of Flanders, attacking off the front of the field on the Molenberg, remaining in contention with the persistent attacks by other riders within the last of the event; Leukemans was aided by De Gendt and Devolder, but could do no better than a seventh-place finish. In the Grand Prix Pino Cerami, Marcato finished in second place, having been part of an eleven-man breakaway formed with around remaining, before losing to Scheirlinckx in a two-man sprint after the two had jettisoned their fellow escapees. Leukemans suffered the same result in Brabantse Pijl, losing out to 's Philippe Gilbert in another two-man sprint, after the two riders attacked off the front of a seven-man lead group. Following a second place at the Grand Prix de Denain, Feillu won the Tour du Finistère in mid-April, gapping the field in an uphill sprint to the line. Leukemans continued his good form into the Ardennes classics, taking seventh place in the Amstel Gold Race, and ninth in Liège–Bastogne–Liège.

May was not as successful for the team, as Marcato finished in sixth place in the Eschborn-Frankfurt City Loop at the start of the month, and Ruijgh took seventh place in the Grand Prix de Plumelec-Morbihan, towards the end of the month. Keizer took his first professional victory, by winning the Boucles de l'Aulne. From a breakaway of five riders, Keizer attacked in the closing stages, and soloed to the win. While in June, Gardeyn finished fourth in the Tour de Rijke, Ruijgh finished second to 's Dirk Bellemakers in the Ruddervoorde Koerse national event, and Veuchelen finished eighth in Halle–Ingooigem.

The team also sent squads to the Omloop Het Nieuwsblad, Kuurne–Brussels–Kuurne, Le Samyn, the Nokere Koerse, the Handzame Classic, Milan – San Remo, the Cholet-Pays de Loire, E3 Prijs Vlaanderen – Harelbeke, Gent–Wevelgem, the Scheldeprijs, Paris–Roubaix, the Tro-Bro Léon, La Flèche Wallonne, the GP Herning, the Rund um Köln, the ProRace Berlin, and the Gullegem Koerse, but placed no higher than 12th in any of these races.

Shortly after the Tour de France, Božič took third place in the Vattenfall Cyclassics. Willem Wauters – who joined the team as a stagiaire in August – made an immediate impact for the team, finishing second behind 's Svein Tuft in the Grote Prijs Stad Zottegem, while the following day, Leukemans followed up his overall win from the Tour du Limousin with victory in Druivenkoers Overijse – for the second year in succession – beating 's Davy Commeyne and Jurgen Van Goolen of to the line.

The team achieved more top-ten placings in September, taking six within the space of a week; Božič finished ninth in the Memorial Rik Van Steenbergen, and sixth in Paris–Brussels, while Leukemans finished sixth in the Grand Prix Cycliste de Québec World Tour race, and third on his return to Europe, in the Grand Prix de Wallonie. Feillu and Marcato each took a seventh place in the Grand Prix de Fourmies, and the Grand Prix Cycliste de Montréal respectively. Mouris and Keizer finished third in Duo Normand, while on the same day, Božič finished fourth in the Grand Prix d'Isbergues. In October, Marcato took his first professional win in the Tour de Vendée, and also finished second to 's Greg Van Avermaet in Paris–Tours, Feillu finished eighth in Paris–Bourges, and Devolder finished seventh in the Chrono des Nations time trial. Hoogerland completed the team's year, in November, with third place in the Amstel Curaçao Race.

The team also sent squads to the Clásica de San Sebastián, the Dutch Food Valley Classic, the Châteauroux Classic, the GP Ouest-France, the Schaal Sels-Merksem, the Grote Prijs Jef Scherens, the Kampioenschap van Vlaanderen, Omloop van het Houtland, Binche–Tournai–Binche, the Nationale Sluitingsprijs, and the Giro di Lombardia, but finished no higher than 11th in any of these races.

The team was very successful at the Tour Méditerranéen in February, as Feillu won three consecutive stages, along with the points classification, and Poels finished as the best young rider in third place overall, having finished in the same position on the final and most difficult stage. Westra finished third in the Volta ao Algarve, before De Gendt took the team's first World Tour stage win of the season, managing to just outlast the advancing field in a sprint finish to the opening stage of Paris–Nice. Feillu took another stage victory at May's Tour de Picardie, en route to an eventual overall victory in the race. The following week at the Circuit de Lorraine, De Gendt won the third stage – giving him the race lead for a time – and Feillu won the fifth and final stage, with De Gendt finishing at the top of the mountains classification, and the team won their respective classification. Westra won the opening prologue of the Tour of Belgium, with the squad eventually winning the teams classification. Feillu took his eighth victory of the season at June's Tour de Luxembourg, taking the final stage win.

Later in June, the team took two stage victories in the Tour de Suisse; in the fifth stage into Tägerschen, following an attack by Marcato, Božič took out the uphill sprint to the line, and on the seventh stage that finished in Austrian town Serfaus, De Gendt triumphed after breaking clear of a 17-man group with remaining on the stage, eventually winning the stage by over half a minute. Held concurrently with the Tour de France, van Leijen won the second stage of the Tour de Wallonie, with Selvaggi later finishing on top of the mountains classification, and the squad took another teams classification win. Poels claimed a stage win during the Tour de l'Ain in August, eventually finishing the race second overall after cracking from the race lead on the final stage, but did win the race's sprints classification. Hoogerland also took the team's sixth mountains classification win of the year. Leukemans completed the team's stage race successes with a stage and overall win at the Tour du Limousin.

The team also won lesser classifications at the Étoile de Bessèges, the Critérium International, the Three Days of De Panne, and the Tour de Pologne. The team also sent squads to the Tour Down Under, the Vuelta an Andalucía, Driedaagse van West-Vlaanderen, Vuelta a Murcia, Tirreno–Adriatico, the Volta a Catalunya, the Tour of the Basque Country, Ronde van Drenthe, the Tour de Romandie, the Four Days of Dunkirk, the Critérium du Dauphiné, the Delta Tour Zeeland, the Ster ZLM Toer, the Danmark Rundt, the Eneco Tour, the Tour of Britain, the Tour de Wallonie-Picarde, and the Tour of Beijing, but did not achieve a stage win, classification win, or podium finish in any of them.

The UCI considered a potential revoking of Vacansoleil-DCM's ProTeam licence in mid-February, which would stop the team from automatically being invited to any World Tour race and be demoted to a Professional Continental team, as they were in 2010. This licence issue came to light due to continued investigations into doping regarding two of the team's riders; Mosquera and Riccò. Mosquera had tested positive for hydroxyethyl starch at the 2010 Vuelta a España, while Riccò had been admitted to hospital earlier in February, amid allegations that he had carried out a self-administered autologous blood transfusion at his home. (For more information on the Riccò allegations, see the Dismissal of Riccardo Riccò section)

Despite talk of a potential exclusion from the race due to these scandals, the team were included in the list of 23 teams admitted, on March 7, per UCI rules. Carrara was the team's leader for the race, while Božič and Hoogerland were named to the squad to aim for stage wins and breakaway representation. The team's showing in the stage 1 team time trial was average, as they came home 10th of the 23 teams, 37 seconds off the winning pace set by . Božič finished near the front of the field in the Giro's first road stage, taking fifth in the mass sprint finish to the second stage, in Parma. Hoogerland and Selvaggi made breakaway attempts on stages 7 and 8, but neither could hold a sustainable advantage until the end of each stage. Carrara moved into the top ten overall after stage 9, finishing 14th on the race's first summit finish, at Mount Etna. Selvaggi took the team's only top-ten placing in the second half of the race by finishing eighth in a mass sprint finish on stage 12, while Carrara eventually finished the race as the team's highest placed rider in the general classification, finishing 17th overall.

Feillu was the team's leader for the Tour, leading a youthful team into the race, with three riders – De Gendt, Poels and Ruijgh – eligible for the young rider classification. Westra made the first breakaway of the Tour along with two other riders, while the team finished 20th of the 22 teams in the team time trial. It was not until stage 3 that the team finished highly; Feillu finished second behind 's Tyler Farrar, with Božič also making it into the top ten, in eighth position. Hoogerland and Westra made breakaway manoeuvres on stages 4 and 6 respectively, but again could not muster a big enough advantage for a stage victory. Hoogerland did however take the lead of the mountains classification at the conclusion of the sixth stage, where Feillu had finished fourth and Marcato ninth. Feillu took another fourth place the following day on the seventh stage into Châteauroux.

Hoogerland made another break from the peloton on the ninth stage, as he was joined by five other riders who extended their lead over the field. With remaining, Hoogerland and fellow escapee Juan Antonio Flecha of were involved in a dramatic crash; while attempting to overtake the riders, a support car from France Télévisions sideswiped Flecha, and as a result, caused Hoogerland to crash into a barbed wire fence, and would later require 33 stitches to close gashes on his leg. Prior to the crash, Hoogerland had gained enough points on the stage to retake the lead of the mountains classification from 's Tejay van Garderen. Flecha and Hoogerland both finished the stage and were jointly awarded the combative rider award for the day. Marcato made the breakaway on stage ten, with Feillu and Božič again making the top ten at stage end; Feillu finished fifth with Božič three places behind, in eighth place. Feillu closed the first half of the race, with sixth place on stage 11.

None of the team's riders featured prominently in the early mountain stages, as it was not until stage 16 when Vacansoleil-DCM returned to the top ten of a stage result, with Marcato finishing eighth into Gap. Božič was tenth on stage 17 and seventh on the final stage, sandwiching two top ten placings for De Gendt, who finished sixth on stage 19 to Alpe d'Huez, and fourth on the following day's individual time trial. At the race's conclusion, the team's highest-placed rider was Ruijgh in 21st, some 33 minutes down on race winner Cadel Evans of .

Although the team had 2010 runner-up Mosquera on their books, they elected not to send him – having been on the team's pre-selection list – to the race due to the ongoing investigation into his positive doping case for hydroxyethyl starch. Instead, the team elected to place leadership upon the shoulders of Poels, who had taken second place and a stage victory in the Tour de l'Ain, held one week before the Vuelta. The team started with another mediocre performance in the team time trial, coming in 18th of the 22 teams, but Pidgornyy was part of a successful four-man breakaway on the third stage, and although he eventually finished 15 seconds down on the eventual stage winner Pablo Lastras (), Pidgornyy moved into fourth place in the general classification.

Poels featured in the top ten of the next two stages, the sharp incline to Sierra Nevada – finishing eighth, two places behind teammate Lagutin – and was the closest to 's Joaquim Rodríguez on the steep finish into Valdepeñas de Jaén. He also tried to make a late-stage move, within the final , on the eighth stage, but was unsuccessful, as he was swallowed up by the main field prior to the 20% gradient final climb to the line. Ligthart and Keizer made their way into the breakaway on stage 9, with both being dropped before the climb to . Pidgornyy made it into his second breakaway of the race, as the race moved into its second half, on stage 12, but he and rider Luis Angel Maté were overhauled with just remaining.

As the race began to take shape in the Cantabrian Mountains, Poels continued his impressive Vuelta by again featuring in the top five of a stage, by taking fourth place on stage 14. Having stayed with the main group of overall contenders, Poels managed to stay with the likes of 's Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome, while others such as Rodríguez and defending race winner Vincenzo Nibali of had faded out of contention. The next day, the race headed to the summit finish of the Angliru for the first time in three years, and while 's Juan José Cobo soloed into his eventual race-winning general classification lead, Poels was his closest challenger, 48 seconds in arrears but sufficient enough to move him into the top ten overall. Poels slipped out of the top ten after losing time on the finish to , and thus tried to make a breakaway the following day, on stage 18, but was not given the freedom to break and finished with the main field. Poels ultimately finished the race 17th, but the team's best-placed rider honour went to Lagutin, who finished almost three minutes ahead in 15th place.

Having made his season début with a seventh place in the Grand Prix d'Ouverture La Marseillaise in France on January 30, and prior to travelling to the Tour Méditerranéen, Riccò was admitted to hospital in Pavullo nel Frignano on February 6, with his father Rubinho stating that his son had apparent "kidney failure" and a body temperature of ; he was later transferred to a hospital in Modena. Two days later, the Italian State Police confirmed that they were investigating Riccò for blood doping, after an apparent self-administered autologous blood transfusion at his home, and obtained his medical records while Riccò was in hospital recovering. His team also released a statement that day, calling the reports "a rumour", but started their own investigation into the matter, and if found to have doped, Riccò would be sacked as a violation of UCI anti-doping rules.

Personalities within the cycling world condemned Riccò for returning to doping, having already served a 20-month ban for the banned blood booster CERA in 2008. After conducting their investigation, the team announced that they had suspended Riccò on February 11, also indicating that they had sent a letter of their decision to Riccò. Following this scandal, as well as the continued allegations over teammate Mosquera in 2010, the UCI had planned to look at the credibility of having the team at the highest echelon of the sport – as a ProTeam – with Riccò's points making up a proportion of the team's allocation in regards to a ProTeam licence. Riccò was sacked by the team on February 19, on the basis of their "zero-tolerance policy" on doping. The team later announced a more stringent policy on how they deal with doping. Having previously given Leukemans a second chance after a positive test for artificial testosterone, team manager Daan Luijkx stated that the team would not give riders a second chance to prove their capabilities after Riccò's situation.

Riccò announced his intention to never race again in March, but signed with Continental team Meridiana-Kamen in June in the hope of competing in the Tour de Serbie. This did not transpire, as he was suspended by the Italian National Olympic Committee prior to the race, in relation to the February blood transfusion. He eventually received a twelve-year ban from the Italian National Anti-Doping Tribunal in April 2012.


</doc>
<doc id="31197224" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31197224" title="Born This Way (Glee)">
Born This Way (Glee)

"Born This Way" is the eighteenth episode of the second season of the American television series "Glee", and the fortieth episode overall. It originally aired on Fox in the United States on April 26, 2011. The episode was written by Brad Falchuk and directed by Alfonso Gomez-Rejon, and is a tribute to Lady Gaga, the second such tribute to the artist in the show's history; the first one was "Theatricality". Most of the major plots of the episode center on the topic of homosexuality, as Kurt (Chris Colfer) lays the groundwork for his longtime bully Dave Karofsky (Max Adler) to come to terms with his sexuality, and Santana (Naya Rivera) plots to run for school prom queen in the hopes of winning her love interest Brittany (Heather Morris) from Artie (Kevin McHale).

"Born This Way" attracted mostly positive reception from most critics of the show, as many felt that it was one of the better episodes of the season. However, the episode came under scrutiny by several conservative media critics who criticized the show's depiction of homosexuality. This episode featured cover versions of seven songs, including a cover of "Born This Way" by Lady Gaga. Other musical works featured in the episode include cover versions of the Keane song "Somewhere Only We Know" and "I've Gotta Be Me" from the 1968 Broadway production "Golden Rainbow". The musical covers and performances were met with generally positive reception from critics, with several noting that it contained the best musical selection in a while. With the exception of "Barbra Streisand", all cover versions were released as singles available for digital download.

Upon its initial airing, the episode was viewed by 8.62 million American viewers, and garnered a 3.4/11 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, the lowest ratings and total viewership of the season. The episode's ratings and total viewership significantly declined from the previous episode, "Night of Neglect", which had previously been the low point in viewership.

During dance rehearsals for the upcoming Nationals competition, New Directions glee club co-captain Finn Hudson (Cory Monteith) accidentally breaks Rachel Berry's (Lea Michele) nose. Her doctor (George Wyner) recommends septoplasty and elective rhinoplasty; Rachel considers modelling her nose after Finn's current girlfriend Quinn Fabray (Dianna Agron), and the two girls duet on the mash-up "I Feel Pretty/Unpretty". Both Finn and Puck (Mark Salling) oppose her planned transformation. Puck tries to help her accept her nose as part of her Jewish heritage, and recruits Kurt Hummel (Chris Colfer), who convinces her to look to her idol Barbra Streisand, who refused to succumb to pressure to alter her nose. Ultimately, Rachel decides against having surgery.

Club member Santana Lopez (Naya Rivera) uses Rachel's broken nose as a launching point to highlight the other group members' physical flaws. Aiming to help them achieve self-acceptance, glee club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) urges them to embrace their perceived flaws by printing them on T-shirts to be worn during a group performance of Lady Gaga's "Born This Way". He also encourages school guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays) to confront her OCD; she begins treatment with a psychiatrist, Dr. Shane (Kathleen Quinlan).
Santana, who is a closeted lesbian, decides to run for school prom queen in the hope that she can win the love of her best friend Brittany Pierce (Heather Morris), who is dating Artie (Kevin McHale). She realizes that popular jock Dave Karofsky (Max Adler) is also in the closet, after noticing him checking out Sam (Chord Overstreet), and hatches an elaborate scheme to attain her goals: she threatens to out Karofsky unless he agrees to stop the bullying that drove Kurt from McKinley and the glee club. The pair form an anti-bullying club to make the school safer in order to entice Kurt back and bolster the glee club's chance at Nationals, though mostly to boost Santana's popularity before the prom. They also become one another's "beard" to bolster their heterosexual facades.

Karofsky issues an apology to Kurt at a group meeting involving Will, Principal Figgins (Iqbal Theba), and their fathers. Though Kurt wants to transfer back to McKinley from Dalton Academy, he is hesitant until Karofsky admits privately that Santana's prom queen scheme is behind his change of heart and the anti-bullying movement; Kurt agrees to return, but only if Karofsky will start a school PFLAG club with him. As Kurt arrives back at McKinley, the Dalton Academy Warblers glee club that he had joined while he was away—fronted by his boyfriend Blaine Anderson (Darren Criss)—serenades him in farewell with a rendition of Keane's "Somewhere Only We Know". Kurt marks his re-entry to New Directions with a solo performance of "As If We Never Said Goodbye" from "Sunset Boulevard".

As the race for prom queen intensifies, Lauren Zizes (Ashley Fink) begins campaigning against Quinn. She discovers that Quinn's first name is Lucy, and that she used to be an overweight outcast who had rhinoplasty before re-inventing herself and transferring to McKinley. Lauren attempts to sabotage Quinn's campaign by revealing her former image to the other students, but it backfires when Quinn's popularity actually increases amongst the girls like Lauren, encouraged by the idea of someone able to rise above such difficulties like she did, and become popular. Lauren apologizes to Quinn, but Quinn commends her for her confidence and pride, and the two form a bond. Brittany shows off her shirt to Santana, and gives Santana a shirt reading "Lebanese", believing that it reads "Lesbian". Santana balks at wearing it, and the two argue; Brittany finally storms off saying that if Santana loved herself as much as Brittany loved her, she would put on the shirt and dance with her. The episode closes with the club, minus Santana, embracing their identities and performing "Born This Way". During the song, Emma arrives wearing a T-shirt that acknowledges her own problems—it reads "OCD"—and she and Will join the performance. Karofsky and Santana watch from the audience, with Santana wearing her "Lebanese" shirt.

The episode was extended and ran for 90 minutes, as opposed to the usual 60 minutes. Michael Ausiello of "TVLine" reported that the producers included two extra musical performances to fill the extended time slot. Series creator Ian Brennan stated that he believed the extension was granted as there were two songs which would otherwise have been cut for length. He welcomed the additional 24 minutes of screen time, and commented: "We're always desperately cutting down our episodes. Even when we write them, and then in the editing room we're always throwing away stuff that I really love to get it down to time. [...] It will be just really interesting content-wise for us [to have an extension]."

The focus of the episode is Lady Gaga's song "Born This Way", which she approved for use in "Glee" before the song premiered. This will be the second episode to highlight Gaga's music, the first one being season one's "Theatricality". According to Monteith, the focus of "Born This Way" is the characters "embracing the things about [them]selves that [they] don't like and tailoring [their] performances around that." It features homophobic Dave Karofsky starting to come to terms with his homosexuality. The plot arc, which began in the season's sixth episode, "Never Been Kissed", is intended by series creator Ryan Murphy to have a happy ending. He explained that, while someone like Karofsky could turn to drugs or alcohol or commit suicide, "Glee" is "by nature optimistic", so he plans to conclude the storyline positively. For fellow closeted character Santana, "Born This Way" set up the final three episodes of the season, which will increase focus on her love for her best friend Brittany. The episode additionally marked the first appearance of guest star Dr. Shane, "a very smart, cool and kind psychiatrist" who may become a recurring character. Other characters seen in "Born This Way" include glee club members Mike Chang (Harry Shum, Jr.), Sam Evans and Lauren Zizes, Kurt's boyfriend Blaine Anderson, school bully Azimio (James Earl), Principal Figgins, and Karofsky's father, Paul (Daniel Roebuck).

In addition to "Born This Way", the other songs covered in the episode were Keane's "Somewhere Only We Know", "As If We Never Said Goodbye" from the musical "Sunset Boulevard", a mash-up of "I Feel Pretty" from "West Side Story" and "Unpretty" by TLC, "I've Gotta Be Me" from the musical "Golden Rainbow", and Duck Sauce's "Barbra Streisand". All but "Barbra Streisand" were released as digital singles for the episode. "Somewhere Only We Know" was included on the series' seventh soundtrack, "", and "As If We Never Said Goodbye", "Born This Way" and "I Feel Pretty / Unpretty" were included on the series' eighth soundtrack, "".

"Born This Way" was first broadcast on April 26, 2011, in the United States. It averaged a 3.4/11 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, and also averaged nearly 8.62 million American viewers during its initial airing. The first hour of the show garnered 8.3 million American viewers and a 3.3/9 rating in the 18–49 demographic, despite airing simultaneously with a rerun of "NCIS" on CBS, "" on NBC, "No Ordinary Family" on ABC, and "One Tree Hill" on The CW. The last half-hour of the episode had 8.5 million American viewers, as well as a 3.4/9 rating in the 18–49 demographic, despite airing alongside a rerun of "" on CBS, "Dancing with the Stars" on ABC, "The Voice" on NBC, and "Hellcats" on The CW. The total viewership and ratings were the lowest of the second season of Glee, and was down from those of the previous episode, "Night of Neglect", which was watched by 9.80 million American viewers and acquired a 3.8/11 rating/share upon first airing. In the UK, the episode was watched by 2.52 million viewers (2.087 million on E4, and 433,000 on E4+1), becoming the most-watched show on E4 and E4 +1 for the week, and the most-watched show on cable for the week.

"Born This Way" was given a positive reception by many critics of the show. Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" and Sandra Gonzalez of "Entertainment Weekly" both considered it to be an improvement from the previous episode. Futterman wrote that it "gave us the charm, wit and just-zany-enough-to-be-plausible plot lines we were sorely missing after last week's predictable" episode, and added, "Even better: the episode didn't feel as long as the 90 minutes it clocked in at." "IGN" Robert Canning gave the episode a "great" rating of 8 out of 10. While he said the episode was entertaining, he felt that it did not need to be an hour and a half. Emily Yahr of "The Washington Post" agreed about the extended length, and did not like what she called "lame attempts to fill time", which she said "detracted from what started as a decent episode". She did, however, cite several "promising storylines", including Rachel's, and noted, "Usually, New Directions leader Rachel Berry is a caricature of all things annoying—but this episode, we see her genuinely struggling with wanting to love herself the way she is". The "Houston Chronicle" Bobby Hankinson summed it up as follows: "Not an epic episode, just sort of … meh." Amy Reiter of "The Los Angeles Times" reacted more positively and wrote, "The 90-minute episode had a lot of laughs, a lot of heart, some good lessons, character development, a few good numbers and more than a few surprises."

"The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff gave it a "B", and wrote that he "finally got a sense that, yes, this second season has been building toward something and has been trying to tell an emotional story, as well as a humorous one. 'Born This Way', for the first time in a long time, made me feel like I could say I was a fan of "Glee" without a million qualifiers." Gary Mills of the "Florida Times-Union" felt that the episode didn't live up to its hype, but also said that he wasn't disappointed. Brett Berk of "Vanity Fair" reacted positively, and noted that by "focusing on what makes these lovable dorks, well, lovable dorks—and not pop, or high-school, superstars—tonight's episode, if a bit tidily, reminded us that these are supposed to be kids". Matt Zoller Seitz of "Salon" thought that "Born This Way" was "the show's best episode to date", and "an epic about a hero returning from a long journey, walking serenely through halls that once scared him, and performing with such skill and sincerity that his friends stared at him with love and awe." Aly Semigran of "MTV" had mixed emotions. She criticized the abrupt changes of the storylines in the episode, and thought that the episode "was a noble effort" but "it didn't quite work the way it was supposed to." Raymund Flandez of "The Wall Street Journal" stated that the episode "sounded just the perfect notes" and called it "the best episode yet". He continued: "The night held wonderful gems: A clear message. Witty repartee (…). Great character build up. And tailored songs that carried emotional heft."
Several critics praised the development of Santana. Hankinson wrote, "My goodness, Santana. It's as if all the writers sat around a room, identified the best lines of tonight's episode and then decided to give them all to Santana. Fantastic." VanDerWerff called Santana the highlight of the episode: "The best thing about this episode is Naya Rivera's work as Santana and the story the three writers have cooked up for her. Rivera's really come into her own this season, going from just a generic bitchy cheerleader to an actual character who has motivations and might be a better villain for the show than Sue." He added, "the storyline of Santana realizing she was in love with Brittany and, thus, is probably a lesbian has been nicely plotted and surprisingly deep. The reveal about Santana hasn't washed away her less savory qualities; indeed, it's heightened them, to a degree, as she struggles to be true to herself and still maintain her status as the hottest girl in school." Jenna Mullins of "E! Online" wrote of Santana, "This episode just cemented my love for her. The insult spew in the beginning of the episode was awesomely mean." She also said that Santana's "inner monologue is often more entertaining than other characters' outer monologues". "CNN" Lisa Respers France considered Santana the episode's highlight, and went on to write, "She embraced her inner lesbian (sort of) and rattled off the best [lines] like 'the only straight I am is straight-up [bitch].' You gotta love that."

Some critics reacted negatively to the episode. Scott Pierce of "The Salt Lake Tribune" felt that the show has jumped the shark starting from this episode. He felt that the Kurt storyline had some major flaws, and that the messages being sent have been mixed. The episode garnered criticism from a number of conservatives, who found the depiction of homosexuality abrasive. In an interview with ABC News, conservative media critic Dan Gainor felt that it was Ryan Murphy's "latest depraved initiative to promote his gay agenda." He added: "This is clearly Ryan Murphy's vision of what growing up should be, not most of America's. It's a high school most parents would not want to send their kids to."

The musical performances and cover versions in the episode received generally positive commentary. Gonzalez stated that she loved the song choices, and Meghan Brown of "The Atlantic" felt that this episode carried the best selection of music of a "Glee" episode in a long time. Flandez commended that they are "tailored songs that carried emotional heft".

Critics mostly reacted with acclaim for the mash-up of "I Feel Pretty / Unpretty". Gonzalez gave the performance an "A" and commented: "While part of me would have said that pairing Rachel and Quinn for a duet would vocally be like putting a pit bull in a cage match with a Maltipoo, it actually worked! There was a surprisingly balanced and incredibly lovely tone." All three writers of "The Atlantic" review praised the mash-up: Patrick Burns said it was beautiful, and noted that "the arrangement was clever, the ladies sounded great, and the song was placed perfectly into the plot of two characters who were restored a bit of their depth in this episode", Brown stated that the song was lovely, and Kevin Fallon felt that it was "unexpectedly gorgeous and haunting", and noted that it was "yet another example of how skilled the music directors are at these mash-ups." Semigran felt that it was the best performance of the night, and "TV Line" Michael Slezak gave the piece an "A", and said that it was a "vocally and visually stunning set piece for the unlikeliest of duet partners." Flandez commented that the song "floated like gossamer between Rachel and Quinn as they beautifully poured the sentiments of ugly ducklings", and Futterman wrote, "It's a poignant moment, and the inclusion of "West Side Story" 'I Feel Pretty' makes for a great pop/theater mash-up that reminds us of what "Glee" is at its heart."

Kurt's performance of "As If We Never Said Goodbye" was also met with critical acclaim. Brown stated that the song was "absolutely stunning in every conceivable way." She thought that he had the emotional connection, the musicality, and the storytelling ability "down pat". Gonzalez gave the song an "A−" and wrote, "Kurt apparently picked up a few helpful notes ... from his Warbler brothers and emerged an even better solo singer than I recall. ... Most enjoyable, however, was a tenderness Kurt added to the song that I don't think could have been duplicated by any other member of this ensemble." Slezak commended Kurt's voice, gave the song an "A", and said, "I feel like we haven't had too many strong musical moments from Kurt this season, but this number, which pushed Chris Colfer's falsetto to impressive heights, went a long way to erase the deficit." Futterman thought that it was "a sweeter moment than last season's 'Rose's Turn', but the high notes and big vocals are still there." Berk gave it three out of five stars and called it "lovely, and properly sentimental". Zoller Seitz called the performance "spellbinding" and concluded, "Chris Colfer turns 'As if We Never Said Goodbye' into a valentine to self-knowledge and self-improvement—and a young, gay singer's dream of treating the world as a stage and commanding it like a star."

The New Directions' rendition of "Born This Way" was strongly approved by Lady Gaga. On her Twitter account, she wrote, "I really loved Glee Born This Way episode. I admire the show for being brave+fighting for such modern social messaging. Never back down." Gonzalez gave the performance a "B+", and commented that it wasn't her favorite group number, mostly because she felt the song "wasn't [Lady Gaga's] best effort". Berk was less kind about the song, and called it a "crappy but thematically admirable Gaga tune", though he gave it three stars out of five. Slezak gave it an "A−" and approved of the rendition: "it was nice to see and hear Tina, Mercedes and Kurt on lead vocals—instead of, say, Blaine, Rachel, and Mr. Schue."

The duet of "I Gotta Be Me" by Finn and Mike was considered to be "shockingly adorable" by Berk, who gave it four stars out of five. Slezak was less impressed: "The jazz band arrangement and the Mike-teaches-Finn-some-moves choreography was cute, I guess, but it's not a good sign that I spent half the number focusing on Mike's matching green t-shirt and shoe laces." He went on to question the song's inclusion—"In an episode about confronting one's greatest teenage insecurities, I wonder if there might have been a better choice for a solo than the popular football player with the cheerleader girlfriend lamenting his inability to dance"—and ultimately gave the performance a "B−". Futterman also commented on the song's selection, though from a slightly different angle: "In theory it's charming—and there are definitely moments of the 'I can dance/You can't dance' exchange that were enjoyable—but we couldn't ever imagine this song as something Finn would have voluntarily picked."

"Somewhere Only We Know", as performed by Blaine and the Warblers, received an "A+" from Gonzalez, who loved the song and commented that she was "going to miss the Warblers". Slezak gave the performance a "B", and said that he "can't be too mad at another pretty song sung well by Darren Criss." The performance was acclaimed by Futterman, who wrote, "While the rest of the Warblers maintain their stoic facade, Blaine shows enough emotion to make this bittersweet Keane tune a simple, yet powerful, performance."

The flash-mob mall performance of "Barbra Streisand" was deemed to be pointless by Gonzalez, and she gave it a "C", her lowest grade of the episode. Futterman enjoyed the performance, thinking that it was "the episode's most fun moment and beats out last year's 'Safety Dance' for "Glee" numbers done in a mall." Slezak also reacted positively to the performance, giving it a "B+".

Several of the cover versions featured debuted on numerous musical charts. The show's rendition of "Born This Way" debuted at number forty-four on the "Billboard" Hot 100, on an issue dated for May 4, 2011. It sold 73,000 copies in the United States in its first week of release as a digitally downloadable single. The mash-up of "I Feel Pretty / Unpretty" was the highest charted single featured in the episode, debuting at number twenty-two on the "Billboard" Hot 100. It also peaked at number thirteen on the Digital 100 charts and sold 112,000 digital downloads in the United States in its first week of release. It was the highest charting "Glee" single on the "Billboard" charts since "Loser Like Me", which debuted at number six on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and sold over 210,000 downloads in its first week. "Somewhere Only We Know" peaked at number forty-two on the "Billboard" Hot 100 charts, and it sold over 75,000 copies within its first week. The fourth single, "As If We Never Said Goodbye", charted at number eighty.

In Ireland, two of the songs debuted on the Irish Singles Charts on an issue dated May 5, 2011. The mash-up peaked at number thirty-seven, while the cover version of "Somewhere Only We Know" trailed behind at number forty-seven. On May 6, three of the singles appeared on the Canadian Hot 100. The "I Feel Pretty / Unpretty" mash-up peaked the highest out of all the singles, debuting at twenty-eight. It was followed by "Born This Way" and "Somewhere Only We Know", which debuted at number thirty-one and fifty-two on the charts, respectively.



</doc>
<doc id="31206387" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31206387" title="Montauk Point land claim">
Montauk Point land claim

The Montauk Point land claim was a series of three lawsuits brought by Chief Wyandank Pharaoh, nephew of the Stephen Talkhouse who died in the same year (1879) that the tribe lost the last remaining vestige of their territory in the New York state courts, claiming Montauk Point on behalf of the Montaukett Indians, against the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) and its predecessors in title.

The first suit, Montauk Tribe of Indians v. Long Island R.R. Co., brought by Wyandank Pharaoh in the name of the tribe, was dismissed because the tribe had not been explicitly authorized by the state to sue in its own name.

As recommended by the Appellate Division's opinion, the second suit, Johnson v. Long Island R.R. Co., was brought in the name of Eugene M. Johnson, a citizen and tribal member. The New York Court of Appeals disavowed the previous dicta of the Appellate Division, and held that neither an individual Indian nor a tribe could sue in court without enabling legislation.

The tribe failed in its efforts to convince the federal government to pass legislation enabling the tribe to bring the claim in federal court. In 1906, the state passed a statute enabling the tribe to sue, and Wyandank Pharaoh brought a third suit, Pharaoh v. Benson, in the name of the tribe. Reaching the merits, the New York courts held that the tribe no longer existed and that the transactions were valid. Since the litigation, the Montauks have failed in their efforts to obtain compensation from the federal and state government, and much of the land in question has come to be held by public parks.
Circa 1875, the Montauk tribe began renting out Montauk Point for pasturage through the Proprietors' Company; the company took possession of the grazing allotments, and paid the tribe an annuity. Circa 1880, the shareholders of the company disagreed over whether the lands should continue to be leased, or whether they should be re-apportioned. In 1878, Robert M. Grinnell sued Edward M. Baker et al. for partition and division of the allotments. In "Grinnell v. Baker" (unreported), the court ordered the lands sold at public auction (subject to the Montauk claim), with the proceeds distributed equally among the non-Indian lessees, rather than the Montauk tribe.

The auction took place at the home of Jehial Parsons. Arthur W. Benson bought the at auction for $151,000 in 1879. In turn, Benson sold of the land to the Long Island Rail Road for $600,000.

Benson hired Nathaniel Dominey to negotiate the removal of the Montauks still living on the reservation. At a later, Senate Sub-Committee hearing, Dominey testified that eight Indians remained on the reservation at the time, including: future Chief Wyandank Pharaoh (10 years old at the time), his mother, and two of her brothers. Later, Dominey experienced a change of heart and cooperated with the Montauks in their claim, and turning over his letters from Benson. Dominey testified that he compensated Wyandank Pharaoh's mother with a $100 semi-annual annuity and two houses, to be inherited by Pharaoh, $80 each to her two brothers, and $10 to Wyandank.

Arthur Benson had viewed Montauk as "his private playground"; after his death, his son approached Austin Corbin, President and controlling shareholder of the Long Island Rail Road, and Charles Pratt, of Standard Oil, about the possibility of voiding his fathers will and opening Montauk to development. Montauk Point was purchased by Corbin and Pratt in 1895.

On October 30, 1895, Chief Wyandank Pharaoh returned from a research trip to Brooklyn and Washington, D.C. to gather evidence to pursue a claim. Pharaoh declared his intentions to undertake a hunting trip on the disputed land and initiate a lawsuit if he was interfered with.

The "New York Times" blamed Chief Pharaoh for the dispute:
If King Wyandank Pharaoh of the Montauk Tribe of Indians had not given for $10 the living members of the Montauk tribe might now be wealthy, instead of being poor and fighting for their rights with a desperate hope of regaining at least part of what they claim to be their lawful heritage.

Chief Wyandank Pharaoh, on behalf of the tribe, filed suit, stating a cause of action for ejectment on February 5, 1897. For proof of tribal status, the tribe cited a partition action decided by Judge Dykman and the 1890 United States Census. The complaint valued the land at approximately $300,000.

On June 5, 1897, Judge Wilmot Moses Smith of the New York Supreme Court set a hearing date for June 19 in Patchogue to hear the oral arguments for the defendants' demurrer. The matter was transferred to Judge Samuel T. Maddox in Brooklyn. Judge Maddox granted the demurrer, dismissing the action but allowing the tribe to re-plead if they paid costs.

The Montauk's, represented by ex-judge George M. Curtis, filed a notice of appeal on December 22, 1897. Before the Appellate Division, the Montauk's case was argued by Leman B. Treadwell, with Francis M. Morrison (both Boston lawyers) also on the brief. Alfred A. Gardner argued on behalf of the LIRR, with William J. Kelly on the brief. The Appellate Division panel consisted of Judges Goodrich, Edgar M. Cullen, Willard Bartlett, Hatch, and Woodward.

The Appellate Division of the Second Department unanimously affirmed the judgment of the Suffolk Special Term on April 19, 1898. Citing "Strong v. Waterman" and "Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy", Judge Cullen noted that "no provision had been made by law for bringing ejectment to recover possession of [Indians]" and "as a body or tribe, the Indians have no corporate name by which they can institute such a suit." Judge Cullen suggested that the tribe either petition the legislature for enabling legislation to allow them to sue as a tribe, or have individual members bring the suit.

Eugene M. Johnson, a U.S. citizen of Montauk descent, and a member of the tribe since birth, brought a similar suit in his own name, on behalf of himself and other similarly interested. The Special Term sustained a demurrer.

The divided panel of the Appellate Division of the Second Department reversed on July 1, 1899. In a per curiam opinion, joined by all but Judge Willard Bartlett, the Appellate Division held:
While the right to maintain this action in its present form is not free from doubt, still, as it is brought in accordance with the view expressed by us on the prior appeal, we think we should adhere to our former decision, and allow the question to be finally determined by the court of appeals.

The Appellate Division certified three questions to the Court of Appeals:
1. Has the plaintiff in this action legal capacity to sue?<br>2. Is there a defect of the parties plaintiff in this action, in that the members of the alleged Montauk Tribe of Indians are not made parties plaintiff?<br>3. Does the complaint herein state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action?

Before the Court of Appeals, Treadwell and Morrison again argued for the Montauks, while Gardner and Kelly again argued for the LIRR.

The New York Court of Appeals reversed the Appellate Division, and affirmed the Special Term, on April 17, 1900. The court answered all three certified questions in the negative, without costs to either party. Judge Edward T. Bartlett, joined by Judges Denis O'Brien, Albert Haight, and Celora E. Martin, held that Johnson had no capacity to bring a suit on the tribe's behalf. The Court held that Indians, as wards of the state, had no right to sue unless conferred by statute: 
A decision holding that this action could be maintained either by the tribe, or an individual member thereof on behalf of himself and all others who should come in and contribute, would be contrary to the policy and practice which have been long established in our treatment of the Indian tribes. They are regarded as the wards of the state, and, generally speaking, possessed of only such rights to appear and litigate in courts of justice as are conferred upon them by statute.

Chief Judge Alton B. Parker concurred in the result, without separate opinion; Judges Irving G. Vann and Landon dissented, without opinion.

Chief Pharaoh, along with representatives of the Shinnecock Tribe, Narragansett Tribe, and Mohegan Tribe, testified before a Sub-Committee of the Senate Indian Affairs Committee on September 22, 1900, at the Fifth Avenue Hotel. The Sub-Committee consisted of Senators John M. Thurston (R-NE) and Orville H. Platt (R-CT). In addition to Pharaoh, the testifying Indians were: Rev. Eugene A. Johnson, Nathan J. Cuffee, and James Cuffee (of the Montauk Council), John Noka, Joshua Noka, and Donald Seeter (of the Narragansett Council), David Kellis (of the Shinnecock Council). Maria Crippen and Dr. William H. Johnson of the Montauk tribe were among the spectators.

Rev. Johnson testified that there were 300 living members of the Montauk tribe. Johnson also testified that the New York state legislature had denied the Montauks a hearing because they were not "persons." Johnson argued that the Montauks could not alienate property without the consent of both New York and the federal government. He valued the disputed property at $3,000,000.

The tribes requested special legislation to allow them to bring their land claims, for fraud, in the United States circuit court. The Montauks and Shinnecocks claimed of Montauk Point; the Narragansetts an eight-square-mile tract near Narragansett Bay; the Mohegans a reservation in and near Norwich, Connecticut. Tredwell and Morrison continued to represent the tribes before the hearing.

A bill granting the Montauks permission to sue was introduced in February 1903. The Montauk's lawyer, Charles O. Maas, was the key lobbyist for the bill.

On April 10, 1906, the New York legislature passed a statute enabling the Montauk tribe to bring suit, The act contained the following proviso: "the question as to the existence of the Montauk Tribe of Indians shall be a question of law and fact to be determined by the court." Judge Blackmar interpreted the act as "providing that the act should not be construed as conferring tribal rights on any individuals, but that the question of the existence of the Montauk Tribe should be determined by the court."

Pursuant to the enabling act, Chief Wyandank Pharaoh brought a third suit on behalf of the tribe in 1906. The named defendants were: Jane Ann Benson and Mary Benson, the executrices of Arthur Benson's will, John J. Pierrepoint and Henry R. Hoyt, the executors and trustees of Frank Sherman Benson's will, Mary Benson, the Montauk Company, the Montauk Dock and Improvement Company, Alfred W. Hoyt, the Montauk Extension Railroad Company, and the Long Island Rail Road. An area of was named in the third complaint ( of it adjacent to the LIRR).

Chief Pharaoh was represented by Maas and Lawrence W. Trowbridge (of counsel). The defendants were represented by Daly, Hoyt & Mason (for the Bensons), Austin & McLanahan (for the Dock and Improvement Co.), A. T. Mason (for Pierrepoint and Henry Hoyt), P. Tecumseh Sherman (for Alfred Hoyt), and Joseph Keany (for the LIRR). According to a 1910 Q&A in the "New York Times", the lawyers fees were "long since supposed to have eclipsed the value of the land in litigation."

The trial took place, without a jury, before Judge Abel Blackmar of the Supreme Court of Suffolk County, Special Term. Fourteen of the sixteen living Montauk men appeared as witnesses at trial.

Judge Blackmar, ruled against the Montauks on October 11, 1910. According to Blackmar, the Montauks individually conveyed all their lands and claims to Arthur Benson between 1885 and 1894, in exchange for $100 to $250 each, except for Wyandank Pharaoh who received only $10, plus between in Freetown and East Hampton, plus a $240 annuity to be divided per capita.

Judge Blackmar also relied upon a December 1686 patent granted by Governor Thomas Dongan to the freeholders of East Hampton, granting them the exclusive right to purchase Indian lands in the area. Benson had separately purchased the fee rights from the descendants of the patentees.

Judge Blackmar also held that the Montauks were no longer a tribe:
During this long period the number of the Indians was greatly reduced. Their blood became so mixed that in many of them Indian traits were obliterated. They had no internal government, and they lived a sort of shiftless life, hunting, fishing, cultivating the ground 'Indian fashion' as a witness called it, and often leaving for long periods and working in some menial capacity for the whites.
On appeal, the Montauks found a new lawyer: Allen Caruthers.

The Appellate Division—composed of Judges Jenks, Burr, Rich, Stapleton, and Putnam—affirmed on October 16, 1914. On appeal, the Montauks were represented by Allen Caruthers, while the defendants were represented by Charles K. Carpenter, with Alexander T. Mason and George T. Austin on the brief. Judge Burr, for a unanimous court, wrote the opinion.

The Court of Appeals—composed of Chief Judge Frank Harris Hiscock and Judges Emory A. Chase, Frederick Collin, William Herman Cuddeback, John W. Hogan, McLaughlin, and Frederick E. Crane—affirmed (per curiam, without opinion) on January 29, 1918, without costs.

Maas departed for Washington, D.C. after the passage of the state enabling legislation. The Interior Department endorsed the idea on July 7, 1906.

In January 1921, Senator James Wolcott Wadsworth, Jr. (R-NY) and Representative Homer P. Snyder (R-NY) introduced legislation and asked the Interior Secretary to report to Congress on the Montauk's tribal status and the merits of their land claim. The Secretary prepared a report agreeing with the conclusions of Judge Blackmar and the New York appellate courts in "Pharaoh v. Benson". The Senate Committee on Indian Affairs received the report on April 22, 1922, and introduced the Wadsworth bill that June; the bill did not make it out of committee.

In 1996, represented by Bell, Boyd & Lloyd, the Montauks filed a letter of intent with the Branch of Acknowledgement and Research of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the first step towards federal recognition. The petition for recognition was submitted on June 23, 1998. The tribe received a request for documents from the BIA in January 1999.

On February 14, 1922, New York state assemblyman John J. O'Connor introduced legislation to compensate the Montauks. The bill excluded James Waters and the other members of the Montauk diaspora. The bill would have created a three-person committee—composed of two assembly members and one state senator—to determine whether the land claim had been meritorious. The bill never reached the floor.

In 1983, Fort Hill Associates and Signal Hill Associates applied to the town of East Hampton for a permit to build homes on North Neck hill, above the Montauk's ancestral burial ground. As quoted in the "New York Times", the East Hampton town supervisor said, "Who cares about a bunch of dead Indians?" The Montauketts won a temporary injunction in court that July. That November, the town board voted to purchase the for $1.4 million and preserve the burial ground.

In 1989, developers announced plans touching on a different Montaukett burial ground in North Neck. After protests, the town government agreed to preserve the site in 1991.

In 1984, the federal government announced plans to sell Montauk Air Force Station, a air force installation south of Montauk Point, to real estate developers. New York State and the Town of East Hampton sued to block the sale. The land was eventually turned over to the New York State Park Service, becoming Camp Hero State Park. The state purchased of Hither Woods in 1986 and created Hither Hills State Park. In 1988, the state purchased more to augment the park.



</doc>
<doc id="31222883" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31222883" title="Saint-Inglevert Airfield">
Saint-Inglevert Airfield

Saint-Inglevert Airfield is a general aviation airfield at Saint-Inglevert, Pas-de-Calais, France. In the First World War an airfield was established near Saint-Inglevert by the Royal Flying Corps, later passing to the Royal Air Force on formation and thus becoming RAF Saint Inglevert.

In 1920, a civil airfield was established on a different site which was a designated customs airfield. During the Second World War, Saint-Inglevert was occupied by the Royal Air Force and the "Armée de l'Air". The airfield was captured by the Germans towards the end of the Battle of France and occupied by the Luftwaffe. It was abandoned in 1941, but in 1943 field artillery units were based around the airfield as part of the Atlantic Wall. Although civil flying returned to Saint-Inglevert post-war, the airfield was abandoned in 1957 and returned to agriculture. It was reopened by l'aéroclub du Boulonnais () in 1986.

Saint-Inglevert airfield is located on a hill to the north west of the village of Saint-Inglevert, and east of Hervelinghen. It lies south west of Calais.

There was a Royal Flying Corps airfield at Saint-Inglevert during the First World War, but not on the site of the current airfield. In April 1918, No. 21 Squadron Royal Air Force (RAF) were based at Saint-Inglevert, flying Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8 aircraft. From 29 June to 23 October, No. 214 Squadron RAF were based there flying Handley Page O/400s, and in November, they were replaced by No. 115 Squadron RAF, who were flying the same type of aircraft. Two more squadrons, No. 97 Squadron RAF and No. 100 Squadron RAF, were based there from 17 November, to be joined by two squadrons of the United States Navy in 1918, flying Sopwith Camels. All Royal Air Force squadrons departed from Saint-Inglevert on 4 March 1919.

In 1920, an airfield was established at Saint-Inglevert on a different site to the former military airfield. Facilities developed over the years to include two hangars, customs facilities and ultra short wave radio. In March 1920, a Notice to Airmen was issued stating that Saint-Inglevert was open and fuel, oil and water were available, but there were no hangars or repair facilities. A proposal to designate Saint-Inglevert as a customs airfield in order to relieve Le Bourget of some of its workload was made in April 1920. Facilities then in existence included hangars, repair facilities and a radio station. Later that month, it was notified that an aerial lighthouse had been installed at the airfield, flashing the Morse letter A, and Saint-Inglevert became a customs airport on 20 May. By July, the provision of ground signals at Saint-Inglevert had begun. A arrow was displayed indicating the wind direction. In August, it was reported that Saint-Inglevert was sending weather report by radio seven times a day to Le Bourget. By October, aids available included a windsock and a landing T. Requirements for aircraft to perform clockwise or anticlockwise circuits when landing were indicated by the flying of a red or white flag respectively. The aerial lighthouse was reported to be out of action in November 1920.

It was notified that the road forming the eastern boundary of the airfield was to be marked by a series of posts high, surmounted by vertical white discs in diameter, in January 1921, and the following month, a Notice to Airmen issued in the United Kingdom stated that radio communication with Saint-Inglevert was to be in French. As part of a series of trials to assess the viability of civil aviation in France, a Farman F.60 Goliath flew a test flight carrying of cargo on 1 May. Three laps of a circuit Paris – Orléans – Rouen – Saint-Inglevert – Metz – Dijon – Paris were flown. Saint-Inglevert was one of the designated landing places for the 1921 "Coupe Michelin", an aerial circuit of France with a ₣20,000 prize. In November, a Compagnie des Messageries Aériennes aircraft called at Saint-Inglevert to collect a cargo of six 18-pounder and three 4.5–inch live shells for onward transmission to Croydon Airport in Surrey, United Kingdom. In a paper read to the Royal Aeronautical Society on 17 November, Colonel Frank Searle, managing director of Daimler Airway, criticized the organization of Saint-Inglevert and Le Bourget.

In or about March 1922, the wireless station at Saint-Inglevert was destroyed in a fire. A meeting of airlines and the British Air Ministry in April following the 1922 Picardie mid-air collision on 7 April at Thieuloy-Saint-Antoine, Oise resulted in a number of resolutions being passed with the intention of improving the safety of aviation, one of which was that the Saint-Inglevert wireless station should be replaced. The aerial lighthouse at Saint-Inglevert was in operation again by 11 April, when a test flight was flown at night on the British part of the London – Paris air route. The aircraft flew as far as Saint-Inglevert before turning back and landing at Lympne, Kent. In December, a Notice to Airmen stated that a portable searchlight was in operation at Saint-Inglevert by prior arrangement for aircraft landing at night, and that the "T" was illuminated at night.

In April 1923, a ₣25,000 prize (then worth £360) was offered by the daily newspaper "Le Matin" for the first French aviator to fly from Saint-Inglevert to Lympne and back in one day in an aircraft of French design and construction, with an engine capacity of less than . Georges Barbot won the prize when he completed the journey during the evening of 6 May in a Dewoitine aircraft fitted with a Clerget engine. It took him 2 hours and 25 minutes, including a 40-minute stop at Lympne while one of the struts supporting the undercarriage was repaired.

Imperial Airways were operating cross-channel services using Armstrong Whitworth Argosy aircraft in 1924, with the first stop in France at Saint-Inglevert. When an aircraft departed from Lympne for St Inglevert, the destination airfield was advised, and if arrival was not notified within two hours, the British coastguard was informed. Communication between the airfields used Carmichael Microway UHF transmitters. A new system was introduced for non-radio aircraft crossing the English Channel in August. Aircraft crossing from Lympne to Ostend, Belgium had to make a circuit of the airfield at an altitude of , while two circuits were made if departing for Saint-Inglevert. The destination was then informed by radio of the departure. Arrival was confirmed by the aircraft flying another circuit, and was then reported back to Lympne by radio. If the aircraft had not arrived within an hour of departure, it would be considered as missing. A similar arrangement applied for aircraft flying in the reverse direction. In September, Saint-Inglevert was one of the landing points for an aerial "Tour de France", in which a specified route had to be flown on a course. Sixteen aircraft competed in four classes.

The airfield has been involved in several aviation records. On 18 September 1928, Juan de la Cierva completed the first cross-Channel flight in an autogyro when he landed there after departing from Lympne in a Cierva C.8. Lissant Beardmore completed the first cross-Channel flight in a glider on 19 June 1931. He took off from Lympne and was towed by an aircraft to an altitude of , landing at Saint-Inglevert after a flight of one and a half hours to the surprise of the airfield manager. The first double crossing of the Channel in a glider was made by Austrian Robert Kronfeld on 20 June. In a glider called "Wien", he took off from Saint-Inglevert by means of an aero-tow to an altitude of , and landed at the former RAF Swingfield airfield near Dover, Kent. From Swingfield, another aero-tow to an altitude of enabled him to return to Saint-Inglevert. Kronfeld received a £1,000 prize from the "Daily Mail" for his flights, which were verified by the British Gliding Association. On 10 September 1929, Charles Fauvel departed from Saint-Inglevert in a Mauboussin aircraft fitted with an ABC Scorpion engine. The flight to Pau set a new Fédération Aéronautique Internationale world record for distance flown by a single seat aircraft weighing less than .

In November 1932, it was reported that new radio equipment was to be installed at Lympne and St Inglevert operating on the 15 centimetre waveband at 2,000 MHz, which would be used for the announcement of departures of non-radio aircraft across the Channel. Messages sent by radio were also printed out by a teleprinter, providing a record of the communication. The British Air Ministry and the French "Ministère de l'Air" co-operated in the arrangements for setting up the system, which was scheduled to come into operation in Spring 1933. It proved its effectiveness on 7 March 1933, when a non-radio de Havilland DH.60 Moth of British Air Transport failed to arrive at Lympne. The aircraft had ditched in the Channel and both occupants were rescued by a steamship bound for Amsterdam, the Netherlands. A new short-wave radio system came into operation on 16 January 1934, using equipment manufactured by "Le Matériel Téléphonique", Paris.

In the mid-1930s, a number of notable people used Saint-Inglevert Airfield. King Edward VIII made three visits, the first on 4 February 1935, while still the Prince of Wales, when he arrived from Fort Belvedere, Surrey on the first part of a journey to take a holiday at Kitzbühel, Austria. As king, he departed on 26 July 1936 to RAF Hendon on his return from the ceremony to unveil the Canadian National Vimy Memorial, and flew in from the Great West Aerodrome, Harmondsworth, UK on 8 August, in order to catch the "Orient Express" at Calais, as part of a holiday in Yugoslavia. Henri Mignet flew from Saint-Inglevert to Lympne on 13 August 1935, in his Flying Flea, then the world's smallest aircraft.

Following the outbreak of the Second World War, Saint-Inglevert was taken over by the "Armée de l'Air" in December 1939. "Groupe Aérien d'Observation 516" (GAO 516) of the "16ème Corps d'Armée" () were based here, operating five Potez 63-11 and five Breguet 27 aircraft, and carrying out air reconnaissance over the Nord-Pas de Calais region. "B" Flight, No. 615 Squadron RAF was stationed at Saint-Inglevert in the early months of 1940, equipped with Gloster Gladiator II aircraft. Following the discovery of a dismantled Morane-Saulnier MS.138 in one of the hangars, a wager was made between the British and French as to whether or not the aircraft could be returned to the air. With the aid of materials supplied by the French, the aircraft was made flyable, but when 615 Squadron received orders to relocate to Vitry-en-Artois, an attempt to fly the aircraft to the new base was unsuccessful, and a forced landing had to be made in a field. On 10 May 1940, the airfield was attacked by the Luftwaffe, with over 110 bombs being dropped, resulting in a Breguet being destroyed, another Breguet and a Potez being severely damaged and the radio facilities being temporarily put out of action.

During April 1940, No. 607 Squadron RAF was based at Saint-Inglevert, flying Gloster Gladiator Mk II HR aircraft. The military commander General Maxime Weygand visited the airfield on 21 May, and ordered 516 GAO to prepare to evacuate as the Germans were in the neighbouring Somme "department". The following day, the order came to evacuate to Boos airfield, Rouen, Normandy, but only four of the ten aircraft that departed from Saint-Inglevert arrived safely at Boos. All aircraft carried as many passengers as could be accommodated. Two Potez 63-11's and a Bloch MB.152 were abandoned at Saint-Inglevert, and were destroyed to prevent their use by the enemy, as were supplies of fuel. Personnel from 516 GAO were evacuated from Dunquerque on the , although nineteen of them were killed when the ship struck a mine and sank.
Saint-Inglevert was captured by the Luftwaffe towards the end of the Battle of France. "1 Gruppe, Lehrgeschwader 2" moved in on 20 June, equipped with Messerschmitt Bf 109 aircraft. They departed for Jever, Germany, on 12 July, and were replaced by "1 Gruppe, Jagdgeschwader 51", also equipped with Bf 109s. From August until November Stab JG 51 were in occupation, and "Aufklärungsgruppe 32(H)" aircraft were also based at Saint-Inglevert during this period, with the unit operating Henschel Hs 126 parasol monoplanes. On 30 July 1940, Saint-Inglevert was bombed by the Royal Air Force, who claimed that hangars and aircraft were damaged, and a subsequent raid on 19 August resulted in a fire, smoke from which could be seen in Kent.

From 24 September to 5 November, "2 Gruppe, Jagdgeschwader 27" were based there. Facilities at the airfield were improved, by erecting new hangars and constructing a new concrete runway. On 27 December 1940, Saint-Inglevert was again bombed by the Royal Air Force. The airfield was largely abandoned by 1941, with occasional use by Junkers 52s as a refuelling station.

In 1943, the airfield was designated as "Stützpunkt 134 Paderborn", housing defence units as part of the Atlantic Wall coastal fortifications. The units were equipped with 10.5 cm leFH 18 howitzers. During the winter of 1943–44, 10.5 cm leFH 324(f) howitzers replaced the leFH 18s. A number of concrete bunkers were constructed to house the guns, which were still standing around the airfield in October 2007. Following Operation Overlord at the start of the Allied invasion of western Europe, the Germans committed various acts of sabotage on departure from Saint-Inglevert.

Post-war, the airfield was restored to operational condition and civil flying returned. On 10 April 1957, a report was published which resulted in the abandonment of Saint-Inglevert in favour of an airport east of Calais. The airfield was returned to agriculture.

In 1986, "l'aéroclub du Boulonnais" took over Saint-Inglevert following closure of their previous base at Ambleteuse. Since its closure, the runway had been used as a dump for old tyres and scrap vehicles, and it took three years to restore the airfield, which reopened on 30 July 1989. On the night of 5–6 April 2010, a fire in a hangar at Saint-Inglevert destroyed the hangar and eight aircraft. The destroyed aircraft were replaced by a Robin DR300, a Robin DR400, a Piel Emeraude CP3005 and a Jodel D195. A Piper PA-28 was also acquired which needed restoration to make it airworthy. The replacement aircraft were housed in a tent hangar erected on the airfield, or temporarily outstationed at Calais or Le Touquet. A new hangar, replacing the one destroyed by the fire, was officially opened on 30 March 2012, and can accommodate ten aircraft. Following the fire, a NOTAM was issued temporarily restricting the use of the airfield until 15 November 2010 to aircraft based there. On 26 August 2010, Saint-Inglevert was given the ICAO identifier LFIS, allowing it to be classed as a public airfield instead of a private one. This had taken ten years to achieve.





</doc>
<doc id="31227103" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31227103" title="American Horror Story">
American Horror Story

American Horror Story (sometimes abbreviated as AHS) is an American anthology horror television series created by Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk. Each season is conceived as a self-contained miniseries, following a different set of characters and settings, and a storyline with its own "beginning, middle, and end." Some plot elements of each season are loosely inspired by true events. Sarah Paulson is the only actor to have appeared in every season. Evan Peters has appeared in every season as well. However, he has confirmed he won’t be in season nine. Frances Conroy and Lily Rabe have each appeared in all but one season.

The first season, retroactively subtitled "", takes place in Los Angeles, California, during the year 2011, and centers on a family that moves into a house haunted by its deceased former occupants. The second season, subtitled "", takes place in Massachusetts during the year 1964, and follows the stories of the patients and staff of an institution for the criminally insane. The third season, subtitled "", takes place in New Orleans, Louisiana, during the year 2013, and follows a coven of witches who face off against those who wish to destroy them. The fourth season, subtitled "", takes place in Jupiter, Florida, during the year 1952, and centers around one of the last remaining American freak shows and their struggle for survival. The fifth season, subtitled "", takes place in Los Angeles, California, during the year 2015, and focuses on the staff and guests of a supernatural hotel. The sixth season, subtitled "", takes place in North Carolina during the years 2014–2016, and focuses on the paranormal events that take place at an isolated farmhouse haunted by the deceased Roanoke colony. The seventh season, subtitled "", takes place in the fictional suburb of Brookfield Heights, Michigan, during the year 2017, and centers on a cult terrorizing the residents in the aftermath of the 2016 U.S. presidential election. The eighth season, subtitled "", takes place in California during the years 2018-2021 and features the return of the witches from "Coven" as they battle the Antichrist from "Murder House," Michael Langdon, and attempt to prevent the apocalypse.

The series is broadcast on the cable television channel FX in the United States. On January 12, 2017, the series was renewed for a ninth season, with a two-season renewal alongside "Apocalypse". On August 3, 2018, the series was greenlit for a tenth season. 

Although reception to individual seasons has varied, "American Horror Story" largely has been well received by television critics, with the majority of the praise going towards the cast, particularly Jessica Lange, who won two Emmy Awards, a Golden Globe Award, and a Screen Actors Guild Award for her performances. Kathy Bates and James Cromwell each won an Emmy Award for their performances, while Lady Gaga won a Golden Globe Award. The series draws consistently high ratings for the FX network, with its first season being the most-viewed new cable series of 2011.

Set in the year 2011, the season follows the Harmons, consisting of wife and mother Vivien (Connie Britton), her psychiatrist husband Ben (Dylan McDermott), and their teenage daughter Violet (Taissa Farmiga), as they move from Boston to Los Angeles to make a fresh start after Vivien's miscarriage led to Ben having an affair with one of his students, which almost tore their family apart. They move into a restored mansion and soon encounter the residence's housekeeper, Moira O'Hara (Frances Conroy and Alexandra Breckenridge), as well as their neighbors – the eccentric Langdon family consisting of Constance (Jessica Lange) and her daughter Adelaide (Jamie Brewer). The Harmons' lives are troubled by the meddling Langdons, the incompetent realtor Marcy (Christine Estabrook), as well as by the disfigured Larry Harvey (Denis O'Hare), a former resident of the mansion who is secretly in love with Constance, and the scorned Hayden McClaine (Kate Mara), Ben's former student who follows him to Los Angeles after deciding not to abort the baby that was a result of her and Ben's affair. Ben and Vivien try to rekindle their relationship while Violet, suffering from depression, finds comfort in Tate (Evan Peters), the ghost of Constance's psychopathic son who was killed after murdering several students at Westfield High in a school shooting. The family soon discovers that the home is haunted by the ghosts of anyone who has ever died on the property, including its creators Charles (Matt Ross) and Nora Montgomery (Lily Rabe); and their deformed son Thaddeus (Ben Woolf) who is sometimes referred to as the 'Infantata'. Flashbacks depict the mansion's previous homeowners throughout the last century, dating back to its construction in the 1920s.

Set in the year 1964, the season follows the patients and staff members of the church-owned Briarcliff Manor, located in Massachusetts, which was founded to treat and house the criminally insane. Kit Walker (Evan Peters), accused of being a prolific serial killer named "Bloody Face" after the disappearance of his wife Alma (Britne Olford)—though he claims she was abducted by aliens—is incarcerated at Briarcliff. This piques the interest of ambitious lesbian journalist Lana Winters (Sarah Paulson), who is yearning to find a story for her big break. At Briarcliff, Kit meets the other patients, many of whom claim to be unjustly institutionalized, including microcephalic Pepper (Naomi Grossman), who was framed for her nephew's murder; nymphomaniac Shelley (Chloe Sevigny), whose husband hypocritically committed her after finding her in bed with two guys; and the unassuming Grace Bertrand (Lizzie Brocheré) from France, who appears to be harboring a deep secret of her own. Believed to be a violent serial killer, he becomes the subject of interest of pragmatic psychiatrist Oliver Thredson (Zachary Quinto) and the sadistic Dr. Arthur Arden (James Cromwell), the latter of whom routinely conducts scientific operations on patients. The institution is run under the watchful eye of the stern Sister Jude (Jessica Lange), as well as her second-in-command, the naive Sister Mary Eunice (Lily Rabe), and the founder of the institution, Monsignor Timothy Howard (Joseph Fiennes). Briarcliff's inhabitants are routinely subject to supernatural and scientific influences, including demonic possession and extraterrestrial abduction.

Set in the year 2013, the season follows the dwindling descendants of the witches who survived the Salem Witch Trials and their struggle to hide their identity in the modern world. Those who share this genetic affliction are being subjected to violent attacks from outside forces, such as voodoo practitioners and witch hunters. Zoe Benson (Taissa Farmiga), a young teenager completely unaware of the existence of witches, discovers her identity as a Salem descendant after a violent accident that causes the death of her boyfriend. She is sent to an all-girls boarding school in New Orleans which aims to protect and house young women who carry this unique bloodline, and keep them from the dangers of the outside world. There, she meets the other students, narcissistic film star Madison Montgomery (Emma Roberts), outspoken Queenie (Gabourey Sidibe), and enigmatic Nan (Jamie Brewer), and gets romantically entangled with Kyle Spencer (Evan Peters), a non-witch and good-natured college student. The school is run by headmistress Cordelia Foxx (Sarah Paulson), head of the Witches Council, eccentric fashionista Myrtle Snow (Frances Conroy), and the mute butler Spalding (Denis O'Hare). Cordelia's mother, Fiona Goode (Jessica Lange), is the Supreme and most powerful witch of her generation, though she regularly avoids her responsibilities, much to the chagrin of Cordelia and her long-time rival Myrtle. After a mob of townspeople discover and nearly kill a young witch living in the swamps named Misty Day (Lily Rabe), Fiona returns to the school to ensure the safety of the other young witches, but also to fulfill her own hidden agenda. Events reveal a long-held rivalry between the witches of Salem and the voodoo practitioners of New Orleans, as well as a historic grudge between Voodoo Queen Marie Laveau (Angela Bassett) and socialite serial killer Delphine LaLaurie (Kathy Bates), who tortured and murdered her slaves in the 1830s. In addition to this, the coven is also being targeted by an organization of witch hunters. 

Set in the year 1952, the season follows a struggling freak show led by Elsa Mars (Jessica Lange) in the quiet town of Jupiter, Florida. Decades have passed since the public has looked upon freak shows as a form of entertainment, but Elsa dreams of finding a home for her "monsters," as well as for her own fame and fortune. Other members of her troupe include "Lobster Boy" Jimmy Darling (Evan Peters), a boy born with syndactyly who dreams of living a normal life, and his mother Ethel (Kathy Bates), a bearded lady who acts as Elsa's second-in-command by maintaining law and order under the tent. A strongman from Ethel's past and Jimmy's biological father named Dell Toledo (Michael Chiklis), and his three-breasted wife Desiree Dupree (Angela Bassett), arrive to join the freak show. To drum up business and save her troupe once and for all, Elsa also recruits conjoined twin sisters Bette and Dot Tattler (Sarah Paulson) to perform for her show. In a time when the era of television is beginning to reign high above sideshow acts, these individuals must overcome those who persecute them based on their looks. However, as the season unfolds, it is revealed that multiple dark entities have taken up residence in Jupiter, with all of their eyes being set on the freaks. A conman named Stanley (Denis O'Hare), posing as a Hollywood executive, arrives with his young protege Maggie Esmerelda (Emma Roberts), with the intention of murdering the freaks and selling their bodies to a museum. The wealthy and spoiled Dandy Mott (Finn Wittrock), enabled by his doting mother Gloria (Frances Conroy), develops an unhealthy obsession with the freaks, particularly Bette and Dot. Perhaps the most dangerous of them all is a mysterious, deformed killer clown, known only as Twisty (John Carroll Lynch), who wreaks havoc on Jupiter and appears to be targeting freaks and townspeople alike.

Set in the year 2015, the season follows the strange and dangerous happenings that seem to center around the retro Hotel Cortez in downtown Los Angeles, California, initially built as a secret torture chamber to fulfill the violent desires of founder James March (Evan Peters). Detective John Lowe (Wes Bentley) arrives at the hotel, based on intel from an anonymous tip, to investigate a grisly string of murders, each of which exemplify a sin in violation of one of the Ten Commandments. He has become estranged from his wife Alex (Chloe Sevigny), who suffers from depression, and his daughter Scarlett (Shree Crooks), after the disappearance of their son Holden (Lennon Henry) five years earlier. As the season unfolds, the Lowes discover that the disappearance of Holden may be related to the strange activities at the hotel, led by March's fashionista widow Elizabeth Johnson (Lady Gaga), also known as the Countess—who was turned into a vampire by her former lovers, actor Rudolph Valentino (Finn Wittrock) and his wife Natacha Rambova (Alexandra Daddario)—and her current lover Donovan (Matt Bomer). Throughout his investigation, John also becomes entangled with the spirits of heroin junkie named Sally (Sarah Paulson), hotel maid Hazel Evers (Mare Winningham), and James Patrick March, who is looking for a protege to continue the violent acts he started when he was alive. The hotel's tireless staff includes the surly front desk manager Iris (Kathy Bates), Donovan's mother, and her best friend, the transgender bartender Liz Taylor (Denis O'Hare), both of whom hesitantly cater to Elizabeth and her vampiric children, one out of a desire to remain close to her son and the other out of a sense of loyalty. Elizabeth's relationship with Donovan becomes troubled with the arrival of male model and cocaine addict Tristan Duffy (Finn Wittrock), New York fashion designer Will Drake (Cheyenne Jackson), and her scorned ex-lover Ramona Royale (Angela Bassett), all of whom become entangled in her violent life.

Set in the years 2014-2016, the season follows the supernatural events that occur in a renovated farmhouse in North Carolina, which is situated on the land where the Roanoke Colony moved after their infamous 1580s disappearance. In 2015, Shelby Miller (Lily Rabe), her husband Matt (André Holland), along with Matt's sister Lee Harris (Adina Porter) recount their harrowing experience living in the farmhouse a year prior in a popular documentary series titled "My Roanoke Nightmare", including their encounters with the ghosts of the house's previous residents, the violent ghosts of the Roanoke Colony, the cannibalistic Polk family who live nearby, and the beautiful, yet terrifying Celtic goddess, Scáthach (Lady Gaga). The documentary becomes a huge success, featuring dramatic reenactments of the Millers' story starring Audrey Tindall (Sarah Paulson) as Shelby, Dominic Banks (Cuba Gooding Jr.) as Matt, Monet Tumusiime (Angela Bassett) as Lee, Agnes Mary Winstead (Kathy Bates) as Thomasin White - also known as The Butcher, leader of the ghost colony, Audrey's husband Rory Monahan (Evan Peters) as Edward Philipe Mott, the creator and first owner of the house, William van Henderson (Denis O'Hare) as Dr. Elias Cunningham, a professor who becomes entranced with the paranormal happenings of the area, and Dylan (Wes Bentley) as Ambrose White, Thomasin's son and accomplice. In 2016, the success of the documentary leads to a sequel titled "Return to Roanoke: Three Days In Hell", spearheaded by the producer of the original series, Sidney Aaron James (Cheyenne Jackson), who invites the Millers, as well as many of the reenactment actors, to return to the farmhouse for three days, where all their actions will be captured by hidden cameras. Although the Millers are aware of the entities that reside in the house, all three agree to return, each with their own agenda. The production eventually descends into disaster, however, as cast and crew alike are quickly targeted when the violent entities begin to surface.

Set in the year 2017, the fictional town of Brookfield Heights, Michigan, is left divided upon the wake of Donald Trump's election as president. Local restaurant owner Ally Mayfair-Richards (Sarah Paulson) is left utterly distraught, along with her wife Ivy (Alison Pill). Despite the help of her psychiatrist, Dr. Rudy Vincent Anderson (Cheyenne Jackson), Ally becomes increasingly unstable in the following weeks, as her long repressed phobias begin to re-emerge, and they begin to affect her relationships with her wife as well as their son Oz (Cooper Dodson). Across town, misogynistic alt-righter Kai Anderson (Evan Peters) rejoices at the election results, enticing him to pursue political power by running for city council, led by radical feminist Bebe Babbitt (Frances Conroy) and with the help of his reluctant, liberal sister Winter (Billie Lourd), who the Mayfair-Richards household hire as their nanny. As Ally attempts to re-adjust to regular life despite her growing anxiety and paranoia, she becomes terrorized by a group of masked assailants, donned in clown attire who are only present when she is alone, leaving those around her to wonder if she was truly attacked, or if they were merely hallucinations. Kai's faithful followers include Ally's eccentric neighbors Harrison (Billy Eichner) and Meadow Wilton (Leslie Grossman), reporter Beverly Hope (Adina Porter), detective Jack Samuels (Colton Haynes), and supermarket owner Gary K. Longstreet (Chaz Bono). With Kai's rise to power revealing sinister motives, Ally starts to draw connections between her alleged clown attackers and the many strange incidents occurring in Brookfield Heights. She begins to fear that everyone in town is out to get her, amplifying her growing distrust of those around her, especially her neighbors.

In the near future, the Antichrist, Michael Langdon (Cody Fern) brings about the apocalypse by instigating nuclear warfare. The chosen survivors of the aftermath, heiress Coco St. Pierre Vanderbilt (Leslie Grossman), her personal assistant Mallory (Billie Lourd), hairstylist Mr. Gallant (Evan Peters), Gallant's grandmother Evie (Joan Collins), talk-show host Dinah Stevens (Adina Porter), young adults Timothy Campbell (Kyle Allen) and Emily (Ash Santos), among others, take refuge in a fallout shelter named "Outpost 3", run with an iron fist by Wilhemina Venable (Sarah Paulson) and Miriam Mead (Kathy Bates). Flashbacks to three years before the apocalypse reveal that "Outpost 3" was an all-boys warlock school led by John Henry Moore (Cheyenne Jackson) that unknowingly harbored the Antichrist, in hopes that he would rise as the first ever male Supreme. The witches' council of Cordelia Goode (Paulson), Zoe Benson (Taissa Farmiga) and resurrected Myrtle Snow (Frances Conroy) are summoned and quickly discover how dangerous Michael is to their coven when faced with his evident powers, as he resurrects deceased witches Queenie (Gabourey Sidibe) and Madison Montgomery (Emma Roberts). The coven, with the aid of the warlocks, attempt to save humanity by discovering new witch Mallory's intense powers, learning more about Michael's mysterious origins, in particular from Michael's grandmother Constance Langdon (Jessica Lange), and how to defeat him to prevent the apocalypse.

On January 12, 2017, the series was renewed for a ninth season, with a two-season renewal alongside "Apocalypse", and is set to air in 2019. On February 6, 2019, Emma Roberts and Gus Kenworthy were announced to appear in the season. On April 2, 2019, cast member Evan Peters, who had starred in all eight previous seasons, announced he would not appear in this season. 

Subsequently, on August 3, 2018, the series was renewed for a tenth season, set to air in 2020.

On December 5, 2018, Murphy said the witches from "Coven" and "Apocalypse" will return in a future season, but not in the ninth.

Creators Murphy and Falchuk began working on "American Horror Story" before their Fox series "Glee" began production. Murphy wanted to do the opposite of what he had done previously and thus began his work on the series. He stated: "I went from "Nip/Tuck" to "Glee", so it made sense that I wanted to do something challenging and dark. And I always had loved, as Brad had, the horror genre. So it just was a natural for me." Falchuk was intrigued by the idea of putting a different angle on the horror genre, stating that their main goal in creating the series was to scare viewers. "You want people to be a little bit off balance afterwards," he said.

In February 2011, FX officially announced that it had ordered a pilot for a possible series from Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk, with both Murphy and Falchuk writing and Murphy directing. Dante Di Loreto was announced as executive producer. Production on the series began in April 2011. In July 2011, FX officially announced the project had been picked up to series.

From the beginning, Murphy and Falchuk planned that each season of the series would tell a different story. After the first-season finale aired, Murphy spoke of his plans to change the cast and location for the second season. He did say, however, that some actors who starred in the first season would be returning. "The people that are coming back will be playing completely different characters, creatures, monsters, etc. [The Harmons'] stories are done. People who are coming back will be playing entirely new characters," he announced. In November 2012, FX chief executive, John Landgraf, described the unique format of the series stating: "[T]he notion of doing an anthological series of miniseries with a repertory cast – has proven groundbreaking, wildly successful and will prove to be trendsetting."

At the 2013 PaleyFest, Falchuk compared the series to horror films: "It does demand a little bit of compassion at the end because you fall in love with these characters in a different way than you would in a movie," he said. "If you want to kill everybody in a movie except one person, you can kind of get away with that, but if you're looking to do a horror TV show, you have a different responsibility to the characters because the audience has a different affection for them."

Murphy then explained the process of planning a series' season takes about a year. "We come up with story first and then we come up with the characters," he said. "It is a repertory company, so we'll move people around and sometimes there won't yet be a role for somebody. Like when we started [the second season], I really had no idea that Dylan [McDermott] would be the person to play Sarah's son, but the deeper we got, I thought, that would work great."

In an August 2015 article for "Entertainment Weekly", Murphy revealed that the show is mulling producing two seasons a year, the first being broadcast in the spring and the second in the fall. He explained, "We're doing something that we've never done before on the show where we're doing two different groups of writers rooms. Some of our writers will be bouncing around but a whole different group coming in late August. The next thing we're crafting up is very, very different than ["Hotel"]. Not smaller. But just not opulent. More rogue and more dark."

Connie Britton was first to be cast in the series, portraying female lead Vivien Harmon on "Murder House". Denis O'Hare joined second as Larry Harvey. Jessica Lange soon followed as Constance, her first regular role on television. Dylan McDermott joined the cast soon after Lange as the male lead Ben Harmon. Taissa Farmiga and Evan Peters were the last actors to be added to the main cast, portraying Violet Harmon and Tate Langdon, respectively.
In March 2012, Murphy revealed that the second season had been planned around Jessica Lange, who portrays Sister Jude, a sadistic nun who runs the asylum. Evan Peters, Sarah Paulson, Lily Rabe and Zachary Quinto also return to join the main cast. Peters portrays Kit Walker, an inmate accused of murdering his wife. Paulson portrays Lana, a lesbian reporter who gets committed to the asylum because of her sexuality and intent to snoop around the sanitarium. Rabe's character is Sister Mary Eunice, clumsy second-in-charge to Sister Jude. Quinto portrays Dr. Thredson, a psychiatrist at the asylum. Lizzie Brocheré stars as Grace Bertrand, a character described originally as "a fierce, ferocious, extremely sexual, and dangerous wild-child sexpot", but the role was later heavily revamped. James Cromwell co-stars as Dr. Arthur Arden, who proclaims to be in charge of the asylum and performs dark experiments on its patients. Joseph Fiennes starred as Monsignor Timothy Howard, a possible love interest for Sister Jude.
For the third season, series executive producers and co-creators Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk stated that, as with the second season, "many actors" would return in different roles, beginning with Jessica Lange. Evan Peters and Sarah Paulson were confirmed to return, portraying Kyle Spencer and Cordelia Foxx, respectively. Murphy added that Lange would portray a "real glamour-cat lady", later revealed to be named Fiona Goode. Taissa Farmiga, Violet in the first season, starred as Zoe Benson, a character that is involved in a prominent romance during the season. Lily Rabe co-starred as Misty Day. Recurring cast member Frances Conroy joined as a main cast member, playing the character of Myrtle Snow. Oscar-winning actress Kathy Bates was confirmed to co-star. It was first reported that she would portray "a woman who, at the start, is Lange's character's best friend, but will become her worst enemy", but this was altered. Murphy stated that Bates' character will be "five times worse than [her] "Misery" character" and is also inspired by a "true event". She portrayed Madame Delphine LaLaurie, an immortal racist. It was announced in May 2013 that Emma Roberts had been added to the cast. Roberts played Madison Montgomery, a "self-involved party girl". In July 2013, season one alum Denis O'Hare also joined the cast in an unknown role, later revealed as Spalding. 
In November 2013, Ryan Murphy confirmed that Jessica Lange would be returning for a fourth season, although in a reduced capacity. It was later revealed she would be playing Freak Show owner Elsa Mars. Kathy Bates returned in a main role, portraying bearded lady Ethel Darling. On March 29, 2014, Murphy announced that Sarah Paulson, Evan Peters, Frances Conroy, Emma Roberts, Denis O'Hare, and Angela Bassett would all return for the fourth season. Paulson portrayed conjoined sisters Bette and Dot Tattler; Peters portrayed "Lobster Boy" Jimmy Darling; Conroy played the well-off Gloria Mott; Bassett portrayed three-breasted hermaphrodite Desiree Dupree; and O'Hare played Stanley, a conman working with Roberts' Maggie Esmerelda. At PaleyFest 2014, it was revealed that Michael Chiklis would be joining the cast as Dell Toledo, the father of Jimmy, ex-husband of Ethel, and current husband of Desiree. Finn Wittrock later joined the main cast as Gloria's spoiled son, Dandy Mott.
For the series' fifth cycle, singer-songwriter Lady Gaga was announced as the first and newest main cast member on February 25, 2015. After a special guest appearance on the previous season, Matt Bomer joined the fifth season's cast along with series newcomer Cheyenne Jackson during PaleyFest 2015. Chloë Sevigny and Wes Bentley were promoted as main cast members, after they appear as recurring special guests in "Asylum" and "Freak Show" respectively. Murphy later announced the returns of Kathy Bates, Sarah Paulson, Evan Peters and Angela Bassett. In June 2015, it was announced Denis O'Hare would also return for the fifth season. In August 2015, Murphy announced the character roles for the cast: Gaga's Elizabeth Johnson also known as "The Countess", a fashionista vampire who owns the Hotel Cortez; Jackson's Will Drake, a desperate fashion designer; O'Hare's Liz Taylor, a transgender bartender who works at the hotel's Blue Parrot Lounge bar; Sevigny's Alex Lowe, a pediatrician who was the wife of Bentley's John Lowe, a detective who investigates the murders inside the hotel; Bomer's Donovan, the lover to the Countess whom often had conflict with his mother and hotel manager, Bates' Iris; Bassett's Ramona Royale, a former actress who was the former lover of Elizabeth; Paulson's Sally, a drug addict who had a rivalry with Iris and forms a bond with John since his visit in the hotel. Peters co-starred as serial killer James Patrick March and the original hotelier of the Hotel Cortez.
In February 2016, Angela Bassett confirmed she would return to join the main cast of the sixth season during an interview with Larry King. Denis O'Hare announced that he will also appear in the season in a May 2016 interview. In June 2016, Cheyenne Jackson, Evan Peters, Wes Bentley, and Kathy Bates announced their returns for the sixth season. In August 2016, Sarah Paulson announced that she would return to the series in the sixth season and Ryan Murphy announced that Oscar winner Cuba Gooding Jr. had joined the main cast. In September 2016, the full main cast was announced after the first episode with the inclusion of André Holland and returning series veteran Lily Rabe. On Halloween 2016, Murphy announced that Paulson's "Asylum" character, Lana Winters would also appear in the series after the recent appearance of the actress' first role Billie Dean Howard from "Murder House" in the final episode of the fifth season.

For the seventh season, Paulson and Peters were set to return to the series, as announced during the Winter 2017 TCA Press Tour. Billie Lourd, who made her breakout appearance with Murphy in 2015, was confirmed to join the main cast in April, while Jackson was the next series regular to return in the next month. In June, Alison Pill was announced to co-star in the season, portraying the partner of Paulson's character.

On October 2017, Paulson announced that she'll return for the series' eighth cycle. The next year, Peters was announced to appear in the main cast while Bates returned to the series after "Roanoke", leading the season with Paulson. Jackson confirmed he will return while Adina Porter was promoted to the series' main cast after her first appearance in "Murder House" as well as Leslie Grossman since "Cult". Lourd later returned to the main cast the next month. On June, Roberts announced that she'll reprise her "Coven" character Madison Montgomery in the eighth season. The next month, Australian actor Cody Fern was cast as the adult Michael Langdon who was last seen at the first series' final episode.

The pilot episode was shot on location in a house in Country Club Park, Los Angeles, California, which serves as the haunted house and crime scene in the series. Designed and built in 1908 by Alfred Rosenheim, the president of the American Institute of Architects' Los Angeles chapter, the Tudor or Collegiate Gothic-style single family home was previously used as a convent. The first season was filmed on sets which are an exact replica of the house. Details such as Louis Comfort Tiffany stained glass windows and hammered bronze light fixtures were recreated to preserve the look of the house.

Production and shooting for the second season began in late July 2012 for a scheduled premiere in mid October. The exteriors for the second season were filmed in Hidden Valley, Ventura County, California, a rural area outside Los Angeles, although the season took place in Massachusetts.

Principal photography for the third season began on July 23, 2013, in New Orleans, Louisiana. It was first reported that the season would film in multiple locations, but filming primarily took place in New Orleans.

Principal photography for the fourth season began on July 15, 2014, in New Orleans, though the story takes place in Jupiter, Florida.

Principal photography for the fifth season began on July 14, 2015, in Los Angeles, California, where the story also takes place. Murphy revealed a six-story hotel set was being built on the Fox lot. A dummy set of the hotel was built at the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con, showing an Art Deco style building from the 1920s, inspired by the old Hollywood era.

Filming for the sixth season began on July 6, 2016 at Santa Clarita, California. Set constructions include a colonial settler home to speculate the disappearance of the Roanoke Colony.

Filming for the seventh season was originally planned to begin in Orange, California, on June 2017 before it was moved to May instead.

Filming for the eighth season began on June 16, 2018. It was filmed in multiple locations.

"American Horror Story" title screens offer vague hints to important plot elements and events that compose each season. For "Murder House", Murphy described the sequence as a mini-mystery and stated that: "By the time you see the ninth episode of this season, every image in that title sequence will be explained," establishing the purpose of the title sequence for future seasons.

The opening title sequence was created by Kyle Cooper and his company Prologue. He also created the title sequence for the AMC series "The Walking Dead" and the 1995 film "Seven". The theme music was composed by sound designer Cesar Davila-Irizarry and musician Charlie Clouser. The cinematography was done by Juan Ruiz Anchía and the editing by Gabriel J. Diaz.

For "Murder House", the sequence is set in the Harmons' basement and includes images of postmortem young children, fetuses in jars, skulls, a christening dress, a nurse's uniform, and a figure holding a pair of bloody hedge clippers. A photo of alleged axe murderer Lizzie Borden is also shown.

"Asylum"s opening sequence is done by the same creative team. "We are shooting a new title sequence with the same team that did last year's," series creator Ryan Murphy said. "The song may stay... not sure." The music was kept, and the new title sequence was set around the Asylum, using shots of inmates raving and surgeons operating on patients with bandages obscuring their faces. Elements include a young girl walking backwards on her hands and feet up a staircase and a shot of the Virgin Mary's smile changing from one of benevolence to one of spite.

"Coven"s opening sequence keeps the same music, and this sequence is the first one to be filmed primarily outside and not in an enclosed location. Shots include figures wearing black robes and capirotes, a bony-skeleton creature with wings and shots of dead goats, the Minotaur from the season also appears. For the first time, there are actual backgrounds that appear with the actor names instead of an all-black background, some of these images include witches hanging and Santa Muerte. Other elements include a black man with piercing eyes and a disturbing smile as well as voodoo dolls burning. The final shot continues after the figures in black capirotes seize one of their own who is later seen burning at a stake where young, dress-clad witches dance around.

"Freak Show"s opening sequence changed things up, the series theme music remains intact albeit with an added carnival-like soundscape. The sequence is composed of both CGI and stop-motion animation and features strange characters such as a skeleton chimera of a human being and an elephant riding a bicycle, a skeleton of what appears to be a single head but two bodies, a devil-like man, a boy in a wheel chair with deformed legs, a character with severe syndactyly of the hands and feet, a clown who can twist his head around, a woman with a third leg where her genitalia should be, and a demonic cymbal-banging monkey toy. There are also shots of side show attractions like the Human Blockhead, knife throwing and sword swallowing. The main recurring element features a balloon twister popping balloons with a knife.

"Hotel"s opening sequence also was very different from previous seasons, taking more of a biblical approach. The font, while remaining the same as the first four seasons, glows in red against a hotel wallpaper. The Ten Commandments are also shown throughout the sequence. The intro returns to live-action like the first three seasons. Visuals include many people scrubbing blood all over the walls and the floor, strange things shown through peepholes, people being victims to the hotel, little kids running around the hotel, a woman screaming as she smears lipstick all over her face, as well as many different creatures.

"Roanoke" featured no title sequence or opening credits, instead opting for a simple title card from the first season, "Murder House", while the series theme music plays over the end credits. At the end of the finale's credits, the title of the season ""American Horror Story: Roanoke"" was revealed.

In the development of "Cult", Murphy confirmed that the opening sequence will return. "Cult"'s opening sequence features the series theme music played by a marching band. The sequence is live-action. Visuals include: a gang of clowns rising from a casket, Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton masks, a George Washington statue, a dead dog killed by toxic gas, a Merry Go Round, bloody hands that cannot be washed, a beehive, toxic smoke released from a grenade, holes in several forms, a bloody US flag with the sound of a xylophone playing The Star-Spangled Banner, a blood covered couple having sex, a magician pulling guts out of a hat and a handcuffed pinky promise.

"Apocalypse"s opening sequence features the original theme music from the first three seasons. The sequence includes images of nuclear disaster and sketches of demons fusing together. Other visuals include burning candles, snakes, both human and goat skulls, a scorpion, a blooming flower, and photos of nuclear-testing documents. Visuals from the title sequences of both season one and season three are also included with slight alterations, including the skeletal winged creature in the forest ("Coven"), the nurse's blouse ("Murder House"), a picture of a baby that has been set on fire ("Murder House"), and the goat skulls ("Coven").

The title sequence for all seasons of the show use a variation of the Willow typeface that very closely resembles a style for which Scottish designer Charles Rennie Mackintosh was known.

As part of the promotion for the series, FX launched a "House Call" campaign, in which viewers at home could sign up and come face-to-face with a character from the series. Prior to the series premiere, FX released several clues to shine light on the series. They were offered on the show's official YouTube channel and Reddit. Ten clues were released. In September 2011, FX launched a website which allows visitors to tour the Murder House throughout the decades and look for clues.

In August 2012, the first promo for the second season was released on the "American Horror Story" Facebook page entitled "Special Delivery", in which a nun carries a couple of buckets filled with body parts through a field. As a church bell rings, the nun empties one bucket's bloody contents, leaving the empty bucket behind, and resumes her trek. Over 20 subsequent teasers were released. Four photos were also released on EW.com. Two televised teasers, titled "Meet the Residents", were released on August 31, 2012. They feature the patients and some staff (such as Dr. Thredson, played by Zachary Quinto, and Sister Mary Eunice, played by Lily Rabe) lying in twin beds and dealing with their individual issues as the heads of the asylum (Jessica Lange, Joseph Fiennes and James Cromwell) look on. The song "Que Sera, Sera", mixed with the show's theme music, plays. To promote "Cult", a competition was set up where fans who donated to the Children's Hospital Los Angeles could get a chance to get a walk-on role in an episode, and lunch with Evan Peters.

Overall, themes for each season are typically kept under wraps until soon before premiers and are alluded to with brief and vague teaser trailers. 

On August 16, 2016, FX announced a deal had been struck to feature an "American Horror Story" exhibit at Universal Studios Hollywood and Universal Orlando for their "Halloween Horror Nights". The maze will feature sets and themes from "Murder House", "Freak Show", and "Hotel". Universal said of the experience, "Twisted scenes from "Murder House" will unleash the evil spirits that possess the Harmon estate, spiraling guests through decades of the tortured dead who previously resided there. In "Freak Show", guests will join a troupe of biological misfits in a sinister sideshow where they'll be stalked by the murderous and deformed Twisty the Clown. Finally, guests will succumb to the warped desires of The Countess after checking into the haunted Hotel Cortez, conceived from the beginning as a torture chamber for its customers."

In 2017, the show returned as haunted attractions to both parks, with Universal Orlando having an attraction based on "Asylum", "Coven", and "Roanoke", and Universal Studios Hollywood basing their attraction solely on "Roanoke".

The series premiered on October 5, 2011, and is broadcast on the cable television channel FX in the United States. In November 2011, it premiered internationally on the respective countries' Fox Networks Group. The first season premiered on October 5, 2011, and concluded on December 21, 2011. The second season premiered on October 17, 2012, and concluded on January 23, 2013. The third season premiered on October 9, 2013, and concluded on January 29, 2014. The fourth season premiered on October 8, 2014, and concluded on January 21, 2015. The fifth season premiered on October 7, 2015, and concluded on January 13, 2016. The sixth season premiered on September 14, 2016, and concluded on November 16, 2016. The seventh season premiered on September 5, 2017, and concluded on November 14, 2017. The eighth season premiered on September 12, 2018 and concluded on November 14, 2018. Seasons 5-7 premiered on the same day and same time with the American broadcasts on FX in Canada, though the first season followed a slightly different schedule as that network launched on October 31, 2011. The series is aired in India on STAR World Premiere HD shortly after its U.S. airing. Along with it, it airs on FX India on standard definition.

The first season, "", received generally positive reviews from critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 73% of 38 critics gave the first season a positive review. The site's consensus stated: "Convoluted yet effective, "American Horror Story" is strange, gory, and twisted enough to keep viewers hooked." The first season scored 62 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 30 reviews. Ken Tucker from "Entertainment Weekly" awarded the pilot episode a B+, stating: ""AHS" is pretty much all scare, all the time: a whole lotta screams, sex, jolts, mashed faces, psychotic behavior, and dead babies." Hank Stuever from "The Washington Post" said in his review that: "Overdoing things is one of Murphy's trademark flaws, but this show has a captivating style and giddy gross-outs." Not all reviews were favorable: Alan Sepinwall of HitFix gave the series a D−, saying: "It is so far over the top that the top is a microscopic speck in its rearview mirror, and so full of strange sounds, sights and characters that you likely won't forget it – even though many of you will wish you could." Sepinwall would later go on to call it one of the worst TV shows of 2011. The "Los Angeles Times" Mary McNamara gave it a mixed review, stating that it "collapses into camp... upon more than one occasion" but also noting that it is "hard to look away."

The second season, "", received positive reviews from critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 84% of 43 critics gave the season a positive review. The site's consensus is: ""American Horror Story: Asylum" crosses boundaries to shock and scare with sexy subplots and some innovative takes on current social issues." It scored 65 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 23 reviews. James Poniewozik from "Time" stated: ""AHS: Asylum" feels like a more focused, if equally frenetic, screamfest. It's also gorgeously realized, with a vision of its '60s institution setting so detailed you can smell the stale air and incense." Maureen Ryan of "The Huffington Post" said: "It's to the credit of "Asylum" writers, directors and cast that the emotional pain of the characters often feels as real as their uncertainty and terror." Verne Gay from "Newsday" gave the season a C grade, stating it "has some good special effects, just not much of a story to hang them on." Linda Stasi of the "New York Post" thought the season was "over the top," adding: "I need to enter [an asylum] myself after two hours of this craziness."

The third season, "", received positive reviews from critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 83% of 35 critics gave the season a positive review. The site's consensus reads: "A noteworthy ensemble cast combined with creepy storytelling and campy, outrageous thrills make "American Horror Story: Coven" a potently structured fright-fest." It scored 71 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 24 reviews, the highest score for the show to that point. Not all reviews were positive, however, with criticism focused mainly in regards to the progression of both the story and certain character arcs in the second half of the season. "The A.V. Club" gave this season the low rating of a D+, with critic Todd Van DerWerff remarking: "It lurched drunkenly from idea to idea, never settling on one long enough to build anything of worth."

The fourth season, "", received positive reviews. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 79% of 32 critics gave the season a positive review. The site's consensus is: "Though it may turn off new viewers unaccustomed to its unabashed weirdness, "Freak Show" still brings the thrills, thanks to its reliably stylish presentation and game cast." It scored 69 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 19 "generally favorable" reviews.

The fifth season, "", received more mixed reviews from critics, in comparison to its predecessors. Rotten Tomatoes reports that 63% of 43 critics gave the season a positive review. The site's consensus is: "Favoring garish style over effective storytelling, the fifth American Horror Story strands a talented cast at Ryan Murphy's Hotel." "Hotel" scored a 60 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 24 "mixed or average" reviews.

The sixth season, "", received positive reviews from critics. Rotten Tomatoes reports that 76% of 13 critics gave the season a positive review. The site's consensus is: ""American Horror Story: My Roanoke Nightmare" takes a surprising turn away from prior "AHS" formats, revisiting the deliberate pace of earlier seasons on a spookier, smaller scale, even if the true-crime format feels overdone." It scored a 72 on Metacritic based on six reviews.

The seventh season, "", received mostly positive reviews from critics. Rotten Tomatoes reports that 73% of 47 critics gave the season a positive review. The site's consensus is: ""American Horror Story: Cult" intrigues with timely, over-the-top creepiness – and lots of clowns – despite being hampered by broad political generalizations and occasional holes in the narrative's logic." It scored a 66 on Metacritic based on 24 "generally favorable" reviews.

The eighth season, "", received mostly positive reviews from critics. Rotten Tomatoes reports that 71% of 175 critics gave the season a positive review. The site's consensus is: "Ryan Murphy and his murderers' row of witchy performers literally save the world - and franchise - in Apocalypse, the series most ambitious crossover swing yet." It scored a 63 on Metacritic based on 6 "generally favorable" reviews.

Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk have been credited with creating a series that increases both the LGBT creators and storylines in the industry. Theresa L. Geller and Anna Marie Banker have stated that Murphy and Falchuk utilize "the formal structure of the serialized anthology...to present serial narratives made by and about 'queers,' openly subverting gender and sexual norms that define the majority of television".

The pilot episode of "American Horror Story" was watched by 3.2 million viewers and averaged a 1.6 rating in the 18–49 years adult demographic, the most sought after by advertisers. These were the best numbers FX had ever received for a series premiere. The episode was seen by 3.2 million total viewers in 59 countries. Ratings increased as the season progressed, with the season finale being watched by 3.22 million viewers and receiving a 1.7 ratings share in the 18–49 years adult demographic. The series premiere aired in November 2011 across Europe and Latin America on Fox International Channels, and ranked as first or second most watched telecast in its timeslot among all paid television in most metered markets. "Numbers so strong, it's scary. "American Horror Story" has brought droves of new viewers to a killer global lineup", said Hernan Lopez, the president of Fox International Channels.

The second season's premiere gained a 2.2 18–49 ratings share and gathered 3.85 million viewers, marking the highest numbers for the series. By the season's sixth episode, the numbers dropped to a series-low 0.9 18–49 ratings share and 1.89 million viewers; however, they rebounded to above two million viewers for the subsequent episodes, and reached 2.29 million viewers for the season's finale. The premiere of the fifth season of the series became the second most-watched telecast in the network's history, only behind the premiere episode of the previous season, which was watched by 6.13 million viewers. The show was subsequently renewed for another season; John Landgraf, the CEO of the network, commented on the show's success by saying that "American Horror Story", the network's highest rated series, "has unquestionably joined the ranks of television's landmark series." In 2016, a "New York Times" study of the 50 TV shows with the most Facebook Likes found that "unlike a lot of shows about the supernatural", "American Horror Story" was "more popular in cities, but also throughout parts of the Southwest".

"American Horror Story" has won 94 of its 429 award nominations. The franchise has garnered 28 Primetime Emmy Award nominations, with Jessica Lange winning for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie and for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie, James Cromwell winning for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie, and Kathy Bates winning for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie. It received an additional 50 Creative Arts Emmy Award nominations, winning eleven times, including Outstanding Hairstyling for a Miniseries or a Movie, Outstanding Costumes for a Miniseries, Movie, or Special, Outstanding Sound Editing for a Miniseries, Movie, or Special, and Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series, Limited Series, Movie or a Special. It has received nine Golden Globe Award nominations, with Lange winning for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries or Television Film, and Lady Gaga winning for Best Actress in a Miniseries or Television Film. The series has also received three Screen Actors Guild Award nominations, with Lange winning for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series. Additional accolades include eighteen Critics' Choice Television Awards nominations, with four wins, the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding TV Miniseries, four Costume Designers Guild Awards nominations, winning three times, eight wins out of ten nominations at the Make-Up Artists and Hair Stylists Guild, five People's Choice Awards nominations, winning once, and eleven Satellite Awards nomination, with three wins.

On October 7, 2014, it was announced that FX had ordered a 10-episode spin-off titled "American Crime Story", developed by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski. While each season of "American Horror Story" focuses on a new horror theme, each season of "American Crime Story" focuses on a new true crime story. The series features "American Horror Story" cast members Sarah Paulson, Connie Britton, Cuba Gooding Jr., Darren Criss, Finn Wittrock, Max Greenfield, Jon Jon Briones and Cody Fern. The first season premiered in February 2016, with the second season premiering in January 2018. A third season is in development, but the production is scrapped.



</doc>
<doc id="31299650" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31299650" title="Hurricane Beatriz (2011)">
Hurricane Beatriz (2011)

Hurricane Beatriz was a Category 1 hurricane that killed four people after brushing the western coast of Mexico in June 2011. Originating from an area of disturbed weather on June 19, several hundred miles south of Mexico, Beatriz gradually intensified. Gaining latitude, the system became increasingly organized and reached hurricane status on the evening of June 20. The following morning, Beatriz attained winds of 90 mph (150 km/h) as it passed roughly 15 mi (20 km) of Mexico. Due to its interaction with land, the hurricane abruptly weakened hours later. Early on June 22, Beatriz dissipated over open waters. Prior to Beatriz's arrival in Mexico, hurricane watches and warnings were issued for coastal areas. Hundreds of shelters opened across the states of Colima and Guerrero. Heavy rains from the storm triggered significant flooding along the Sabana River in Acapulco, killing four people. However, the overall effects of Beatriz were limited and the rains were largely beneficial in mitigating a severe drought.

On June 16, 2011, a trough situated off the southern coast of Guatemala showed signs of possible tropical cyclogenesis. Though located within an area favoring development, the system remained broad and disorganized as it moved slowly west-northwestward. Gradually, convection consolidated around an area of low pressure. On June 18, a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was issued for the system as it was expected to develop into a tropical depression within 24 hours. On the following day, the low further developed and was declared Tropical Depression Two-E by the National Hurricane Center at 1500 UTC. Upon being declared, the depression was located about 335 mi (540 km) south-southeast of Lázaro Cárdenas, Mexico. However, after post-analysis, the depression had actually developed nine hours earlier. Maintaining a west-northwesterly track in response to a subtropical ridge to the north, the depression was forecast to move into a favorable environment, characterized by low wind shear and sea surface temperatures up to . Three hours after classification, the depression strengthened Tropical Storm Beatriz, the second named storm of the season.

Early on June 20, convection increased markedly with several overshooting tops (denoted by cloud-top temperatures below ) appearing on satellite imagery. A notable increase in southerly outflow also took place. As the subtropical ridge north of the storm weakened, Beatriz acquired a more northerly component to its track, bringing the center of the storm closer to Mexico. Convective bands gradually wrapped around the system throughout the day. During the afternoon hours of June 20, a hurricane hunter aircraft found Beatriz just below hurricane strength, and subsequently, the system was upgraded just a few hours later, while situated roughly 85 mi (140 km) southeast of Manzanillo, Mexico. Early on June 21, a wide eye developed within the central dense overcast. In light of this, the National Hurricane Center estimated Beatriz to have attained winds of 90 mph (150 km/h) along with a barometric pressure of 977 mbar (hPa; 28.85 inHg); however, it was noted that this could be conservative based on estimates of 105 mph (165 km/h) from the University of Wisconsin and the Satellite Analysis Branch.

Throughout the morning of June 21, Beatriz brushed the coast of Mexico, with the center passing roughly 15 mi (20 km) south-southeast of La Fortuna, Mexico. Centered just off the coast of Mexico, the system interacted with land and began weakening. Hours later, convection rapidly diminished as dry air became entrained in the circulation. In response to quick degradation of the system's structure, the NHC downgraded Beatriz to a tropical storm. Rapid weakening continued throughout the day and by the evening hours, the storm no longer had a defined circulation. Lacking an organized center and deep convection, the final advisory was issued on Beatriz. The storm's remnants persisted for several more hours before dissipating roughly 175 mi (280 km) southwest of Cabo Corrientes, Jalisco.

Following the classification of Tropical Depression Two-E on June 19, the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning for coastal areas between Zihuatanejo and Manzanillo. A hurricane watch was also put in place from Tecpán de Galeana to Punta San Telmo. Later that day, the tropical storm warning was upgraded to a hurricane warning and the watch was extended westward to La Fortuna. As Beatriz continued to strengthen, the watches and warnings were extended westward to Cabo Corrientes on June 20. Early on June 21, the easternmost advisories were discontinued as Beatriz moved away. Later that morning, all watches and warnings were discontinued in light of Beatriz's rapid weakening.

In Colima and Jalisco, residents were warned of heavy rains that could trigger flooding and mudslides. Schools across both states canceled classes for June 21. In Colima, 236 shelters were opened to the public. Additionally, the Mexican Navy was placed on standby for hurricane relief. A total of 980 temporary shelters were opened in Guerrero, many of which were in Acapulco, as many residents were expected to evacuate flood-prone area. An orange-level alert was issued for portions of Chiapas in light of potentially heavy rains. Throughout Western and Southwestern Mexico, the Servicio Meteorológico Nacional (National Weather Service) advised that all air and sea traffic be suspended until the passage of Beatriz.

Across Guerrero, Beatriz produced heavy rain, peaking at in Copala, Guerrero. Several homes across the state were damaged, though none were destroyed. In Acapulco, 380 homes were inundated by flood waters, prompting evacuations in areas built in 1999 to relocate residents after Hurricane Pauline. Several landslides blocked off roads and a section of a roundabout was destroyed. In the community of Amatillo, three people were killed after being washed away by flood waters. Heavy rains from Beatriz caused the Sabana River to overflow its banks, placing 150 homes across 14 colonias under water. One person drowned in San Agustín after falling in the swollen river. Twenty-seven colonias in and around the city lost power after muddy floodwaters entered a substation. Throughout Oaxaca, at least a dozen homes lost their roofs due to high winds. Portions of Colima, Chiapas, Michoacán and Jalisco experienced heavy rains; however, in many areas, the rain proved beneficial in mitigating a severe drought.



</doc>
<doc id="31311332" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31311332" title="1893–94 Small Heath F.C. season">
1893–94 Small Heath F.C. season

The 1893–94 season was the 13th season of competitive association football and second season in the Football League played by Small Heath F.C., an English football club based in Birmingham. In 1892–93, the inaugural season of the Football League Second Division, Small Heath had won the divisional championship but failed to gain promotion via the test match system. This year, they finished as distant runners-up in the League, eight points behind Liverpool, but were successful in the test match, defeating Darwen 3–1 to confirm their place in the First Division for the 1894–95 Football League season. The club struggled financially during the season, and there were suggestions that it might have disbanded had promotion not been secured.

Small Heath entered the 1893–94 FA Cup in the first round proper, and lost in that round for the second consecutive year, this time to the eventual losing finalists, Bolton Wanderers of the First Division. In local competitions, they were eliminated by Midland League club Loughborough in the first round of the Birmingham Senior Cup and by Wolverhampton Wanderers in the semi-final of the Mayor of Birmingham's Charity Cup. Small Heath played fewer friendly matches than in the previous season, instead competing in a regionally organised supplementary competition, the United Counties League, in which they finished third of four teams in the southern section.

Small Heath used 23 different players in nationally organised competitive matches during the season and had 12 different goalscorers. Four players, Ted Devey, Fred Wheldon, Tommy Hands and Billy Ollis, appeared in every League match, all but Devey for the second consecutive season. The top scorer was inside-forward Frank Mobley with 25 goals – his total of 24 League goals made him the Second Division's leading scorer – and all five first-choice forwards reached double figures for the second season running.
Small Heath were elected to the newly formed Second Division in 1892, and went on to win the divisional championship. However, promotion to the First Division depended on the test match system, in which each of the lowest-ranked three teams from the First Division played off against one of the highest-ranked three from the Second Division. Small Heath lost to Newton Heath after a replay, so were not promoted. The League's Annual General Meeting heard proposals that the First Division be expanded to either 20 or 18 teams. Both motions were, unsurprisingly, seconded by Small Heath, but both were defeated, thus confirming that the team would play in the Second Division for the 1893–94 season. The Second Division championship shield was presented to the club at a meeting of the Football League held at the Colonnade Hotel in New Street, Birmingham, in August.

Of the regular first-team members from the previous season, goalkeeper Chris Charsley, a serving police officer, was unavailable and full back Tom Bayley had been released. Fred Speller, who had suffered a badly broken leg early in the season, had been playing in practice matches and was believed to be back to full fitness. Fringe players Harry Edwards and Fred Jones had left the club, and Harry Morris had retired to concentrate on his plumbing business. Goalkeeper George Hollis, backs Arthur Littleford, Bernard Pumfrey and George Short, half-backs Ted Devey, Caesar Jenkyns, Teddy Jolley and Billy Ollis, and forwards Jack Hallam, Tommy Hands, Frank Mobley, Billy Walton and Fred Wheldon all remained with the club. Newcomers included forwards Jack Lee, Charles Izon and Walter Jackson, all signed from non-league clubs in the West Midlands area. Alfred Jones continued as secretary-manager, and Caesar Jenkyns retained the captaincy. The team adopted a new kit, keeping the white knickerbockers but replacing the royal blue shirt and stockings with shirts in a lighter shade of blue, with navy collar trim, cuffs and pocket and navy stockings.

Small Heath opened their second season in the Football League with a visit to Walsall, who were playing at Wednesbury because their new ground was not yet ready. Former Small Heath full-back Tom Bayley was one of several newcomers for the hosts, but their visitors had few changes in personnel. Teddy Jolley came in at full-back, and replacing Billy Walton was Jack Lee, who "dribbles cleverly, and is a very dangerous forward round goal". In the presence of 4,000 spectators, Lee scored twice as Small Heath won 3–1. Fred Wheldon opened the scoring for Small Heath in the first 30 seconds of their next match, at home to Rotherham Town; 15 minutes later the visitors were 3–2 ahead, but by half-time the home side had regained the lead. Unsurprisingly the tempo dropped in the second half, but a game played in a "friendly and sportsmanlike spirit" was marred towards the end by Rotherham forward Alf Pickering suffering a fracture of his right leg just below the knee in an accidental collision with Bernard Pumfrey, "the snap of the bone being heard all round the ground". Initial reports suggested the break was such that he was "almost certain" never to play football again. This was followed by a comfortable 6–1 defeat of Burton Swifts, in which Jolley moved to inside right in Jack Hallam's absence through illness, giving Gilbert Smith his debut at full back.

In the return fixture against Walsall, Charles Izon, a well-built forward who "is quick on the ball, and shoots excellently", scored a hat-trick on his debut as Small Heath again won comfortably. A visit to Liverpool gave Caesar Jenkyns the honour of scoring the first Football League goal conceded by the home side, but the visitors "fell all to pieces" in the second half, and were decisively beaten. The young and inexperienced Smith made mistakes that cost two goals, but the forwards "were undoubtedly the weak spot", and the "Birmingham Daily Post"'s reporter suggested they would "have to learn to shoot harder and play with far more spirit if they are to keep up the reputation they gained last season". After Burslem Port Vale "beat Small Heath on Monday in more decided a fashion than did Liverpool", by five goals to nil, the poor form shown in the previous two matches by the forwards, and by Wheldon in particular, was much improved at Ardwick. Although Small Heath scored only once, the resultant win was enough to take them into October in second place in the division, having already completed a quarter of the 28-game league programme.

Small Heath came back from a 2–1 half-time deficit to beat Grimsby Town 5–2, but the visit of Liverpool was eventful in a rather different manner. After the referee rejected the Liverpool players' claim that Small Heath's equaliser had entered the goal through a hole in the side netting, their play became rough, culminating in centre-half Joe McQue, a "strapping fellow", kicking Frank Mobley in the abdomen, apparently intentionally. While the referee was cautioning McQue, Small Heath captain Caesar Jenkyns rushed in, knocked McQue to the ground, and was sent off. With a man advantage, it still took Liverpool until the stroke of time to score the winning goal. The "Post"'s reporter suggested that, despite the provocation, Jenkyns should not have reacted the way he did, but "the knowledge that it cost his side the game" was sufficient punishment. Despite the referee in his report agreeing that "the punishment of being sent off would meet case", and that Jenkyns had "played a perfectly fair game" and had expressed regret at his actions, both when dismissed and after the game, the Football Association imposed a four-week suspension, to begin on 31 October.

In the meantime the play of Jenkyns and his fellow half-backs was instrumental in a 4–1 defeat of Woolwich Arsenal. The first half hour was played "in a spiritless fashion", but then Wheldon scored "a fine goal with one of his characteristic shots", and the remainder of the game was one-sided. The Small Heath team prepared for their match at Newcastle United by taking the train as far as York on the Friday evening, which left only another for the day of the match. Contrary to expectation, Small Heath were successful in a "hard game", with the half-backs again influential despite Jenkyns receiving a "nasty blow in the mouth". They ended October level on points with three other clubs, in third place on goal average.

While most of the Second Division clubs were involved in FA Cup qualifying ties, Small Heath, who had received a bye to the first round proper, lost a friendly match against Everton reserve team by five goals to nil. Everton's near neighbours Liverpool complained to the League that the game adversely affected the attendance at their home fixture with Newcastle, but the League confirmed that Everton were within their rights to arrange the match. "Better forward play [had] rarely been witnessed at Lincoln than that shown by Small Heath" in a 5–2 defeat of Lincoln City, whose defence failed to cope with the industry and creativity of Teddy Jolley feeding the "light but nimble" forwards, Mobley in particular. The next weekend, numerous matches were postponed or abandoned because of the weather. Although the Small Heath and Crewe Alexandra players were changed and ready to play, the referee would not start the game because the "blinding snowstorm would prevent him from having a proper sight of the play".

Advertised as a "Grand League Match" in the local paper – vying for attention with the forthcoming Sailors' Bazaar, a Boys' Brigade band concert and a clearance sale of squirrel-tail fur boas – Small Heath's visit to Middlesbrough Ironopolis failed to live up to the billing. A storm that cost hundreds of lives at sea had left the Paradise Ground with damaged railings and grandstand blown down, and only a few hundred spectators stood in the pouring rain to see the home side produce a surprise victory by three goals to nil on a sodden pitch. The "Leicester Chronicle" feared "that last year's second division champions are far from being what they were", having dropped as many points already as in the whole of the previous season.

Jenkyns returned from suspension against a Northwich Victoria side bottom of the division and playing with only ten men. Wheldon scored four and Mobley three in an 8–0 win, and the goalscoring continued in midweek in the fixture postponed because of the snowstorm, as Small Heath beat a Crewe Alexandra side without several first-choice players by six goals to one. Burton Swifts proved more difficult opponents. On a heavy pitch, play was concentrated in the midfield area as the strength of both teams lay in their half backs, and Small Heath's winning goal came with ten minutes of the match remaining. It was reported that the club had turned down a big offer from First Division club Aston Villa for the services of Fred Wheldon. Newcastle United travelled to Birmingham on the Friday, to be fresh for Saturday's match, as Small Heath had done in the reverse fixture, and again, the tactic worked. Their forwards "displayed excellent combination", were "splendidly supported by the half-backs", and "but for [Jenkyns'] untiring efforts matters would have been worse" than the 4–1 defeat.

Changes were made for the visit of Middlesbrough Ironopolis, Arthur Littleford, Charles Izon and Bernard Pumfrey coming in for Smith, Mobley and Jack Hallam. The half-backs were again the backbone of the team, and Wheldon, who produced "a brilliant exposition of dodging and shooting", scored the winning goal five minutes from time in what the "Standard"'s reporter described as a "rattling good game". Fred Speller was reported to have "not been seen in such form since his leg was broken last year" in a Boxing Day friendly with top amateur club Marlow, the club from which he signed for Small Heath. Their last League match of 1893, a comfortable 6–0 victory against Lincoln City, took them into the new year in second place in the division, three points ahead of Notts County but two points behind Liverpool, who had played two fewer matches. Pumfrey strengthened the defence, George Hollis was as usual secure in goal, and the forwards, with the returning Mobley and the introduction of reserve-team player Walter Jackson, "showed better combination and greater dash than they have recently done".

On New Year's Day, Small Heath made the short trip to Wellington Road for a friendly with Aston Villa. After a dull and goalless first half, Tommy Hands crossed the ball for Wheldon to open the scoring, from which point goals followed regularly until the match finished as a 4–3 home win. Wheldon was involved in two of his side's three goals, but was "too closely watched by Reynolds to be as effective as usual". On a day when the hard and slippery surface meant "those teams whose players have the least regard for the safety of their limbs usually gain the victory", Small Heath, without Hallam, who was unwell, and William Reynolds, injured against Aston Villa, defeated a "very indifferent" Northwich Victoria 7–0. In their next match, at Crewe Alexandra, the home players reportedly played "with supreme indifference to the safety of their opponents' limbs". Hands, who had been one of Small Heath's better performers, was carried off after receiving a "nasty kick" to the leg, but despite having to play with ten men, the visitors won 5–3. Of Crewe's three goals, the first should have been disallowed for offside and the third was a Ted Devey own goal.

Midland League club Loughborough hosted Small Heath in the first round of the Birmingham Senior Cup. In heavy rain, the scores were level until ten minutes from time, when goalkeeper George Hollis was barged into the goal before he could get to a shot from distance. The ball followed him over the line, and despite the obstruction on the goalkeeper, the referee awarded Loughborough a goal. Small Heath threw men forward in search of an equaliser, which left them ill-protected in defence, and they conceded twice more. In the FA Cup, Small Heath were drawn at home to Bolton Wanderers, who were so keen to have the match played on their own ground that they offered Small Heath the total gate receipts up to £150 and a half share of receipts above that figure, with a minimum guarantee of £60, to agree to a change of venue. The offer was declined. Bolton were predicted to lose, but they did not. With the wind behind them, Small Heath took a two-goal half-time lead, but in the second half, Hollis, who had "not given a worse display in goal all season", made numerous mistakes, gifted the visitors two goals, and the final score was 4–3 to the First Division side.

Third-placed Notts County beat Small Heath 3–1 to narrow the gap between the clubs to just one point. Charles Partridge, making his Football League debut after Hollis was taken ill, played behind an experimental defensive pairing of half-back Ted Devey and reserve-team player George Short. Despite the scoreline, the "Nottinghamshire Guardian" described them as "a very useful pair of backs", although not up to the home team's standard, and the "Daily Post" rated Devey as "easily the best left-back the club have played this season". Two of Notts' goals were fortunate: an attempted clearance by Devey ricocheted off Jenkyns' head for their second goal, and for their third, the ball appeared to be heading safely over the crossbar until caught by a gust of wind.

Eight Midlands clubs formed a league to be played as a supplementary competition to fill vacant dates in the season without the trouble and expense of arranging friendly matches, later joined by Small Heath and Notts County. Small Heath's first four matches in this United Counties League were played in February. After "a creditable draw" at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers of the First Division, they "thoroughly deserved" to win the return match 2–1. West Bromwich Albion took a 5–1 lead in the first half at Coventry Road, yet in the second, the Small Heath forwards raised their level of performance, scored three times without reply, and were unfortunate not to secure a draw. Two days later, the First Division club won the return match at Stoney Lane rather more comfortably.

The committee organised a public meeting at which chairman Walter Hart bemoaned the poor attendances, which he felt would not improve unless the team were promoted to the First Division, mentioned that the club had rejected a "big offer from a neighbouring club for the release of a prominent player", and called for £200 to be raised to bring in players to strengthen the team's defence. A collection in the hall raised cash and pledges to the value of £42 10s, and supporters contributed generously to the public appeal. An attempt to sign full-back Jack Oliver from Middlesbrough Ironopolis was unsuccessful, and the club offered the services of goalkeeper Chris Charsley to Aston Villa.

In front of a large crowd, Small Heath suffered what was described as an "unfortunate" one-goal defeat at Grimsby Town. Hollis should have done better with Grimsby's opener, Frank Mobley was injured around the eye in collision with the goalkeeper when scoring Small Heath's only goal and showed some bravery in remaining on the field, and Wheldon had an apparently valid goal disallowed. Short, in a "trifle risky" style, and the solid Devey again did well in defence. Lost gate receipts because of Aston Villa's withdrawal from the United Counties League was decidedly unpopular with the other members, and the Small Heath committee arranged a smoking concert to raise funds. Those clubs at the bottom of the First Division and top of the Second were all recruiting new players: "the test matches mean such a lot to the clubs concerned that there is no wonder at this anxiety to secure new blood." Small Heath acquired the services of full-backs Percy Watson and William Purves, from Rotherham Town and Irish club Glentoran respectively.

The Small Heath club staged a "double-header" the following Saturday. After the reserves beat Brierley Hill Alliance 3–0 in the Birmingham & District League, Watson made a promising debut at back as the first team played a friendly against a below-strength Nottingham Forest side. Charsley returned to first-team duty in a 10–2 demolition of Ardwick, whose goalkeeper arrived with his team already one goal behind. Mobley's fourth hat-trick gave him ten goals from his last six matches, taking him past the 20-goal mark for the season. A close game at Rotherham produced a 3–2 win, and against Burslem Port Vale, the Small Heath forwards had "rarely been seen to greater advantage" as they scored six without reply.

The semi-final of the Birmingham Charity Cup provided a break from League action. Mobley opened the scoring, but Wolverhampton Wanderers shot against the woodwork on several occasions and the visitors were "singularly fortunate" in restricting the home side to one goal, and that a penalty kick. With the scores level, a decision was made not to play extra time, and the replay was arranged for two weeks later at Coventry Road. In their penultimate match of the Football League season, Small Heath produced a good team performance to win 4–1 at Woolwich Arsenal and reach 100 League goals for the season. The forwards played a characteristic "beautifully combined" game, the half-backs, particularly Jenkyns, were too strong for the home forwards, Purves looked set to be the full-back the team had needed for some time, and Charsley "kept goal exceedingly well".

Against Stoke in the United Counties League, Jack Hallam opened the scoring after a fine passing move as Small Heath won 3–0. In the return fixture, Charles Partridge's "magnificent performance" in goal kept the score down to a 2–1 defeat, as Small Heath finished third in the four-team division.

Going into the last match of the Football League season, Small Heath were in second place in the division, one point ahead of opponents Notts County. Neither could challenge Liverpool for the title, but both were sure of their places in the promotion test matches. The likely opponent for the team finishing second would be Darwen, whereas the third-placed team could expect the rather tougher prospect of Preston North End. Notts County had won the FA Cup the previous weekend, and the "Daily Post" took that as a good omen, "inasmuch as the winners of the English Cup rarely do themselves justice on the following Saturday".

Handicapped early on by George Short suffering concussion and being unable to continue, Small Heath lost the replayed Charity Cup semi-final to Wolverhampton Wanderers 2–0. Fred Wheldon was the only Second Division player selected in the Football League representative team to play the Scottish League at Goodison Park, Liverpool. Expected to join Aston Villa should Small Heath not be promoted, and "thought by many to be the best inside left in England", Wheldon "performed like the clever and finished player he is" as the match was drawn.

The "Leicester Chronicle" felt that Darwen would have to "play up" to stand much chance against Small Heath, who had "a smarter set of forwards than can be found amongst most of the first division teams", and pointed out that Small Heath were the only team in either division to have scored 100 goals during the season. The players prepared for the test match at Droitwich Spa, where the saturated salt water of the Brine Baths provided relief for tired muscles. The match, played at Stoke's Victoria Ground, was an exciting one. Darwen had much the best of the first half, but failed to take their chances. Small Heath were restricted to rare attacks, but were dangerous on the break, and opened the scoring through Jack Hallam. Darwen equalised before the interval, and continued their dominance until superior fitness told. With six minutes left, Small Heath took the lead, the goal variously attributed to Wheldon or an Orr own goal, after which Darwen lost heart and Tommy Hands scored again four minutes later. The "Daily Post" suggested that "one would scarcely believe that they were the same five forwards who have so often delighted the spectators with their play at Coventry Road", but "to every man [of the defence] great praise is due for so ably checking the opposing forwards". The "Nottinghamshire Guardian" was less critical of the forwards, but took the view that Small Heath were fortunate to catch Darwen "in a very crippled condition", and that goalkeeper Chris Charsley had done the club a considerable service in making himself available for such a vital game.

The victorious team arrived back in Birmingham by train, the engine's funnel draped in the players' blue and white kit, to be greeted by 1,000 supporters at New Street Station. Interviewed 55 years later, Billy Walton remembered how "We were rushed pell mell into a coach and, followed by others, we paraded the streets calling at what seemed to be every hotel and pub en route. I almost regret to say that when the celebrations ended it was necessary to engage hansom cabs to convey our players to their homes." The season ended with a friendly against newly crowned Football League champions Aston Villa, the visitors giving their services free for the benefit of the Small Heath club. Before a crowd of four or five thousand, both clubs fielded strong sides, and the match finished as a 3–3 draw.

The "Daily Post"'s pleasure at Small Heath's victory was heightened by their belief that "defeat would in all probability have meant the disbanding of the club", ambitions of promotion having sustained the committee's efforts throughout the season to raise enough funds to keep the club going. They pointed out that further expense was necessary both to strengthen the team, "for it cannot be expected that eleven or twelve men will stand the strain of a season's work amongst the first division clubs", and to improve facilities at the Coventry Road ground. The club held a celebratory dinner, at which the chairman congratulated the players, exhorted them to redouble their efforts to make a decent showing in the First Division, and appealed to their continuing loyalty. He attempted to dispel suggestions that the city could not support two teams in the top division, and expressed gratitude to the Aston Villa club for their sincere best wishes as demonstrated by their generous donation of the recent benefit match. The balance sheet showed expenditure of £2,039, of which players' wages accounted for £1,303, which resulted in a net loss of £222 when set against income of £1,816, of which £1,586 came from gate receipts and £104 from season tickets. Nevertheless, during the close season the club began work on a grandstand and "the furrows on the field of play [were] filled up".

Small Heath went through the League season without drawing a match. They scored 103 goals, at a rate of 3.6 goals per game, and became the first team to exceed 100 goals in a Football League season (Sunderland scored exactly 100 the previous season). If test match goals are counted, all five first-choice forwards reached double figures for the second consecutive season. The leading scorer was Frank Mobley with 24 League goals, a total which also made him the top scorer in the Second Division, closely followed by Fred Wheldon with 22. Ted Devey, Tommy Hands, Billy Ollis and Wheldon were ever-present in the League, all but Devey for the second season running, and Caesar Jenkyns missed only the two games for which he was suspended.

Fred Speller attempted a comeback, appearing twice for the first team early in the season, but the injury received against Darwen proved the end of his professional football career. Bernard Pumfrey left for Midland League club Gainsborough Trinity, and went on to captain that club in the Football League. Walter Jackson, William Reynolds and Gilbert Smith were all released to join Birmingham & District League club Berwick Rangers, and Percy Watson returned to his native Yorkshire. Chris Charsley played no more League football, concentrating instead on his police career: he reached the rank of Chief Inspector in the Birmingham force, and in 1899 was appointed Chief Constable of Coventry. Small Heath signed the former Sunderland full back Jack Oliver, whom they had failed to recruit earlier in the season, but despite the misgivings of the local press, they were to negotiate their debut First Division season with no other major signings.

For consistency, attendances and goalscorers' names in the League, Test Match and FA Cup match details tables are sourced from Matthews' "Complete Record". Information in contemporary newspaper reports could, and often did, differ. League positions are sourced from "11v11.com".

This table includes appearances and goals in nationally organised competitions – the Football League, including promotion test matches, and FA Cup – only. For a description of the playing positions, see Formation (association football)#2–3–5 (Pyramid).




</doc>
<doc id="31326029" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31326029" title="John Komnenos Asen">
John Komnenos Asen

John Komnenos Asen (, "Yoan Komnin Asen"; , "Iōannēs Komnēnos Asanēs"; , "Jovan Komnin Asen") was the ruler of the Principality of Valona from circa 1345 to 1363, initially as a Serbian vassal and after 1355 as a largely independent lord. Descended from high-ranking Bulgarian nobility, John was a brother of both Tsar Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria and Helena of Bulgaria, the wife of Tsar Stephen Dušan of Serbia. Perhaps in search of better opportunities, he emigrated to Serbia, where his sister was married. There, he was granted the title of despot by Stephen Dušan, who placed him in charge of his territories in modern south Albania.

As the despot of Valona, John established commercial ties with Venice and Ragusa, and he became a citizen of the former in 1353. After the death of Dušan in 1355, he took the side of the unsuccessful Simeon Uroš in the ensuing conflict for the Serbian throne. With Venetian assistance, John maintained the essentially independent status of the Principality of Valona. He probably died of the plague in 1363 and he was succeeded by Alexander Komnenos Asen, who was likely his son from his unknown first wife. John's second marriage was to the former Epirote queen-consort Anna Palaiologina.

While the birth date of John Komnenos Asen is unknown, his origin is clearly documented in the sources. On both sides, he descended from the highest ranks of 14th-century Bulgarian nobility. He was born to Keratsa Petritsa, a daughter of despot Shishman of Vidin, and Sratsimir, the despot of Kran. John's mother was a descendant of the Asen dynasty as a grand granddaughter of Tsar Ivan Asen II. His siblings were Ivan Alexander, who would ascend to the Bulgarian throne in 1331, and Helena, who married Serbian ruler Stephen Dušan in 1332. Even though John was commonly referred to as a Komnenos in the sources, his relations to that Byzantine family are rather scarce. He had rights to that name either through his mother's descent from the Asens, themselves related to the Komnenoi, or through his marriage to Anna Palaiologina.

It is uncertain as to exactly why John emigrated to Serbia instead of assuming a high-ranking position in Bulgaria, as his ancestry and family ties would suggest. Bulgarian historian Ivan Bozhilov is of the opinion that John was not seeking political refuge in Serbia. Instead, it is most likely that he moved to that country with the belief that Serbia's territorial expansion and political influence in that period would secure him better career opportunities. Presumably, John accompanied his sister Helena when she moved to Serbia to marry Stephen Dušan in 1332.

John was first mentioned as the despot of Valona in 1350 and his documented presence in the Albanian lands only dates to 1349. However, he was most likely bestowed the title as early as 1345 or 1346, when Stephen Dušan was proclaimed Emperor (Tsar). American scholar John Fine believes this happened immediately after Stephen Dušan's coronation in 1346. Along with Stephen Dušan's half-brother, Simeon Uroš, and Jovan Oliver, John was one of three people to bear that title under Stephen Dušan.

John was installed as ruler of Valona in late 1345, in the wake of the Serbian conquest of south Albania from the Byzantine Empire, which was concluded no later than August 1345. Besides the Adriatic port of Valona (modern Vlorë), John's appanage included nearby Kanina and the inland castle of Berat to the northeast. Other than that, the extent of his domain is uncertain. Estimates of the area John ruled over range from all of central Albania to only the three cities mentioned, with the rest remaining under the government of local Albanian nobility, who owed allegiance either to John or to Stephen Dušan directly. To the south, John's appanage bordered on the lands of Simeon Uroš, the ruler of Epirus.

In 1349, John plundered a Venetian commercial ship which had been shipwrecked on the coast he controlled, in accordance with the medieval principle of "jus naufragii". This act necessitated the involvement of Stephen Dušan in order to settle the dispute between Venice and John, as evidenced by an official document from 13 April 1350. Despite this conflict, under John the Principality of Valona was an active partner of Venice and Ragusa (modern Dubrovnik) in maritime commerce. Two receipts from 27 April 1350 document John's role as a mediator in cattle, sugar and pepper trade and reveal that he received significant income from the Valona customs. The customs was profitable because the port was often visited by merchant ships. Even though all of these documents were written in Slavic, John signed his name in Greek, which testifies to his Hellenisation. At the time, John also had ties with the Mamluk rulers of Egypt, who addressed him as “King of Serbia and Bulgaria” in correspondence.

In 1353, John and his family were granted Venetian citizenship, which hints that his domain was under the protection of Venice. The premature death of Stephen Dušan in 1355 plunged the Serbian Empire into civil war. In that conflict, John took the side of his wife's son-in-law Simeon Uroš against the legitimate successor Stephen Uroš, who was Stephen Dušan's son and Simeon Uroš's nephew. While Simeon's attempt at taking the throne was ill-fated and Stephen Uroš even captured Berat in 1356, John managed to preserve his remaining lands and became independent from both Simeon and Stephen Uroš. The threat of Nikephoros II Orsini, who was gaining ground in Thessaly and Epirus, forced John to request the dispatch of a Venetian warship and an administrator from Venice to take control of his domain, to which the republic obliged.

Bulgarian historian Hristo Matanov conjectures that after 1355, John may have minted his own coinage intended for trade with partners outside the inner Balkans. He bases this theory on a new reading of several Latin-language coin inscriptions as "Monita despoti Ioanni" instead of "Monita despoti Oliveri", as previously thought. The new reading, which would identify the coins as being minted by John, was proposed by Yugoslav numismatist Nedeljković, who rejects the initial attribution of these coins to Jovan Oliver.

A commercial document from 30 January 1359, which testifies to John's continuing trade relations with Venice, is chronologically the last reference to his activity in contemporary sources. While the date of his death was not recorded, it is likely that John perished during the plague epidemic which hit Valona and Durazzo (today Durrës) in 1363.

John's first marriage probably dates to after his arrival in Serbia, though the identity of his first wife, if any, is unknown. If the next ruler of Valona, Alexander Komnenos Asen, was his son, then he would have been born circa 1346–1348, as he was already an adult in 1363–1366. This would place John's potential first marriage a few years before Alexander's estimated birth. Around 1350–1355, John married Anna Palaiologina, a granddaughter of Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos and a widow of John II Orsini, the despot of Epirus. This marriage to an Epirote noblewoman consolidated and legitimised John's position in the region. Besides Alexander, another very likely child of John Komnenos Asen was a certain Komnena, the wife of Balša II who had succeeded Alexander as ruler of Valona in early 1372.



</doc>
<doc id="31360531" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31360531" title="Jacob L. Beilhart">
Jacob L. Beilhart

Jacob L. Beilhart (March 4, 1867 – November 24, 1908) was the founder and leader of a communitarian group known as the Spirit Fruit Society. Beilhart believed that jealousy, materialism, and the fear of losing another's love were at the root of much of the illness in the world. Under his direction, the Spirit Fruit Society sought to model and practice those beliefs.

Beilhart was born in Ohio and raised in the Lutheran faith. He moved to Kansas when he was 18 and embraced Seventh-day Adventism. He later attended college to become a licensed preacher. Eventually, Beilhart came to believe that it was more important to put faith into practice helping others so he left preaching to study nursing and work in a sanitarium. He returned to Ohio in 1899 to start the Spirit Fruit Society, an intentional community based on his experiences, learning, and views. Beilhart led the group for nine years before he died of appendicitis and peritonitis in 1908. Beilhart's commune survived for another 22 years making it one of the longest surviving communes in America.

Beilhart was born March 4, 1867 in Columbiana County, Ohio to a Lutheran father and a Mennonite mother. The ninth of 11 children, Beilhart was raised in the Lutheran church and his early home environment was strictly religious. Jacob did not receive much in the way of formal education. His father died when he was six or seven years old so Jacob attended only elementary school. At the age of 17, Beilhart went to work at his brother-in-law's harness shop in southern Ohio and, when they moved to Ottawa, Kansas, Jacob went with them.

Beilhart left his brother-in-law's home a year later and went to live and work on a sheep farm. The family he lived with were devout Seventh Day Adventists. During this time, he became convinced that their view of the Bible and its teachings were quite different than what he had been raised to understand, but he accepted their religion entirely.

Although it is not known for certain, it is possible that the sheep farmer was the father of Olive Louema Blow, whom Beilhart married in 1887. Jacob and Louema attended Healdsburg College in California where Jacob received a license to preach. Beilhart returned to Kansas to begin a career in preaching. After two years, however, faced with the prospect of being sent to teach in other areas, Beilhart left preaching. He maintained that he wanted to do something "besides talk." Beilhart felt a strong need to help the sick so he enrolled in a nursing program at the Battle Creek Sanitarium that was run by Dr. John Harvey Kellogg.

Once, while working at the Sanitarium, Beilhart was called to the bedside of a young girl for whom doctors had given up hope. When Beilhart prayed for her, she experienced a quick and complete recovery. Beilhart's conviction that faith-healing was the remedy for illness put him in disfavor with the sanitarium officials and he was asked to resign.

Beilhart became friends with C. W. Post, who was a patient at the sanitarium, but Post was healed by a Christian Science faith healer, Mrs Elizabeth K. Gregory. In 1892, Post started "La Vita Inn", a sanitarium of his own and brought Beilhart on as an associate. The two men took instruction in Christian Science. Both Post and Beilhart rejected the doctrine of the religion but they embraced the view that illness was an illusion and could be overcome by mental suggestion, prayer, and self-sacrifice.

After the birth of their daughter, Edith in 1896, Louema revealed that the father of both Edith and her older brother, Harvey (1893), was C. W. Post. Though Post offered him financial interest in "La Vita Inn" and his prospective famous breakfast drink, Postum, provided Beilhart he would stay and work at the Inn. Outraged at his friend's betrayal, Beilhart ordered Post out of his house and left Battle Creek for Ohio. Louema left Jacob and took the children back to her family in Kansas in 1897. This experience undoubtedly had a profound effect upon Beilhart's view of marriage.

In 1896, Beilhart returned to Ohio and settled in Lisbon, close to where he had grown up. In 1899 he decided to create an intentional community in order to practice his newly developed beliefs and to model this practice for others. Beilhart also started two newspapers called "Spirit Fruit" and "Spirit Voice" that were distributed widely by subscription. The Spirit Fruit Society was incorporated as a religious organization in 1901. The stated goal in the incorporation documents was to, "teach mankind how to apply the truths taught by Jesus Christ".
Jacob made no effort to solicit members for his commune other than through his newspapers and sometimes rejected applicants when he felt they were not fit candidates. The commune attracted only about a dozen residents – mostly from outside the Ohio area.

Beilhart preached in Chicago and elsewhere, but was not known to proselytize strongly; however, although the group typically kept to themselves, their mysterious nature led to misconceptions and suspicion in the press. In 1904, numerous newspaper articles and editorials were written, mostly in Chicago, about the Society. Those articles were often sensationalist and served to put the Society in a bad light. The views and practices of the Society, particularly those against marriage and promoting free love, were not well accepted in the small Ohio community. Thus, in 1904, the group left Lisbon for Chicago where they expected their progressive ideas might be better tolerated.

Beilhart had preached in Chicago on a number of occasions and felt that the reception of the Society by that community would be better. Unfavorable publicity followed the group to Chicago however, and this period lasted only a relatively short time. In 1906 Beilhart purchased the 90 acre "Dalziel Farm" on the shores of Wooster Lake. Owing to his beliefs against personal property, almost immediately after the purchase he had his name removed from the deed because he did not want anything in his name.

In November 1908, returning from a meeting in Chicago, Beilhart fell ill with stomach pains. He was diagnosed with appendicitis, and a surgeon was brought in. There is some discrepancy concerning the diagnosis once surgery was performed. One doctor indicated that his appendix was healthy while another maintained that it had ruptured. Beilhart developed peritonitis and died on November 24, 1908.

In accordance with his beliefs, the Society buried Beilhart in an unmarked grave on the farm overlooking Wooster Lake. Although most of the area is now covered by a residential development, Beilhart's grave site has been preserved, surrounded by brush.


</doc>
<doc id="31403252" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31403252" title="Dancehall Queen (Robyn song)">
Dancehall Queen (Robyn song)

"Dancehall Queen" is a song by Swedish recording artist Robyn, taken from her fifth studio album, "Body Talk Pt. 1" (2010). The song was written by Klas Åhlund, who produced it with disc jockey Diplo. The initial writing and production of the song arose from a discussion by Robyn, Diplo and Åhlund about Ace of Base. The song features a dancehall and reggae-infused sound with 1980s synths and subwoofers. It was released as a promotional single before the album was launched in April 2010.

The song received mixed to positive reviews from critics. Some praised its hook and chorus, while others dismissed its overall sound. "Dancehall Queen" charted at number fifty-six on the Sverigetopplistan chart and was listed there for only a week. The accompanying music video, released in November 2010, was directed by Diplo, Red Foxx and Pomp&Clout. It resembles a karaoke tape with sing-along lyrics on the bottom of the screen. Robyn herself does not appear in the clip.

In November 2009, a video of Robyn and Diplo working on "Dancehall Queen" in the studio was posted onto YouTube. The song originally leaked onto the Internet in February 2010, under the title "No Hassle". In an interview with music website "Stereogum", Robyn spoke of the song's origin, saying; "We [Robyn, Diplo and Klas Åhlund] were talking about Ace of Base and we were just having fun with that kind of genre music. And the idea of making this song came out of that discussion. It was fun. We really connected on something where music that you might put in one box becomes something else, depending on how you look at it." In an interview with music magazine "Pitchfork", she spoke of the song's musical style, stating;

"Dancehall Queen" was released digitally in the US on 13 April 2010, and on 28 April 2010 in Sweden. It was one of three promotional singles released before the album's release.

"Dancehall Queen" was written by Klas Åhlund, who produced the song with Diplo. The piece is a dancehall song, with influences of reggae. The song incorporates 1980s dancehall synths and subwoofer wobbles. Nate Chinen of "The New York Times" called the song "an ode to 1990s Euro-dub". Noel Gardner of Drowned in Sound called it a "modern equivalent" of 10cc's "Dreadlock Holiday". The song utilizes electrified Caribbean sounds, influenced by Ace of Base. According to Ben Norman of About.com, Robyn "raggas her way through a laid back and bouncy electronic atmosphere". The chorus features Robyn singing "I still run this thing like a dancehall queen/I really don't want no hassle." The song also includes a shoutout to Sleng Teng; "I came to dance, not to socialize." According to Marc Hogan of "Pitchfork", the song's title is a "sideways allusion" to ABBA.

Marc Hogan of Pitchfork called the song a "so-wrong-it's-right collaboration with tastemaking Philadelphia DJ/producer Diplo." Hogan wrote that "It's here, dancing, with a chorus that Santigold and Gwen Stefani might kill for, that Robyn is free from all the worries that are "killing" her at the album's start." Christopher Muther of "The Boston Globe" wrote that "[Robyn's] take on Jamaican music has the potential to reek of day-old Ace of Bass", but called it "surprisingly solid". Noel Gardner of Drowned in Sound called it "frankly peculiar", and wrote, "It’s evidently laced with irony, and is possibly the most fun tune on here". Luke Lewis of "NME" wrote a mixed review of the song, stating, "It feels less authentic, especially on ‘Dancefloor Queen’, a misfiring collaboration with Diplo that features the least convincing patois this side of a George Lamb radio show." 

Ben Norman of About.com wrote, "Nothing against 'Dancehall Queen,' but it just isn't the Robyn people have come to love." Robbie Daw of Idolator called it "subtle", and wrote that "it’s hard to imagine this song being worked as a single", but concluded saying that it "definitely has an infectious hook". Anthony Balderrama of Consequence of Sound wrote that the song "is what you’d expect to hear: a smooth beat and an international sound, but nothing you’ll keep on repeat. It seems like a match made in heaven, but ultimately it’s fairly safe." Matthew Horton of BBC Music called the song "superfluous".

The song entered the Sverigetopplistan chart at its peak position of number fifty-six, before dropping out the next week. The song also peaked at number fifty-one on the Swedish Digital Chart.

The music video for "Dancehall Queen" was directed by Diplo, Red Foxx and Pomp&Clout. It premiered on 29 November 2010 via Robyn's official YouTube account. Ryan Staake of Pomp&Clout referred the video to as a "really weird VHS/karaoke video". The video resembles a faded karaoke tape with occasional sing-along lyrics on the bottom of the screen. Robyn does not appear in the video. Larry Fitzmaurice of Pitchfork said that the video is "complete with awkward/sexy dancing and footage of bustling city life". Erika Brooks Adickman of Idolator wrote a mixed review of the clip, stating, "We’re guessing Robyn didn’t want the “hassle” of appearing, so instead we’re treated to—seemingly—random grainy footage of the streets of Japan and gyrating women as the words of the chorus appear karaoke-style on the screen. We can say one good thing about the flick, if you were confused about the song’s lyrics, they’re fairly easy to read."

The video features dancing Japanese former Jamaican Dancehall Queen Junko Kudō.




</doc>
<doc id="31527076" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31527076" title="Next to You (Chris Brown song)">
Next to You (Chris Brown song)

"Next to You" is a song by American recording artist Chris Brown, included as a track on his fourth studio album, "F.A.M.E.", released on March 18, 2011. The song features Canadian singer Justin Bieber. Brown co-wrote the song with "Sevyn" Streeter of RichGirl. Brown first revealed plans to collaborate with Bieber in December 2010, and the track is the first of two tracks they worked together on, the second being a remix of Bieber's "Up."

Musically, "Next to You" is a R&B and pop number, with lyrics pertaining to the love between two in a relationship. Most music critics positively reviewed the song, complimenting the blending of Brown and Bieber's vocals. However a common criticism of the track was how it stood out in comparison into the more lyrically explicit music on "F.A.M.E.". After the release of the album, the song appeared on the charts in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. It was released for digital download on June 24, 2011, as the album's fifth single.

The song was written by Brown and Amber Streeter (of American R&B girl group RichGirl). The latter duo receive production credits on the track. In December 2010, Brown tweeted that he would be collaborating with Bieber. The song first appeared online on March 8, 2011. The song was one of two collaborations between Bieber and Brown in 2011, the other being a remix of "Up" from Bieber's "My World 2.0" album, which was included as a track on his "Never Say Never – The Remixes" set. In an interview with MTV News, Brown revealed that the duo recorded the "Up" remix first, and Brown wanted Bieber on his album after their first collaboration.

"Next to You" is a R&B and pop song. The song has lyrics about a relationship, but Eliot Glazer of MTV Buzzworthy said that the song also contained inspirational lyrics. It features "digitized" violins. According to the sheet music at Musicnotes.com by Sony/ATV Music Publishing, the song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 116 beats per minute. It is composed in the key of E major with Bieber and Brown's vocal ranges spanning from the low-note of G to the high-note of C. The song features the chord progression of E–B–Cm–A. Nadia Noir of WNOW-FM said the song was a hybrid of a "dance-jam" and "love-song." Furthermore, AOL Music's Charley Rogulewski called the song a "dreamy pop love song." The song sees Brown and Bieber trading verses and the chorus in lyrics like "I'll be there when you're insecure/ Let you know that you're always lovely/ Girl, because you are the only thing that I got right now."

The music video for "Next to You" was directed by Colin Tilley and filmed at the Universal Studios in Los Angeles, and upper Manhattan. On May 10, 2011, Bieber's manager confirmed plans for a music video via Twitter. In an interview with MTV News, Tilley spoke briefly about the video, saying "Tomorrow, I'm shooting New Boyz and Chris Brown ... then Justin Bieber and Chris Brown, together ... I can't tell you anything about that yet, but it's going to happen. It's gonna be big. It's gonna be big. I can't say anything else." On May 21, 2011, Brown posted two photos from the shoot via Twitter, showing him and Bieber standing among overturned cars in a path of destruction. However, the unfinished version of the music video leaked onto the internet on June 6, and the final cut was premiered on June 17, 2011.
The video begins with Brown and Bieber interacting with their girlfriends while the song "All Back" by Chris Brown is playing. Bieber's love interest is removed by her father, who reprimands, "You will never see him again. You understand that?" Brown is thinking of his girlfriend (played by Shannon Elizabeth) before the apocalypse occurs, which is characterized by land fissures, buildings toppling down and fiery scenery. Brown searches for his love interest who is then hit by the car that Bieber's girlfriend is in. Brown saves her by leaping over the fissure. Near the end of the video, Bieber's girlfriend finds him on top of the roof of a building and it ends with them reuniting and kissing. Interspersed are scenes of Brown and Bieber dancing amongst the destruction. Jamie Peck of MTV wrote of the video, "The whole thing is delightfully ridiculous in its cinematic drama". The video was nominated for International Artist Video of the Year at the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards.

Brad Wete of "Entertainment Weekly" coined the song as "thumping" and said that "Brown and guest Justin Bieber trade verses assuring their ladies of their dedication." Joanne Dorken of MTV News UK said "It seems that everything Justin Bieber touches turns to gold at the moment and this cutesy ballad is no exception." Dorken complimented how well the song showed the blending of the pair's voices, and she commented, as "the most 'pop' song on the LP, we are hoping Chris decides to make this a single ... a sure fire hit." Nadia Noir of WNOW-FM wrote, "What do you get when you combine two of pop's best-looking/greatest dancers, the sexy rasp of Justin Bieber, and a dance-jam/love-song? A combination of all the best elements of music!" Nick Levine of BBC Music said the track was part of Brown's identity crisis on the album, as "Next to You" was just two tracks after the "grisly sex jam" of "Wet the Bed" featuring Ludacris. Levine called the collaboration a "wholesome-as-homemade-chutney hook-up." While complementing that the album had "something for everyone", Jody Rosen of "Rolling Stone" called "Next to You" a "puppy-love declaration." Bri LaPelusa called the song a "dreamy ballad" and said it melted Brown and Bieber's "angelic" voices. She went on to add that "Next to You" "might be affirmation that Chris Brown is once again an accepted celebrity."

Concerning the lyrics, Eliot Glazer of MTV Buzzworthy said "It ain't new, but it's still cute." Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine said Brown was unable to capture the "majesty of 'Forever'" with the song, noting it was "rendered limp by the undercurrent of sincerity." Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" wrote that the song does not compliment Brown's already weak voice, and called it "geniunely awful." Caramanica also commented that Bieber was "apparently not worried about the stain this collaboration might leave."

Due to digital sales after the release of "F.A.M.E.", "Next to You" debuted on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100 charts of the week ending April 9, 2011. The song debuted at number ten on the Hot Digital Songs chart in the US, and at number 26 on the Hot 100. The following week, the song fell to number ninety before falling off the chart the next week. On the Canadian Hot 100, it debuted at number 36, and spent one week on the chart. 

In the United Kingdom, after the release of "F.A.M.E.", "Next to You" appeared at number forty-nine. It spent one week on the chart. After being released as a single, it appeared on the chart again and eventually peaked at number fourteen. The single was eventually certified Silver by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for sales of over 200,000 copies in the UK.

Source


</doc>
<doc id="31543883" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31543883" title="Rumours (Glee)">
Rumours (Glee)

"Rumours" is the nineteenth episode of the second season of the American musical television series "Glee", and the forty-first overall. The episode was written by series co-creator Ryan Murphy, directed by Tim Hunter, first aired on May 3, 2011 on Fox in the United States, and it features the return of guest star Kristin Chenoweth. In "Rumours", the glee club is swept by rumors that strain the friendships and relationships of the members, so director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) has them perform songs from Fleetwood Mac's 1977 album "Rumours". The episode is a tribute to that album, and all the songs covered in the episode are from it. This generated strong interest in the album: "Rumours" reentered the "Billboard" 200 chart at number eleven the week after the show was aired in the US, and the Australian album charts at number two five days after the show was aired in that country.

The episode received mixed reviews from critics. Amy Reiter of the "Los Angeles Times" wrote that "the episode had its moments that made lovin' Glee fun", but called the Sue Sylvester subplot "tired". Many critics were impressed with how well the album's music was incorporated into the episode including Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone", who wrote "the songs of "Rumours" fit the New Directions' drama in an organic way." The "Fondue for Two" segments were a favorite of reviewers, and were developed from an idea by one of the show's fans.

The musical performances received mostly praise, especially "Never Going Back Again" and "Go Your Own Way". Five of the six "Rumours" cover versions debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100, and four of these were featured on the subsequent "" soundtrack album. Upon its initial airing, the "Rumours" episode was viewed by 8.85 million American viewers and garnered a 3.7/11 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic. The total viewership and ratings for this episode was up slightly from the previous episode, "Born This Way".

Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) revives the student newspaper "The Muckraker". She wants to publish libel about the McKinley High glee club to cause conflict between the club's members and destroy it from within. Brittany's (Heather Morris) new internet talk show—"Fondue for Two"—gives the newspaper some grist when she seems to out Santana (Naya Rivera) on it. Santana berates Brittany for her ill-chosen words, and Finn (Cory Monteith) nearly comes to blows with Sam (Chord Overstreet) over another item that pairs Sam and Finn's girlfriend Quinn (Dianna Agron). Although Quinn and Sam both deny dating, Finn plans a stakeout with Rachel's help to see if it is true. Their surveillance of a shabby motel instead finds Sam and Kurt (Chris Colfer) leaving a room, after which Sam goes back inside alone.
April Rhodes (Kristin Chenoweth) visits Will to ask for his help with her new Broadway project: a one-woman show entitled "CrossRhodes". He tells her about the current glee club tensions, which she likens to Fleetwood Mac when they made their "Rumours" album. Will and April sing "Dreams" to the club, and he assigns them to perform songs from the album, to focus them back on music.

Artie Abrams (Kevin McHale) confronts Brittany: he becomes upset that Brittany cannot recognize that she is cheating on him with Santana, and calls her stupid. Brittany walks away in tears, stating that he was the only one who never called her that up until then, and he sings "Never Going Back Again". Santana further opens up to Brittany about her true feelings by singing "Songbird" to her. She agrees to go on Brittany's online talk show to let Brittany ask her to the prom, but she backs out at the last minute. Brittany later overhears Santana claim in an interview for "The Muckraker" that she is in love with Dave Karofsky (Max Adler), her running mate for prom king and queen.

Most of New Directions, minus Kurt and Sam, meet for coffee and speculate about the absent pair. Quinn maintains that Kurt would never cheat on his boyfriend Blaine (Darren Criss), and states that Sam is not gay. When Finn and Rachel resume their stakeout that night, they see Quinn leaving the same motel room, and Sam giving her a hug before going back inside.

The next day, the newspaper has an item about Finn and Rachel, who were spotted on their stakeout. Quinn is furious with Finn, and Finn is already mad about seeing Quinn with Sam. They confront each other, then sing a barbed version of the duet "I Don't Want to Know" as their glee club assignment. Quinn then gives an ultimatum: if Finn wants their relationship to continue, he cannot sing any more duets with Rachel. Rachel has other ideas, and later sings "Go Your Own Way" to Finn, who accompanies her on the drums. Some sharp accusations are thrown before Sam bitterly reveals that he was at the motel because his parents are unemployed and his family lives there now that their house has been foreclosed on—Kurt was bringing Sam some clothes, and Quinn was helping Sam babysit his younger brother and sister. Sam storms out. When the club discovers from Quinn that Sam has pawned his guitar, they buy it back for him and offer their support. Sam brings his siblings to a glee club rehearsal, and everyone sings "Don't Stop".

The show's co-creators Ryan Murphy, Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan had long "wanted to do an episode" that would be a tribute to a single album rather than to a "musical act". "Glee" had covered "Landslide" by Stevie Nicks several weeks earlier in the episode "Sexy"; Nicks had visited the set to watch the song being filmed, and stayed for six hours. This relationship helped them obtain the rights to cover the songs on the 1977 Fleetwood Mac studio album from which the episode is named.

The idea for Brittany's "Fondue for Two" segments in the episode came from a "Glee" fan. Teresa Musumeci went to the 2010 Glee Live! In Concert! show at Radio City Music Hall in New York, and she had a letter delivered to Cory Monteith that mentioned she was writing her own internet program: "More like a Youtube show called 'Fondue for Two. According to wsvn.com, "Heather Morris who plays Brittany admits the idea came from a letter", and the show later sent Musumeci an autographed copy of the script and an autographed cast picture in thanks.

Chenoweth's reappearance marks her third time on the series as April. She last appeared in the season one episode "Home". Murphy explained the reason for her return as the failure of her attempt at an all-white musical production of "The Wiz". Other recurring guest stars in the episode include glee club members Mike Chang (Harry Shum, Jr.), Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet), and Lauren Zizes (Ashley Fink), school bully Azimio (James Earl), school reporter Jacob Ben Israel (Josh Sussman), and cheerleader Becky Jackson (Lauren Potter). Additional guests include Sam's sister Stacey and brother Stevie, played by Ava Chelsea Ingram and Cody Hamilton respectively, a barista played by Cathy Doe, and a coffee shop patron played by Connie Ventress.

All six songs from "Rumours" covered in the episode were released as singles, available for digital download. Chenoweth and Morrison were featured on "Dreams", McHale sang "Never Going Back Again", Rivera covered "Songbird", Monteith and Agron duetted on "I Don't Want to Know", Michele sang "Go Your Own Way", and the glee club combined on "Don't Stop". The episode also included a portion of an original song, "Nice to Meet You, Have I Slept with You?"—written by Brennan and Adam Anders and sung by Chenoweth and Morrison—which was not released. "The Chain", also from "Rumours", was used as backing music in the second motel stakeout scene.

"Rumours" was first broadcast on May 3, 2011 in the United States on Fox. It garnered a 3.7/11 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, and received 8.85 million American viewers during its initial airing. It was the third most-watched scripted show of the week among adults aged 18–49. The total viewership and ratings for this episode were slightly up from those of the previous episode, "Born This Way", which was watched by 8.62 million American viewers and acquired a 3.4/11 rating/share in the 18–49 demographic upon first airing.

The episode's Canadian broadcast, also on May 3, 2011, drew 1.49 million viewers and was the eighteenth most-watched program of the week. It dropped three places from the previous episode, which attained 82,000 more viewers. In Australia, "Rumours" was watched by 959,000 viewers, which made "Glee" the twelfth most-watched show of the night. The episode was the thirty-second most-watched program of the week, but ranked fifth in the 16–39 demographic. Viewership again increased from "Born This Way", which drew 805,000 viewers and ranked fourteenth on the night of broadcast. In the UK, the episode was watched by 2.50 million viewers—2.07 million on E4, and 432,000 on E4+1. It was the most-watched show on E4 and E4+1 for the week, and the second most-watched on cable. Here, viewership registered a slight decline on the previous episode, which attained 20,000 more viewers and ranked first on cable.

"Rumours" was met with mixed to favorable reviews from the critics, though many of the latter listed significant caveats. Amy Reiter of the "Los Angeles Times" wrote that "the episode had its moments that made lovin' "Glee" fun". "MTV" Aly Semigran said "It wasn't a perfect episode, but it was certainly an improvement over the last few". Lisa Respers France of "CNN" "had a whole ball of tissue" in her hand by the time the cast sang the "Don't Stop" finale, and concluded, "Well played, "Glee"."
"Time" James Poniewozik said "while 'Rumours' had its flaws ... the structure allowed the show to serve the stories, rather than feeling like the stories were there to service the songs", and particularly praised how "the songs were integrated into the drama". Semigran and Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" concurred with the latter point, and Futterman wrote that "despite a forced theme premise, the songs of "Rumours" fit the New Directions' drama in an organic way." "The Atlantic" Kevin Fallon called the episode's focus on the Fleetwood Mac songs "a refreshing change of pace". Robert Canning of "IGN" liked the album concept, but felt it "didn't fully deliver". He gave "Rumours" a "good" rating of 7 out of 10, and wrote, "What made the episode at least mildly entertaining were the comedy bits. Brittany's 'Fondue For Two' segments were fantastic". Most other reviewers were similarly smitten with the "Fondue for Two" segments, including the aforementioned Reiter, Poniewozik, Semigran, and Respers France.

Futterman praised the return of Chenoweth's character April Rhodes, and "The Wall Street Journal" Raymund Flandez said that she "brings such lightness, humor and zaniness that's endearingly button-nose cute". Fallon wrote, "Chenoweth's every sly smirk, eyebrow tick, and note sung—well, that was my week's highlight." Reiter was unenthusiastic: she acknowledged "Chenoweth's amazing pipes", but added "her character, which was thin to start with, has kind of worn out its welcome". The subplot of Will thinking about going to Broadway with April was roundly criticized: both Meghan Brown of "The Atlantic" and Bobby Hankinson of the "Houston Chronicle" said there was no tension at all because the viewer knows that he will stay. "The A.V. Club" Zack Handlen called the entire scenario "ludicrous", made even more so by the highly compressed time frame, and their dress rehearsal "bizarre", criticisms echoed by Brown.

Sue's scenes were generally not well-liked. Although Canning wrote that the newspaper "delivered on the laughs", "Entertainment Weekly" Sandra Gonzalez characterized the newspaper subplot was "neither important nor substantive" and was unimpressed with the "random, frightening costume changes", and Reiter said Sue's storyline was one that "felt as tired as secondhand news". Poniewozik said that the episode "recognized that she is not really a character but a human obstacle", which he suggested was "a better way for the show to use her".

According to Hankinson, "One of the best parts of the episode centered around Brittany and Santana, but I think all the principals—Artie, Finn, Rachel, and Quinn too—did a great job portraying the tension and distrust pervading the team." Anthony Benigno of "The Faster Times" felt the show was "absurdly preachy" on the matter of rumors, though he said the episode was "decent". The scene in the motel room with Sam, Rachel, Finn and Sam's brother and sister was called "arguably the most affecting scene of the entire episode" by Handlen, and Poniewozik wrote that "Chord Overstreet sold Sam's feeling of loss". Canning felt otherwise: "It may have had a better impact if we cared more about Sam or if Chord Overstreet had delivered more believable tears, but as things were, it was just some ordinary, blah drama."

The developments in the relationship between Brittany and Santana received considerable attention. John Kubicek of "BuddyTV" thought the plot was pointless, and said it "boiled down to: I'm not ready to come out. I'm ready. Now I'm not again." He added, "If you're going to have Santana question herself, at least show it and don't have it all happen off screen." Both Hankinson and Respers France were impressed by the acting of both Morris and Rivera. Hankinson wrote, "It feels like their relationship is developing organically", while Respers France commended Morris for Brittany's breakup scene with Artie, and Rivera for far surpassing her expectations.

All of the musical numbers were generally praised, though not every number was received with the same enthusiasm. Benigno was disappointed that there was "nothing special" in any of the arrangements, but Futterman saw the performances from a different perspective: "They're not as visually stunning, but they're vocally some of the more impressive renditions "Glee" has done all season." She said of the "Dreams" rendition by Chenoweth with Morrison, "The harmonies and bare-bones arrangement make for one of "Glee" most faithful covers yet." Most critics welcomed the Chenoweth version. Gonzalez gave the song a "B+" and Brett Berk of "Vanity Fair" awarded it four stars of five; both praised Chenoweth but criticized Morrison. Semigran and Kubicek simply gave kudos to Chenoweth alone. Benigno wondered why the pair were trying to imitate Nicks and Lindsey Buckingham when he felt they were better singers than those two, and gave the song a "B".

Hankinson wrote, "I enjoyed all the smaller numbers tonight because I felt like the kids really sold the performances and infused some nice emotional context." Of these, "Never Going Back Again" received the most consistent approval. Futterman said it was "better than Artie's post-Tina 'Stronger, and Kubicek declared it "proof that he's quite good at hitting emotional notes", while Semigran said she was "blown away". Both Gonzalez and Benigno gave it an "A−", while Berk gave it all five stars. Berk also gave five stars to "Songbird", which Gonzalez again gave an "A−", while Benigno was slightly less generous with a "B+". Futterman described Santana's vocals as "raw and restrained", and called her rendition of the song a "heartbreaking performance", but while Semigran called it "sweet enough", she also wrote "Rivera's voice doesn't pack quite the punch the tune requires". Kubicek, however, said it was "easily the best song from the episode".

Many reviewers appreciated the pointed "I Don't Want to Know" performance. Kubicek called it "quite entertaining", Gonzalez felt the "angry singing" was "hot" and gave it an "A−", the same grade as Benigno, who said the song had "a bit more oomph than the original", though he added that Finn "sings with the subtlety of an artillery barrage" and he was happy with Quinn's "strong foundation in the back". Futterman wrote that it was "better than Quinn and Sam's 'Lucky, but Berk gave the song only two stars out of five, the same grade he gave to "Go Your Own Way". Although both Kubicek and Gonzalez criticized Rachel's motivations in singing the song, the latter still gave it an "A" and noted "if I had to listen to someone cover this song, it'd be her". Semigran called it "one of Lea Michele's strongest outings all season", while Benigno said "this is one of those rare times her balls-to-the-walls delivery works with the arrangement instead of distracting from it" and gave it an "A". Hankinson was "particularly fond" of the song, and added that it had "great energy".

The group finale of "Don't Stop" received good grades—"A" from Gonzales and "B+" from Benigno, and four of five stars from Berk. Kubicek found a bright spot in that Sam got to sing a solo. The performance received encomiums such as "pretty great" from Semigran and "inspired" from Futterman. The portion of an original song for the April Rhodes musical sung by April and Will, "Nice to Meet You, Have I Slept with You?", received little commentary, though Flandez made specific mention of "her operatic range, and their charismatic stage presence".

Five of the six "Rumours" cover versions debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100: "Go Your Own Way" debuted at number forty-five, "Songbird" at number sixty-eight, "Don't Stop" at number seventy-nine, "Never Going Back Again" at number eighty-one, and "Dreams" at number ninety-two. The sixth, "I Don't Want to Know", did not chart. The first four "Glee" songs on the Hot 100 also charted on the "Billboard" Canadian Hot 100: "Go Your Own Way" debuted at number thirty-one, "Don't Stop" at number sixty-five, "Songbird" at number seventy, and "Never Going Back Again" at number eighty. The peak positions attained by "Songbird" and "Go Your Own Way" were fifty-four and thirty, in the UK and Australia respectively. Out of the six songs from "Rumours" that were featured in the episode, four were also featured on the eighth soundtrack album of the series, "": "Songbird", "Don't Stop", "Go Your Own Way", and "Dreams".

The episode also sparked renewed interest in Fleetwood Mac and its most commercially successful album, and "Rumours" reentered the "Billboard" 200 chart at number twelve, the same week that Nicks' new solo album "In Your Dreams" debuted at number six. The two recordings sold a little less than 30,000 and 52,000 units, respectively. Music downloads accounted for ninety-one percent of the "Rumours" sales. The spike in sales for "Rumours" represented an uptick of 1,951%, and it had the highest US chart entry by a previously issued album since The Rolling Stones' reissue of "Exile on Main St." entered the chart at number two on June 5, 2010. In Australia, the interest had an even more profound effect: five days after the episode aired, the "Rumours" album entered the Australian charts at number two, and was at number three the following week. Most sales came from digital downloads. In all, the album was in the top forty for nine consecutive weeks. "Rumours" received its 13× Platinum certification in Australia at the end of May 2011.



</doc>
<doc id="31562084" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31562084" title="The Inner Circle (The Office)">
The Inner Circle (The Office)

"The Inner Circle" is the twenty-third episode of the seventh season of the American comedy television series "The Office" and the show's 149th episode overall. The episode originally aired on May 5, 2011, on NBC. The episode also marked Will Ferrell's final appearance as Deangelo, having signed up for four episodes. Cody Horn also makes her first guest appearance for the series as Jordan Garfield.

The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton, Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. In this episode, new office manager Deangelo begins picking favorites among the staff, revealing his true management style. After he only picks men to join his "inner circle", many of the female staffers begin to believe he is sexist.

The episode was written by Charlie Grandy and directed by Matt Sohn. The episode marks the first episode since Steve Carell left the series as a series regular. "The Inner Circle" received mixed reviews from critics, with many commenting on Ferrell's performance, with opinions ranging from positive to negative. According to Nielsen Media Research, the episode was viewed by an estimated 6.90 million households and received a 3.5 Nielsen rating and 10% share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 marking a drop in the ratings from the previous episode, "Goodbye, Michael".

New office manager Deangelo Vickers (Will Ferrell) picks favorites among the staff, including Kevin Malone (Brian Baumgartner), Jim Halpert (John Krasinski), a sycophantic Gabe Lewis (Zach Woods), and Darryl Philbin (Craig Robinson), who is attending business school thanks to Deangelo. He is also favorable towards Ryan Howard (B. J. Novak), who he believes is the head of the customer service department, and Kelly Kapoor's (Mindy Kaling) direct supervisor. Kelly is initially irate at the situation, but Ryan agrees to be a more dutiful boyfriend in exchange for Kelly keeping up the charade. Andy Bernard (Ed Helms) desperately aspires to join the inner circle, while Deangelo repeatedly attempts to win over Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson), who is still apathetic toward the new boss. Angela Martin (Angela Kinsey) sees his style as sexist, as every member of the inner circle is male, which Pam Halpert (Jenna Fischer) agrees to, as Deangelo has repeatedly been acting coldly towards her. To prove to the staff that he's not sexist, Deangelo hires a woman named Jordan Garfield (Cody Horn), who turns out to have no business experience (having previously worked in Anthropologie) over other qualified candidates, including a friend of Pam's. Kelly later attempts to tell Deangelo the truth about Ryan's actual position as a temp worker, but Deangelo simply appoints Ryan as the department head rather than figuring out the truth.

Jim is kicked out of the inner circle after pointing out what the women of the office had said, and an enthusiastic Andy (having previously denounced Deangelo after admitting that he was sexist) replaces him. Pam interrupts a mock basketball session the inner circle is having in the office in order to quiet it down, and an annoyed Deangelo reinvites Jim back into the circle. Jim instead challenges him to try a real dunk, which Deangelo claims he can do, at the warehouse basketball hoop downstairs. Deangelo brings everyone down to the warehouse, including Dwight, who Deangelo finally loses his temper with and directly orders him downstairs or be fired. Deangelo then attempts to dunk from the free-throw line, only to severely injure himself by crashing down with the basketball stand on top of him. He is quickly taken to the hospital, leaving Dunder Mifflin Scranton without a manager. 

At the end of the episode, Deangelo makes it back to the office, still in his hospital gown, with an IV tube trailing from his arm. His attempts to tell a bar joke come out as random gibberish. Gabe and Jim lead him out of the office after Erin Hannon (Ellie Kemper) calls for an ambulance.

The episode was written by supervising producer Charlie Grandy, his sixth writing credit of the series. It was directed by the series' cinematographer Matt Sohn, his second directing credit of the series. This is the first episode of "The Office" without former lead actor Steve Carell as Michael Scott. The feeling during filming was initially "weird", but the mood eventually changed to "very hopeful, excited and anticipatory feeling" according to "Office" showrunner Paul Lieberstein. The episode marked the final appearance in Will Ferrell's four-episode arc on the series after first appearing in "Training Day". The episode is also the first appearance of Cody Horn as Jordan Garfield, Deangelo's executive assistant, and the first of three new roles since Carell's departure. The role was originally said to be recurring at first with a chance of her becoming a series regular. She eventually did not return for the eighth season. In the final scene, Krasinski can be seen breaking character and putting his head down.

The official website for "The Office" included three cut scenes from "The Inner Circle" within a week of its release. In the first 38 second clip, Deangelo invites Dwight on a weekend trip to a Los Lobos concert which Dwight declines once he learns he can't drive the bus. In a talking head, Dwight reveals that Deangelo makes his skin crawl. In the second 144 second clip, Andy tries to become Deangelo's new executive assistant while in a talking head Pam decides to give up trying to impress Deangelo. It is also revealed in the same talking head that Michael named his new dog after Pam. In the third 82 second clip, Jim attempts to get back into the inner circle.

In its original American broadcast on May 5, 2011, "The Inner Circle" was viewed by an estimated 6.90 million households and received a 3.5 rating/10% share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49. This means that it was seen by 3.5% of all 18- to 49-year-olds, and 10% of all 18- to 49-year-olds watching television at the time of the broadcast. This marked a 17% drop in the ratings from the previous episode, "Goodbye, Michael", but marked a rise from the last regular episode, "Michael's Last Dundies". The episode tied for first in its timeslot beating "Bones" which received a 3.2 rating/9% share in the 18–49 demographic, "" which received a 2.3 rating/6% share and "Nikita" which received a 0.8 rating/2% share. The episode also tied for first in its timeslot with "Grey's Anatomy". "The Inner Circle" was the fifth most-watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18–49.

The episode received mixed reviews from critics. "The A.V. Club" writer Myles McNutt compared the episode to "Training Day" commenting that The Inner Circle' is more successful than that episode ['Training Day'] on some levels", but "both episodes suffer from the same problem: They’re simply not very funny or meaningful, which I'd argue is even more problematic for "The Inner Circle" given its position in the season." He ultimately gave the episode a C-. TV Squad writer Joel Keller wrote that while "the episode did have its funny moments", "overall, you can just feel that the show has changed in a very fundamental way". Alan Sepinwall of HitFix criticized the writers for still not finding Deangelo's character out commenting that "the fact that the writers so clearly had no idea what to do with Ferrell doesn't fill me with confidence for whatever guest stars turn up in the final episodes – nor do I feel especially great right now about the idea of an outside character coming in as the permanent new regional manager."

IGN reviewer Cindy White praised the writing for Deangelo's character saying that "Ferrell is much better carrying the show on his own than being second banana to Carell. It seemed like he was having more fun with the role in this episode". She ultimately gave the episode a 7.0/10. "New York"s Phoebe Reilly wrote that "while it was nice to see the staff responding to someone new, it didn't feel like enough to make an audience antsy to come back after a long summer." Hillary Busis of "Entertainment Weekly" also gave the episode a mediocre review commenting that "judging by tonight's episode alone, the transition from the Carell era to the post-Carell era is going to be shaky, to say the least". "The Inner Circle" was voted the fourth lowest-rated episode out of 24 from the seventh season, according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally. In another poll, the episode was voted the third lowest-rated episode out of 24 from the seventh season and was rated 6.86 out of 10.



</doc>
<doc id="31571046" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31571046" title="Chuck Versus the Last Details">
Chuck Versus the Last Details

"Chuck Versus the Last Details" is the 23rd episode of the fourth season of "Chuck", and the 77th overall episode of the series. The episode was written by Henry Alonso Myers and Kristin Newman, and directed by Peter Lauer. It originally aired on May 9, 2011.

In the episode, Chuck Bartowski (Zachary Levi) and Sarah Walker's (Yvonne Strahovski) wedding preparation includes one final detail: ensuring that the mother-of-the-groom, Mary (Linda Hamilton), makes it to the ceremony alive. Meanwhile, Morgan Grimes's (Joshua Gomez) responsibilities as best man include his most dangerous mission yet, as he faces Vivian Volkoff (Lauren Cohan). Elsewhere, Ellie Woodcomb (Sarah Lancaster) tends to the last details of the rehearsal dinner and seeks help from an unlikely source.

"Chuck Versus the Last Details" received generally positive reviews from critics. According to the Nielsen ratings system, it drew 4.1 million viewers, the third-lowest number in "Chuck" history, after "Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff" and "Chuck Versus Agent X". It had a 2.4/4 share among all households and 1.4/4 share among those aged 18–49.

Mary Elizabeth Bartowski (Linda Hamilton) sneaks into a mine in Amacayacu, Colombia to retrieve the fully assembled "Norseman" weapon, only to be captured by Vivian Volkoff (Lauren Cohan) and Riley (Ray Wise). To ensure that Mary is at his wedding, Chuck Bartowski (Zachary Levi) travels to the mine and rescues Mary, leaving best man Morgan Grimes (Joshua Gomez) in charge of creating a video montage as his wedding present to Sarah Walker (Yvonne Strahovski). Morgan allows Jeff Barnes (Scott Krinsky), Lester Patel (Vik Sahay), and Big Mike (Mark Christopher Lawrence) to create the first cut so that he can partake in the mission, but John Casey (Adam Baldwin) forces Morgan to stay in Burbank due to Alex McHugh's (Mekenna Melvin) worry for his safety.

Later, Morgan is assigned to infiltrate the meeting where Vivian intends to sell the Norseman, posing as a recently captured criminal he closely resembles. At the meeting, Riley uses the Norseman to kill all the buyers, eliminating all "competition" to Volkoff Industries. Because the Norseman was attuned to the DNA of the buyer Morgan was impersonating, rather than Morgan himself, Morgan pretends to be dead and is able to escape unharmed, but the team is forced to confront Riley and Vivian, who believes Chuck to be "Agent X". Chuck then reveals the truth that Vivian's father Alexei Volkoff was Agent X. Riley twists the information to further manipulate and shape Vivian, only to be shot and killed by Sarah. Vivian, however, manages to escape.

At Chuck and Sarah's rehearsal dinner, Morgan tells Alex that he will stop going on missions and simply become an analyst. Chuck's sister Ellie (Sarah Lancaster) is unable to make her own video montage, having previewed and rejected Lester's deeply disturbed first cut. However, Jeff offers his own flawless cut of the montage, being rewarded with a kiss from Ellie. During the video, Chuck gets a phone call from Vivian, who intends to make him suffer. Vivian activates the Norseman device on a target at the dinner, who Chuck initially fears is his mother. Suddenly, Sarah's nose starts to bleed and she collapses in Chuck's arms as he calls out for help.

"Chuck Versus the Last Details" was directed by Peter Lauer, based on a script by Henry Alonso Myers and Kristin Newman. The episode originally aired in the United States on May 9, 2011, on NBC as the 23rd episode of "Chuck" fourth season and the 77th episode overall.

Zap2it confirmed in April 2011 that Linda Hamilton, Lauren Cohan, Mekenna Melvin, and Ray Wise would reprise their recurring roles of Mary Elizabeth Bartowski, Vivian Volkoff, Alex McHugh, and Riley, respectively. Michael Bailey Smith also guest starred as a Volkoff security guard, Vlad.

Series co-creator Chris Fedak revealed at the 2011 Chicago Comic & Entertainment Expo that the series would focus less on the band Jeffster! than on Jeff and Lester's "other obsession" as amateur film makers, saying that the "two young "au-teurs" will "ma-ture" right in front of [the audience]."

Multiple references are made to the "Star Wars" saga throughout the episode. Chuck directly compares their attempting to sneak in to Vivian's base to the same method used by Luke Skywalker and Han Solo to rescue Princess Leia in the original film, by referring to the bound Casey as "Chewie." During the same scene Casey mutters "I have a bad feeling about this," a catch-phrase used by characters throughout the film series. The series is twice referenced directly, by Chuck when Sarah fails to understand his "Chewie" reference, and by Casey, who says, "This is what happens when you draw your plans from "Star Wars"." Chuck and Morgan also make use of "The Imperial March" as a means to prepare Morgan for his mission to pose as a villain while infiltrating a meeting with Vivian.

The episode contains a number of other references. Sarah comments that she has "finally" watched "Mannequin". Mary is later shown doing pull-ups from her bed frame in her prison cell, referencing the film "", where Sarah Connor (also portrayed by Hamilton) did the same thing. While practicing his Italian accent, Morgan quotes video game character Mario's catchphrase "It's me, Mario!" Morgan later comments that buckets of acid are going to be used in the same way as on "Breaking Bad", recommending the series to Casey.

"Chuck Versus the Last Details" received the third-fewest viewers of any episode in the season. According to the Nielsen ratings system, it drew 4.099 million viewers, higher only than "Chuck Versus the Family Volkoff" and "Chuck Versus Agent X". The episode had a 2.4/4 share among all households and 1.4/4 share among those aged 18–49.

The episode received positive reviews from critics. HitFix Senior Editor Alan Sepinwall wrote, "It wasn't a perfect episode, mainly because Vivian remains a fairly muddled, bratty villain, and because I don't feel like the show ever really used Ray Wise to his full potential. But so much of it was so satisfying, both emotionally and comedically, that, until Vivian called Chuck during the rehearsal dinner, I actually thought to myself, 'You know, this would be a pretty damn good finale in and of itself. Ryan McGee of "The A.V. Club" rated the episode a B on an A+ to F scale. McGee wrote, "The last act was fairly phenomenal, but we had to get through a lot of troubling material in order to achieve true liftoff on the hour. With so many loose ends to wrap up, the hour felt overstuffed: the impending wedding, The Norseman, Agent X, Morgan's first field assignment...I mean, that's a lot of stuff. And it doesn't help that Vivian Volkoff is at the center of three of those things, and inserted herself into the fourth at the last moment. And in thinking about the clunkiness of aspects of this episode, I thought about the clunkiness of this latter half of the season as a whole." Eric Goldman of IGN gave this episode a score of 8.5 out of 10, writing that it was a mistake not to include Timothy Dalton as Alexei Volkoff after the plot twists of the previous episode. Sarah Stegall of SFScope wrote, ""Chuck" is killing me by inches. So close, so close to the Chuck/Sarah wedding, but things keep going wrong."



</doc>
<doc id="31602346" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31602346" title="Winter Is Coming">
Winter Is Coming

"Winter Is Coming" is the series premiere episode of the HBO medieval fantasy television series "Game of Thrones". The first episode of the first season, it was written by the show creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, in a faithful adaptation of the first chapters of George R. R. Martin's book "A Game of Thrones". The episode was directed by Tim Van Patten, redoing the work done by director Tom McCarthy in an unaired pilot.

As the first episode of the series, it introduces the setting and the main characters of the show. The episode centers on the Stark family, and how its lord, Eddard Stark, gets involved in the court politics after the king chooses Eddard to replace his recently deceased chief administrator ("Hand of the King"). The episode received largely positive reviews, and was seen initially by 2.2 million viewers. A week before the episode first aired, HBO made the first 15 minutes available as an Internet preview.

The title of the episode is the motto (referred to as "House Words" in-universe) of House Stark, which is spoken several times in the episode and in the series.

The episode begins the process of interweaving action happening in multiple separate locations within and around the fictional continent of Westeros.

Three rangers of the Night's Watch scout beyond the Wall, a massive barrier of ice at the north end of the kingdom. After finding the mutilated corpses of some "wildlings" (tribal humans who live north of the Wall), the rangers are confronted by "White Walkers" (demonic creatures) and undead wildlings. Two of the rangers are killed by the White Walkers, while the third, Will, is left alive. Fearing for his life, Will deserts the Night's Watch, going South.

Queen Cersei, and her twin brother, Jaime Lannister, are watching as the dead body of Jon Arryn, The Hand of The King, is tended to by the Silent Sisters. They discuss whether he revealed any dangerous information regarding the two of them to anyone before his death. Jaime assures his sister that if Arryn had spoken to anyone, they would already have been executed.

The Starks of Winterfell are introduced, including Lord Eddard "Ned" Stark, his wife, Lady Catelyn "Cat" Stark and his five children: heir Robb, elder daughter Sansa, younger daughter Arya, ten-year-old son Bran and youngest son, Rickon. Also introduced are Ned's illegitimate son Jon Snow and ward Theon Greyjoy.

Ned is informed that a deserter of the Night's Watch has been captured. He takes his sons to witness Will's execution. Will reports that he saw White Walkers, but nobody believes him and Ned beheads him. When Bran asks his father about the White Walkers, Ned dismisses it as a madman's ravings, insisting that the Walkers have been extinct for thousands of years. Upon their return, the Starks find a dead stag, sigil (seal) of House Baratheon. A bit farther they find a dead dire wolf and her surviving pups. Noting that the dire wolf is the sigil of the Stark family and there are as many pups as the Stark children, they take the pups in as companions.

Back at Winterfell, a letter arrives announcing the death of Lord Arryn, Eddard's old friend and Catelyn's brother-in-law. An additional message reports that the king himself is coming to Winterfell. Winterfell receives the royal court, including King Robert Baratheon; his wife Queen Cersei; their three children: the heir Prince Joffrey, Princess Myrcella and the youngest Prince Tommen; as well as Cersei's twin brother, Jaime Lannister, a member of the Kingsguard; and their younger brother, Tyrion Lannister, a dwarf known as "The Imp". As Robert pays his respects to Lyanna Stark, his late fiancée and Ned's sister, Robert confides to his old friend that he doesn't trust anyone around him. He decides to name Ned as the new Hand of the King, and to solidify the alliance between the two families, he suggests that Sansa be betrothed to Joffrey.

At night, Catelyn receives a troubling message from her sister, Lord Arryn's widow. She suspects her husband Jon was murdered by the king's in-laws, the powerful Lannisters. Ned, who at first was reluctant to accept the position of Hand of the King, does so in order to protect his old friend. Bran, who enjoys climbing the walls of Winterfell, climbs an abandoned tower where he stumbles on Queen Cersei and Jaime having sex. To keep the incestuous relationship a secret, Jaime shoves Bran out of the high window.

Exiled prince Viserys Targaryen plots to overthrow King Robert and reclaim his father's throne. To this end, he brokers a marriage between his sister Daenerys and a powerful warlord Khal Drogo, leader of a nomadic horde of Dothraki. During the wedding ceremony, Daenerys is given two wedding gifts. The first is a collection of books from the Seven Kingdoms, given by Ser Jorah Mormont, an exiled knight loyal to the Targaryens. The second gift is a chest containing three petrified dragon eggs, given by Magister Illyrio Mopatis, the man who helped arrange the marriage.

A number of Hollywood studios had contacted George R. R. Martin about possible adaptation of his book series "A Song of Ice and Fire" into a film, however Martin expressed the opinion the books could not be made into a film as too much would have to be cut from the books, but thought it could be made into a television series. In January 2006, David Benioff spoke to Martin's literary agent about the books he represented for possible adaption, and the agent sent the first four books of "A Song of Ice and Fire" to David Benioff. Benioff read a few hundred pages of the first book in the series, "A Game of Thrones", called D. B. Weiss and said: "Maybe I'm crazy, but I haven't had this much fun reading anything in about 20 years. So take a look because I think it might make a great HBO series." Weiss, who then read the first book in two days, was very enthusiastic about a possible television project based on the books. They arranged a meeting with Martin, who asked them if they knew who Jon Snow’s real mother might be, and was satisfied with their answer.

In March 2006, a few weeks after meeting Martin, Benioff and Weiss pitched the show to Showtime and Carolyn Strauss of HBO, who accepted their proposal. HBO acquired the rights to the novels to turn them into a television series, with Benioff and Weiss as writers and executive producers of the series. The series went into development in January 2007. The series would begin with the 1996 first book of "A Song of Ice and Fire", "A Game of Thrones", with the intention that each novel in the series would form the basis for a season's worth of episodes. However, Benioff and Weiss had to resubmit a proposal after Carolyn Strauss stepped down as president of HBO in 2008. The first and second drafts of the pilot script, written by Benioff and Weiss, were submitted in August 2007 and June 2008 respectively. While HBO found both drafts to their liking, a pilot was not ordered until November 2008.

Scripted by the show creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, the first episode includes the plot of the book's chapters 1–9 and 12 (Prologue, Bran I, Catelyn I, Daenerys I, Eddard I, Jon I, Catelyn II, partial Arya I, Bran II, Daenerys II). Changes in the adaptation include the sequence of events in the prologue (in the books it is Gared and not Will who survives and is beheaded by Eddard afterwards, and Arya's material is set before the arrival of the royal family), new scenes showing the Lannister twins' perspective, and Daenerys's wedding night showing Drogo not waiting for her to consent to sex.

Tom McCarthy was chosen to direct the pilot episode, shot between October 24 and November 19, 2009 on location in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Morocco. However, the pilot was deemed unsatisfactory and had to be reshot.

The new pilot episode was filmed in 2010 by new director Tim Van Patten, and several actors appearing in the original pilot did not return for the series. Tamzin Merchant was replaced as Daenerys Targaryen by Emilia Clarke, and Jennifer Ehle was replaced as Catelyn Stark by Michelle Fairley. Additionally, Ian McNeice was replaced as Magister Illyrio by Roger Allam, Richard Ridings as Gared by Dermot Keaney, and Jamie Campbell Bower as Ser Waymar Royce by Rob Ostlere.

Another difference is that the original pilot featured scenes shot in Scotland and scenes in Pentos were shot in Morocco, but in the aired series, Winterfell was filmed in a combination of locations in Northern Ireland, while scenes from Pentos were from Malta. The Doune Castle in Scotland was originally used to recreate Winterfell, and its great hall was used for some interior shots. Some scenes survived, but as it was not practical to return to Scotland for the reshoot, an exact replica of Doune's Great Hall was recreated in the soundstage in Belfast for the series. Castle Ward in Northern Ireland was used in the reshoot to film King Robert's entourage entry into Winterfell castle. A car park stood in for the Winterfell castle's courtyard and a wine cellar for the Stark family crypt. The Tollymore Forest Park was used for the opening scene of the encounter with the White Walkers.

All the scenes shot in Morocco were reshot in Malta. The original pilot reused the sets of "Kingdom of Heaven" in Morocco to stand in for Pentos and the site of Drogo and Daenerys's wedding. In Malta, the Verdala Palace, the 16th century summer palace of the president of Malta, was used for the exterior scenes at Illyrio's mansion. The Azure Window was used as the backdrop for the wedding. Filming at the Azure Window, however, caused some controversy when a protected ecosystem was damaged by a subcontractor.

In the sex scene, the then-pregnant Lena Headey was substituted by a body double; the production hid her pregnancy for the rest of the season. In the scene in which the Starks encounter a stag killed by a dire wolf as they return from the execution, an actual animal was used rather than a prop. As the stag had been dead for two days, it stank so much that the actors had to take much care not to let it show on their faces. Some scenes filmed were never aired, for example a flashback to the death of Eddard Stark's brother, and the death of Jon Arryn.

The original pilot from 2009 was poorly received in a private viewing with friends, one of whom, Craig Mazin, said to Benioff and Weiss, "You guys have a massive problem", and said "change everything" when asked for ideas. It was so disliked that Kit Harington joked that when he annoys Benioff and Weiss, they threaten to release the episode on YouTube. Weiss said of the viewing: "Watching them watch the pilot was a deeply humiliating, painful experience, because these are very smart individuals, and it just clearly wasn’t working for any of them on a very basic level." For example, it was never established that the two major characters, Jaime and Cersei Lannister were in fact brother and sister, a major plot point.

HBO did not make a decision for four months after the pilot was delivered. In March 2010, HBO's decision to greenlight the series including the pilot was announced, with the production of the series scheduled to start June 2010. HBO however demanded extensive reshoot of the pilot, and wanted all the scenes from Morocco scrapped. A cameo appearance by George RR Martin as a Pentoshi nobleman at Daenerys's wedding filmed in Morocco was therefore also cut. In all 90 percent of the pilot was re-shot in 2010, with some cast changes and a different director.

The original pilot remained unaired, although some footage from the original pilot was used in the first aired episode. This includes Sansa's scenes with Catelyn (Michelle Fairley's footage as Catelyn was inserted over Jennifer Ehle's performance), Will's ride through the woods (retained though also portrayed by a different actor), most of the feast at Winterfell, and Ned and Robert's scene in the crypt. That scene is one of a few to be filmed on 35 mm film, and consequently slight film grain can be seen in the HD version of the episode.

On April 3, 2011, two weeks before the series premiere aired, the first 15 minutes of "Winter Is Coming" were released as a preview on HBO's website. "Wired"'s Dave Banks called the preview "much better than anticipated." Scott Stinson of Toronto's National Post noted that "you know you aren’t watching a network drama when there have been two beheadings in the first 15 minutes."

The first episode of "Game of Thrones" obtained 2.2 million viewers in its premiere airing, with an additional 2 million viewers in the reruns aired during the same night. The day after the premiere HBO aired the episode six additional times, adding another 1.2 million to the viewer's figures. Reruns aired during the following week upped the total viewership to 6.8 million.

The show premiered on HBO Canada at the same time as its U.S. premiere. On April 18, 2011, the show premiered in United Kingdom and Ireland through Sky Atlantic, gathering 750,000 viewers, a ratings record for the network. The series was broadcast throughout Latin America beginning on May 8, 2011. New Zealand's "Dominion Post" noted in an article on copyright laws that the popular series was downloaded via file sharing service regularly before its release to that market. In Australia, the July 17 premiere of the series was largely overshadowed by the release of "A Dance with Dragons", but according to "The Sydney Morning Herald" was successful "especially with women, who aren't seen as a target market for sword-fighting sagas".

The critical response to the first episode of the series was positive. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes surveyed 10 reviews of the episode and judged 100% of them to be positive with an average score of 8.5 out of 10. The website's critical consensus reads, Winter is Coming' is an introduction to a wonderfully bleak journey that honors its source material with stellar execution and an impressive cast." James Poniewozik from "Time" considered it an "epic win", and Jace Lacob from "The Daily Beast" deemed it "unforgettable". HitFix's Alan Sepinwall wrote that while it was too early to say if "Game of Thrones" belonged to the HBO pantheon with shows like "The Sopranos" or "The Wire", it had many things in common with those shows. IGN's Matt Fowler wrote that the pilot "effortlessly takes us along, faithfully, through the book, but it also manages to capture the majestically morbid spirit of Martin's pages and turn them into thrilling television".

Much praise was given to the production values and the acting: Scott Meslow from "The Atlantic" states that "the show's immense cast is almost universally strong, and the fantasy land of Westeros feels lived-in, and looks terrific". Alan Sepinwall also qualifies the casting as "really exceptional", and states that the show is "feast for the eyes", with all the different locations having their own memorable looks. The opening sequence, with an aerial view of the world where the series takes place with the different settings emerging from it, was also acclaimed.

On April 19, less than two days after the initial airing, HBO announced that the series had been renewed for a second season. In a press teleconference, HBO executives announced their satisfaction with initial ratings, which they compared favorably to "True Blood".



</doc>
<doc id="31625168" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31625168" title="SpaceChem">
SpaceChem

SpaceChem is an indie puzzle game developed by Zachtronics Industries, based on principles of automation and chemical bonding. In the game, the player is tasked to produce one or more specific chemical molecules via an assembly line by programming two remote manipulators (called "waldos" in the game) that interact with atoms and molecules through a visual programming language. "SpaceChem" was the developer's first foray into a commercial title after a number of free Flash-based browser games that feature similar puzzle-based assembly problems.

The game was initially released for Microsoft Windows at the start of 2011 via Zachtronics' own website. Though it was initially rejected for sale on the Steam platform, Valve later offered to sell the game after it received high praise from game journalists; further attention came from the game's release alongside one of the Humble Indie Bundles. The game has since been ported to other computing platforms and mobile devices. Reviewers found the game's open-ended problem-solving nature as a highlight of the title. "SpaceChem" was incorporated into some academic institutions for teaching concepts related to both chemistry and programming.

In "SpaceChem", the player takes the role of a "SpaceChem" Reactor Engineer whose task is to create circuits through which atoms and molecules flow with the aid of waldos to produce particular batches of chemical shipments for each level.

The primary game mode of "SpaceChem" depicts the internal workings of a Reactor, mapped out to a 10 × 8 regular grid. Each reactor has up to two input and up to two output quadrants, and supports two waldos, red and blue, manipulated through command icons placed on the grid. The player adds commands from an array to direct each waldo independently through the grid. The commands direct the movement of the waldo, to pick up, rotate, and drop atoms and molecules, and to trigger reactor events such as chemical bond formation. The two waldos can also be synchronized, forcing one to wait for the other to reach a synchronization command. The reactors may support specific nodes, set by the player, that act where atomic bonds can be made or broken, where atoms can undergo fission or fusion, or where logic decisions based on atom type can be made. As such, the player is challenged to create a visual program to accept the given inputs, disassemble and reassemble them as necessary, and deliver them to the target output areas to match the required product. The product molecule does not need to match orientation or specific layout of the molecules as long as the molecule is topologically equivalent with respect to atoms, bonds, and bond types; however, in larger puzzles, these factors will influence the inputs to downstream reactors. While the two waldos can cross over each other without harm, collision of atoms with one another or with the walls of the reactor is not allowed; such collisions stop the program and force the player to re-evaluate their solution. Similarly, if a waldo delivers the wrong product, the player will need to check their program. The player successfully completes each puzzle by constructing a program capable of repeatedly generating the required output, meeting a certain quota.

In larger puzzles, the player can also guide the formation of chemicals through multiple reactors, which they place out on a larger rectangular grid representing the planet's surface. From here, the output from one reactor will become the input for another reactor; the player is often free to determine what intermediate products to produce to send to the next reactor. The player must not only program the individual reactors, often limited in functionality such as one that can only break bonds but not form them, but plan out the location and order of reactors to make the final product.

The game's puzzles are divided into groups set on different planets. Players generally must complete each puzzle in order to progress to the next one, but the game includes optional harder puzzles. Final boss levels, called out as defense levels, complete each planet; here, the player must efficiently create chemicals and deliver them in a timely manner, once the reactor systems have been started, to trigger defense systems to ward off attacking enemies before they destroy a control structure.

Upon completion of each puzzle, the player's performance is compared on a leaderboard based on the number of instructions placed in their reactors, the number of cycles it took to meet the quota, and the number of reactors required to meet the solution. The player also has an option to upload videos of their solution to YouTube. The player, once having cleared a puzzle, can return to previous puzzles to try to improve their solution by reducing the number of instructions, cycles taken, or reactors used. "SpaceChem" supports downloadable content created by the developers themselves, and user-submitted puzzles through its ResearchNet service. A later addition included an open-ended sandbox mode where players could simply explore the game's capabilities.

Prior to "SpaceChem", Zach Barth, the designer behind Zachtronics Industries, had created several Flash-based browser games with automation puzzles, including "The Codex of Alchemical Engineering" where the player had to place and program manipulator arms to construct atoms and molecules following the rules of alchemy. Barth had wanted to expand the ideas in "Codex" to include more realistic aspects of chemistry, such as more complex molecules, but did not pursue the idea immediately afterwards. About a year after completing "Codex", Barth was inspired by the disused chemical plant at Gas Works Park in Seattle, giving him the idea to incorporate pipelines into the basic mechanics of molecule-building from "Codex".

"SpaceChem" took about a year with a team of seven people from around the globe to create: Barth was responsible for design and production, Collin Arnold and Keith Holman handled the programming, Ryan Sumo created the visuals, Evan Le Ny the music, Ken Bowen the sound and Hillary Field created the game's narrative. The development costs were around $4,000, with the team working on the game during their spare time on weekends. Barth considered this a risk-cutting measure; if the game did not succeed, the team still had their full-time jobs they could continue. The team used the C# language built on the Mono framework for the game which would allow for easy porting to other platforms beyond Microsoft Windows. Initially, they had considered using Microsoft XNA for ease of porting to the Xbox 360, but later opted to consider other release platforms, requiring them to switch to the more portable Mono framework.

In designing puzzles, Barth wanted to keep puzzles open-ended, allowing the player to come to a solution without funneling them in a specific direction. The team designed puzzles based on general chemistry concepts without envisioning the specific solution that the player would take. They brainstormed a number of puzzles and then eliminated those with similar solutions, and arranged the others into a reasonable learning curve for the game. Despite this, Barth reflected that the tutorials provided to explain the game's mechanics had mixed responses, from some players who took up the concept easily to others that remained baffled as to the puzzle's goal even when instructions were set out step by step. In some cases, Barth discovered that players made assumptions on limitations of the game from these tutorials such as the idea that the red and blue waldos must remain in the separate halves of the screen. Based on the feedback that players had made on sites that hosted his previous Flash-based games, Barth designed the global-based histograms to allow players to check their solution without feeling overwhelmed by the top players as would be normally listed on a leaderboard. He also devised the means of sharing solutions through YouTube videos due to similar comments and discussions on the previous games.

Barth had envisioned the game as his first commercial project, and based on feedback from "Codex" and other games, wanted to include a storyline along with the puzzles. The story missions included "defense" puzzles that typically were considered very hard to solve; Barth recognized after release that players would stall out at these puzzles and not attempt to complete the game, with only 2% of the players tracked having reached the final puzzle. Barth would have likely placed the harder puzzles at the end or as part of the ResearchNet add-on. He also tried too much to incorporate a theme based on scientific research, popularized at the time by the success of "Portal". He instead found potential players were scared off by the chemistry aspect even though the game had little connection to real chemistry; a colleague had once suggested to Barth that if the game was named "SpaceGems" and modeled around alchemy, the game would have sold twice as many copies.

"SpaceChem" was released on January 1, 2011 via digital download from the Zachtronics website for Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux computers. They had initially sought to get approval from Valve Corporation to sell the game through Steam, but Valve refused them, and thus opted for sale from their own website. Shortly after its release, the game received several positive reviews including one from Quintin Smith of the gaming website Rock Paper Shotgun. Zachtronics was contacted two days later by Valve Software with an interest to add it to Steam. The game was subsequently made available on Steam by March 4, 2011, and later on GamersGate on March 17, 2011. The inclusion of the game on Steam was considered by Barth to be the largest boost to sales of the game, outweighing any other distribution method they had.

"SpaceChem" received a free update in late April 2011, which added several new features to the game as well as new puzzles. The patch included support for the ResearchNet puzzle creation and sharing system, and for the Steam-enabled version, support for achievements and leaderboards specific for Steam friends. The update for the Steam version also included a small set of puzzles tied in with "Team Fortress 2", which upon completion would reward the player with a decorative item they could use within "Team Fortress 2". The game was included in the Humble Frozen Synapse Bundle charitable sale in early October 2011.

"SpaceChem" was ported to the iPad in October 2011, using touch controls instead of mouse and keyboard to manipulate the visual program. An Android port was released in July 2012. Both mobile platforms include most of the full game excluding the defense puzzles. The sandbox mode was added at the request of a player who was trying to explore "SpaceChem" computational abilities. Alongside the sandbox mode, Zactronics offered a contest for the most interesting sandbox creation. This same user was able to demonstrate a brainfuck interpreter within "SpaceChem", claiming that the visual programming language was Turing complete. Barth has mentioned the possibility of a sequel in an interview with IndieGamer.

Zachtronics Industries has encouraged the game to be used as a learning tool for programming and chemistry concepts, and offers discounts for schools, though briefly offered the game free-of-charge for educational institutions for a few months after the release of the sandbox mode addition. According to The Independent Games Developers Association, schools in the United Kingdom have started using "SpaceChem" to teach students fundamental programming concepts. The success of "SpaceChem" led to several companies contacting Zachtronics to develop educational titles; the company spent about two years working with Amplify to develop three "edutainment" games for their platform before they returned to work on more direct entertainment titles, but used the opportunity to improve on their in-game teaching mechanics.

On September 30, 2012, "SpaceChem" was the featured game on IndieGameStand, a site which features indie games with a pay-what-you-want model with a portion of the proceeds going to charity. Zachtronics Industries chose the Against Malaria Foundation as the charity to which 10% of the proceeds were donated.

On October 25, 2015, Zachtronics announced they have dropped all support for "SpaceChem" on the iOS and OS X platform. The reason they gave was due to the complexity of the Mono package for future support.

"SpaceChem" was generally well received by critics, with an aggregate Metacritic score of 84 out of 100 from its Microsoft Windows release. Quintin Smith of Rock, Paper, Shotgun said "I think we might have just received one of the year's best indie games in the first week of 2011". Gamasutra's Margaret Robertson praised "SpaceChem"s gameplay, contrasting it with other open-ended activities as it offers the opportunity for the player to be as creative as they want to be within the minimal ruleset required of each puzzle. Robertson also found the game to be thrilling, having each puzzle initially appear "so astonishingly dispiriting" to what she had previously learned, but through trial and error coming to a solution that works and giving her the feeling of having "made a creative statement" in her solution. Eurogamer's John Teti praised the means through which the game introduced new mechanics without excessive reliance on tutorials; he commented that "the problems become more daunting" through the addition of new elements and commands, the game "is always more accessible than it looks". "Edge" said "The triumph of "SpaceChem" is that overcoming these situations is more a case of inventing a solution than discovering one."

"Team Fortress" creator Robin Walker recommended "SpaceChem" on Steam, calling it "Pretty much the greatest game ever made". Gamasutra named "SpaceChem" the best indie game of 2011. Though total sales of the game are unknown, at least 230,000 copies were purchases as part of the game's inclusion in the Humble Indie Bundle. Barth stated that with sales of "SpaceChem", he was able to quit his job at Microsoft and run his development company full-time. Ryan Sumo, the freelance artist for the game, gained recognition in the industry and went on to help develop the art for "Prison Architect".


</doc>
<doc id="31695751" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31695751" title="Bikernieki Memorial">
Bikernieki Memorial

Bikernieki Memorial () is a war memorial to The Holocaust victims of World War II in Bikernieki forest (), near Riga, Latvia. Bikernieki forest is the biggest mass murder site during The Holocaust in Latvia with two memorial territories spanning over with 55 marked burial sites with around 20,000 victims still buried in total.

The memorial was initially planned and construction started in 1986, but was delayed after Latvia declared independence in 1991. The construction was revived in 2000 by German War Graves Commission with the help of local Latvian organisations and several German cities. It was financed mostly by German government and organisations, Austrian State Fund, and involved city donations. It was designed by Sergey Rizh and opened on November 30, 2001.

The architect of the memorial is Sergey Rizh (), who worked for 15 years on the design of the memorial, saying it was "his human obligation" to devote his career to this. The memorial is located in the Bikernieki forest, next to the Bikernieku Street () passing through the forest. There are two memorial territories – wide on both sides from the road. In addition to smaller forest pathways, there are two roads leading to the memorial's central square – a historic road used to bring the victims and the main central road paved with concrete slabs and marked with a concrete arc exiting to Bikernieku Street.

The centre of assembly houses a black granite cube – a symbolic altar with engraving from Book of Job 16:18 "Earth, don't cover my blood. Let my cry have no place to rest." in Latvian, Russian, German, and Hebrew languages. The immediate area is surrounded by 4,000 granite stones arranged in a grid of forty-five squares, and resembles a traditional Jewish cemetery. The unique rough-hewn high granite stones of black, gray, and reddish colors come from Zhytomyr region in Ukraine. The stones are carved with European city names representing the home towns of the victims. The entrances to the memorial and other grave sites in the forest are marked with concrete pillars with symbols representing various groups of the fallen – Star of David representing Jews, Crown of Thorns representing war prisoners, and Christian cross representing civilians. Historians from the New Synagogue Berlin – Centrum Judaicum, educational establishment House of the Wannsee Conference, and historians from the member cities have documented the names of over 31,000 victims, published in "Book of Remembrance: The German, Austrian and Czechoslovakian Jews deported to the Baltic States" (2003).

Despite the nature of memorial, the surrounding hills are a popular summer hiking and winter sledding and skiing location. Although Germany supplies annual funding for memorial maintenance, it is insufficient to fund regular police patrols and surveillance. The memorial and gravestones have been vandalised several times, each time attracting media attention. In 2011 two people, among them a member of the Socialist Party of Latvia, were caught after spraying a stylized image of a Nazi, swastikas and text in Latvian on the entrance arc on May 8.

Bikernieki forest is Latvia's biggest mass murder site during The Holocaust of World War II during years 1941–44. There are 55 marked mass burial sites in the forest. About 46,500 people were reported to have been killed there, including Latvian and Western European Jews, Soviet prisoners of war, and Nazis' political adversaries. The exact number of victims is unknown. Although Soviet Nazi War Crime Research Committee declared over 46,000 murders, later excavations did not confirm this number. The number of victims is speculated to be closer to 30,000.

The first victims were a few thousand men arrested in July 1941 and brought from Riga Central Prison. In 1942 another 12,000 Jews were brought from Germany, Austria, and Czechoslovakia. In 1943 Riga Ghetto prisoners were brought here who were unable to work at Kaiserwald concentration camp, followed by those from the camp itself unable to work in 1944. In 1943 and onwards Nazis dug up graves and burned the bodies to hide the evidence. It is estimated that there are now around 20,000 victims buried in the forest.

In the 1960s, only a simple commemorative plaque was placed in the forest and the grave sites were marked with concrete borders. The plaque stated that 46,500 Soviet citizens had died and omitted mentioning nationalities. The location had been neglected and slowly degrading since. The first plans for the Bikernieki forest grave site cleanup were formed in 1986 by a team from the Komunālprojekts Institute. The team included Gaļina Lobaševa, Vija Jansone, Gaļina Alsina, Ineta Vītola, Māris Galarovskis, and Sergey Rizh in the lead. The project received Riga City Council's approval and state funding and the works continued until 1991 when the current government was dissolved after Latvia declared independence. The work halted at around a fifth of the completion with only the surrounding terrain cleared and central and entrance memorial signs erected.

The project was revived in 1993–4 by the initiative of Eric Herzl, an expert from Austrian Society of Memorials, who obtained the permission from Riga City Council to continue the construction work. Austria brought the project to the attention of the German War Graves Commission and more than a dozen German cities in 1999. On May 23, 2000, 13 German city representatives and the president of German War Graves Commission met in Berlin to form German Riga Committee. The chapter was formed to plan and build a war memorial in Bikernieki forest to commemorate the Jews deported and killed at the start of the 1940s. The project was funded by German War Graves Commission, the National Fund of the Republic of Austria, the German government including Central Council of Jews in Germany, and donations from several German town municipalities. The work was carried out by The German Commission, Latvian Fraternal Cemeteries Commission, and the Riga City Council. The projected cost was DEM 900,000 and the actual project cost DEM 1M (or LVL 285,000).

The memorial was opened on November 30, 2001, 60 years after the start of the deportations. The event was opened by the former president of Latvia Vaira Vīķe-Freiberga who in her speech noted the importance of raising people's awareness about the events that took place there. The event was well attended, including former Latvian Prime Minister Andris Bērziņš, Latvian chief rabbi Natans Barkans, officials and ambassadors from various countries, former ghetto and concentration camp inmates, and relatives of the victims from Lithuania, Estonia, Germany, Israel, Austria, and Russia. Several research, education, and remembrance events were held after the opening ceremony. The opening and the following events received local and foreign media coverage. The opening ceremony ended with a Jewish prayer Kaddish by Riga Jewish community cantor Vlad Shulman.

The architect Sergey Rizh says he attempted to show the idea of the memorial with a "concise language of architectural forms". His goal was to encompass the surrounding terrain in line with contemporary art. Art historian Solvita Krese called the project successful and lauded the design for avoiding exaggeration of themes at hand. She also noted that the memorial fit well with the terrain. Architect Ausma Skujiņa also said the project was successful among many other less successful ones. She stressed its positive nature and how the memorial "reconciles with the pain, and evens it out." Winfried Nachtwei describes it as the "first of its kind in Eastern Europe". Historian Andrievs Ezergailis says Rizh successfully adapted and improved on the memorial concept of Treblinka, however criticises that the architect implied deaths of Russian prisoners that Ezergailis describes as inaccurate.


</doc>
<doc id="31717534" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31717534" title="A Passion for Churches">
A Passion for Churches

A Passion for Churches is a 1974 BBC television documentary written and presented by the then Poet Laureate Sir John Betjeman and produced and directed by Edward Mirzoeff. Commissioned as a follow-up to the critically acclaimed 1973 documentary "Metro-land", the film offers Betjeman's personal poetic record of the goings-on taking place throughout the Anglican Diocese of Norwich and its churches in the run-up to Easter Sunday using the framing device of the Holy sacraments.

Created with the approval of the Bishop of Norwich, Maurice Wood, the 49-minute film was shot on location in Norfolk and parts of Suffolk throughout the spring of 1974 on 16 mm colour film by cameraman John McGlashan. For the film, John Betjeman wrote an original poetic commentary consisting of blank verse, free verse, and prose and he appeared on-screen in several segments to describe features of ecclesiastical buildings and to reminisce about his lifelong "passion for churches".

The programme was praised by critics upon its original BBC 2 screening in December 1974 and gained high audience appreciation figures. It has since been repeated on BBC Four in 2006. It was released on a limited-edition DVD in 2007.

Following the success of the 1973 film "Metro-land", which documented life in suburban London, Edward Mirzoeff was commissioned to create a new documentary with John Betjeman. Mirzoeff noticed that aside from suburban themes, the Church of England was the other major influence on Betjeman's poetry. His proposal to the poet was for a study of the Church of England to be titled "Failed in Divinity", a line derived from Betjeman's poetic autobiography "Summoned by Bells", in which the poet relates how was sent down from the University of Oxford after failing a compulsory examination on divinity. In Mirzoeff's first treatment, Betjeman would have embarked on a journey around Britain studying fine cathedrals, churches and their congregations. Betjeman ruled against the title, but liked the idea, although he was keen that the film should be primarily about the Church and its people, and not himself.

Following this early proposal, Mirzoeff and Betjeman realised that a study of the whole Church would be too ambitious, and instead decided to set the film within one diocese. Betjeman initially suggested the Diocese of Southwark, owing to a friendship with the then-Bishop of Southwark, Mervyn Stockwood. Mirzoeff was not keen, given that Southwark was primarily an urban diocese. A disastrous meeting with the bishop (who was "high-handed, arrogant and very, very rude") led to that idea being scrapped.

Film editor Ted Roberts suggested the Diocese of Norwich, as Norfolk is noted for the density of its medieval churches in a variety of urban, coastal and rural locations. In addition, Betjeman was close friends with Lady Wilhelmina "Billa" Harrod (to whom he had once been engaged), who resided at The Old Rectory, Holt. She was greatly involved with saving redundant churches and was personal friends with the Bishop of Norwich, Maurice Wood, and was also able to provide the crew with accommodation. Early location-scouting proved fruitful, and the production was bolstered by a meeting with Bishop Wood in March 1974, during which the bishop, after initial reluctance, gave the production his blessing. Filming began in April 1974.

The documentary was shot on 16 mm colour film by cameraman John McGlashan, who had also worked on the BBC's M.R. James series of adaptations "A Ghost Story for Christmas", of which the early installments were entirely filmed in Norfolk (Betjeman was a fan of Jamesian ghost stories, and often read them to the crew while travelling to locations). McGlashan was also a part-time priest for a Liberal Catholic church, and was able to bring to the production additional knowledge of the Sacraments.

After deciding against the original "Failed in Divinity" preface, it was decided to open the film with Betjeman remembering a Norfolk rowing holiday from his youth in which his father pointed out the tower of St Peter's church in Belaugh. This moment, he said, led to his lifelong "passion for churches", a phrase that would eventually form the title of the film. The crew decided to film Betjeman revisiting this location on the River Bure, although on several occasions the poet nearly capsized his rowing boat.

The production work was exhaustive, involving the filming of numerous churches in Norfolk, both ancient and more modern. Many of the clergymen featured in the programme were discovered by accident or by word-of-mouth. For example, the production researcher managed to find, on request, a vicar who had an extensive model railway in his rectory, another whose ministry was based on water (the Chaplain of the Broads) and a vicar whose congregation at the time numbered zero.

Several of the services featured in the film were one-off events. For example, the wedding was shot at Lyng, where the bride's father was the rector. The bridegroom, Nigel McCulloch, went on to become the Bishop of Manchester. The production encountered difficulties with obtaining some footage; while filming a Seaman's Mission from Great Yarmouth, a wave flooded the boat, ruining the sound-recording equipment, and a sequence featuring an open-air service taking place at daybreak on Easter Sunday at the most easterly point of the UK — at Ness Point, Lowestoft — was nearly missed after the sound recordist overslept.

The commentary alternates between blank verse, free verse, and prose. Although Betjeman had accompanied the production on most of its shoots, his poetic commentary was only written in the weeks after the film had already been edited by Roberts. According to Mirzoeff, he would run sequences from the film for hours, searching for inspiration in the rhythm of the editing, sometimes sitting in a small cupboard to help himself concentrate. Mirzoeff notes that he found writing the text for "A Passion for Churches" more of a strain than for his previous film since he had to take into consideration both his own beliefs and those of his friends. Sometimes members of the crew would help him by writing their own verses for him to use or modify. One particular sequence proved so difficult to write that Betjeman flew into a rage after the director pressured him to hurry the composition along. Mirzoeff suggests that several sequences, such as the scene about redundancy and death, provoked verse of much greater "complexity and depth" than any heard in his previous screen appearances.

The film is roughly based on themes suggested by the Anglican sacraments. It opens with Betjeman's recollection of how a boating holiday by Belaugh in Norfolk inspired his "Passion for Churches". After a montage of church architecture with the musical accompaniment of the barrel organ of Bressingham, the focus shifts to St Margaret's, Cley next the Sea, where Betjeman introduces the viewer to its features. The scene then switches to a baptism in Trunch and later a children's service in Mattishall. Also seen are the restoration of the medieval screen at Ranworth and examples of surviving Norwich glass. Betjeman then journeys to Norwich, which has more surviving medieval churches than London, Bristol and York combined. At Norwich Cathedral, the centre of the diocese, he attends a Mothers' Union meeting with the Bishop, and later the institution of a new rector to the living of Holt. Betjeman tells the viewer about the Elizabethan vicarage of Great Snoring. Later seen are a vicar busily writing his newsletter at Weston Longville, a parish meeting at Letheringsett and a fête at South Raynham. Betjeman presents the three-storey pulpit of St Mary's Bylaugh and the brass-rubbing at Felbrigg. A wedding takes place in Lyng and in the tower, change ringers explain their addiction to bell-ringing.

Betjeman explores the ruins of St Benet's Abbey before seeing its modern equivalent at a convent of Anglican nuns at the Community of All Hallows, Ditchingham. Betjeman then takes the North Norfolk Railway to Walsingham to see the Anglican pilgrims going to the church of Our Lady of Walsingham. After a look at the Queen's church in Sandringham and the unusual Victorian church at Booton, choir practices are seen in progress at Martham and Wymondham Abbey. Exulting the work of Sir Ninian Comper at Lound, Suffolk, Betjeman recalls that he looked like Colonel Sanders. As Easter Day approaches, Betjeman reflects on the furthest reaches of the diocese - water-borne ministries, a parish church in Flordon that no one attends, as well as the fate of those churches declared redundant; conversion into hospitals, an artists' studio, a shoe store and dereliction. Easter Day breaks in Lowestoft, and the viewer sees traditionally dressed ladies from the Almshouses in Castle Rising. The film concludes back in Norwich as parishioners of St Peter Mancroft, and parishioners from churches all around the county summoned by bells, walk to worship.

Mirzoeff recalls that "A Passion for Churches" created a minor internal disagreement at the BBC since the film, produced by the General Features Department, discussed a subject considered to be the territory of the Religious Broadcasting Department. The head of the department insisted on a screening, but was placated by the presence of the poet and Prime Minister Harold Wilson's wife, Mary, at a private showing held in November 1974, and he gave the film his approval.

Critical reception to the film was generally very positive: "The Times Literary Supplement" named it "Sir John's masterpiece to date" and the "Financial Times" described it as "extremely good". Television playwright Dennis Potter was also highly complimentary, writing his New Statesman review in verse as a tribute. Only the "Eastern Daily Press" felt that the film was too short and lacking in detail. But it responded favourably to the repeat, claiming that its original criticisms had led to the film being much improved. In fact not one single frame had been changed. Audience response was recorded as "exceptionally enthusiastic" and Betjeman himself was pleased with the result, although of his films he still favoured "Metro-land".

"A Passion for Churches" was revived by BBC Four in 2006 to mark the centenary of the poet's birth. It was subsequently released on a limited-edition DVD in 2007 with notes by the producer and two additional short films by the poet.




</doc>
<doc id="31743501" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31743501" title="Businessman (film)">
Businessman (film)

Businessman, also known as The Businessman, is a 2012 Indian Telugu-language action film written and directed by Puri Jagannadh. Based on a concept by Ram Gopal Varma and produced by R. R. Venkat under the banner R. R. Movie Makers, the film features Mahesh Babu and Kajal Aggarwal in the lead roles, with Nassar, Prakash Raj, Sayaji Shinde, Raza Murad and Brahmaji in supporting roles.

Mahesh plays Vijay Surya, who later becomes Surya Bhai a ruthless man who comes to Mumbai from South India aspiring to become a mafia don. Surya arrives just as the Mumbai police declare the end of the "Mafia Raj" and begins his journey by helping a local politician and trapping the city commissioner's daughter, only to fall in love with her. He eventually emerges as the biggest mafia leader of Mumbai and kills a national politician Jai Dev in retribution for cheating and murdering his parents.

S. Thaman composed the film's music and Shyam K. Naidu was the film's cinematographer. The film was made with a budget of 400 million and was launched formally on 15 August 2011 at Hyderabad. Principal photography began on 2 September 2011 and was shot in Hyderabad, Mumbai and Goa. A few song sequences were shot in Bangkok. Filming ended on 10 December 2011 in 74 working days, one of the shortest periods in which a Telugu film has been shot.

Released during Sankranthi on 13 January 2012, the film received mixed feedback from critics, but was commercially successful. It grossed more than 550 million and collected a distributor share of 448 million, eventually becoming one of the highest grossing Telugu films of 2012.

Mumbai Police commissioner Ajay Bhardwaj announces the end of the "Mafia Raj" in the city, to try to bring peace to the city's streets. However, a ruthless south Indian named Vijay Surya comes to the city, aspiring to be the most powerful Mafia Don there. Staying in Dharavi with his friend, he is introduced to a local politician Laalu, who is in trouble and offers him help. He recruits a portion of the gangsters and criminals living in Mumbai led by Naseer to work under him. Surya's henchman Shakeel manages to kill a witness of Laalu's crimes in the jail where he is kept in, winning Laalu's friendship.

After this, Surya promises to clear the debts of Dharavi locals so that their houses will not be repossessed. His men rob the original copies of the loan documents in the local branch of Bank of Maharashtra and destroy the bank records. Surya slowly becomes both popular and feared as an extortionist, while Dharavi locals praise him as their saviour. Surya is aware of Bhardwaj's intentions. To safeguard himself, he traps Bhardwaj's daughter Chitra, a keen painter, by posing as a NRI businessman interested in arts. They both fall in love. However, by the time Surya realises that he truly loves her, Bhardwaj has exposed Surya's real nature to Chitra which makes her hate him. Surya is immediately arrested.

Surya is released after manipulating Bhardwaj by having his associates kidnap Chitra. He promises to leave crime behind him and asks Bhardwaj for permission to marry Chitra. When they refuse his proposal, he insists to Bhardwaj that he will set up a business which is untouchable by the police, and will eventually marry Chitra. Surya sets up a company named "Surya Exports & Imports" as a front for the organised crime that they indulge in. He plans to grow his organised crime network all over India and begins to set up branch offices for "Surya Exports & Imports" in all major cities, towns and villages all over India. He recruits local gangsters for staff and begins to forcibly collect a two percent tax on every contract made in that area. Surya amasses a huge fortune, making him a billionaire, and during the inauguration of his "Business Bank", he reveals his thirst for power to Bhardwaj. He claims that the crime rate dropped significantly after he started to recruit all the gangsters. He also states that he wants to rid India of crime and help the needy.

Next, Surya helps Laalu to become the Mayor of Mumbai by defeating Arun Ghokle, endorsed by Ghanapuleti Jai Dev, a powerful national politician who wants to become the new prime minister of India in the upcoming elections. Ghokle then reveals Jai Dev's illegal scams to Bhardwaj, after which he is killed by Jai Dev. After the meeting, Surya comes to know that Jai Dev is planning to kill Bhardwaj and Chitra. He reaches Chitra's house and saves her but fails to save Bhardwaj. Chitra is devastated and Surya reveals to her that he was an American-born Indian who lost his philanthropist NRI father and mother at an early age; they were cheated and killed by Jai Dev. This incident and the peoples' attitudes towards orphans while growing up made him hate that society.

Surya shifts his attention towards the upcoming Indian parliament elections and meets Guru Govind Patel, the head of the opposition party through Laalu. He makes a deal with him, offering 350 billion for election campaigning and also promises him that he would make him the prime minister of India. Surya spends millions on every constituency in India, making Jai Dev unable to contest in the elections by revealing his illegal affairs. Jai Dev kidnaps Chitra to seek revenge on Surya, who fights with Jai Dev's henchmen. He is injured, but eventually kills Jai Dev, saving Chitra and proposing to her for the last time. It is revealed at the end that Surya successfully installed Guru Govind Patel as the Prime Minister of India.

Surya is last seen recuperating in a hospital in the company of Chitra, who accepts his proposal.



Ram Gopal Varma signed Suriya for a multilingual crime film titled "The Businessman" in May 2010, to be directed by Puri Jagannadh simultaneously in Telugu, Tamil and Hindi. The film's protagonist was supposed to be a south Indian coming to Mumbai and setting up a crime business using tact and intelligence to emerge as one of the biggest gangsters. The film's production was expected to begin in October 2010 once Suriya completed his part in "7aum Arivu" (2011) and was scheduled for release in the summer of 2011. Jagannadh stated in an interview that principal photography would begin in September 2010. It was speculated that the film was to be based on the real-life story of a gangster who had moved from the Cuddalore district of Tamil Nadu to Mumbai in the late 1960s.

The film was revived later by R. R. Venkat later in January 2011 with a tagline "Guns do not need agreements". He signed Mahesh Babu as the protagonist who worked with Jagannadh in the past for "Pokiri" (2006). Venkat added that the film would be produced under the banner R. R. Movie Makers. Jagannadh completed the final draft of the film's script on 25 July 2011 during his stay at Bangkok, adding that he was inspired by Ram Gopal Varma. He stated that the pending pre-production work would begin in Hyderabad after a week. The film had its formal launch on 15 August 2011 with a small pooja ceremony conducted at Hyderabad. Shyam K. Naidu and S. Thaman were confirmed as the film's cinematographer and music director respectively.

Mahesh received the film's script while dubbing for "Dookudu" (2011), but due to that commitment took ten days to finish reading the script. He said in an interview that he could maintain the consistency in the character only because of the fewer working days. Jagannadh did not cast Brahmanandam and Ali because of Mahesh's specific characterisation; he added that Mahesh's voice had changed when compared to his performance in "Pokiri". Mahesh also convinced Jagannadh to give up smoking, since he himself was trying to give up after being a chain smoker.

Shruti Haasan was initially considered for the female lead role after her performance in her Telugu film debut, "Anaganaga O Dheerudu" (2011). However, Kajal Aggarwal was signed as the female lead later in May 2011, marking her first collaboration with both Mahesh and Jagannadh respectively. She was paid 10 million for this film. Jagannadh confirmed reports stating Mahesh and Kajal sharing a kiss in the film, adding that he retained them after Mahesh's wife Namrata Shirodkar approved it. It was reportedly the first onscreen kiss for both of them. Kajal explained that it was not supposed to be sensual, but was meant to portray the conflict between two characters, and added that it was shot "aesthetically" by Jagannadh.

Prakash Raj, Nassar, Sayaji Shinde, Dharmavarapu Subramanyam, Brahmaji and Bandla Ganesh among others were cast for key supporting roles. Hansika Motwani was rumoured to be a part of the film's cast in late August 2011 but not immediately confirmed. In mid October 2011, Hansika reportedly agreed to perform an item number in the film. She later dismissed those reports as baseless rumours, claiming that other acting assignments keep her away from accepting.

Actress Shweta Bhardwaj was therefore selected to perform the item number instead. She was friends with Jagannadh, and he approached her for this song during the film's shoot at Mumbai, saying that the song suited her and her personality as a dancer. She also tried to understand the meaning of the lyrics while dancing. Bhardwaj was afraid of dancing, suspecting a possible sprain, and found the costumes uneasy, but had to continue upon the choreographer's insistence. Canadian-born Indian actress Ayesha Shiva was signed to play Kajal's friend in the film.

The film was planned to be shot entirely in and around Mumbai and Jagannadh searched for distinct localities there which suit the script's backdrops. Jagannadh told Venkat that he needed 75 working days to complete the film's shoot. He planned to start with Mahesh in the first week of September 2011 and established this schedule before finishing in the first week of January 2012. Filming began on 2 September 2011 at Rajiv Gandhi International Airport in Hyderabad.

The second schedule began at Mumbai from 20 September 2011 and Mahesh confirmed in an interview that it would last until 5 December 2011. An action sequence choreographed by Vijayan was shot in mid October 2011 and it was announced that the film's climax would be shot in and around Goa from 27 October 2011. The song "We Want Bad Boys" was shot in late October 2011. At the same time, Jagannadh planned to shoot a couple of songs with Mahesh and Kajal in Spain during November 2011. The filming of the climax sequences featuring Mahesh, Prakash Raj and others was finished by 2 November 2011.

After filming two songs in the districts of Krabi and Pattaya in Bangkok, the film's unit returned to Hyderabad on 2 December 2011 for completing patch work. The film's shooting was wrapped up on 10 December 2011 in 74 working days as expected. Jagannadh revealed in an interview that the film's length by the end of shoot was 84,000 feet as planned. He added that Mahesh and Kajal participated in the film's shoot for 65 and 30 days respectively.

The film's dubbing activities began on 15 December 2011 at Shabdalaya Studios in Hyderabad. The DTS mixing works were in progress in early January 2012. The Central Board of Film Certification passed the film with an 'A' certificate; board members found few of the film's dialogues offensive and potentially upsetting to the people of Mumbai.

The soundtrack consists of six songs composed by S. Thaman and written by Bhaskarabhatla Ravi Kumar. Aditya Music acquired the audio rights. The original along with both the dubbed versions of the soundtrack were released on 22 December 2011 at Shilpakala Vedika in Hyderabad. Na. Muthukumar and Kailas Rishi wrote the lyrics for the dubbed Tamil and Malayalam versions of the songs respectively. The soundtrack sold nearly 200,000 compact discs on the first day of its release itself.

The film was initially planned for a worldwide release on 11 January 2012. Hari Venkateswara Pictures acquired the film's overseas distribution rights and after requests by non-Telugu Mahesh fans, it was the first Telugu film to release with subtitles in overseas cinemas. The makers planned for a release in new international markets like Japan and Dubai to cash in on Mahesh's previous film, "Dookudu". The release was postponed by two days to 13 January 2012 due to post production delays. Two thousand screens across the world were booked for the film's initial release.

It was released to 92 screens across Hyderabad, breaking the previous record set by "Oosaravelli" (2011) which was released to 70 screens. Prasads IMAX screened 33 shows on the release day. The film's Tamil and Malayalam dubbed versions, also titled "Businessman", was released on 7 December 2012 to 200 screens across Tamil Nadu and 28 December 2012 respectively.

S. Thaman was criticised for copying the tunes of the Italian partisan song "Bella ciao" for the song "Pilla Chao"and "He Lives in You", a song written and performed by Lebo M and his South African Choir for the album "Rhythm of the Pride Lands" (1995), for the song "Chandamama". "Pilla Chao" was one of the more successful songs on the soundtrack and many music lovers left angry comments about the plagiarism on the song's YouTube video.

The makers violated the rules of The Cinematograph Act, 1952 and the Central Board of Film Certification regarding the re-working of its title from "The Businessman" to "Businessman" after the board cleared the film with the former title. The Andhra Pradesh Film Chamber of Commerce cleared the registration of the film title as "The Businessman" on 1 January 2011 through a letter and was renewed up to 22 April 2012. The set of posters sent to the board for certification purpose carried the full title. The film was publicised without the definite article, which was also missing from the posters. Also the 'A' certification was omitted.

After release, the film was criticised for the usage of curse-words by the protagonist and a few intimate sequences between the lead pair. The muting of a few dialogues and blurring of a few visuals by the board were criticised by viewers. Bajrang Dal lodged a complaint with Municipal police on 14 January 2012 stating that the lyrics of the song "We love Bad Boys" contained vulgar words and conveyed an unacceptable meaning for which they demanded action against Jagannadh. The police confirmed this and stated they would seek legal opinions for taking further action.

Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad activists entered the Aradhana theatre at Tarnaka near Osmania University, and stopped a screening on 25 January 2012 at 11:30 AM. They stole the film's reels and ripped off the film's hoardings and flexies at the theatre, protesting a few dialogues which allegedly demeaned Rama and were anti-patriotic. They burnt the film's reels in front of Osmania Arts College in protest of the lyrics of the song "We want Bad Boys" alleging that the song was filled with abusive words. They also demanded a public apology by Mahesh and Jagannadh. Journalist Rohit Vats in his article "Real and reel: How Telugu cinema celebrates stalking" mentioned the sequences in "Businessman" quoting, "The conversation between Mahesh Babu and Kajal Aggarwal in Businessman was termed vulgar but later it was accepted in the name of sarcasm. Basically, it was perceived as harmless teasing".

A first-look teaser of 41 seconds was released on 9 November 2011. The first-look poster featuring a still of Mahesh sitting in a chair and deeply thinking was revealed on 11 November 2011 (11.11.11), receiving a positive response. Two posters featuring Mahesh were unveiled on 5 and 11 December 2011. The theatrical trailer was attached to the prints of "Panjaa" (2011) to be screened in theatres from 9 December 2011.

As a part of the film's promotion, Aditya Music offered a range of ringtone packs. Contests were introduced where the winners won posters autographed by Mahesh, the film's tickets and soundtrack discs apart from others.

Jagannadh acquired the satellite rights of the film during his negotiations with the film's producers for 50 million. He wanted to rotate the film screening on various channels, at appropriate times, in a bid to gain more widespread viewership and recoup his investment. Studio N acquired the film's television broadcast rights in March 2012 for 66 million, which were later sold to Gemini TV. The film's DVD and Blu Ray discs were produced by Universal Home Entertainment and were released in May 2012.

Suresh Krishnamoorthy of "The Hindu" called "Businessman" a "wholesome package" and a "pure entertainer", quoting "Puri Jagannath has proved that he's still the director with the Midas touch with his latest release, "Businessman"". Y. Sunita Chowdary, also from "The Hindu", wrote "The "Businessman" has a mix of action, image, dialogue and montage but what makes it entertaining is that all the above quantities are inextricably bound and linked together at every level with an admirably tight script." She added that Jagannadh did not make any structural, technical or content errors, although the story was a regular one. Suresh Kavirayani of "The Times of India" gave the film 3.25 out of 5 stars and called the film an "unpretentious entertainer that manages to strike the right balance", which according to him, had enough in it to keep the viewers interested till the end despite not being a spectacular production.

Indo-Asian News Service gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and called "Businessman" a film for Mahesh's fans and highlighted Mahesh's performance and Jagannadh's dialogues as the film's strong points. Another reviewer from IANS called the film "senseless yet entertaining" and stated "Mahesh's dashing performance as a mafia kingpin with a hidden personal agenda is commendable and deserves high appreciation. "Businessman" may be perverse and appeal only to the masses, yet is a winner for unexplainable reasons." Radhika Rajamani of Rediff.com gave the film 2.5 out of 5 stars and opined that "Businessman" was an entertaining film if watched uncritically. She added "There's no doubt that Puri Jagan has played to the gallery and kept the masses and Mahesh's image in mind while conceiving this film. It's just Mahesh all the way."

Sify felt that the film was strictly for Mahesh's fans but praised Jagannadh's work saying that the "story sounds far fetched, demanding logic. The screenplay is a saving grace, which works like magic, making the audiences forget the monotony in between." The reviewer highlighted Mahesh's performance, the dialogues and the songs as the film's stronger elements. Ramchander of Oneindia Entertainment called "Businessman" a serious film with limited appeal, which might be enjoyed by Mahesh's fans but which would be an average for others. B. V. S. Prakash of "Deccan Chronicle" gave the film 2 out of 5 stars and stated ""Businessman" is a typical Mahesh Babu film all the way, evoking laughs with comic one-liners and subtle expressions. However, his efforts could go in vain thanks to a contrived and highly exaggerated plot." IndiaGlitz called "Businessman" a "Mahesh-Magnified film" and stated "It is clear that the director throws all logic to the winds in the hope that Mahesh the Prince and a few cheeky one-liners will salvage the film. There is so much meaningless lecturing in the movie in the form of the demented arguments that our hero employs in many a scene."

"Businessman" opened to 85% occupancy in both single screens and multiplexes at AP/Nizam box office on its first day. It grossed approximately 187.35 million and collected a share of 137.8 million at the global box office on its first day creating an all-time record in terms of opening day collections. The film collected a distributor share of 120 million in AP/Nizam box office, 10 million in Karnataka, 7.5 million together in Tamil Nadu, Orissa and North India respectively and 0.3 million together in the United States, United Kingdom, Australia and Japan on its first day.

The film collected approximately 418.35 million by the end of its first week at the global box office and was declared a blockbuster. The film completed a 50-day run in 350 centres on 3 March 2012, and a 100-day run in undisclosed number of centres on 21 April 2012. The film collected a distributor share of 448 million and grossed over 550 million in its lifetime at the global box office.

After Mahesh refused to perform in the Hindi remake of this film, Jagannadh approached Ranbir Kapoor in late January 2012 and arranged a special screening for him. Ram Gopal Varma confirmed in March 2012 that he and Jagannadh would remake the film in Hindi with Abhishek Bachchan playing the role of Mahesh in the original. The film was remade in Bengali as "" in 2013 by choreographer-turned-director Baba Yadav with Jeet and Subhasree Ganguly reprising the roles of Mahesh and Kajal from the original respectively.

Jagannadh expressed interest in making a sequel of the film after the response to the original on its first day and planned to begin work on the same from late 2012. Mahesh too confirmed the same in late January 2012 during the scripting stage of the sequel titled "Businessman 2". It was planned as a bilingual film to be shot in Telugu and Hindi simultaneously. Ram Gopal Varma also expressed interest after listening to the script and felt that the sequel would do much better business than the original. However, Jagannadh shelved the sequel in early August 2012 and opted to direct Mahesh in an original film.


</doc>
<doc id="31747730" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31747730" title="New York (Glee)">
New York (Glee)

"New York" is the twenty-second episode and season finale of the second season of the American musical television series "Glee", and the forty-fourth overall. The episode was written and directed by series creator Brad Falchuk, filmed in part on location in New York City, and first aired on May 24, 2011 on Fox in the United States. With a $6 million budget, it was reportedly the most expensive episode of "Glee" at the time of broadcast. It garnered a Primetime Emmy nomination for Outstanding Costumes for a Series. The episode features an appearance by Patti LuPone as herself and guest stars Jonathan Groff, Cheyenne Jackson, and Jake Zyrus. The McKinley High School glee club, New Directions, performs at the National show choir competition in New York City and finishes in twelfth place. While they are there, the glee club members see the sights, including Times Square and Central Park. Rachel (Lea Michele) and Kurt (Chris Colfer) sing a song from a Broadway stage, as does their director, Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison).

The episode, and the musical performances featured, received mixed reviews from critics. While a number of scenes were praised, including the epilogue after the club's return to Lima, Ohio, reviewers excoriated the fact that New Directions arrived in New York with their songs for the competition unwritten, and deemed it completely illogical. The original songs in the competition were met with a wide range of opinions, as were most of the covers. Five original songs and five covers were performed, all but one of which were released as singles; three of the originals and two of the covers charted on the "Billboard" Hot 100. Upon its initial airing, this episode was viewed by 11.80 million American viewers and garnered a 4.6/11 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic. The total viewership and ratings for this episode were up significantly from the previous episode, "Funeral".

The McKinley High School glee club, New Directions, travels to New York City to compete in the National show choir competition. Glee club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) tasks the students with writing two original songs, then leaves on an errand. After spending hours trying to compose music, their only creation is "My Cup" by Brittany (Heather Morris), Artie (Kevin McHale), and Puck (Mark Salling). Seeking fresh inspiration for their songwriting, they explore the city as they sing a mash-up of "I Love New York" and "New York, New York".

Meanwhile, Will has been visiting the theater where "CrossRhodes", the April Rhodes musical in which he is secretly involved, is located. He performs "Still Got Tonight" from the stage. When Will returns, he finds that the glee club has been shaken after learning of his Broadway plans from Dustin Goolsby (Cheyenne Jackson), the coach of rival club Vocal Adrenaline. He reassures them that he has now fulfilled his dream of singing on a Broadway stage and chooses to stay with New Directions.

Encouraged by his fellow male glee club members, Finn (Cory Monteith) asks Rachel on a date in Central Park. The two enjoy dinner at Sardi's where they meet Patti LuPone. As the date draws to a close with Puck, Artie, Sam (Chord Overstreet), and Mike (Harry Shum, Jr.) serenading the two with "Bella Notte", Rachel feels torn between Finn and her dreams of being on Broadway, and leaves after refusing to kiss him. The next morning, after breakfast at Tiffany's, Rachel and Kurt (Chris Colfer) sneak onto the stage of "Wicked" and sing a duet of "For Good". Rachel realizes that her true love is Broadway and they vow to return to New York City for college.

At Nationals, Rachel encounters a nervous Sunshine Corazon (Charice). She apologizes for having made Sunshine feel unwelcome at McKinley, and admits that she was jealous of her talent. She offers Sunshine her support, and reassures her as she opens for Vocal Adrenaline with "As Long As You're There".

The New Directions set begins with Rachel and Finn singing the duet he wrote, "Pretending", and an enthusiastic audience falls silent when the two of them kiss at its conclusion. The glee club closes with "Light Up the World" and receives a standing ovation. A jealous Jesse St. James (Jonathan Groff) confronts Finn after the performance, and asserts that the unprofessional kiss will cost them the championship. New Directions is not one of the ten groups named to advance to the finals the next day, and finishes in twelfth place out of fifty competing show choirs.

Back in Ohio, Kurt recounts his experiences in New York City to Blaine (Darren Criss), and they profess their love to each other. It is revealed that Sam and Mercedes (Amber Riley) are secretly dating. Santana (Naya Rivera) and Brittany reaffirm their friendship, and Brittany tells Santana she loves her more than she has ever loved anyone. Rachel meets up with Finn and the two contemplate their Nationals kiss; Finn reminds her that she still has a year until graduation and kisses her.

This was the most expensive "Glee" episode yet, at a reported $6 million. The budget exceeded the previous record-holder, "The Sue Sylvester Shuffle", which was the episode that followed the 2011 Super Bowl. It was also the show's first major out-of-state location shoot. The cast and crew filmed for five weekdays in New York City, from April 25 through April 29, 2011. Forty members of the crew were flown to New York along with the cast, and were joined there by sixty local crew members. All three of the show's creators—who also serve as executive or co-executive producers—were present: Ryan Murphy, Ian Brennan and episode writer and director Brad Falchuk, along with executive producer Dante Di Loreto and first assistant director Leo Bauer.

Ten locations were used during the New York filming, including Times Square, Lincoln Center, the Gershwin Theatre, Central Park, and Sardi's. LuPone made a guest appearance as herself in the Sardi's scene, which was shot in the morning on Thursday to accommodate her schedule—she had an 11:00 am rehearsal for another show. Washington Square Park, which was used on the final day of filming, had not been approved as a location by the city until after the production team arrived in New York. Di Loreto noted that the biggest challenge of shooting in the city was "the amount of people who can say no."

While some of the costumes for the New York shoot were prepared ahead of time, much of the costuming was done in New York, and the costumes for the episode received an Emmy Award nomination. Costume designer Lou Eyrich revealed that the plan was to have the costuming be a "little nod" to the "iconic New York places we were going to shoot", and with a "little bit of '50s, '60s flair", but not too "vintage". She said, "We landed in New York on a Saturday night, shopped all day Sunday, threw them in the clothes" for the filming that began on Monday. According to an article in "The Hollywood Reporter", twenty-six outfits were found in a single day.

Filming continued back in Los Angeles, where episodes are typically shot, including a location shoot at the Million Dollar Theater to film Morrison's scene where he sings "Still Got Tonight" on a Broadway stage. The shooting for the episode—and the season—wrapped up in the early hours of May 12, 2011.

Recurring guest star Groff appeared in this episode as Jesse, as did Jackson as Vocal Adrenaline coach Dustin Goolsby and Charice as his star vocalist Sunshine. Other recurring characters included glee club members Mike Chang, Sam Evans and Lauren Zizes (Ashley Fink), and Kurt's boyfriend Blaine Anderson.

The episode featured five original songs and five musical cover versions. Of the original songs, Morris and McHale performed "My Cup", Morrison sang "Still Got Tonight", a track from his solo album, Charice performed "As Long As You're There", Michele and Monteith sang "Pretending", and New Directions performed "Light Up the World", with solo vocals by Rivera, Morris, McHale and Monteith, and a short duet with McHale and Jenna Ushkowitz. The cover versions included a brief performance of Frank Sinatra's "Theme from "New York, New York", a mash-up of Madonna's "I Love New York" and "New York, New York" from "On the Town", "Bella Notte" from "Lady and the Tramp", Michele and Colfer on "For Good" from "Wicked", and Usher's "Yeah!". All but the Sinatra number were released as singles, available for digital download, though "Still Got Tonight" had been released in late April in the lead-up to the debut of Morrison's album on May 10, 2011.

"New York" was first broadcast on May 24, 2011 in the United States on Fox. It garnered a 4.6/11 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, and received 11.80 million American viewers during its initial airing. With an "American Idol" lead-in, and despite strong competition from the first hour of "Dancing With the Stars Results" on ABC, which matched the "Glee" Nielsen rating/share for its two-hour broadcast, the total viewership and ratings for this episode were up by a third from those of the previous episode, "Funeral", which was watched by 8.97 million American viewers and acquired a 3.6/10 rating/share in the 18–49 demographic upon first airing. The episode was the top scripted show of the week among all viewers.

The episode's Canadian broadcast, also on May 24, 2011, drew 1.77 million viewers. It was the seventh most-watched show of the week, and ranked twice as high as "Funeral", which was watched by 1.58 million viewers. In the UK, the episode aired on June 13, 2011, and was watched by 2.61 million viewers (2.03 million on E4, and 573,000 on E4+1). It was the most watched show on cable for the week, and again increased viewership on "Funeral", which was watched by 2.19 million viewers. In Australia, "New York" aired on June 15, 2011, and was watched by 987,000 viewers, which made "Glee" the tenth most-watched show of the night. Viewership here declined from "Funeral", which was watched by 1.07 million and ranked seventh.

"New York" was met with mixed reviews by many critics. Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" wrote, "We didn't actually expect the New Directions to win nationals, but the episode just felt like it was going through the motions rather than seizing the opportunity to do something truly spectacular." "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff called the episode a "good piece of television", and gave it a "B+". He said it "wasn't as good" as the first-season finale, "Journey to Regionals", "largely because it wasted a lot of time on performances designed solely to show off how the show was actually in New York and also because it borrowed a lot of that episode's set pieces without finding anything remotely as powerful as the performance of 'Bohemian Rhapsody. Robert Canning of "IGN" gave "New York" a "good" grade of 7.5 out of 10 and stated, "while not as epic as Nationals in New York should have been, 'New York' was a decent close to an enjoyable season." "The Atlantic" Meghan Brown said the episode was "an uneven end to an uneven season, with a few killer numbers, strange resolutions, and head-scratching plot devices", while her colleague Kevin Fallon opined that the season finale was "no exception" to "Glee" having "been undeniably frustrating in season two", though "there was still ample reason to tune in and enjoy".

Several elements of the episode were highlighted for their implausibility. The arrival of New Directions in New York without having their songs already prepared received widespread condemnation, including from VanDerWerff and the "Houston Chronicle" Bobby Hankinson, and led Brown to write, "there is absolutely no universe in which that makes sense. At all. It was so logically unsound that it was distracting." The notion that Rachel would not know that "Cats" had closed eleven years before was derided by Brown and Amy Reiter of the "Los Angeles Times", while Rachel and Kurt's encounter with "the only friendly security guard in New York City" was mocked by Anthony Benigno of "The Faster Times" and "Entertainment Weekly" Sandra Gonzalez. Several critics were disappointed that Quinn's ominous mention of plans for New York in "Funeral" came to nothing, including Benigno, who called her actual idea a "cockamamie sabotage plot", though he credited Agron's scene as a "great, wasted job in a great, wasted character", sentiments echoed by VanDerWerff and James Poniewozik of "Time". Terron R. Moore of "Ology.com" gave the episode a "C+", and likened Quinn's dropped plot to Will leaving for Broadway and Rachel disowning her love for Finn: "the fact that none of this happened—and the fact that we know none of it would ever happen—is just another issue I have with the show. I hope that next season, it actually grows a pair."

Finn and Rachel's date in New York was praised, though not everyone was happy with its ending. Gonzalez liked LuPone's short guest spot, and hoped it would be "a lesson to producers in how to deal with guest appearances in the future". Canning said the date had a "sweet comical tone", and thought the episode was "the best the series has done so far with this couple". Reiter felt Rachel was making a "false" choice in her refusal of Finn at the end of the date, and wondered "couldn't she at least have asked him" if he would consider coming to New York. At the competition performance, Poniewozik said of the end of "Pretending", "I may not be that invested in Finn/Rachel, but the startling moment where the audience disappeared in the middle of their kiss made me feel like I was." Benigno called the moment "awesome", and VanDerWerff was also pleased.

Those reviewers who singled out the show's final segment, set after the return to Ohio, did so with compliments. Poniewozik wrote that the episode "did a really fine job handling its epilogue, in which New Directions had their hopes crushed, went back to Lima—and found that it was a pretty awesome experience regardless. Brittany connected with Santana, a brief scene that reminded me how far both characters have come this season. Kurt didn't get a championship, but he has Blaine, and he has a taste of what life can be like for him after graduation." Canning said it was a "nice denouement, putting everyone at peace for having failed to reach the top ten at Nationals and getting their hopes high for next year." Hankinson credited Brittany with some of the funniest lines in the episode as well as the most important scene—in the epilogue with Santana—and he was impressed with her lead vocals throughout. He concluded, "She's the M.V.P. of the night and possibly the season."

The musical performances received a mixed reaction from critics, both as a whole and individually. Poniewozik said the songs "mostly felt like padding, without anything that offered a strong connection of contrast with the story." VanDerWerff called the music his least favorite element of the episode, and was only complimentary about "Bella Notte". Brittany's original song, "My Cup", was called "light and fun" by Benigno. Kubicek characterized it as "another brilliantly absurd original song", and Canning said it was a "hilarious performance". While Brett Berk of "Vanity Fair" stated that it was "amazingly horrible", he nevertheless gave it three stars out of five.

The mash-up of "I Love New York" and "New York, New York" was typical of the range of reactions songs received. Benigno gave it a "C" and wondered whether it was bad that he "thought this was a joke song before [he] realized it was a mash-up". Gonzalez gave it a "B" and said it was "not [her] favorite". Futterman called it an "infectious, high-speed mash-up" and Hankinson listed it as one of the four favorite songs from the episode, though Kubicek said the on-screen performance "would make any real New Yorker want to kick [New Directions] in the shins".

Most reviewers were highly critical of the inclusion of Morrison's "Still Got Tonight", the second single from his solo album. VanDerWerff called it "way too self-indulgent" and Kubicek characterized it as "shameless self promotion". Gonzalez said the song "isn't half bad" and gave it a "B−", while Benigno was more generous with a "B+", despite his belief that it did not belong in the episode. Futterman called it "a generic-sounding pop melody". The use of "Bella Notte", by contrast, was generally approved of, though Kubicek thought it was "kind of weird that they weren't really there", and Berk gave both of its two stars out of five solely due to the "spectral singers". VanDerWerff thought the song was "well-performed", and Benigno gave it a "B+"; he had a very different take from Kubicek, as he found the imaginary appearance by the male club members hilarious.

Although Kurt and Rachel being allowed on the stage of a Broadway theater was deemed improbable in the extreme by many critics, most were willing to suspend disbelief and enjoy their duet of "For Good". Futterman wrote that the performance brought events "full circle from their season one drama around singing 'Defying Gravity'. It's a fitting song for friendship and Kurt and Rachel nail it." "The Wall Street Journal" Raymund Flandez described it as "so sublime that it could have fit so easily in the cast version of the musical's CD". While Benigno wished the song had started two-voice harmony sooner, he gave it an "A−" and called it "friggin' lovely". Among the less favorable comments, VanDerWerff felt that the song itself was "pretty weak".

Usher's "Yeah!" by an unnamed all-female a cappella group received variant opinions. Aly Semigran of "MTV" said that the group "nailed" the song, but Benigno found the track and performers annoying and gave it a "D−". Futterman noted, "the arrangement feels flat and the dancing is overexaggerated", and Hankinson called this song and the Vocal Adrenaline offering, "As Long As You're There", "meh". The latter song also garnered divergent opinions, from Kubicek's "neither fun nor interesting" to Gonzalez's award of an "A+", her best grade of the show. Futterman wrote that Sunshine handled her ballad with "masterful skill and unbelievable ease".

The two original songs sung by New Directions were rated from excellent to abysmal. Benigno gave each song a "B+"; he called the duet, "Pretending", "lovely". The nicest thing Kubicek wrote of it was that it sounded as if the lyrics had been "written by a lovesick teenage boy", and he called "Light Up the World" a "trainwreck". Berk was even harsher: "When the show has carte blanche access to every amazing song in the history of popular music, there's something terribly humiliating about watching the kids sing this shit tune as their finale, and do so with such desperate conviction." Gonzalez gave "Light Up the World" a "B+", but said it sounded a "bit too much" like "Loser Like Me", and while Benigno thought it had a better melody than "Loser" and also made "much better use of the Gleeks as a whole", he criticized the chorus for its similarity to "Let It Rock" by Kevin Rudolf. Semigran said it was an "uplifting, if not rather lackluster pop song", yet Hankinson called it his favorite number in the episode.

Three original songs and two cover versions that were featured in the episode debuted on numerous musical charts. The two original songs sung by the main "Glee" cast did best, with "Light Up the World" debuting at number thirty-three on the "Billboard" Hot 100, on an issue dated for June 11, 2011. It sold 86,000 copies in the United States in its first week since its release as a digitally downloadable single, and "Pretending" was in fortieth with 79,000 sold. The third single, a cover of "For Good" from "Wicked", charted at number fifty-eight, and the other cover, the mash-up "I Love New York / New York, New York", debuted at number eighty-one. The third original song, "As Long As You're There", sung by Charice, was number ninety-three. In the Canadian Top 100, "Light Up the World" debuted at number twenty-six, "Pretending" at number forty, "For Good" at number seventy-nine, and "I Love New York / New York, New York" at number eighty-one.

Of the nine songs that were performed in the episode, four were featured on the eighth soundtrack album of the series, "": the three original songs, "Light Up the World", "Pretending", and "As Long As You're There", plus the cover of "Bella Notte". The album was released the day before the episode aired, and debuted at number four on the US "Billboard" 200 and number one on "Billboard" Soundtracks chart. It sold 80,000 copies in its first week, which was the second-lowest opening sales figure for a "Glee" release next to the extended play "", and lower than the 86,000 sold by "" in its first week the previous month. The album was also at number four on the "Billboard" Canadian Albums chart.



</doc>
<doc id="31775073" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31775073" title="Beat of My Drum">
Beat of My Drum

"Beat of My Drum" is a song by British recording artist Nicola Roberts. It was released on 2 June 2011, by Polydor Records, as the lead single from Roberts' debut solo album, "Cinderella's Eyes" (2011). The song was simultaneously released with the on air on sale method, receiving no prior promotion. "Beat of My Drum" was written by Roberts, Dimitri Tikovoi, Maya von Doll and Diplo, and was initially produced by Roberts and Tikovoi. Written to feel British and fun, Roberts intended "Beat of My Drum" to be a song which people could sing and dance.

"Beat of My Drum" is a dance-pop song which incorporates elements of indie pop, and has been compared to the work of artists including M.I.A. and Major Lazer. Lyrically, the song discusses Roberts' time in the girl band she was a part of, Girls Aloud; while part of the group, she felt undervalued in comparison to other members. "Beat of My Drum" garnered universal acclaim from music critics, with some describing it as more original than solo releases by other members of Girls Aloud; it was also compared to the work of artists such as Kelis and Robyn. Commercially, "Beat of My Drum" failed to make a large impact.

In the United Kingdom, it charted at number 27, and number 26 in Scotland. In Ireland, the song peaked at number 37. The song's accompanying music video was directed by Wendy Morgan. It displayed Roberts performing in a hall with dancers. Roberts performed the song for the first time at the 2011 T4 on the Beach, as well as various other chat shows.

Before embarking her solo career, Roberts was one fifth of British girl band Girls Aloud. Roberts claimed that she found the experience of going solo troubling. She revealed that she struggled to cope with life in the public eye and the constant media attention. In particular, she received negative attention concerning her image. The experience led her to start to develop her debut album, which, lyrically, reflected the difficult times she experienced in Girls Aloud. On "Beat of My Drum", Roberts describes herself as a "baby in the corner" - the song's original title. Roberts helped to write all of the tracks on "Cinderella's Eyes", with the lyrics telling stories of things that happened in her life. "Beat of My Drum" was co-written with Maya von Doll, Diplo and Dimitri Tikovoi. She stated that she had always wanted "Beat of My Drum" to be something different from the music that other pop singers were presenting in the charts. Roberts stated that "Beat of My Drum" is "a song everyone can sing and dance to". Roberts stated that she felt the song had a "fun concept" with a British influence.

The song was originally recorded by Roberts and Tikovoi. However, the pair struggled to finish its production, with Roberts describing the process as something that "just wouldn't work". The incompletion of the song led to stress and illness for Roberts, and she decided to contact producer Diplo to work on the record. Discussing her choice in an interview for "The Guardian", Roberts said that she only had one chance to get him to work with her and asked for his assistance. After Diplo reassured the singer that he would help, Roberts revealed that the situation was no longer in her hands and that she would wait for him to contact her with some progress. Despite her worries, she felt that "he just got it straight away". Communications were limited between the pair, but when Roberts received Diplo's finished production, she was too nervous to listen to it immediately. Instead, she burnt the track to a CD, and drove to a deserted field with her younger brother and sister, where she played the song loudly. After positive responses from her siblings, Roberts declared Diplo a "genius".

"Beat of My Drum" is a dance-pop track with themes of indie pop, and has been compared to the work of M.I.A. and Daphne & Celeste. The verses, choruses and bridge are all distinctively different; the chorus consists of chants, the verses are spoken-sung (half spoken. half sung), and the bridge are dancehall themed. The bridge gathered comparisons to the music of Major Lazer, which it samples. The vocals are performed against sirens. Music journalist James Montgomery observed how the song "mashes together every notable pop moment from recent history", pointing out the dancehall rhythms, drum breaks and "electro-vocal tics".

"Beat of My Drum" was released with the on air on sale method on 3 June 2011. Universal Music, the record company which owns Polydor, were releasing all singles under this format at the time of "Beat of My Drum"'s release. The reason for this was to try and reduce the level of illegal downloading of music, a system that Roberts was not used to. As part of promoting singles in Girls Aloud, she was used to releasing a song after approximately six weeks of promotion, which included radio interviews, televised performances and print work. As a result, Roberts stated that the new system was "very scary" as she was not used to releasing a song with comparatively little publicity, and worried about how her "Beat of My Drum" and subsequent singles would chart.

"Beat of My Drum" was acclaimed by music critics. Robert Copsey for Digital Spy gave the song five out of five stars, saying that "Once named the least desirable member of Girls Aloud, the transformation of Nicola Roberts from pasty and awkward backing singer into glowing, haute couture pop songstress has been a magnificent spectacle." Jeff Benjamin of "Billboard" called Roberts' effort the most "intriguing" out of all the Girls Aloud solo efforts. He said that Roberts had potential for success in the United States, comparing the song to the work of such artists as M.I.A., Robyn and Kelis. He asked readers to imagine that "a young M.I.A. – mixed with Robyn and band Yelle – went on a shopping spree to Urban Outfitters, started chanting "L! O! V! E!" and turned it all into a true summer anthem." A writer from Popjustice noted that "Beat of My Drum" "hardly happened by accident" but that "it feels really carefree and spontaneous", explaining "what we mean by that is that you can tell a lot of care and attention has gone into it".

Dean Piper for the "Daily Mirror" called the song "fantastic" claiming that Roberts "means business with her debut solo material", and saying he could not "get enough of the single", calling it "classic pop, fresh and fantastic." Michael Cragg for "The Guardian" compared the chanting chorus to that of Justice vs. Simian's track, "We Are Your Friends". He called it both "ridiculously cool and a bit naff". In response to the general acclaim from critics, Roberts wished that the track would be well received amongst her peers, saying "I haven't seen one bad review from the single or album samplers – it seems too good to be true. The response from critics has been amazing. It's like being at school and being told ‘well done’ by the teachers but I want my classmates to like it too. I want the people at home to get something from the record. Then I'll be doubly happy."
After the leak of the Madonna track "Give Me All Your Luvin'" in November 2011 critics such as David Kreps of Yahoo! and fans alike noted similarities to the track and Roberts own "Beat of My Drum" The comparisons arose after the "cheerleader-style" chorus is heard on the Madonna track as she chants the lyrics "L-U-V Madonna" whilst Roberts track features the lyrics "L.O.V.E/ Dance to the beat of my drum/ Dance to the beat of my drum." A writer for the "Daily Mirror" commented on the comparison calling "Give Me All Your Luvin'" "a poor variation on Nicola Roberts’ Beat Of My Drum" and negatively commenting on the misspelling of "love", which Madonna stylised as "l-u-v".

At the end of 2011, "Beat of My Drum" was voted number 25 on MTV's 25 Best Songs of 2011. James Montgomery wrote that the song was a "supremely saccharine single from erstwhile Girls Aloud member mashes together every notable pop moment in recent history, yet somehow manages to be better that the sum of its parts. That's thanks mostly to the supercharged, sing-a-long chorus, where the whole thing comes together in a head-spinning rush. She should go solo more often." The song was also listed on "Billboard" magazine's Best Songs of 2011 list at number 14. "Beat of My Drum" was listed as "The Guardian"'s 14th best song.

The music video for "Beat of My Drum" was filmed in Los Angeles and directed by Wendy Morgan, who Roberts described as "focused and passionate". The singer continued to say that because of this, she felt comfortable with her immediately. The music video and production was featured on the "Through Nicola's Eyes" webisodes, in which Roberts stated that she found the production of the music video very stressful. Talking about the experience in an interview with MTV News, Roberts stated that "I'm nervous and I'm dreading the night before... I know I'm going to be like losing half a stone in weight overnight, so I'm going to have to get myself into the zone." Roberts attributed her stress on the set of the video to her time with Girls Aloud, as she had always recorded music videos with four other members; this was the first time she had performed on her own. This meant that critical responses would only be aimed only at her. During the video shoot, Roberts further discussed the anxiety of a solo career claiming pressure from Morgan was making her feel uncomfortable. During the production, Roberts feared that feeling uncomfortable whilst shooting could have an overall negative effect on the video, explaining "You've got to be strong and be professional and get through it, obviously enjoy it, but if you feel uncomfortable, you can't look uncomfortable otherwise it's not going to work". The video has gained over 5 million views on YouTube.

The video opens with two men street dancing in a white hall, with speakers and chairs scattered around. Shots of an audience lead to Roberts walking to a microphone positioned on a stage before she starts lip-synching, wearing a 1970s style outfit. After knocking over the microphone stand, Roberts performs a routine with three female back-up dancers in front of multiple speakers. During the chorus, she dances with the same three dancers, whilst shots of men watching them are shown. Roberts then leads the three women through the hall before they perform a dance section in the bridge of the track. Three men marching in a small white room are shown, leading to a shot of Roberts marching alongside a marching band of drummers. She is then shown in a multi-coloured sweater-dress, stood atop a speaker and surrounded by dancers. Final shots show Roberts producing shapes of letters L, O, V, and E with cheerleaders. The video ends with Roberts casually interacting with her dancers.

A writer from MTV Buzzworthy stated they were "sold" on the concept; The "Daily Mail"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Jessica Satherley also responded well, noting that Roberts' "adventurous dance moves certainly give her Girls Aloud pal Cheryl Cole a run for her money." "Daily Mail" also reported that Perez Hilton liked the video; in a Twitter comment, he said "I am dancing to the beat of my drum!!! Just heard the song in full and I am LIVING for [Roberts'] new single! Vid looks HOT too!!".

Roberts performed "Beat of My Drum" for the first time at the 2011 T4 on the Beach in the United Kingdom. After her performance, the singer was asked how she felt it went, saying she had "forgotten what a crowd like that feels and looks like. I try not to get nervous – I don't like to think about things too much beforehand, otherwise I worry too much. I like to deal with the situation when it happens." A beatboxer from Norfolk, Tom Povey, was picked to perform with her on stage after he was seen performing in a London pub. Povey, who performs with the stage name Intensi T, said it was the highlight of his career. Roberts also performed the song on British chat-shows "Daybreak" and "Paul O'Grady Live".


In the United Kingdom, "Beat of My Drum" debuted at number 27 on the UK Singles Chart, on 18 June 2011. The following week, the single fell outside of the top 40 to number 64, and fell to number 88 in its third week. However, the song rose to number 76 in its fourth week, and again to number 50 in its fifth. In Ireland, the song debuted and peaked at number 37 on the Irish Singles Chart on 9 June 2011, whilst in Scotland the song debuted at number 26 on the issue date of 18 June 2011.

The song is featured in the soundtrack of "", released in 2011.


</doc>
<doc id="31912076" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31912076" title="Once Upon ay Time in Mumbai Dobaara!">
Once Upon ay Time in Mumbai Dobaara!

Once Upon A Time in Mumbai Dobaara! (; ) is a 2013 Indian gangster film directed by Milan Luthria and produced by Ekta Kapoor and Shobha Kapoor. A sequel to 2010's "Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai", the film stars Akshay Kumar, Sonakshi Sinha and Imran Khan in the lead roles, with Sonali Bendre in a supporting role.

Filming began on 27 August 2012 in Mumbai, with filming moving to Oman in September, becoming the first major Indian production filmed in the sultanate. Footage was shot in beach in Qantab, Qurum, and at the Shangri-La's Barr Al Jissah Resort & Spa in Muscat. The film's visual effects (VFX) were by Reliance MediaWorks, and a team of 40 artists augmented 600 digital shots in one month. The live action sequences were filmed with RED and Arri's Alexa digital motion-picture camera. "Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" was well-promoted, and the film's second trailer was shown on prime-time slots on four television channels. Hollywood actor Al Pacino was shown the theatrical trailer of the film.

The first trailer of the film was released on 28 May 2013, and the film premiered on 15 August, the eve of Independence Day in India. This was later scheduled to avoid clashing with Rohit Shetty's "Chennai Express", which was released on 9 August. "Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" received mixed to negative reviews and performed poorly at the box office.

The film begins where its predecessor ended, with reigning don Shoaib Khan (Akshay Kumar) earning respect after assassinating his mentor, Sultan Mirza (Ajay Devgn). Twelve years later he is still a charismatic, suave womaniser, who has extended his empire to the Middle East. Khan's only friends are Javed (Sarfaraz Khan) (who oversees his illegal work), his former love Mumtaz (Sonali Bendre), and Aslam (Imran Khan), a teenager Khan met during a visit to the slums in which he grew up.

An older Khan returns to Bombay to kill Rawal (Mahesh Manjrekar), who opposed his ambition to take the reins in Bombay. Although the city was his first love, rising starlet Jasmine (Sonakshi Sinha) wins his heart. Khan advances Jasmine's career by rigging awards, and showers her with gifts; he becomes obsessed with her. He sends Aslam and another trustworthy aide, Jimmy, to kill Rawal. Jimmy fails, accidentally killing his girlfriend, Mona, and flees. He is soon captured by the police, hot on Khan's trail after learning about his arrival in Bombay. Jimmy, loyal to Khan, does not crack during his interrogation and is freed due to lack of evidence. The police intend to draw Khan out from hiding; he has eluded them for twelve years, and this is their last chance to take him on Indian soil.

Khan, suspicious that Jimmy has become a police informer, decides to kill him but Aslam offers to do the deed to deflect police attention. He, Dedh Tang and several thugs masquerade as rival (Yamaha RX100)biker gangs and stage a brawl. Plainclothes police officers try to control the chaos when Aslam corners Jimmy. When a police officer stops Aslam, Khan appears out of nowhere, murders Jimmy and injures the policeman. A chase ensues; the police fail to catch the two, who escape in Khan's Mercedes.

Although Khan has bought Jasmine a house, she rejects his advances, saying that she has never seen him as being more than a friend. Angry and disappointed, Khan slaps her and tells her to leave. He angrily destroys the set of the film she is cast in, leaving with her a twenty-four-hour deadline to accept his proposal. Jasmine returns home to see that Khan has filled her house with expensive presents. Her mother is taken aback when Jasmine explains that Khan is a gangster with whom she'd prefer not to associate. Her family questions the sense in rejecting a man as powerful and dangerous as Khan.

Later in the night, Jasmine meets Aslam at his uncle's restaurant. He tries to explain his love for her, only to be interrupted and told that she is engaged and the two should stop seeing one another. Dejected and disappointed, Aslam meets with Khan, who seems unusually pensive. The two lament their relationships, not knowing they are both in love with the same woman. Just before Aslam is about to reveal the name of his romantic interest, a phone rings – Khan, jubilant, announces that his proposal has been accepted and orders Aslam to pick up his new "bhabhi," or sister-in-law.

Aslam arrives at the address Khan has given him and, much to his shock, sees Jasmine walking towards his car. Initially angry that he is still following her, the two realize that they have been caught up in a complicated affair – that Aslam, unbeknownst to Jasmine, works for Khan, and that Jasmine was the one he had been sent to pick up. Before either can speak, a car containing Rawal and his henchmen arrives at a distance. Rawal shoots Jasmine, having learned of her relationship with Khan and hoping that hurting her lure the gangster into a vulnerable position.

Jasmine remains unconscious at the hospital as Khan arrives. He accuses Aslam of being in love with his fiancée – an accusation which Aslam denies as Khan reveals that he has masterminded a plan to murder Rawal and ensure his own dominance over the Mumbai underworld. Khan intends to fabricate a story of him feuding with Aslam to tempt Rawal and his rivals into contacting Aslam. The "news" reaches Rawal, who seems delighted at the prospect of being able to turn Khan's right-hand man against him.

When Rawal calls Aslam at the hospital, Aslam, now fully aware of Khan's feelings towards Jasmine, seems unsure whether to abide by Khan's plan. He reluctantly provides Rawal with an address, ending the phone call by telling him to "murder the bastard." Khan, lying in wait outside the address with a sniper rifle, kills Rawal and his henchmen when they arrive. Khan, having consolidated power, savours his victory and walks into a police station as a taunt to law enforcement. However, Dedh Tang accidentally reveals Aslam's love for Jasmine in the midst of celebration. Khan, infuriated, diverts the car to the hospital to confront Aslam, who has continued to stay with Jasmine as she recovers from being shot by Rawal. Knowing that his friend is in danger, Dedh Tang honks the horn of the car repeatedly after Shoaib and his henchmen enter the building, alerting Aslam to the danger and giving him time to escape. Entering to see an empty bed where Jasmine had before been laying, Khan realizes that Dedh Tang had given him away.

Khan sends his aide Akbar to kill Aslam after he and Jasmine flee to Aslam's uncle's restaurant in Dongri. Aslam assures Jasmine that Khan, though violent, would never hurt him. Their conversation is interrupted by a car's horn honking – running outside, Aslam is ambushed by Akbar after discovering the body of Dedh Tang, who has been killed by Shoaib for aiding the couple in their escape. Aslam, though injured and initially losing the fight, kills Akbar with a shovel. He calls Khan to tell him that the murder of Dedh Tang has, in effect, erased his deep-seated loyalty to his former boss. Khan responds by telling Aslam that sending Akbar was a mistake, as he must be the one to kill the man he views as also having betrayed him by "stealing" Jasmine.

Aslam and Khan confront one another as the police, having been alerted to Khan's location by a storekeeper, descend upon Dongri. Shoaib rains down blows and insults upon Aslam, urging him to defend himself in front of Jasmine. Nevertheless, Aslam, who still feels indebted and bound to Khan, does not fight back until Inspector Awant appears through the gathered crowd – even then, Aslam only pushes Khan away so that Khan is not shot by the officer. Reacting quickly, Khan draws a pistol of his own and shoots Awant before turning his weapon on Jasmine and Aslam. Jasmine, through tears and while holding a bleeding Aslam, tells Khan that he is truly evil and will never have her love. Khan seems to recognize the truth in her words as he drops his weapon and stares at the couple. Just then, more police officers arrive on the scene and open fire on Khan, who, now injured, is dragged away by one of his henchmen. He and Aslam, both alive but bloodied, lock eyes and reach out for another, having finally put aside their differences.

In the last scene, a bullet-ridden, dejected Khan reads a letter he was unable to give Jasmine in the cargo hold of a ship leaving the city forever.


Tanuj Garg, CEO of Balaji Motion Pictures, announced on Twitter that principal photography began on 27 August 2012 in Mumbai. Female lead Sonakshi Sinha joined the cast and crew two days later after completing her previous film, "Son of Sardaar", with Ajay Devgn. The overseas shooting schedule began in September in Oman, the first major Indian production filmed in the sultanate.
Portions of the film were shot on a beach in Qantab, on the corniche in Qurum, and at the Shangri-La's Barr Al Jissah Resort & Spa in Muscat. When director Milan Luthria became ill with a virus, shooting was postponed for three days. To make up the lost time Luthria persuaded Kumar to work on two consecutive Sundays, the first time he had worked on a Sunday since Priyadarshan's 2006 "Bhagam Bhag". The remainder of the film was shot on location in Khala, on the Sassoon Docks and at Mukesh Mills in Mumbai. The shoot was wrapped up by January 2013.

The film's visual effects (VFX) were by Reliance MediaWorks, which also produced computer-generated imagery (CGI) for Balaji Motion Pictures and Luthria for its prequel, "Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai" (2010). Since the company was also generating VFX for the yet-unreleased "Chennai Express" (2013) its roster of animators and compositors was divided into two teams. The "Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" team consisted of 40 artists, who augmented 600 digital shots in one month. Luthria informed the company that "Dobaara!" was set during the 1980s, with car chases requiring visual effects. About 25 percent were shot against chroma key backgrounds, since they would have been difficult to film otherwise. Scenes in the Sharjah Cricket Association Stadium in the United Arab Emirates were recreated three-dimensionally with polygonal modeling in Autodesk Maya instead of the live-action plates used for shots in Muscat. Adobe Photoshop and ZBrush were used to add texture to matte paintings in the background and the 3D models. Outdoor shots in Mumbai (such as Colaba Causeway and Ballard Pier) were replaced by interior and exterior live-action plates from Oman. According to Sanjiv Naik, the film's VFX supervisor, the last few scenes were the most difficult ones to shoot. In the last scene where Khan is lying wounded in the cargo hold of a ship, the camera zooms out to reveal the word "Mumbai". The VFX shot was captured in 2,000 frames which took 15 days to complete, with the camera panning out only 30 feet in reality. Except for the interior shot of Kumar, the remaining shots were digital. The live action was filmed with RED and Arri's Alexa digital motion-picture camera.

Emraan Hashmi, who appeared in the original film, was initially chosen to play the lead role. However, Luthria was looking for an older actor and chose Kumar for the role of Shoaib Khan (based on Dawood Ibrahim). In February 2012 it was announced that there were two male leads in the film, the second said to be Shahid Kapoor, but the following month Imran Khan was confirmed as the second male lead. Many actresses were considered for the female lead, including Illeana D'Cruz, Kareena Kapoor, Kangana Ranaut, Asin Thottumkal, Sonam Kapoor and Deepika Padukone, but in April it was reported that Sonakshi Sinha had been cast. Sonali Bendre was also signed as a lead character in the film. The film marked Bendre's first role since "Shankar Dada MBBS". Bendre did not charge her fees for the film owing to the fact that Sobha Kapoor, one of the producers of the film has been the friend of her Mother-in-law for the past 40 years also out of gratitude for Luthria, who shot her first song "Sambhala hai Maine" in the 1994 film Naaraaz. In November 2012, it was announced that the film was scheduled for release on Eid 2013. TV actor Chetan Hansraj was signed as an antagonist in the film. Kumar revealed during the trailer launch of the film about having no aspirations to set new benchmarks on a role previously enacted by Hashmi. Khan in preparation for his role in the film drew inspiration from Jackie Shroff and Anil Kapoor, copying their mannerisms, behaviour and dressing style by watching DVD's of films starring them produced in the 1980s. Back in those days copying mannerism of film stars drew appreciation from peers.

Akshay Kumar played a fictitious gangster based on Dawood Ibrahim. Kumar's character's look was revealed on a reality show on Aapka Colors. Kumar's entrance on the show was supposed to be accompanied by music after a scene from the prequel (choreographed by director Milan Luthria), followed by an action sequence. The scene had a "minor glitch", believed to be a failed attempt to sabotage Kumar's entrance. The scene was performed twice, taking a toll on Kumar's back and leading to the cancellation of a public appearance. The film would reportedly feature a scene with Kumar watching a cricket match, but whether the match was between India and Pakistan at the Sharjah Cricket Association Stadium during the 1980s was unconfirmed. The trailer premiered in Mumbai, where many of the film's outdoor scenes were shot. To promote the film, Kumar flew from New York (where he was on holiday with his family) to Birmingham to watch the India-Pakistan ICC Champions Trophy match on 15 June 2013 at Edgbaston Cricket Ground. A second trailer of the film was released on 3 July 2013, with narration by Kumar's character (Shoaib Khan), revealing plot details such as the rivalry between Kumar's and Imran Khan's characters for Jasmine's love. The trailer described Khan as the film's antihero, featuring action sequences between Shoaib Khan and Aslam (Imran Khan). Mohar Basu of Koimoi praised the second trailer, its background score, direction and action choreography, saying it "is even better than the film's first trailer" and has "an explosive impact on its audiences".

Producer Ekta Kapoor promoted the film's second trailer, buying prime-time (8 to 11 pm) slots on four television channels. She also spent 20 million rupees for a slot on a leading channel for a promotion for the film. Akshay Kumar, Sonakshi Sinha and Imran Khan (the three leads) promoted the film on "Comedy Nights with Kapil", hosted by Kapil Sharma. Kumar, Sinha, Khan, Kapoor and most of the other cast and crew visited the Dargah Sharif (a shrine to the Sufi saint Moinuddin Chishti in Ajmer) on Monday morning, 5 August, to pray for the film's success and the well-being of all involved.

Hollywood actor Al Pacino enjoyed the film's promotion, saying that the promos and posters reminded him of "The Godfather" when business associate Barry Navidi showed him the theatrical trailer (Pacino portrayed Michael Corleone, son of Vito Corleone). Akshay Kumar said of Pacino's response: "A touch of appreciation is always held dearly in an actor's arms, even if it's from the simplest of people like our beloved spot boys. But to have your work spoken of so kindly by the world's most admired gangster Al Pacino himself – I had goose-bumps thinking about him watching the promo! I was so humbled, not only as an actor but as a fan of his legendary work. I pray he enjoys the final piece as much as he enjoyed the promo!" Actor Rishi Kapoor, on whom the original version of the song Tayyab Ali was picturized in "Amar Akbar Anthony", praised Imran Khan's performance and the song after an impromptu meeting with Khan (who was concerned about comparisons between the versions) during a dubbing session for the film.
The film's title has been changed several times. The media first referred to the production as "Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai 2", although it was earlier officially known as "Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai Again". Due to the producer's beliefs in astrology and numerology, the film was renamed "Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai Dobara" ("again" in Hindi). A "y" and an extra "a" were added, making it "Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" (the present title).

It was promoted at the unveiling of a line of LED televisions by manufacturer Arise India with appearances by Kumar, Sinha, Khan and Kapoor. In addition to visiting the Dargah Sharif and the Balaji shrine in South India to pray for the success of her films before their release, Kapoor fasted during Ramazan for the film's success and planned visits to Mumbai's Mohamed Ali Road to celebrate iftaari and feed the poor.

"Chennai Express" and "Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" were originally not scheduled for release by Pakistani distributors and exhibitors, but deals were finalised to release both films in Pakistan.

In an effort to discourage cinema audience from using Mobile phones at theatres with the help of a short-film featuring Kumar in his character, Shoaib Khan from the film. The short directed by Luthria was shown in PVR Cinemas from 31 May 2013 till the films theatrical release.

"Ye Tune Kya Kiya", sung by Javed Bashir and composed by Pritam, premiered on YouTube 15 June 2013 as the lead single from the soundtrack album. Another song, "Tayyab Ali" (a cover of a song from 1977's "Amar Akbar Anthony", sung by Javed Ali), premiered on YouTube on 28 June. The song's music video was shot in six days at Film City in Mumbai. "Tu Hi Khwahish", sung by Sunidhi Chauhan, was released on YouTube on 16 July. The album (including four original tracks) was released on 17 July, with all tracks available for digital download as singles on the digital music platform iTunes. The music video for the fourth song, "Chugliyaan" (released earlier with the album), released on the T-Series YouTube channel on 22 July. The video for the fifth single, "Bismillah" (an Eid track), was released on the T-Series YouTube channel on 7 August. "Bismillah", shot at Film City and a Mumbai nightclub modified to evoke the 1980s, was released by Balaji the day before Eid to capitalise on Eid celebrations nationwide.

The soundtrack of the film received mainly-positive reviews. Rumnique Nannar of Bollyspice gave the soundtrack three-and-a-half stars, saying "the album succeeds in all respects, since it features a remake, a retro song, and two gems, and manages to fit with the film's tone and mood of the 80s". Movie Talkies also gave the soundtrack three-and-a-half stars, remarking that "the soundtrack of "OUATIMD" is an excellent effort from Pritam and is sure to be lapped up by the audiences in much the same way as its predecessor. It sure might be a short album with just four songs in it but suffice to say, Quality wins over Quantity". Rajiv Vijayakar of Bollywood Hungama said that "the soundtrack has only four songs but nevertheless emerges as one of the better albums of this year" praising the first three tracks identifying "Tu Hi Khwahish" and "Chugliyaan" as the finest and weakest links of the album respectively. Bryan Durham of "The Times of India" said that "brevity seems to be the soul of the "Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai Dobaara" soundtrack", highlighting "Yeh Tune Kya Kiya" as the best song." Mohar Basu reviewed the soundtrack for Koimoi, summarising it to be "just about alright... in comparison to its predecessor turned out to be drab!"

The film which at the beginning was scheduled to be released on Eid, 8 August 2013 was pushed back to 15 August 2013, to avoid clashing with Rohit Shetty's directorial venture, "Chennai Express" starring Shah Rukh Khan. The decision was made by Jitendra on Shah Rukh Khan's request after a meeting was held between the producers of the respective films so as to provide both each of the films ample opportunity of earning-well at the box office without diminishing each other's profits.

"Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara" was released on 1,300–1,600 screens for India's 67th Independence Day, and some cinemas were sold out. The screen count increased on 16 August to 2,500–2,700 nationwide.

"Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" received mixed-to-negative reviews. Anupama Chopra gave the film three out of five stars in "The Hindustan Times": "Once Upon Ay Time in Mumbaai Dobaara! had me cheering for the bad guy. Which, at least in the movies, is never a bad thing. The film gets one extra star for Akshay Kumar, who makes a stellar killer". Madhureeta Mukherjee awarded the film 3.5 out of five stars in "The Times of India", telling readers to watch the film only for its flattering dons and their heroines, saying "there's nothing criminal about it!" She praised Milan Luthria for capturing the essence of the film's setting and Kumar's portrayal of Shoaib Khan: ""Bhai" act with flamboyance and mojo ... He gets a chance to do what he does best – "herogiri" (albeit less menacing, more entertaining), with charisma and clap-trap dialoguebaazi" but criticised Imran Khan's "ill-at-ease" rogue, the second half of the film for being "at times too overbearing" and said, "this film has its moments, but it's not as compelling as the prequel." Vinayak Chakrovorty gave the film two-and-a-half out of five stars in "India Today": "OUATIMD should remind Bollywood what we all always knew: Never make a sequel just for the heck of it if you don't have a genuine idea to entertain". Subhash K. Jha termed the film as "one of the most ill-timed gangster dramas" criticising the acting of all the three leads, praising only the short cameo of Sonali Bendre.

The film drew a number of negative reactions from the film critics. Subhra Gupta gave the film a half-star out of five in "The Indian Express", saying "After all the shoot-outs and bang-bangs are over, you are left with a film which leaves you with so little new that you wonder if there's any juice left in this style of retro gangsta flick. Or are we heading for a third-time-in-Mumbai-Tibara?" Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN gave the film 1.5 out of five stars, describing the film as the "equivalent of getting a root canal". He criticised the naivety of the three leads: Kumar for his "in-your-face flamboyance", Khan for playing an "urban rich kid slumming it out at a dress-up party" and both for "rat-a-tat punch lines", but praised Sonali Bendre's cameo as Mumtaz. Mohar Basu gave the film two out of five stars in Koimoi, criticising the melodrama and the "lacklustre chemistry", remarking that the film "lacks the effervescence and naturalness of its prequel".

"Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" and its prequel "Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai" have been described as having a storyline and characters similar to the life of Dawood Ibrahim. Luthria and Kapoor have "repeatedly drilled home the notion that Shoaib Khan could be any gangster and not necessarily Dawood" a position that Kumar has also stated.

"Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" opened well, with sold-out showings (particularly in Delhi, Mumbai, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Hyderabad) due to its release on Independence Day eve. Due to limited screen availability (about 1,000), Balaji Motion Pictures negotiated with the producers of "Chennai Express" to release 1,000 more screens for a total of 2,700. Despite the low number of screens, the film netted on its opening day. Due to competition from "Chennai Express" the film earned ( three-day) over its extended four-day weekend, considered a poor result. Earnings dropped on Monday to . The film did better on Tuesday and Wednesday due to Raksha Bandhan, earning on both days. It earned ( seven-day) during its eight-day first week. During its second weekend the film dropped nearly 90 percent, earning to bring its total to . The film earned during its second week, bringing its total to . Despite this, it was declared a "flop" by Box Office India. The film did not do well overseas, earning $1.55 million during its first weekend. In total, the film grossed () worldwide.

Satellite rights to "Once Upon Time in Mumbai Dobaara!" were acquired by Sony Max, along with three other films produced by Balaji Motion Pictures. The other films, acquired for about , were "Ek Thi Daayan", "Lootera" and "Shootout at Wadala"; the latter was acquired for . Satellite rights to the film were later confirmed as . After the film's poor box-office performance, its producers and Sony Max moved its world television premiere up to 29 September 2013, within a month of the film's theatrical release.

The film was scheduled to be released on DVD and Blu-ray by Shemaroo Entertainment in early November, and pre-release orders were available on Flipkart, Amazon and other online shopping sites in early October. On Amazon, the expected delivery date was 7 November 2013 for Blu-ray preorders, with the DVD released by 26 October. The Blu-ray version was released on 27 October as a 50 GB single disc with 1080p H.264/MPEG-4 AVC video and an aspect ratio of 2.35:1 (instead of the 2.39:1 theatrical ratio) and Dolby DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1 and Dolby Digital 5.1 audio.

After the film's mainly negative reviews Akshay Kumar lashed out at critics, accusing them of lacking an understanding of the audience and the basic ideas of filmmaking. There were rumours about a feud between Kumar and Ekta Kapoor about the former's distancing himself from the project and not promoting it enough. The three leads attended the inaugural 2013 Indian Premier League match between Kolkata Knight Riders and Delhi Daredevils to promote the film, but the match organisers asked their cameramen not to focus on the actors. After this, a disappointed Kumar asked Kapoor to re-arrange the film's marketing schedule.

Zee Cine Awards—





</doc>
<doc id="31914470" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31914470" title="2014 South African general election">
2014 South African general election

The 2014 South African general election was held on 7 May 2014, to elect a new National Assembly and new provincial legislatures in each province. It was the fifth election held in South Africa under conditions of universal adult suffrage since the end of the apartheid era in 1994, and also the first held since the death of Nelson Mandela. It was also the first time that South African expatriates were allowed to vote in a South African national election.

The National Assembly election was won by the African National Congress (ANC), but with a reduced majority of 62.1%, down from 65.9% in the 2009 election. The official opposition Democratic Alliance (DA) increased its share of the vote from 16.7% to 22.2%, while the newly formed Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) obtained 6.4% of the vote.

Eight of the nine provincial legislatures were won by the ANC. The EFF obtained over 10% of the vote in Gauteng, Limpopo and North West, and beat the DA to second place in the last two. In the other six provinces won by the ANC, the DA obtained second place. This included KwaZulu-Natal, where the DA for the first time beat the Inkatha Freedom Party to second place. In the Western Cape, the only province not won by the ANC, the DA increased its majority from 51.5% to 59.4%.

South Africa has a parliamentary system of government; the National Assembly consists of 400 members elected by proportional representation with a closed list approach. Two hundred members are elected from national party lists; the other 200 are elected from provincial party lists in each of the nine provinces. The President of South Africa was chosen by the National Assembly after the election.

The provincial legislatures, which vary in size from 30 to 80 members, are also elected by proportional representation with closed lists. The premiers of each province will be chosen by the winning majority in each provincial legislature.

The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) consists of 90 members, ten elected by each provincial legislature. The NCOP members will be elected by the provincial legislatures in proportion to the party makeup of the legislatures.

On 26 November 2013 the Electoral Amendment Act, 2013, came into force. It allows South African citizens resident outside South Africa to register and vote in the election of the National Assembly.

A new regulation added in 2013 that was enforced for the first time on 7 May 2014 is the prohibition of photographing marked ballot papers, which aims to inhibit voter intimidation.

The governing African National Congress (ANC), supported by its Tripartite Alliance with the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and the South African Communist Party (SACP), have held a majority of the seats in the National Assembly since 1994. They were re-elected with increasing majorities in 1999 and 2004, and with a slight fall in its majority from 69% to 65.9% in 2009. The ANC is led by Jacob Zuma. In 2012, Zuma was re-elected to a second five-year term as President of the African National Congress, beating his only rival and deputy, Kgalema Motlanthe, by a wide margin. Cyril Ramaphosa was elected as Deputy President of the ANC, succeeding Motlanthe who had declined a second term after losing to Zuma.

The official opposition Democratic Alliance (DA) received 16.7% of the vote in 2009, up from 12.4% in 2004. The DA is led by Helen Zille, who was re-elected unopposed as Leader of the Democratic Alliance at the party's Federal Congress in Gauteng in 2012, while Lindiwe Mazibuko continued as Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. At provincial level, the DA has been in power in the Western Cape province since 2009, and came to power in several Western Cape municipalities in the 2011 municipal election. Traditionally, the DA was seen as a party rallying against apartheid laws, especially in the 1980s. However, one of its larger following bases are the whites in the south, especially after it absorbed the New National Party in 2001 (although NNP was disbanded in 2004).

Congress of the People (COPE), is led by Mosiuoa Lekota, although the leadership is disputed by Mbhazima Shilowa who continues to battle for recognition in the High Court. The party has been riven by infighting, causing it to lose much of its support and resulting in the formation of a splinter group, the United Congress. COPE won three seats in the National Assembly in the 2014 elections.

Mangosuthu Buthelezi remains leader of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) despite a challenge by former IFP chairperson Zanele kaMagwaza-Msibi, who formed the National Freedom Party (NFP) after her feud with Buthelezi. The NFP and IFP split the vote in the Zulu-dominated KwaZulu-Natal province in the previous local government elections, each getting an even share of the vote, while the ANC continued to dominate the former IFP stronghold.

The Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) announced on 17 March that a record number of 33 parties had registered candidates for the national parliamentary election. In the provincial legislature elections the number of parties registering candidates, including four parties which had not yet paid the required deposits subject to a 24 March deadline, were:

The electoral code of conduct was signed in Midrand, Gauteng on 19 March 2014. At the signing event, a draw was held in which the Freedom Front Plus won the right to appear at the top of the ballot paper.

Several parties contested the election for the first time and gained seats nationally and provincially:


Other new parties were formed but did not obtain seats nationally:


The Independent Democrats party, which won four seats and 0.9% of the national vote in 2009, merged with the Democratic Alliance before the 2014 general election.

On 17 December 2013, the South African Press Association reported that five opposition parties, namely COPE, the IFP, the African Christian Democratic Party, the United Christian Democratic Party and the Freedom Front Plus, had formed a coalition with 20 specific priorities. The parties in the coalition, named the Collective for Democracy (CD) and chaired by COPE leader Mosiuoa Lekota, will retain their own identity and contest the election individually. The IFP denied being part of the coalition, saying they were wary of forming such alliances given the confusion it had caused for their supporters in previous elections. Three days later, the 20th, COSATU's largest affiliate National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA) announced that they would not endorse the ANC or any other political party in 2014. NUMSA planned to establish a new working class collective along the lines of the defunct United Democratic Front, with the ultimate goal of forming a socialist party that will contest the 2019 general election. An opposing COSATU faction has obtained a legal opinion on removing NUMSA from COSATU, with significant implications for the country's labour and political landscape.

On 28 January 2014, the DA announced that Mamphela Ramphele had accepted an invitation to stand as its presidential candidate in the 2014 general election, and the DA and Agang South Africa were set to merge. On the 31st, Ramphele stated that she would not take up DA party membership and would remain the leader of Agang South Africa, resulting in confusion. On 2 February, Helen Zille stated that Ramphele had reneged on her agreement to stand as the DA's presidential candidate. Ramphele subsequently apologised for the reversal of her decision, saying that the timing was not right as the reaction to it had shown people were unable to overcome race-based party politics.

On 6 February, it was reported that COPE members who support Mbhazima Shilowa's planned to join the United Democratic Movement led by Bantu Holomisa which won four seats in the 2009 election. On 10 March, it was reported that COPE MP Nqaba Bhangu had joined the DA as an Eastern Cape parliamentary candidate, and three COPE MPs, namely Juli Kilian, Leonard Ramatlakane and Nick Koornhof were included on the ANC's list of national parliamentary candidates published on the 11th. On 28 April, it was reported that over 20 COPE MPs had defected to the ANC citing "poor political leadership". The only COPE member in the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature, Lucky Gabela, subsequently also defected to the ANC citing internal conflict.

On 11 March, Al Jama-ah and the Africa Muslim Party announced they would campaign together under the Al Jama-ah Community Party banner. The next day, it was reported that DA MP Beverley Abrahams had joined the ANC. On the 17th, Economic Freedom Fighters announced agreement to establish working relations with the Socialist Party of Azania (SOPA) and Black Consciousness Party (BCP), who would not independently stand for elections, but their candidates would be part of the EFF election 2014 candidates list as EFF members. EFF also had members of South Africa First (SAF) in the list who hold dual membership. Although SAF had not agreed to them being on the EFF list, its leadership collective endorsed the lists.

On the 20th, it was reported that DA MPs Lourie Bosman, Niekie van den Berg and Theo Coetzee were joining Freedom Front Plus on the party's national candidates list for the 2014 election. On the 30th, it was reported in the "Sunday Times" that DA MP Mpowele Swathe had joined the United Christian Democratic Party (UCDP) after his name appeared on election candidate lists for both parties.

On 2 May 2014, the "Mail & Guardian" newspaper "urged readers to oppose the ANC" for the first time, to dilute the ruling party's "overweening political power". The editorial cited the support of Cabinet ministers for the controversial proposed "secrecy law" and the ANC's "cynical response to the Nkandla scandal" among its reasons. A "Financial Mail" editorial published on the same day, cited unemployment and changes in the government's administration and policies which impacted business negatively. It stated "the ANC does not get our endorsement this time" and "our vote goes to the DA". An editorial published in "The Economist" the following day, cited unemployment and an increase in corruption under Zuma's leadership in particular and stated that the ANC and Zuma "no longer deserve to rule" and "The DA deserves to be endorsed." Also on the 2nd, Abahlali baseMjondolo, a social movement representing shack dwellers which previously supported the No Land! No House! No Vote! election boycott campaign, announced its provincial endorsement of the DA in KwaZulu-Natal for the election as a tactical vote against the ANC.

On the weekends of 9–10 November 2013 and 8–9 February 2014 all voting stations were opened for new voters to register and for those who moved residence to re-register in their new voting district. The presidency of South Africa urged voters who had missed the voting station registration weekends to register at an IEC office during office hours. Presidential spokesperson, Mac Maharaj, said that voters were allowed to register to vote until the election date is published in a government gazette, after which the voters' roll is closed. Approximately 5.5 million people in total visited voting stations, including between 1 and 2 million new voters. This increased the number of registered voters to 25.3 million, representing 80.5% of the 31.4 million people eligible to vote in the country. South Africans who were born after the 1994 general election, known as the "born-free" generation, and are aged 18 or older were eligible to vote for the first time.

South Africans living abroad could register to vote at any South African Embassy, High Commission or Consulate-General from 9 January 2014 to 7 February 2014. South Africans living abroad who wished to vote had to notify the IEC of their intention to vote by 12 March 2014. The weekends of 18–19 January and 25–26 January were made registration weekends to accommodate voters who were unable to register during business hours. Over 26,000 voters were registered to vote abroad by the time of the election.

A total of 26,701 voters were registered to vote abroad, with the highest numbers of voters being registered to vote in London (9,863), Dubai (1,539) and Canberra (1,243) with other stations totalling 14,056 registered voters.

According to an internal poll conducted by the DA with American pollster Stan Greenberg in March–April 2014, the ANC would get 59% of the vote, the DA 26% and the EFF 8%.

In an Ipsos survey of 1,000 registered ANC members conducted for the "Sunday Times" in December 2013, 55% of respondents said they will vote for the ANC again, 5% said they will vote for the DA, 6% said they will vote for other parties, and the remaining 34% said they did not know or preferred not to answer.

According to the results of an Ipsos "Pulse of the People" survey published in February 2014, the DA is the most multi-racial party while the ANC has 96% black supporters and the EFF has 99% black supporters, relative to 76% black survey respondents. The age profile of ANC supporters closely resembles the age profile of voters, while DA supporters are slightly older overall and EFF supporters are significantly younger overall.

Africa Check, a non-profit organisation that checks facts in claims made about Africa, and the Centre for the Study of Democracy have criticised polls by market research companies as unscientific. Africa Check warned that some polls are intentionally misleading and some are essentially conjecture.
The Ipsos "Pulse of the People" survey undertaken in October and November 2013 showed that a number of provinces would be closely contested. The ANC will continue to dominate in the Eastern Cape, Limpopo, North West, Mpumalanga, KwaZulu-Natal and Free State. The DA will keep the Western Cape while control of the Northern Cape and Gauteng will be contested between the ANC and DA, with other parties holding the balance of power, so coalitions may be decisive. In Limpopo and North West the EFF could become the official opposition.
The Ipsos/"Sunday Times" survey undertaken in February and March 2014 showed that the ANC enjoyed majority support in all provinces except the Western Cape, where the DA retains majority support. DA support followed that of the ANC in all other provinces except for the North West, where the EFF came in second place.

The South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) broadcast weekly election debates from February to May 2014. They were broadcast between 6pm and 7pm on SABC 1 and streamed live on the SABC's YouTube channel.

The following debates took place:

In January 2014, Helen Zille announced that the DA would be marching to Luthuli House, the ANC's headquarters, saying, “We are taking the fight to Luthuli House to highlight the failure of (President) Jacob Zuma's ANC to cut corruption and create jobs.” Zille said that 6000 people would be marching, each one representing 1000 South Africans who would benefit from the 6 million jobs that the DA promised to create if it came to power. The planned date of the march was 4 February 2014, but this was later changed to the 12th due to logistical problems. The Johannesburg Metro Police Department (JMPD) initially denied the DA's application to march but the decision was overturned on 3 February 2014 when the DA took the matter to the Johannesburg High Court. On the 11th, it was reported that the JMPD had set the march perimeters to prevent the DA from marching to Luthuli House. JMPD spokesperson, Chief Superintendent Wayne Minnaar said, "The protest march by the DA... has been prohibited on the grounds that there would be a security risk to protesters." The DA announced that the march would now end at Beyers Naude Square. On the day of the march, an application to stop the DA march filed by the ANC to the South Gauteng High Court was dismissed.

The march ended early after the DA was confronted by ANC supporters 40 minutes into the march. Stones and petrol bombs were thrown by ANC supporters at police trying to calm the situation.

On 13 March, violence erupted in the Bekkersdal township in Gauteng, the scene of violent service delivery protests in 2013. Residents staged a protest over a planned ANC campaign in the area, barricading the streets with rocks and burning tyres and pelting ANC officials and police vehicles with stones. Police responded to the volatile situation by firing rubber bullets at residents.

Shortly after Public Protector Thuli Madonsela's final report on security upgrades to President Jacob Zuma's private residence at Nkandla was published on 19 March, the DA sent a bulk text message to Gauteng voters which reads: "The Nkandla report shows how Zuma stole your money to build his R246m home. Vote DA on 7 May to beat corruption. Together for change." The ANC submitted an urgent application to the South Gauteng High Court to stop distribution of the text message on the grounds that it violated the Electoral Act. On 4 April, the court ruled that the wording of the message was fair comment and dismissed the ANC's application with costs. The ANC was granted leave to appeal the decision. On 6 May, the Electoral Court ruled that the DA must retract the text message, finding that it wrongly targeted Zuma personally instead of the systematic failures highlighted in Madonsela's report. The court case was ultimately won by the DA when the Constitutional Court set aside the Electoral Court ruling on 19 January 2015.

On 5 April, a marquee, a stage, a sound system and chairs set up for an EFF rally in Thokoza were petrol bombed in the early hours of the morning. EFF spokesperson, Mbuyiseni Mdlozi said that the EFF suspected ANC members were responsible for the sabotage. ANC spokesperson Jackson Mthembu denied the allegations, saying "We don't do such things."

The following day, the DA accused the ANC of abusing state resources after the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) was seen giving out blankets and toiletries at an ANC rally in Parys. ANC spokesperson Khusela Sangoni-Khawe denied the accusation, saying that the ANC did not know SASSA would be at the rally.
Four days later, the DA submitted a complaint to the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) about censorship by the public broadcaster after the SABC informed the DA it would not continue broadcasting a DA television advert titled "ANC Ayisafani", meaning "the ANC's not the same", and five DA radio adverts aired on 8 and 9 April 2014. According to the DA's Mmusi Maimane, who appears in the television advert, the SABC banned all DA adverts from 11 public radio stations as well as the television advert. ICASA announced that it would hold public hearings on the matter on Thursday the 17th, 6 days after the DA lodged their complaint. Following the DA's announcement that it would submit an urgent application to the South Gauteng High Court requesting a ruling on the adverts before the long Easter weekend commencing Good Friday, the day after ICASA's proposed public hearing date, the ICASA hearings commenced 2 days earlier than originally scheduled. On the day after the hearing, the ban was lifted temporarily as the SABC had failed to provide reasons for the ban during the ICASA hearings and requested more time to prepare a response. The DA also objected to the SABC not allowing the national official opposition party to participate in a televised election debate on land reform on SABCin the first 2 weeks of April. On 25 April, ICASA upheld the SABC's ban on the television advert finding that it contravened ICASA's regulations on party election broadcasts. ICASA ordered that a photograph taken by "The Citizen" photographer Alaister Russell of a police officer firing rubber bullets at unarmed residents during the March 2014 Bekkersdal protest be removed from the advert as "the police should not be seen as a threat to the community". In the advert, Maimane says "We've seen a police force killing our own people" while the photograph is shown on the screen. The South African Police Service had earlier submitted a complaint to ICASA that this footage would incite violence against police officers. On 15 April 2014, a protest campaign against corruption with the slogan "Vukani! Sidikwe! (Wake up! We are Fed up!) Vote No", supported by over 100 ANC veterans, was launched by former government ministers Ronnie Kasrils and Nozizwe Madlala-Routledge. The IEC has requested a legal opinion on whether the campaign contravenes the Electoral Act. The campaign urges ANC supporters to either spoil their votes or vote for a smaller party. Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu welcomed the campaign, and human rights activist and cleric Barney Pityana describes it as "a campaign to bring rationality, order, morality and decency back into our electoral system" in a "Mail & Guardian" opinion piece.

On the same day, United Democratic Movement leader Bantu Holomisa announced that lawyers acting on behalf of several opposition parties concerned about the credibility of the general election would approach the Electoral Court following the IEC chairperson Pansy Tlakula's refusal to agree to their call for her resignation. Public Protector Thuli Madonsela found Tlakula had been involved in building procurement irregularities in a report published in August 2013, and a subsequent National Treasury review published in March 2014 supported her findings. Five days before the election, the Electoral Court postponed the inquiry into her conduct until 2 June 2014, as it would not be able to rule on the matter before the 7 May election date. On 18 June, the Electoral Court recommended Tlakula's removal from office due to financial misconduct. Tlakula resigned as IEC chairperson on 1 September after an unsuccessful application to the Constitutional Court for leave to appeal the Electoral Court ruling.

On 22 April, the EFF also lodged a complaint with ICASA after the SABC banned an EFF election campaign television advert titled "Now is the time for economic freedom" that was due to be aired on 2 occasions, 2 days before the complaint was lodged and on the day the complaint was lodged. Four days after the complaint was lodged, ICASA upheld the SABC's ban on the advert. ICASA found that wording in the advert about physically destroying contentious e-tolls in Gauteng could incite violence and therefore contravened ICASA's regulations on party election broadcasts. The EFF advert had also highlighted police brutality, using interviews and photographs related to the Marikana massacre and the same photograph of the March 2014 Bekkersdal protest that ICASA ordered removed from the DA advert.

Nine days before the election, a Parliamentary committee set up to consider Zuma's response to Madonsela's final Nkandla report was referred to the next Parliament to be formed after the election, citing insufficient time available before the 7 May election date.

Two days before the election, Zuma spoke about the Nkandla scandal at a media briefing, saying it was only an issue with the media and the opposition, "the bright people ... very clever people", and not an issue with ANC voters.

On the day before the election, it was reported that the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (NSPCA) had ambushed election campaign posters by attaching matching NSPCA posters to the bottom of them. NSPCA spokesperson, Christine Kuch said that the NSPCA campaign hoped to get more political parties to include animal rights in their manifestos.

Due to the secretive nature of political funding in South Africa generally little public information exists on both sources of political funding of South African political parties and the nature of their expenses however the ruling ANC did declare the 2014 elections to be the “most expensive election” it had ever fought to date. According to leaked sources within the ANC the 2014 elections cost the ANC over R429-million. Some of the ANC's expenses include R118 million on campaign T-shirts, R17-million for the manifesto launch in Mbombela, R83.7-million in advertising (including R27-million for posters and billboards), R21 million for the victory rally, and R67-million on volunteers.

Over 26,000 South Africans registered to participate in the national election in the international voting phase, which took place at 116 international voting stations on 30 April 2014. The last international voting station in Los Angeles closed at 6am SAST on 1 May 2014. All international votes were couriered to South Africa, combined into a single voting district and counted on 7 May 2014.

The IEC had budgeted R2 million to cover the cost of couriering the ballot papers from overseas.

The local special vote phase of the election took place on 5–6 May 2014, accommodating who are physically infirm, disabled or pregnant or were unable to vote at their voting station on the polling day. Former President Thabo Mbeki cast a special vote as he was attending a World Economic Forum meeting in Nigeria on polling day.

Voting took place relatively smoothly at 22,264 voting stations in South Africa. It was reported that 2,449, or 11%, of the voting stations opened later than the scheduled opening time of 7am. All voting stations were operational by 11am. Voting stations closed and counting began at 9pm.

A newly designed braille template was used for the first time in a National election, allowing blind voters to vote independently for the first time. In previous elections, blind voters had to communicate their choice of party to a voting official, who then filled in a ballot sheet on their behalf.

On voting day 97 people were arrested for election-related offences, primarily voter intimidation. A number of voters ignored the new legislation prohibiting photographs of marked ballot papers, including local celebrity DJ Sbu and footballer Andile Jali.

The chair of the Independent Electoral Commission, Pansy Tlakula, made it plain that electioneering was forbidden on the day of the election itself. ‘No political events can take place on voting day,’ she told reporters. ‘Campaigning finished at midnight last night.’ In the townships surrounding Cape Town it was evident that this ruling was extensively and openly flouted. As the day drew to a close, cavalcades of cars, with loudspeakers blaring out party songs and supporters waving flags from the windows, could be seen touring up and down the streets. Outside polling stations crowds, some more than a hundred strong, dressed in party colours and waving ANC flags, could be seen dancing less than a metre from the long lines of men and women waiting patiently to cast their votes. When this was drawn to the attention of the police and the representatives of the Electoral Commission at the stations they either shrugged their shoulders or said they did not have the resources to deal with these violations of the regulations.

A voting station in Alexandra, Gauteng was temporarily closed after an argument broke out between ANC and EFF members when the EFF accused the ANC of vote-rigging. The voting station was opened later that afternoon.

An ANC supporter was fatally shot in KwaZulu-Natal by an IFP supporter near a voting station. Dumisani Nxumalo, a 28-year-old from KwaDukuza was charged with the murder. The Durban Regional Court saw his bail application on 26 June 2014 where it was alleged that the shooting took place while IFP supporters were walking past an ANC tent. The case was set to continue in July.

The Electoral Commission decided to exclude the votes from one voting station in Tickeyline, near Tzaneen in Limpopo, because staff at the voting station were attacked at the close of voting and the security of the ballot could not be assured. The final results were announced on 10 May.

The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) consists of 90 members, ten nominated by each provincial legislature, in proportion to the party membership of the provincial legislature. Each provincial delegation consists of six permanent delegates, who are nominated for a term that lasts until a new provincial legislature is elected, and four special delegates. One of the special delegates is the province's Premier, or another member of the provincial legislature designated by the Premier, while the other three special delegates are designated "ad hoc" by the provincial legislature.
In the provincial results of the election, the ANC won a majority in all the provincial legislatures except for the Western Cape, in which it came second to the DA. The DA came second in all other provinces except for Limpopo and the North West, in which it came third after the EFF.

African National Congress supporters gathered in Johannesburg to celebrate the party's results. Jacob Zuma dedicated the ANC's victory to Nelson Mandela. The ANC requested an in-depth analysis of election results from its provincial election team in Gauteng. ANC spokesperson Nkenke Kekana said the ANC was concerned about its drop in support in the 2014 elections. Democratic Alliance leader, Helen Zille, published a press release thanking every South African who voted for the DA. She said that voters had responded positively to the DA's campaign, saying, "We can look back proudly on what was undoubtedly the biggest and best campaign the DA has ever run." Economic Freedom Fighters commander-in-chief Julius Malema dedicated the EFF's result to the girls kidnapped in the Chibok schoolgirl kidnapping, saying, "It looks impossible, but we have proved what looks impossible is possible." EFF supporters gathered at Innes Free Park in Sandton to celebrate the results. Inkatha Freedom Party leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi said in a statement that despite low estimations in the Ipsos polls, the IFP managed to retain its fourth-place position in the elections. Buthelezi thanked all South Africans who voted for the IFP and stated that he was proud to serve South Africa. Agang SA: Mamphela Ramphele congratulate all parties and candidates who contested the election. She expressed disappointment at Agang SA's poor performance, but stated that she was proud that her party achieved parliamentary representation despite it only being formed several months prior to the election. African Christian Democratic Party MP Steve Swart expressed disappointment that the ACDP did not grow its share of the vote, but was grateful that they were able to retain their support compared to other parties in the election.

Angolan President José Eduardo dos Santos congratulated President Jacob Zuma and said that the election results reaffirmed the wish of South Africans to maintain the status quo. President of Botswana, Ian Khama said "We extend our congratulations to President Jacob Zuma and his party the ANC for their re-election." Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan congratulated President Zuma and the ANC on their "resounding victory", describing it as a well-deserved tribute to Nelson Mandela. President of Seychelles, James Michel congratulated Jacob Zuma on his re-election, saying, “It is a mark of confidence, in the leadership that you have provided the people of South Africa and the undeniable strong determination and conviction in making South Africa a beacon of hope and success in Africa and in the world." He also stated he was proud of the partnership between their two countries and he hoped that they would continue to improve. Swaziland's ambassador to South Africa Senzangakhona Dlamini told President Zuma "Swaziland agrees that South Africa has a good story to tell as you celebrate 20 years of democracy". Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe congratulated President Jacob Zuma on the ANC's "resounding victory" and commended South Africans for their "peaceful and exemplary conduct" during the election.

United States Secretary of State, John Kerry, congratulated South Africa on the elections in a press release when the voting had concluded. Once the results had been released, President Barack Obama congratulated Jacob Zuma in a telephone conversation.

The President of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko sent a congratulatory message to Zuma congratulating him on his re-election. It read, "I hope that joint efforts will help us enhance bilateral cooperation for the benefit of the two countries." United Kingdom Foreign Secretary William Hague congratulated South Africa for successful elections and stated that the UK would continue to have good relations with South Africa.

King of Bahrain, Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa congratulated Zuma on his re-election for a second term of governance. Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying, congratulated South Africa on the elections at a press briefing. She said that China had paid great attention to these elections and that "China will continue to view relations with South Africa as a priority in its foreign policy." Indian president, Pranab Mukherjee congratulated Jacob Zuma on his re-election and said that he hoped bilateral relations between India and South Africa would grow from "strength to strength." King Abdullah of Jordan congratulated Zuma and expressed his commitment to improve relations between Jordan and South Africa. Kazakhstan ambassador to South Africa Talgat Kaliyev congratulated President Zuma on "the successful elections". President of Nepal, Ram Baran Yadav congratulated Zuma on his re-elections and wished peace and prosperity for South Africans under Zuma's leadership. Sri Lankan president Mahinda Rajapaksa congratulated the ANC on their victory, saying this showed the popularity of "the party of Nelson Mandela, Oliver Tambo and others."

Barotseland Administrator General, Afumba Mombotwa congratulated Zuma for his victory, saying the result of the election showed that South African citizens had "spoken their minds." President of the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic, Mohamed Abdelaziz conveyed his best wishes to Zuma and the ANC on behalf of his people and government.

United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki Moon applauded the high voter turnout at the elections and South African citizens' willingness to participate in the democratic system their country fought for. African Union observer mission Deputy Head Ibrahim Fall reported that the elections were fair and all parties obeyed electoral rules. He said, "The general political and electoral environment was generally peaceful across the country, with voters being able to exercise their right to vote." Southern African Development Community Electoral Observation Mission said in a statement "Guided by the SADC Principles and Guidelines Governing Democratic Elections, SEOM concludes that the 2014 National and Provincial Elections were peaceful, free, fair, transparent and credible, reflecting the will of the people of South Africa." Commonwealth of Nations Election Observer Mission chairperson, Nana Akufo-Addo said that the South African elections should be an example for the continent of Africa, saying, "So when we see a process like this which seems to have been a commendable process taking place in South Africa, we see there is a tremendous boost to the spread of democracy in the rest of the continent."

BBC's Andrew Harding said that there was no massive change in the elections compared to previous years and Voice of America said that the increase in representation for opposition parties will provide "great political entertainment".

On 8 May 2014, the South African Rand grew 1.2% against the US dollar, reaching its highest level in four months. The following day, the Rand was still trading strongly as preliminary results showed that the ANC would defeat the EFF, whose left-wing policies worried investors.

On 7 June 2014, the Presidency issued a statement saying that Jacob Zuma had been admitted to hospital for tests following "a demanding election and transition programme," and that doctors were satisfied with his condition. Zuma was advised to rest for the next few days. Following internal conflict within Agang SA, party leader Mamphela Ramphele announced her withdrawal from politics on the next day.

On 8 May, it was reported that dumped ballots from the Lynnwood voting district in Pretoria had been found. According to reports, a majority of the dumped votes were for the Democratic Alliance. Helen Zille expressed her concerns over the incident to reporters at the IEC national operations centre, saying, "This is certainly not conducive to public confidence in a free and fair election." However, DA party agents from the voting station confirmed that the votes had already been counted. Party agent for the DA, Jordan Griffith tweeted, “I was the party agent there, those votes were counted and recorded. .signed off. The IEC in their laziness dumped them" The IEC stated that it was looking into the incident.

On 8 May violence broke out in Alexandra, Gauteng after residents found two ballot boxes dumped in the area. An IEC office was damaged.

IFP officials stormed an ANC office in Alexandra and held ANC members hostage after the IFP had realised that they had lost all previous IFP voting districts to the ANC. The ANC office was situated in a multi-purpose centre along with IEC and IFP offices.

Rubber bullets and stun grenades were used on 9 May to disperse a violent protest by 300 to 400 people demanding the release of the suspects arrested the previous day. Members of the South African National Defence Force were called in to bring the situation under control. 44 People were arrested for public violence during the protest.




</doc>
<doc id="31936447" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31936447" title="Sie werden euch in den Bann tun, BWV 183">
Sie werden euch in den Bann tun, BWV 183

' (They will put you under banishment), ', is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach. He composed it in Leipzig for Exaudi, the Sunday after Ascension, and first performed it on 13 May 1725. The work includes some unusual woodwind scoring, two oboes da caccia and two oboes d'amore.

Bach wrote the cantata in his second year in Leipzig for the Sunday Exaudi, the Sunday after Ascension. The prescribed readings for the feast day were from the First Epistle of Peter, "serve each other" (), and from the second Farewell discourse in the Gospel of John, the promise of the Paraclete, the "Spirit of Truth", and the announcement of prosecution ().

Some of the cantatas composed by Bach in his second year were chorale cantatas, a format he chose for services between the first Sunday after Trinity and Palm Sunday. For Easter he had returned to cantatas on more varied texts. Nine of the cantatas for the period between Easter and Pentecost are based on texts of Christiana Mariana von Ziegler, including this cantata. Bach later assigned it to his third annual cycle. Ziegler begins the cantata with the same quotation from the gospel as an unknown poet one year earlier in , the prediction of persecution of Christians. "They will put you under banishment, but the time will come, when, whoever kills you will think that he does God a service by it" (). She continues stressing the lack of fear possible for a follower who relies on "" (the protective arm of Jesus). In movements 3 and 4 she refers to the beginning of the gospel, the spirit who will assist. The closing chorale is the fifth stanza of Paul Gerhardt's "".

Bach first performed the cantata on 13 May 1725.

The autograph score was inherited by C.P.E. Bach.
The music was not published until 1891 when it appeared as part of the first complete edition of the composer´s work, the Bach-Gesellschaft-Ausgabe. The editor of the volume in question was Alfred Dörffel.

Ziegler published the text in a collection of her work, along with the other ones set by Bach. These printed versions are slightly different from the texts used in the cantatas, and this is believed to be the result of the composer modifying the libretti with which he was presented. In the case of "Sie werden euch in den Bann tun" the differences between the printed version and that set by Bach are less than in the preceding cantatas such as .

Bach structured the cantata in five movements, beginning with what John Eliot Gardiner describes as a "curtain raiser", a line from the gospel set as a recitative. This is followed by a sequence aria–recitative–aria, and the cantata is concluded by a four-part chorale. Bach scored the work for four vocal soloists (soprano, alto, tenor and bass), a four-part choir only in the closing chorale, and a Baroque instrumental ensemble in an unusual combination of instruments, two oboes d'amore (Oa), two oboes da caccia (Oc), two violins (Vl), viola (Va), a violoncello piccolo (Vp) and basso continuo.

In the following table of the movements, the scoring follows the Neue Bach-Ausgabe. The continuo, playing throughout, is not shown.

In the first movement the words of Jesus are given to the bass, the voice type which by convention was the (voice of Christ). A year earlier (in "Sie werden euch in den Bann tun", BWV 44), Bach rendered the announcement of Jesus in a two-part movement, a duet for bass and tenor followed by an agitated chorus. In this cantata, he sets it as a recitative of only five measures. The instrumentation is novel, having long chords of the four oboes, two oboes da caccia and two oboes d'amore, accompany the voice above a pedal point held by the continuo. This creates a "sepulchral" sound. The Bach scholar Christoph Wolff notes that this "opulent oboe scoring" with all four oboes playing together is used only in the two recitatives (1 and 3).
The second movement, the first aria, is the longest of the work. It is sung by the tenor with an obbligato part for violoncello piccolo, an instrument with a tenor-bass range. The "dark and shaded" timbre of the movement has been seen as representing the protection provided by Christ. Denying the fear of the threatening death, the violoncello piccolo plays continuous runs.
Movement 3 is again a recitativo accompagnato, even more complex than the first one; the strings play long chords, whereas all the oboes repeat the same four-note motif throughout the movement, sung by the alto on the words "Ich bin bereit" (I am ready).
The second aria is accompanied by the strings and the two oboes da caccia in unison as obbligato instruments, thus both arias are dominated by instruments with a relatively low range (oboes de caccia having a pitch below that of a normal oboe).
The cantata is closed by a four-part chorale on the tune of "".

The selection is taken from the listing on the Bach Cantatas Website. Choirs with one voice per part (OVPP) and orchestras playing period instruments in historically informed performances are marked green.



</doc>
<doc id="31953942" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31953942" title="Hugh Hickling">
Hugh Hickling

Reginald Hugh Hickling (2 August 1920 – 11 February 2007), known as Hugh Hickling, was a British lawyer, civil servant, law academic, and author, and author of the controversial Internal Security Act of colonial Malaysia.

Born in Derby, England, Hickling served from 1941 until 1946 in the British Royal Navy during World War II, and then joined the Colonial Legal Service. In 1955, Hickling was posted to Malaya (now Malaysia), where he gained prominence as a lawmaker. He drafted the Constitution of Malaysia, and as Commissioner of Law Revision wrote the Internal Security Act (ISA) of 1960, which provided for the detention of persons without trial. The ISA was later used to oppress political opponents or those dedicated to non-violent activities, which Hickling later said was not his intention.

In 1972, Hickling retired from the civil service, and subsequently lectured in law in Australia, Malaysia, Singapore, and the United Kingdom. Hickling later wrote many books and law journal articles, and also wrote novels and short stories throughout his career. Hickling died in 2007 in Malvern, Worcestershire.

Hickling was the son of Frederick Hickling, a police inspector, and his wife Elsie, of Malvern, Worcestershire. Hickling was born on 2 August 1920 in Derby, and educated at Buxton College. He applied to study at the University of Oxford, but was unsuccessful at his interview, because he shocked his examiner by rating the poetry of A. E. Housman over that of William Wordsworth. He studied instead at the University of Nottingham, where he became the youngest student to graduate with a Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.). After graduation, Hickling joined a law firm as an articled clerk, and then enrolled for one year of approved academic study at the East Midlands School of Law.

Between 1941 and 1946 Hickling served as an ordinary seaman in World War II with the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve on board "HMS La Malouine", a 29-metre French corvette taken over by the British. The ship was part of Convoy PQ 17, carrying matériel from Britain and the US to the USSR. PQ 17 sailed in June–July 1942 and suffered the heaviest losses of any Russia-bound convoy, with 25 vessels out of 36 lost to enemy action. On D-Day, he was a sub-lieutenant commanding an Mk IV Landing Craft Tank 1013 with LCT 1018 of the 43rd LCT flotilla, which carried several hundred tons of ammunition to Sword Beach, Normandy.

Hickling married Beryl (Bee) Dennett in 1945, and the following year he resumed his legal career as deputy solicitor with the "Evening Standard" in London. After the death of their firstborn son, they emigrated despite his wife's uncertainty about moving as far from England as possible.

Hickling joined the Colonial Legal Service, and in 1950 was posted to Sarawak, then a British colony, as assistant attorney general and, as he put it, "cheerfully assisted in the dissolution of Empire". In 1954, he spent two months in the sultanate of Brunei to research its constitutional status and to brief colonial officials on its history and traditions before the introduction of a written constitution, and submitted his memorandum on the matter in 1955.

Immediately thereafter, Hickling was transferred to Malaya as its first parliamentary draftsman, and in that capacity he helped to prepare the Malayan (now Malaysian) constitution for that country's independence from Britain in 1957. Subsequently, as Commissioner of Law Revision he drafted the Internal Security Act of 1960, based on the Emergency Ordinance 1948 which had been enacted to provide the British colonial authorities with powers to tackle a communist insurgency. For his contributions to Malaya, Hickling was made a Companion of the Order of the Defender of the Realm (known in Malay as the "Johan Mangku Negara" or JMN) by the Malaysian head of state, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, in 1961.

The Internal Security Act allows persons to be detained without trial for acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Malaysia or to the maintenance of its essential services or economic life. It is authorized by Article 149 of the Malaysian Constitution, which stipulates that if an Act recites that action has been taken or threatened by any substantial body of persons, whether inside or outside the Federation in respect of certain situations – including organized violence against persons or property, the excitement of disaffection against the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or the government, or the promotion of feelings of ill-will and hostility between different races or classes of the population likely to cause violence – then any provision of that law designed to stop or prevent that action is valid notwithstanding that it is inconsistent with certain articles of the Constitution guaranteeing fundamental liberties. Upon Singapore's independence from Malaysia in 1965, the island republic retained both the Internal Security Act and Article 149 of the Constitution in its statute book.

According to the "New Straits Times", Hickling later wrote in 1989, "I could not imagine then that the time would come when the power of detention, carefully and deliberately interlocked with Article 149 of the Constitution, would be used against political opponents, welfare workers and others dedicated to nonviolent, peaceful activities." However, he commented that it was not for him to say if the Internal Security Act should be scrapped. "As a lawyer, I'm all for its review but on whether it should be scrapped, I don't know. You've got a multi-racial society [in Malaysia] in which emotions can run high very quickly." Interviewed on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's radio programme "PM" in April 2001, Hickling agreed with the interviewer, Geoff Thompson, that he supported the law's continued existence and said he was "sorry to say that, in the light of my own experience, I'm inclined to think you couldn't really safely get rid of it at the moment". Worldwide terrorist attacks such as 9/11 confirmed his views on the matter.

Hickling later served with the Commonwealth Office in 1964, and as legal adviser to the High Commissioner in Aden and the Federation of South Arabia between 1964 and 1967. He was also Maritime Law Adviser in Thailand (1968–1969), Malaysia (1969), Sri Lanka (1970) and the Yemen Arab Republic (1984 and 1986). His last colonial post was that of Attorney General of Gibraltar between 1970 and 1972.

After retiring from the civil service, Hickling became a law academic. He was a lecturer at the School of Oriental and African Studies in London (which awarded him a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) in Law) from 1976 to 1978 and from 1981 to 1982 where he taught Southeast Asian law, and a visiting lecturer at the National University of Singapore Faculty of Law from 1974 to 1976 and again from 1978 to 1980. He was also adjunct Professor of Southeast Asian Law at the Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (National University of Malaysia) in Bangi, Selangor, for six years.

He authored books and law journal articles, particularly about public law in Malaysia and Singapore; some of the latter were collected into two works, "Essays in Malaysian Law" (1991) and "Essays in Singapore Law" (1992). In 1995, in recognition of his reputation and standing in the legal profession, he was appointed adjunct professor of law at the Centre of South East Asian Law at Charles Darwin University in Darwin in the Northern Territory, Australia. Until 2006, Hickling continued travelling to the Far East and Australia, delivering lectures, reviewing examination papers and visiting friends, colleagues and students. Despite his many accolades, he lived simply and impressed staff and students with his disarming humility. In addition to his legal writings, Hickling wrote novels and short stories, mostly drawing on his experiences of life in different British colonies. Hickling was appointed a Companion of the Order of St. Michael and St. George (CMG) in 1968 and a Queen's Counsel (Gibraltar) in 1970.

Upon his retirement, Hickling chose to settle in Malvern, Worcestershire, because of family connections to the town, and indulged his lifelong passion for the music of Mozart. He died after a short illness on 11 February 2007 in St. Richard's Hospice, Malvern, survived by his wife, two sons and a daughter, and 12 grandchildren.






</doc>
<doc id="31970072" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31970072" title="Egypt at the 2012 Summer Olympics">
Egypt at the 2012 Summer Olympics

Egypt competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, from 27 July to 12 August 2012, sending one of its largest delegations ever. A total of 110 Egyptian athletes participated in 83 events across 20 sports, with more women taking part than ever before. The nation's flagbearer in the opening ceremonies was Hesham Mesbah, a judoka who was Egypt's only medalist at the 2008 Summer Olympics. Egypt won two medals during the course of the Games: Alaaeldin Abouelkassem earned silver in the men's foil, becoming the first competitor from an African nation to win a fencing medal, while Karam Gaber captured silver in the men's 84 kg Greco-Roman wrestling event. Two Egyptian weightlifters were awarded medals retroactively, after higher-ranked competitors were disqualified for doping: Abeer Abdelrahman took silver in the women's 75 kg event, while Tarek Yehia, received bronze in the men's 85 kg event. Among other achievements, Mostafa Mansour was the nation's first competitor in sprint canoeing while fencer Shaimaa El-Gammal became the first Egyptian female to appear in four editions of the Olympics.

Prior to 2012, Egypt had sent athletes to nineteen editions of the Summer Olympic Games, the 1906 Intercalated Games, equestrian at the 1956 Summer Olympics, and the 1984 Winter Olympics. Before the Games began, the Egyptian Olympic Committee distributed counterfeit Nike gear to its athletes, due to its financial troubles following the Egyptian Revolution of 2011. Nike, however, ended up donating legitimate equipment to the Egyptians. Tamer Bayoumi, a 2004 Olympic bronze medalist and the nation’s most successful taekwondo practitioner at the 2012 Games, was chosen to carry Egypt’s flag at the closing ceremony.

Aside from the team sport of football, which had 16 participants, fencing and wrestling were the sports in which Egypt had the most participants, sending 12 representatives to each. Of them, wrestling was almost exclusively male with only one female, Rabab Eid, taking part. The sport with the most Egyptian female participation was synchronized swimming, an all-woman tournament at the Olympics, with eight, while the nation sent six women to fencing, the highest amount for a mixed sport. Among tournaments with the potential for both men and women to take part, Egypt qualified females, but not males, for badminton, and males, but not females, for track and field athletics, boxing, canoeing, equestrian, football, judo, and sailing.

The following Egyptian athletes won medals at the games. In the by discipline sections below, medalists' names are bolded.

Prior to 2012, Egypt had sent athletes to nineteen editions of the Summer Olympic Games (three times as the United Arab Republic), the 1906 Intercalated Games, equestrian at the 1956 Summer Olympics, and the 1984 Winter Olympics. With the exception of the Soviet-boycotted 1984 Summer Olympics, Egypt's 2012 delegation was the largest ever, and chose Hesham Mesbah, a 2008 Olympic medalist in judo, as its flagbearer in the opening ceremony. A total of 110 Egyptians, 76 men and 34 women, travelled to London and competed in 20 different sports. It was the largest delegation of women in the country's Olympic history. Prior the start of the Olympic Games, the Egyptian Olympic Committee (EOC) distributed counterfeit Nike gear from a Chinese distributor to its athletes, due to its financial troubles following the Egyptian Revolution of 2011. Nike ended up donating equipment to the Egyptians, despite the EOC's eventual willingness to pay.

Shaimaa El-Gammal became the nation's first female to appear in her fourth Olympic games, while former Olympic medalists Tamer Bayoumi (taekwondo), Karam Gaber (Greco-Roman wrestling), and Hesham Mesbah (judo) returned to compete again. Middleweight boxer Mohamed Hikal and skeet shooter Mostafa Hamdy also made a fourth appearance at the Games, while Gaber, Mesbah, and six other athletes made their third Olympic appearance: discus thrower Omar Ahmed El Ghazaly, modern pentathlete Aya Medany, table tennis player El-sayed Lashin, Greco-Roman wrestlers Ashraf El-Gharably and Mohamed Abdelfatah, and judoka Islam El Shehaby. Skeet shooter Mona El-Hawary, aged 49, was the oldest athlete on the team, while sprint freestyle swimmer Farida Osman was the youngest at age 17. Bayoumi was selected as Egypt's flagbearer for the closing ceremony.

The following table lists the number of Egyptian competitors who participated in each Olympic sport. Reserves in fencing, field hockey, football, and handball are not included, nor are athletes who failed to start in their event.

Two Egyptian archers, one male and one female, qualified for the Olympics, both of whom earned their berths at the 2012 African Archery Championships. Ahmed El-Nemr finished second at that tournament, behind Philippe Kouassi of Côte d'Ivoire, and entered the men's individual event. El-Nemr had won three medals at the 2011 Pan Arab Games, gold in the individual recurve 90 metres and silver in the individual recurve FITA and the team event. In London he scored 644 points in the ranking round and placed 57th overall out of 64 competitors. In the round of 64 he defeated eighth-ranked Crispin Duenas of Canada three sets to one and then faced Kuo Cheng-wei, who was representing Chinese Taipei. El-Nemr lost this round three sets to one and was eliminated from the tournament, leaving with a final ranking of 17th. Nada Kamel, who had earned seven medals at the 2011 Pan Arab Games, won the women's event at the 2012 African Championships and entered the individual tournament. There she scored 611 points in the ranking round and placed 56th overall out of 64 participants. She was defeated by Ksenia Perova of Russia three sets to none in the opening round and finished the event joint-33rd and last.

Seven Egyptian athletes, six men and one woman, qualified for the Olympics, although one did not compete. Noura Elsayed, the lone woman, was slated to run in the 800 metres, but withdrew due to injury. The only Egyptian to participate in more than one event was Amr Ibrahim Mostafa Seoud, a veteran of the 200 metre event at the 2008 Summer Olympics. Seoud, who had won gold medals in the 100 metres at the 2007 Pan Arab and 2011 All-African Games, and the 200 metres at the 2007 Pan Arab and 2009 Mediterranean Games, as well as the 2010 African Championships, met the "A" qualifying standard for both the 100 metres and 200 metres. In the 100 he drew the same heat as world record-holder and defending Olympic champion Usain Bolt of Jamaica and finished fourth, which was insufficient to advance. He had the same result in the opening heats of the 200. Hamada Mohamed met the "A" qualifying standard for the 800 metres and won his opening heat in London, advancing to the semifinals. He was placed in the same heat as David Rudisha of Kenya, the world-record holder and upcoming gold medalist, and finished eighth out of nine competitors, failing reach the final.

The remaining Egyptians, all of whom qualified through the B standard, competed in field events. Omar Ahmed El Ghazaly, in the discus, was the most experienced of the quartet, with senior international medals going back to bronze at the 2002 African Championships in Athletics, in addition to past Olympic appearances in 2004 and 2008. In London he finished 26th among 41 participants with a best throw of 60.26 meters. Ihab Abdelrahman, in the javelin throw, had missed the 2008 Summer Olympics, despite having been a silver medalist at the 2007 Pan Arab Games, but had won the event at the 2010 African Championships and the 2011 Pan Arab Games. In London he placed 28th out of 44 competitors with a best throw of 77.35 meters. Mostafa Al-Gamel, in the hammer throw, was the gold medalist from the 2011 All-African Games and a silver medalist from the 2008 African Championships and the 2011 Pan Arab Games. In London he was 27th among 41 participants with a best throw of 71.36 meters. Mohamed Fathalla Difallah, who had come in fourth at the 2011 All-Africa Games, was 37th out of 41 competitors in the qualifying round of the long jump in London, with a distance of 7.08 meters, and did not advance to the final.


One Egyptian badminton player qualified for the Olympics, Hadia Hosny El Said. A veteran of the 2008 Summer Games, she trained for London at the University of Bath, where she was a graduate student in bioscience. Ranked 102nd in the world, she qualified by being the top player on the African continent. In the women's singles, she lost to Pi Hongyan of France and Chloe Magee of Ireland, finished in the bottom of her group, and was eliminated from the tournament.

Five Egyptian boxers qualified for the Olympics, all of whom were men and earned their spots at the 2012 African Boxing Olympic Qualification Tournament. The only Egyptian to win a bout in London was Hesham Yehia, in the flyweight division, who defeated Benson Gicharu of Kenya before losing to Jasurbek Latipov of Uzbekistan in the round of 16. Yehia's most successful major international tournament had been the 2011 Pan Arab Games, where he had been the flyweight runner-up. The most experienced boxer was Mohamed Hikal, who had competed in the light-middleweight, welterweight, and middleweight categories of the 2000, 2004, and 2008 Summer Olympics respectively. Among his international boxing distinctions, he was 1999 and 2003 All-African champion, 2005 Mediterranean champion, 2007 and 2011 Pan Arab champion, and 2007 African champion, and won a bronze medal at the 2005 World Championships. In 2012 he was once again representing Egypt as a middleweight and lost his first bout to Soltan Migitinov of Azerbaijan. Ramy Helmy El-Awadi, a bronze medalist from the 2007 Pan Arab Games, received a bye in the opening round of the light flyweight class and was defeated by Ferhat Pehlivan of Turkey in the round of 16. Mohamed Ramadan and Eslam El-Gendy lost their first bouts to eventual silver medalist Han Soon-Chul of South Korea and Gyula Káté of Hungary in the lightweight and light welterweight events respectively.


Egypt's first ever Olympic competitor in canoe and kayak, Mostafa Mansour, qualified for the 2012 Games. Having taken up the sport in 2007, after abandoning his initial pursuit of rowing, Mansour qualified for the K-1 200 metres by coming in third in the event at the 2011 All-Africa Games. The Olympic spots were originally meant to go to the top two finishers, Greg Louw of South Africa and Mohamed Mrabet of Tunisia, but South Africa did not select Louw for the Games. Mansour's best time in the K-1 1000 metres earned him a spot in that event as a continental wildcard. He was eliminated in the opening round of both events in London, after finishing last in his heats.

One Egyptian equestrian qualified for show jumping for the Olympics. Karim El-Zoghby, a veteran of the 2008 Games, qualified with his horse Wervel Wind due to his ranking at the 2010 FEI World Equestrian Games. In the months leading up to the Olympics, he trained full-time in the Netherlands and won a silver medal in the team jumping event at the 2011 Pan Arab Games. In London, Zoghby survived the first qualifying course by finishing joint-53rd with five penalties, but was eliminated after placing 51st in round two with an additional five penalties.

Twelve Egyptian fencers, six men and six women, qualified for the Olympics. Both the men and women qualified their foil teams by being the top African nation in this category, while Ayman Mohamed Fayez and Salma Mahran were selected as the second highest-ranked Africans in the men's épée and the women's sabre respectively. The final competitors, Mona Hassanein in the women's épée and Mannad Zeid in the men's sabre, won an African qualifier to earn their spots. Both foil teams lost their opening rounds against Great Britain and were eliminated from the tournament.

In the men's events, Alaaeldin Abouelkassem, who captured gold in the individual and team foil events at the 2011 Pan Arab Games, won a silver medal in the men's foil, after the losing the final against Lei Sheng of China. To qualify for the final he defeated American Miles Chamley-Watson, Germany's Peter Joppich, Italy's Andrea Cassarà, and South Korea's Choi Byung-Chul, and became the first African to win an Olympic fencing medal. One of his teammates, Tarek Ayad, who had also been part of the gold medal-winning foil team at the 2011 Pan Arab Games and had won bronze individually, defeated fellow Egyptian Anas Mostafa in the opening round, before losing to Aleksey Cheremisinov of Russia in the round of 32. Fayez, who won gold in the individual and team épée events at the 2011 Pan Arab Games, and Zeid were defeated in their opening rounds by eventual gold medalist Rubén Limardo of Venezuela and Malaysia's Yu Peng Kean respectively. None of the women won any bouts in London, but Shaimaa El-Gammal became the first Egyptian female to compete in four Olympics, having taken part in the 2000, 2004, and 2008 editions.


The Egyptian national football team qualified for the Olympics after its third-place finish at the 2011 CAF U-23 Championship. It was the nation's first Olympic appearance since the 1992 Games and they chose Mohamed Aboutrika, Ahmed Fathy, and Emad Moteab as their three over-23 players. The squad was coached by Hany Ramzy. In the tournament, Egypt was drawn into Group C. It lost its first match against Brazil 3–2, but tied New Zealand 1–1 and defeated Belarus 3–1 to advance to the knockout stage. This was their fifth time in eleven tournaments that Egypt progressed out of the group stage. Egypt met Japan in the quarterfinals and lost 3–0, eliminating them from the tournament.



Four Egyptian gymnasts, three artistic and one rhythmic, qualified for the Olympics. Mohamed El-Saharty, the lone male, was invited to London as the highest-ranked African in the individual all-around at the 2011 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships. He was individual all-around Arab Champion in 2011 and 2012, African Champion in 2010 and 2012, and Pan Arab Champion in 2011. At the latter tournament, he had also taken gold in the horizontal bar, the pommel horse, the vault, and the team event. In London his best event was the vault, where he finished 12th. He was 52nd in the horizontal bar, 56th in the floor, 57th in the pommel horse, 61st in the rings, and 65th in the parallel bars. His final rank in the individual all-around was 37th.
Salma El-Said and Sherine El-Zeiny qualified for the Olympics as the second and third-ranked Africans at the 2011 World Championships, with El-Zeiny having been offered a spot after the highest-placed African, Nicole Szabo of South Africa, turned down the invitation due to injury. El-Said had taken a break from active competition while recovering from an injury of her own and came back shortly before the World Championships. Since then she had taken the individual all-around title at the 2011 Arab Games and the 2012 African Championships. El-Zeiny was a veteran of the 2008 tournament and both had been a part of Egypt's victorious all-around team at the 2012 African Championships. In London, El-Said's best event was the balance beam, in which she placed 42nd. She was also 63rd in the uneven bars, 69th in the floor exercise, and was ranked 41st overall in the individual all-around. El-Zeiny was 53rd on the balance beam, but finished 82nd and last in the floor exercise after suffering an injury. Yasmine Rostom, the rhythmic gymnast, qualified by being the top performer from Africa at the 2011 World Rhythmic Gymnastics Championships. In London she was 23rd in the ball and the hoop, 20th in the clubs, and last in the ribbon to finish 23rd out of 24 competitors overall.



Five Egyptian judoka qualified for the Olympics, all men, two of which advanced beyond the round of 32. Ahmed Awad, who was the 2011 African and All-Africa Games champion, as well as the runner-up at the 2009 Mediterranean Games and a bronze medalist at the 2012 African Championships, earned a spot in the 66 kg event by being the highest ranked African in the division. He defeated Humaid Al-Derei of the United Arab Emirates before losing against Tarlan Karimov of Azerbaijan in the round of 16. Hussein Hafiz, who was the 2011 Pan Arab and 2012 African Champion, as well as the 2011 African runner-up and a bronze medalist at the 2009 and 2010 editions and the 2011 All-Africa Games, qualified for London by being ranked 18th in the world in the 73 kg class. He won his opening match against Osman Murillo Segura of Costa Rica before being defeated by France's Ugo Legrand, an eventual bronze medalist. Hesham Mesbah, who was Egypt's only medalist at the 2008 Summer Olympics, returned to the 90 kg division by being ranked 13th in the world, but was eliminated his first match, against Timur Bolat of Kazakhstan.

Islam El Shehaby had participated in the 2004 and 2008 Summer Olympics and had international judo titles in the +100 kg division as far back as the 1999 Pan Arab Games. He was most recently African Champion in the +100 kg and open classes at the 2011 African Championships, and was runner-up in the former category at the 2012 edition. Coming into the 2012 Olympics he was ranked fourth in the world, but lost in the opening round against Ihar Makarau of Belarus. The final judoka, Ramadan Darwish, had won every African championship in the 100 kg class since 2009, was the 2009 Mediterranean champion and 2011 All-Africa Games runner-up, and had earned a bronze medal at the 2009 World Judo Championships. He qualified for the 100 kg event at the Olympic Games by being ranked ninth worldwide, but was defeated in his first match by France's Thierry Fabre.

Three Egyptian athletes qualified for the Olympic modern pentathlon tournament, two men and one woman. Aya Medany, a veteran of the 2004 and 2008 Games, was the most experienced of the three, having competed internationally since 1999 at the age of 10. She won the 2011 African Championships to earn her spot in London, which was her fifth title at the tournament since 2004. In the women's event in London, she won 20 of her fencing bouts and was ranked joint-eighth after the first round. She was 18th in swimming, 19th in riding, and 21st in the combined running/shooting portion to finish 16th overall. On the men's side, Yasser Hefny won the 2011 African Championships and entered the men's event in London, where he won 17 of his fencing bouts and was ranked joint-thirteenth after the first round. He was 19th in the swimming, 28th in riding, and 31st in the combined running/shooting competition to finish 28th overall.

Amro El Geziry was a veteran of the 2008 Games, having won the 2006 and 2007 African Championships, and was following his brother Emad, who had participated in the 2000 edition. He won a bronze medal with another brother, Omar, at the 2009 World Modern Pentathlon Championships and eventually qualified for the 2012 Olympics by virtue of his world ranking. He received a berth during the second round of Olympic allocations, when spots won by nations who qualified more than the maximum two athletes were redistributed. In London he was victorious in 18 of his fencing bouts and was ranked joint-11th after the first round, but then won the swimming event with an Olympic record time of 1:55.70. He placed 33rd and 34th in the riding and combined riding/shooting competition, however, and finished 33rd overall.

Five Egyptians in three events qualified for the Olympic rowing tournament, all of whom earned their places at the African Continental Qualification Regatta in November 2011. A member of the national team since 2007, Nour El Din Hassanein normally rowed in the double sculls and, with Moustafa Fathy, finished last in the "C" final and 15th overall in that event at the 2010 World Rowing Championships. In London, however, he competed in the men's single sculls and placed second in the "D" final and 20th overall. In the men's lightweight double sculls, Omar Emira and Mohamed Nofel, who were first in the "E" final and 25th overall at the 2011 World Rowing Championships, finished 20th overall and last. In the women's version, Sara Baraka and Fatma Rashed, the latter of whom replaced Baraka's regular partner Ingy Hassem El Din also finished last.


One Egyptian windsurfer qualified for the Olympics, Ahmed Habash, who took up the sport as a teenager, but quit prior to the 2008 Games due to a serious injury. He re-entered competition in 2012 and won the Egyptian National Championships. This qualified him for the , where he performed well enough to earn a spot on the national delegation to London. In the , Habash finished last overall, with 334 net points, and was eliminated prior to the medal round.


Egypt earned seven quota places for shooting events, five of which went to men and two of which were for women. Mona El-Hawary, competing in the women's skeet, was 17th and last in her event, but still ranked higher than any other Egyptian shooter. She was also a veteran of the 2008 Summer Olympics. The other woman, Nourhan Amer, was 41st of 56 competitors in the 10 metre air rifle. She had won three medals in team events at the 2011 Pan Arab Games. Egypt's best-ranked man was Mostafa Hamdy, a veteran of the 1996, 2000, and 2004 Olympic tournaments, who was 18th among 36 participants in the men's skeet. Azmy Mehelba, the 2011 Pan Arab runner up, also competed in the skeet, but was last. Ahmed Zaher, in the trap, was 22nd of 34 competitors, while Karim Wagih was 38th of 44 participants in the 10 metre air pistol. Amgad Hosen, a team gold medalist from the 2011 Pan Arab Games, finished 29th out of 47 competitors in the 10 metre air rifle.


Three Egyptian swimmers, one female and two males, qualified for the Olympics. American-born Farida Osman, the woman, was the youngest member of the 2012 national delegation and qualified for the Games based on having made the Olympic Standard Time in the 50-metre freestyle. In the lead up to the Olympics, she won seven gold medals at the 2011 Pan Arab Games, as well as the 50-metre butterfly title at that year's All-Africa Games and World Junior Championships. In London she was sixth in her heat in the 50-metre freestyle and was eliminated from the tournament, ranking 42nd overall. On the men's side, Shehab Younis qualified for the 50-metre freestyle by meeting the Olympic Selection Time of 22.88 at an international meet in Eindhoven, Netherlands, with a result of 22.85. Prior to the Olympics he had won a bronze medal in the event at the 2011 Pan Arab Games. In London he was third in his heat and 34th overall, failing to advance to the semifinals. Mazen Metwaly, a Saudi-born Egyptian training and studying at Southern Illinois University Carbondale, made the team at an Olympic qualifier in Setúbal, Portugal in June 2012, the second of his two opportunities (his first having been the 2011 World Championships). At the Games, in the marathon 10 kilometre, he was 24th out of 25 competitors.


Egypt's synchronized swimming team qualified for the Olympics by being the top African nation at the 2011 World Aquatics Championships. It was the second time that the nation had qualified for the team event, having previously appeared in 2008. Shaza Abdelrahman and Dalia El-Gebaly, veterans of the 2008 tournament, represented Egypt in the duet, where they placed 24th and last. In the team competition, the nation finished seventh out of eight nations, ranking higher than Australia.

Six Egyptian table tennis players, three men and three women, qualified for the Olympics, four for the singles and an additional two for the team events. The four singles competitors, Omar Assar, El-sayed Lashin, Nadeen El-Dawlatly, and Dina Meshref, all qualified based on their achievements at the 2011 All-Africa Games. At this tournament, Assar won the singles event, was part of the victorious Egyptian team, finished second in the doubles with Emad Moselhy, and placed third in the mixed doubles alongside Meshref. He also won silver in the singles and gold in the team event at the 2011 Pan Arab Games. In London he defeated Yaroslav Zhmudenko of Ukraine in the opening round, but lost to Greece's Panagiotis Gionis in round two. Lashin was the runner-up in the singles at the 2011 All-Africa Games, as well as the winner of the doubles (with Ahmed Saleh), a bronze medalist in the mixed doubles (alongside El-Dawlatly), and a member of the gold medal-earning Egyptian team. His list of international medals stretched back to the 1996 African Championships, where he won a gold medal in the team event, and he had previously appeared in the Olympic Games in 2000 and 2008. In London he defeated Pär Gerell of Sweden and Zoran Primorac of Croatia before losing to Japan's Jun Mizutani in the third round. For the team event, Assar and Lashin were joined by Saleh, a 2008 Olympic veteran whose victories went as far back at the doubles event at the 1996 Arab Championships, but they were eliminated in the opening round.

El-Dawlatly had been fourth in the singles at the 2011 All-Africa Games, as well as third in the doubles and mixed doubles (with Meshref and Lashin respectively), and was a member of the gold medal-winning Egyptian team. She had also earned gold in the team event and the doubles and silver in the singles at the 2011 Pan Arab Games. In London she was defeated in the opening round by Denmark's Mie Skov. Meshref had the same results as El-Dawlatly at the 2011 All-African Games, except for being fifth in the singles, and took gold in the singles, doubles, and team events at the 2011 Pan Arab Games. In London she defeated Offiong Edem of Nigeria and Yana Noskova of Russia before being overcome by Romania's Elizabeta Samara. For the team event, El-Dawlatly and Meshref were joined by Raghd Magdy, who had been third in the doubles and mixed doubles, as well as runner-up in the team competition, at the 2003 All-Africa Games. The Egyptian women were defeated by the Dutch in the first round.


Four Egyptian taekwondo practitioners, two men and two women, qualified for the Olympics, all of whom finished first at the African Qualification tournament, except for Abdelrahman Ossama in the men's 80 kg class, who was second behind Morocco's Issam Chernoubi. Tamer Bayoumi, a bronze medalist from the 2004 Olympics, was the most successful of the quartet. In the 58 kg class he defeated Nursultan Mamayev of Kazakhstan in the round of 16 before losing in sudden death to Lee Dae-Hoon of South Korea, the eventual silver medalist, in the quarterfinals. In the repechage he was defeated by Thailand's Pen-Ek Karaket. The only other Egyptian to win a match was Hedaya Malak, in the women's 57 kg, who overcame Robin Cheong of New Zealand before being defeated by Marlène Harnois of France, an eventual bronze medalist. In his first bout, Ossama lost to Tommy Mollet of the Netherlands in sudden death, while Seham El-Sawalhy, the 2010 and 2012 African champion, was eliminated by Sweden's Elin Johansson in the round of 16 of the women's 67 kg class.

Five Egyptian men, Ahmed Saad, Mohamed Abdelbaki, Ibrahim Ramadan, Ragab Abdelhay, and Tarek Yehia, qualified for the Olympic weightlifting tournament by ranking seventh overall after the 2010 and 2011 World Weightlifting Championships, and three women, Esmat Mansour, Abeer Abdelrahman, and Nahla Ramadan, by ranking fourteenth. For the women, Ramadan, a gold medalist at the 2003 World Weightlifting Championships and the 2011 Pan Arab Games, bronze medalist at the 2002 World Championships, and veteran of the 75 kg class at the 2004 Summer Olympics, finished fourth in the +75 kg class. Abdelrahman, another gold medalist from the 2011 Pan Arab Games and veteran of the 69 kg class at the 2008 Summer Olympics, was fifth in the 75 kg division, although she received a silver medal retroactively after the event’s three medalists were disqualified for doping. Mansour, contesting the 69 kg class, was seventh in her event.

For the men, Yehia, a silver medalist at the 2011 Pan Arab Games, bronze medalist at the 2010 World Championships, and veteran of the 69 kg class at the 2008 Summer Olympics, had the nation's best result, with a fourth-place finish in the 85 kg division that was later upgraded to bronze after runner-up Apti Aukhadov of Russia failed a doping test. His countryman Abdelhay, the gold medalist from the 2011 Pan Arab Games, was ranked fifth in the same event after Aukhadov was disqualified. Saad, a silver medalist at the 2011 Pan Arab Games who had taken part in the 56 kg class at the 2004 Summer Olympics, was ninth in the 62 kg event. Abdelbaki, another gold medalist from the 2011 Pan Arab Games and a veteran of the 62 kg event at the 2008 Summer Olympics, was tenth in the 69 kg class, while Ramadan, also a gold medalist at the 2011 Pan Arab Games, was fifth in the 77kg event.


Thirteen Egyptian wrestlers, twelve men and one woman, qualified for the Olympics. In the men's freestyle tournament, only Hassan Madany in the 60 kg class defeated an opponent, winning his bout against Didier Pais of France in the round of 16 before losing to North Korea's Ri Jong-Myong in the quarterfinals. Madany was a veteran of the 2008 tournament, where he lost his first bout against eventual bronze medalist Morad Mohammadi of Iran, and qualified for the 2012 Games by winning the African and Oceania qualification tournament. Among numerous honors, he was a seven-time African champion (2002, 2005–2009, and 2012) and also won gold medals at the 2005 and 2009 Mediterranean Games and the 2011 Pan Arab Games. The only other Egyptian freestyle wrestler to take part in more than one bout was Ibrahim Farag in the 55 kg class, who lost against eventual silver medalist Vladimer Khinchegashvili of Georgia in the qualification round and Bulgaria's Radoslav Velikov in the repechage. He was African senior champion in 2010 and junior champion in 2009.

Farag, along with Abdou Omar in the 66 kg class, Saleh Emara in the 96 kg class, and El-Desoky Ismail in the 120 kg class, qualified by winning the African and Oceania qualification tournament. Omar, the 2009 and 2010 African champion and a gold medalist at the 2011 Pan American Games, and Emara, who won gold medals at the 2007 All-Africa Games, the 2009 Mediterranean Games, and the 2011 Pan Arab Games, were disqualified after arriving late for their events, while Ismail, a four-time African Champion and bronze medalist at the 2011 Pan Arab Games, was eliminated in the opening round by Tervel Dlagnev of the United States. In women's freestyle wrestling, Rabab Eid qualified for the 55 kg class by coming in second at the African and Oceania qualification tournament, behind Marwa Amri of Tunisia. At the Games, she was defeated by Ukraine's Tetyana Lazareva in the round of 16.

In Greco-Roman wrestling, Karam Gaber, the gold medal winner in the 96 kg class at the 2004 Summer Olympics, won a silver medal in the 84 kg class after losing the final to Russia's Alan Khugayev. Along the way he defeated Nenad Žugaj of Croatia, Mélonin Noumonvi of France, and Damian Janikowski of Poland. He qualified for the Gamea after winning the African and Oceania qualification tournament. The only other Egyptian wrestler to win a bout was Ashraf El-Gharably in the 66 kg class. Gharably, who qualified for the Games after coming in second in the African and Oceania qualification tournament, behind Mohamed Serir of Tunisia, had held numerous international titles since 1997, when he first won the African championships, and had participated in the 60 kg class at the 2004 and 2008 Summer Olympics. In 2012 he defeated Ecuador's Orlando Huacón in the round of 16 before losing to eventual bronze medalist Manuchar Tskhadaia of Georgia in the quarterfinals.

Sayed Abdelmoneim, competing in the 60 kg class, and Abdelrahman El-Trabely, competing in the 120 kg class, both lost in the first round against one of the eventual finalists and were defeated a second time in the repechage. Abdelmoneim had been the 2010 African champion and had qualified for the Olympics by winning the African and Oceania qualification tournament. In London he lost to Georgia's Revaz Lashkhi and Russia's Zaur Kuramagomedov, eventual silver and bronze medalists respectively. El-Trabely was the 2011 African runner-up and was second in the African and Oceania qualification tournament behind Tunisia's Radhouane Chebbi. At the Games he lost against 2008 and 2012 Olympic champion Mijaín López of Cuba and Guram Pherselidze of Georgia. Mohamed Abouhalima, Islam Tolba, and Mohamed Abdelfatah all lost their opening bouts and were eliminated without appearing in the repechage. Abouhalima, competing in the 55kg class, was the 2011 junior and 2012 senior African champion and won the African and Oceania qualifying tournament. Tolba, competing in the 74 kg class, was the runner up at the 2011 African Championships, 2011 Pan Arab Games, and the African and Oceania qualifying tournament, behind Tunisia's Zied Ayet Ikram of Tunisia all three times. Abdelfatah had accrued numerous international honors since winning the 83 kg class at the 1997 Pan Arab Games and was a veteran of the 85 kg class at the 2000 Summer Olympics and the 84 kg class at the 2004 edition. In London he competed in the 96 kg class and qualified by coming in fifth at the 2011 World Championships.



</doc>
<doc id="31974270" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31974270" title="2011–12 Sheffield United F.C. season">
2011–12 Sheffield United F.C. season

Sheffield United Football Club (known as the Blades) participated in League One, the third level of English football for the first time in 23 years having been relegated from the Championship at the end of the previous season. It was also their first appearance in both the Football League Trophy and the first round proper of the FA Cup for a similar length of time, as well as being the first season under new manager Danny Wilson. United began the season well, recording consistently sound results in Football League One and nearing the position required for an immediate return to the Championship. By the turn of the year, the squad was well positioned for promotion.

Reasonable progress was made in the cup competitions, reaching the second round of the League Cup, the fourth round of the FA Cup and the regional quarter finals of the Football League Trophy. With only a handful of games left to play in the league, United looked set to finish in second place in the table but in the aftermath of leading scorer Ched Evans being jailed, results declined, and United slipped to third place in the final week of the season. Although reaching the Play-off Final the team were beaten on penalties by Huddersfield Town at Wembley Stadium, thus failing to achieve promotion and being destined to spend the following season in League One.

The team kit for the 2011–12 season was produced by Macron for the third successive year. The home kit consisted of the club's traditional red and white stripes and was based on the kit worn by the team in the early 1970s, chosen following a poll of fans the previous year. As the pre-season programme got under way the club also revealed a new all yellow away kit. By mid July the club announced that they had struck a joint sponsorship deal with cross-city rivals Sheffield Wednesday which would see both teams sponsored by the same two local companies. The Blades home kit was sponsored by Westfield Health and the away kit by local car dealers Gilders Group (with Sheffield Wednesday's kit's having the reverse). The club later announced that a new secondary sponsor, Nexis, would appear on the back of the home shirts for the coming season.

Following relegation from the Championship at the end of the previous season, company chairman Kevin McCabe sacked manager Micky Adams, insisting that the club needed a new start to take them forward. After a few weeks of speculation, McCabe appointed former Sheffield Wednesday manager Danny Wilson as Adams' successor. This appointment was met with outrage by sections of the Blades support due to Wilson's perceived lack of managerial success and his links with the club's bitter cross-city rivals. Despite these protests, the club pressed ahead with the appointment and Wilson began to assemble his back room team, appointing former United defender Frank Barlow as his number two, fellow former Blade Billy Dearden as chief scout and Dave Morrison as fitness coach.

Wilson stressed that he intended to bring a better style of play to the team in the coming season but admitted that players would have to be sold to balance the books. Deals were already in place to sell Jamie Ward to Derby County for an undisclosed fee, and sign Danny Philliskirk from Chelsea on a free transfer, but Wilson also added to the squad in June by signing Lecsinel Jean-François from his former club Swindon Town, also on a free transfer. After much speculation, and with the players about to return for pre-season training, Darius Henderson was sold to Millwall for an undisclosed fee in order to free up money on the wage bill.

The club announced a low key series of friendlies for July, while Wilson continued to reshape his squad, allowing young defenders Kingsley James and Phil Roe, both products of the Blades Academy, to leave and rejoin former boss Micky Adams at Port Vale on free transfers. A youthful team were held to a draw by Sheffield FC but overcame Worksop Town a few days later. With the team about to leave for a training camp in Malta, Mark Yeates was sold to Watford for an undisclosed fee, Ryan Flynn was signed from Falkirk for a similarly undisclosed fee and Chris Porter arrived on a free transfer having been released by Derby County. Once in Malta, United took on local sides Sliema Wanderers and Hibernians in friendly games, beating both sides. Upon returning to England, the Blades completed their pre-season schedule with two home fixtures, losing to Doncaster Rovers and drawing with Blackpool. With their pre-season schedule completed the Blades signed young winger Nathaniel Mendez-Laing from Wolverhampton Wanderers on a six-month loan deal.

Unfortunately the latter half of July also saw the club hit the national headlines for the wrong reasons. Firstly the club was identified by a Channel 4 undercover investigation as being offered for sale as part of an illegal ownership deal although the Blades themselves were not implicated in any wrongdoing. A fortnight later striker Ched Evans was arrested and charged with rape following an incident in May.

The Blades won the opening game of the season away from home, outclassing Oldham Athletic, but a strong side needed penalties to overcome Hartlepool United at Victoria Park in the first round of the League Cup a few days later. Midfielder Kevin McDonald was added to the squad on a free transfer after a lengthy trial period, before the Blades resumed their league campaign, beating Brentford at home, and overturning a two-nil deficit to overcome Walsall at Bramall Lane. Having spent the previous season on loan at United, Argentinian Elian Parrino returned to South Yorkshire on a one-year deal from Estudiantes de La Plata, after which the Blades embarked on a four match run of away games in the space of eleven days. They dropped their first league points of the season as they were held to a draw by Tranmere Rovers, before suffering their first defeat of the season on a quick return to Merseyside, allowing the lead to slip once more as they crashed out of the League Cup at the hands of Premiership Everton. The team returned to league action and winning ways with an away trip to Yeovil, the first ever competitive meeting between the two clubs, after which they despatched Burton Albion to progress into the second round of the Football League Trophy.

With Danny Wilson still needing to raise money and trim the wage bill the Blades had a relatively busy transfer deadline day, allowing Jordan Slew to join Blackburn Rovers for £1.1m, and Daniel Bogdanović to join Blackpool for an undisclosed fee, but turning down another offer from the Seasiders for Stephen Quinn. The Blades also agreed a deal to take two young midfielders, John Fleck and Kyle Hutton on loan from Rangers for the remainder of the season, but the deal subsequently fell through due to issues with the paperwork involved. The team kicked off September by crushing Bury 4–0 at Bramall Lane, and then travelled to Scunthorpe United where they maintained their unbeaten start after coming from behind to grab a 1–1 draw. Off the field the restructuring of the club continued with the appointment of former Blades player Julian Winter as Chief Executive to replace the departing Trevor Birch. Danny Wilson added to his defensive options by signing Marcus Williams on a months loan from Reading, with the defender making his début only hours later, although he was unable to prevent the Blades from crashing to their first league defeat of the season as they were trounced 3–0 at home by Huddersfield Town. Despite this setback the Blades quickly returned to winning ways, reversing the previous scoreline to crush Colchester United 3–0 at Bramall Lane. The month ended on a low note however as the team suffered a shock defeat at struggling Wycombe Wanderers, although they still managed to hold onto second place in the table.

October started no better for the Blades as they were easily beaten 2–0 at home by league leaders Charlton Athletic and needed a last second goal to progress in the Football League Trophy as they struggled against League Two side Rotherham United. Meanwhile, Danny Wilson boosted his squad ahead of the Steel City derby, with Marcus Williams agreeing to stay on loan for a further two months and Matt Phillips and Billy Clarke arriving for a month each from Blackpool. The new arrivals failed to halt the disappointing run of results however as the Blades let a 2–0 lead slip to end up drawing with their cross–city rivals. Despite this disappointment the team bounced back to score an emphatic away win at Preston a few days later with both new signing Matt Phillips and old hand Lee Williamson netting two goals apiece. With increased competition for first team places, youngsters Danny Philliskirk and Corey Gregory were allowed to go out on loan to Oxford United and Hucknall Town respectively; swiftly followed by Connor Brown who joined Eastwood Town on a months deal. Back in the league, the disappointing results continued as United threw away a lead once again, allowing ten-men Leyton Orient to snatch a draw with the last kick of the game. Once again the Blades quickly responded to the setback by beating fellow promotion rivals MK Dons 2–1 at Bramall Lane, but then conspired to throw away yet more points, allowing Exeter City to come from behind twice in the closing minutes of the next game to snatch a 4–4 draw.

Into November and back on the road, yet another late goal was handed Stevenage all three points, leaving United fifth in the table going into FA Cup week. With Phillips and Clarke playing the final game of their loan spell, United tamely exited the Football League Trophy, losing on penalties to League Two strugglers Bradford City. There was a more positive result in the FA Cup however as a brace from Ched Evans helped the Blades ease past Oxford United. By mid–November, and with Danny Wilson still seeking to add to his attacking options, it was reported that former striker and fans favourite James Beattie had returned to training with the club and could be handed a contract depending on match fitness, and a short term deal was duly signed a few days later. Back in League action United saw out a victory over Carlisle United despite seeing a Richard Cresswell spot–kick saved in the second half, and a week later Ched Evans scored his fifth goal in four games to beat Chesterfield by the same scoreline. The month ended on a sombre note however as former player and manager Gary Speed was found dead at his home after having taken his own life less than a year after leaving his post at Bramall Lane.

December started with the second round of the FA Cup and despite conceding another late goal, the Blades progressed into the third round at the expense of Torquay United, thanks to another brace from in Ched Evans, who then scored for the fifth game in succession in the next game, netting twice more in a league victory over Rochdale. The team's impressive form continued with an away win at Bourenmouth thanks to two own goals, Notts County making a similar gift of an own goal to contribute to their own defeat on Boxing Day, before the Blades rounded the year off by crushing Hartlepool United on New Year's Eve; meaning that the Blades ended 2011 in second place in the table following eight victories in a row in all competitions.

With the transfer window reopening in January, Danny Wilson's first signing was the return of former loan player Marcus Williams who agreed a two and a half year deal. The New Year started disappointingly as the Blades crashed to their first defeat since the beginning of November as they were beaten 3–2 at Carlisle United. Following Danny Wilson being awarded 'League One Manager of the Month' for December, United soon got back to winning ways when they returned to home soil. The team saw off Salisbury City 3–1 in the third round of the FA Cup, the first meeting ever between the two clubs, and then outclassed Yeovil Town a few days later, hitting four without reply including a brace from Lee Williamson and a first ever club goal from captain Michael Doyle. With Danny Wilson looking to freshen up his squad United rewarded four of its younger players with contract extensions, with Erik Tønne and David McAllister set to remain with the club until the summer of 2014, and youth team players Jordan Chapell and Jack Adams agreeing new deals until the end of the season. In a busy day the club saw the departure of Elian Parrino as his short term deal came to an end, and then allowed McAllister to join League Two club Shrewsbury Town on a months loan, with manager Danny Wilson bemoaning a lack of reserve games under the current system. The following week Wilson continued to overhaul the squad with reserve keeper Mihkel Aksalu leaving the club on mutual terms, but was boosted by 'fans favourite' James Beattie agreeing a deal to remain at Bramall Lane until the end of the season. Meanwhile, back in the league the Blades then continued their fine run of form, completing their second league double of the week, as they hit three without reply away at Bury, but that form deserted them for a top-of-the-table trip to Charlton Athletic where a bad tempered match resulted in both teams being reduced to ten men and a 1–0 loss for United. Seven days later United suffered their first back-to-back defeats of the season as they crashed out of the FA Cup at the hands of Birmingham City. With the transfer window about to close Bramall Lane was relatively quite on deadline day; Danny Philliskirk was handed an extended deal, and striker Will Hoskins signed on loan from Brighton & Hove Albion until the end of the season, whilst youngster Erik Tønne was allowed to join Yorkshire neighbours York City, also until the end of the season. The club also gave a trial to experienced Scottish defender David Weir with a view to a potential short term contract.

After various match postponements due to a spell of bad weather and the various cup competitions United finally returned to league action in mid February with new signing Hoskins scoring on his début as the Blades ran out 3–0 victors over Wycombe Wanderers. After a successful spell, midfielder David McAllister opted to extend his loan deal at Shrewsbury until the end of March, whilst young keeper George Long agreed a new long–term deal at Bramall Lane. Meanwhile, on Valentine's Day, the Blades beat Yorkshire and promotion rivals Huddersfield Town 1–0 at the Galpharm Stadium as defender Neill Collins scored his first ever goal for the club, before coming from behind to beat Preston North End at home a few days later, despite Ched Evans missing a penalty. With Mihkel Aksalu having departed, United agreed a two and a half year deal with keeper, and free agent, Mark Howard to provide cover for Steve Simonsen, before the club met their cross-city rivals in the second Steel City derby of the season where United suffered a narrow defeat. Looking for a quick bounce–back, United were forced to come from behind to beat Scunthorpe United at home, to leave them in second place, five points clear of third, in the table at the start of March.

Despite their form, United suffered a catastrophic start to March as they lost at home to Oldham Athletic having had a two-goal lead only to see both Matthew Lowton and Harry Maguire sent off and the team subsequently collapse. With the entire back four unavailable, United were forced to draft in Matt Hill and John Egan on emergency loans, but this was not enough to prevent them slipping to their third defeat in four games as they capitulated at Walsall. Danny Wilson remained keen to find first team experience for the younger members of the squad and as such allowed Seamus Conneely to join Alfreton Town on loan before United returned to winning ways with two goals from Ched Evans being enough to defeat Brentford at Griffin Park. Unfortunately the Blades failed to take advantage of their game in hand, being held to a draw by Colchester United, before once again allowing a lead to slip as they drew with Tranmere Rovers at Bramall Lane. With the transfer deadline for loans approaching, the Blades' longest serving player and vice-captain Nick Montgomery was allowed to join Millwall until the end of the season due to an absence of first team football, allowing Danny Wilson to bring in winger Michael O'Halloran on loan from Bolton Wanderers. Meanwhile, on the pitch, United put their recent poor form behind them as they outclassed Notts County 5–2 at Meadow Lane, before putting four goals past Chesterfield at Bramall Lane, including a hat–trick from in–form striker Ched Evans. Despite a low–key team performance, a second Ched Evans penalty in as many games was enough to finish the month with a third straight victory, with the Blades defeating Hartlepool United at Victoria Park.

With loan defender John Egan returning to his parent club at the start of April, Nick Montgomery's loan at Millwall was all but cut short after only two substitute appearances when he sustained a calf injury likely to sideline him until the end of the season. David McAllister also saw his loan spell at Shrewsbury cut short shortly after receiving a red card, with the resulting three game ban ruling him out for the remainder of his time at the New Meadow. Back in the league a nervy display saw the Blades edge out Bournemouth at Bramall Lane, before a much more emphatic performance saw them bury Rochdale at the Spotland Stadium. With the Blades now in a straight fight with local rivals Sheffield Wednesday for the second automatic promotion spot they came from behind to beat Leyton Orient at Bramall Lane to open up a four-point gap on third placed Wednesday. The next week however their campaign was dealt a crushing blow as star striker and top scorer Ched Evans's case came to trial where he was found guilty of rape and sentenced to five years in prison. Without Evans and missing his injured strike partner Richard Cresswell, United slipped to a damaging defeat at MK Dons. Worse was to come as United could only resister a draw with Stevenage in a dramatic final home game at Bramall Lane, meaning they slipped out of the automatic promotion places for the first time since February. United went into the final league fixture with Exeter City requiring to win and hope that rivals Sheffield Wednesday were beaten to secure promotion; a combination that failed to materialise as Wednesday registered a victory and the Blades could only draw meaning they were consigned to the play-offs.

With James Beattie unavailable for the playoffs following a red card in the final game of the season against Exeter City, manager Danny Wilson was faced with a selection crisis ahead of the critical games against Stevenage. With only one senior striker available a patched up side contested a dour first-leg where neither team created many chances. United did manage to keep a clean sheet however and took the tie back to Bramall Lane with the scores level at 0–0.

The Blades entered the second leg still bereft of forwards, with Richard Cresswell having contracted an illness on the morning of the game, so were forced to play with just Chris Porter as a lone striker once more. An even first half saw few opportunities for either side but following the break United began to attack with more purpose. Despite chances for both sides the game looked to be heading for another draw until Porter scored an 85th-minute winner to put the Blades through to the final at Wembley.

Richard Cresswell was passed fit for the final against Huddersfield but influential midfielder Kevin McDonald was left out through injury so the Blades were forced to make changes once more. The game was played under blistering heat and neither side created many chances. It remained 0–0 after ninety minutes and so extra–time was played but there was still no breakthrough. Ultimately the game went to penalties, which saw every player for both sides take a spot kick only for United to lose 8–7 when goalkeeper Steve Simonsen missed the final kick, consigning the Blades to another season in League One.

Sheffield United Reserves played in the Central League: Central Division in the nearby Derbyshire town of Dronfield at the Coach and Horses ground, which was also the home of Sheffield FC during the season. Experienced defender Chris Morgan was appointed reserve team coach at the start of the season and given the responsibility of developing the young players which made up the bulk of the side. With many teams now opting not to enter a reserve side into an organised competition the Central Division consisted of just seven sides meaning fixtures were irregular throughout the season. In January 2012 Danny Wilson expressed the need to reform the reserve team structure due to this infrequent number of matches citing that experienced players do not gain much from them and the cost of staging the fixtures as issues.

Despite this United's side ended the season as Champions, finishing one point ahead of nearest rivals Derby County who had won the division in the previous season, ironically by one point from The Blades who had finished second. Following a nine match unbeaten run the title was clinched with the final game of the season as United held a strong Nottingham Forest side to a 1–1 draw at the coach and Horses ground. Danny Philliskirk ended the season as top scorer, having netted six goals, whilst he was also the joint leading appearance maker along with Matty Harriott and Shane Murray.

Sheffield United Academy U18s played in the FA Premier Academy League U18s Group D at the Shirecliffe ground at Firshill Crescent. Under the management of John Pemberton, the side were seeking to replicate the success of the previous season when they had reached the final of the FA Youth Cup final. Shorn of a number of key players (who had either graduated to the first team or left the club), the team completed a solid but unspectacular season. Results fluctuated with impressive victories over the likes of Everton, Bolton and Sunderland being mixed with heavy defeats to Leeds United, Coventry City and West Ham United. Eventually finishing fifth (out of ten teams) in their division, manager John Pemberton described the season as "another successful one for everyone associated with the Academy. We have five players becoming professionals who will all be linking up with the first team next season and that is what we are judged on – producing players."

United's hopes of repeating the previous season's success in the FA Youth Cup did not come to fruition however. After a victory in the first round over Tranmere Rovers, they required penalties to see off Port Vale in the next round before finally being eliminated in round three when Southampton recorded a 7–0 victory over the Blades.

New contracts and contract extensions.
Players making their first team Sheffield United début in a fully competitive match.
Players scoring their first goal for Sheffield United in a competitive fixture. 
First ever meeting of the two clubs in a competitive fixture.
First ever visit to a stadium for a competitive fixture











</doc>
<doc id="32011071" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32011071" title="The Albums 2000–2010">
The Albums 2000–2010

The Albums 2000–2010 is a box set by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue. It was released by Parlophone Records on 12 July 2011. The five-disc box set was released in Europe, and Australasia, and included all of Minogue's studio albums from the years 2000 to 2010; "Light Years" (2000), "Fever" (2001), "Body Language" (2003), "X" (2007), and "Aphrodite" (2010). The cover sleeve for the album consisted of fragments from the original artworks inserted into Minogue's silhouette from her cover for "Fever" (2001). "The Albums 2000–2010" marked Minogue's first box set collection until her October 2012 release, "K25: Time Capsule".

Upon its release, "The Albums 2000-2010" received positive reception from most of the reviewers, who complimented the overall packaging of the box set and her releases through Parlophone. Some of the critics were unimpressed with the exclusion of her work from the PWL and Deconstruction period. The box set charted on the UK Albums Chart at number 37, and on the Scottish Albums Chart at number 40.

It was first announced on Minogue's official website in May 2011 that EMI would be releasing a five-CD box set. The set includes every previous studio album Minogue had released from 2000 up until 2010; the original versions of "Light Years" (2000), "Fever" (2001), "Body Language" (2003), "X" (2007), and "Aphrodite" (2010), with each disc housed in a cardboard sleeve. The cardboard sleeves contain the original album artwork and one image from each album photo shoot imprinted inside the cardboard sleeve, without the album or Minogue's logo imprinted. Each box set features a 15" x 10" poster that features the credits and album artworks of the original albums. Inside the box, each of the albums represent a significant colour to which is displays on the front: "Light Years" is light blue, "Fever" is white, "Body Language" is black, "X" is red, and "Aphrodite" is navy blue.

It was her first greatest hits box set to be released; in October 2012, to commemorate her twenty-fifth year in music business, she released her second, all-singles box set, "K25: Time Capsule".

"The Albums 2000–2010" received positive reviews from most reviewers. A writer from "The Sun" awarded the box set a perfect five star rating, stating "Whether you like hot-pant Kylie, indie Kylie, girl-next-door Kylie or dark Kylie, there's something for every Kylie fan in this special box-set. Made up of five albums and celebrating ten years of tunes, we challenge you to get them out of your head." Scott Harrah from Stagezine awarded the album four-and-a-half stars out of five, but did not review the box set; instead, he reviewed each album individually because "all [albums] are so different in both sound and concept." Jon O'Brien from AllMusic awarded the album three-and-a-half stars, labelling her earlier work as "infectious". Despite being critical towards the lack of inclusion of her 1994–1998 Deconstruction work, and the inclusion of her albums, "X", and "Aphrodite", he concluded "Kylie has yet to make that one essential album, and the going-through-the-motions nature of her later releases suggests her time may have passed, but this box set still contains plenty of moments to justify her position as one of the all-time premier pop princesses."

Writing in retrospect for "Daily Express", reviewer Simon Gage was critical of Minogue's lack of musical progression, charisma, and thought that she lacked a "great voice". He stated "There are dodgy tracks and the “voice”, more processed than a tinned pea, does start to grate but it's still pretty good." He awarded the box set three stars. British journalist Paul Du Noyer reviewed the box set, and complimented Minogue's Parlophone work as "ambiguous pop". However, he stated "There’s a lot of ambitious pop in here, but no conceptual overreach. Not even her experience of breast cancer was allowed to surface in Kylie’s subsequent material: lyrically, it was straight back to business. It seems unlikely such a 20-year lucky streak could be sustained without a lot of shrewd decisions by Minogue herself. So it seems that everyone is right after all: Kylie is A Good Thing, and here is just enough of it."

In the United Kingdom, the box set debuted at number thirty-seven on the UK Albums Chart, becoming Minogue's nineteenth album entry since her debut album, "Kylie" (1987). The box set stayed in for one week on the top 100 chart. "The Albums 2000-2010" also debuted at number forty on the Scottish Albums Chart for a sole week.



</doc>
<doc id="32040837" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32040837" title="United States National Bank Building">
United States National Bank Building

The United States National Bank Building in downtown Portland, Oregon, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Designed by famed Portland architect A. E. Doyle in a Roman classical style, the four-story building's first section, facing Sixth Avenue, was completed and opened in 1917. An extension westward to Broadway, approximately doubling its size, was constructed in 1925. Since then the building has occupied one-half of a city block. It features a four-story-high colonnade of Corinthian order columns at its eastern end, originally the principal façade, and extensive use of glazed terracotta. The interior is also decorated extensively with highly textured materials. The building was constructed for the United States National Bank of Portland (USNB), which ultimately became part of U.S. Bancorp, whose retail banking division operates as U.S. Bank. In 2018, more than 100 years after the building's opening, it continues to serve as the bank's main Portland branch.

The United States National Bank of Portland, the predecessor of present-day U.S. Bancorp, was established in Portland in 1890, opening for business in February 1891. During the following three decades, the bank experienced significant growth. It weathered the Panic of 1893 better than many of its competitors, and later acquired some of the competing Portland banks, including the Ainsworth National Bank (in 1902), the Wells Fargo Bank (in 1905), and the Lumbermen's National Bank (in 1917). With the 1902 acquisition, U.S. National Bank moved its headquarters into a larger space formerly occupied by Ainsworth National, in the Ainsworth Building, then located at S.W. Third and Stark streets in downtown Portland. By the 1910s, the bank had outgrown its space. The firm purchased a quarter-block of land at the northwest corner of Sixth and Stark streets in early 1916 and hired Portland architect A. E. Doyle to design a new, dedicated headquarters building.

Construction began in 1916 and was completed in 1917; the building opened to the public on July 30, 1917. Although the building now extends a full block along Stark Street, with entrances on both 6th Avenue and Broadway, it originally faced only 6th Street (now 6th Avenue) and extended only about halfway to Broadway.

In 1922 (another source says 1920), the bank purchased the building that had occupied the quarter-block immediately to the west from the Elks organization which would allow the 1917 bank building to be expanded west to Broadway. (The Elks were preparing to move to a new building elsewhere in downtown.) Originally, a new 24-story building was planned for the site, but the bank ultimately decided to expand its existing building, keeping the same design and height for the new section. Shortly after demolition of the old Elks Building in early 1924, construction of the bank building's expansion began. The new section opened in 1925, doubling the building's size and adding an entrance on Broadway. Doyle was hired again to oversee the expansion, which helped to ensure that the new section would replicate the style of the original section as much as possible, making the expanded building look as though it were built as a single structure, rather than in two stages separated by eight years. In the same year, U.S. National Bank of Portland acquired the Ladd & Tilton Bank, which had been established in 1859, and was the first financial institution in the Pacific Northwest. This acquisition made USNB "the largest financial institution north of San Francisco and west of Minneapolis".

In 1946, U.S. National purchased the Wells Fargo Building (since 1922 known as the Porter Building), a multistory office building located directly adjacent, immediately to the north, to expand its downtown Portland headquarters. United States National Bank of Portland changed its name to United States National Bank of Oregon in 1964. By 1970, the bank was operating 119 branches. At that time, it announced plans for another major expansion of its headquarters on property it had acquired diagonally across from the Wells Fargo Building. The entire oversize block, bounded by 5th and 6th Avenues, and Oak and Burnside Streets, had been acquired, its existing buildings to be razed and replaced by new U.S. National Bank buildings. The first of these was a seven-story building (the U.S. Bank Plaza, at 5th & Oak), completed in 1974. But the headline structure was the U.S. Bancorp Tower, a 42-story building that opened in 1983 (having already been part of the bank's long-term site plans in 1970, but ultimately delayed until the 1980s). Notwithstanding this major expansion, the firm continued to own and use its landmark 1917 building, which company president LeRoy Staver, in a 1970 "Oregonian" article, called "a jewel of a banking property and one that will never be duplicated".
In a 1979 article, "The Oregonian" wrote that, "The 1917-vintage U.S. National Bank, 321 S.W. Sixth Avenue, retains nearly all its original features, inside and out, a rare trait among Portland landmarks." The U.S. National Bank of Oregon was honored by the Portland Historical Landmarks Commission in that year for its longstanding commitment to maintaining the building in nearly original condition.

The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1986, and was still serving as the bank's main branch. Since the end of 1968, United States National Bank of Oregon has been owned by the then-newly formed holding company U.S. Bancorp, which provides consumer banking under the U.S. Bank name. One hundred years after its opening, the 1917-built, 1925-expanded original United States National Bank Building continues to serve as the main branch of U.S. Bank in Portland in 2017.

The building is five stories tall including a mezzanine level and, after its 1925 expansion, occupies a area, along the north side of SW Stark Street from Sixth Avenue to Broadway. The eastern façade, facing Sixth Avenue, features six freestanding Corinthian columns, each in height. These support a portico that is topped by a large and richly decorated Roman frieze, a cornice and balustrade. Decorations on the cornice include lion heads and palmettes. At the back of the portico, and behind the columns, are two Corinthian pilasters, at the far left and right ends of the façade. Between these are "five vertical bays separated by piers made of coursed, rusticated terra cotta. Window openings are set in cast-bronze frames." The five windows at the second-floor level are topped by cast-bronze segmental pediments. There are three entrance doorways in the three central bays, although originally there was only one. The central entrance features a pair of large bronze doors with highly decorated bas relief panels, surrounded by detailed terracotta, including replicas of early Greek, Roman and U.S. coins in the decoration framing the door, and a heraldic eagle in a pedimented cornice above the doorway. The bronze relief panels were cast in 1931, replacing the 1917 door panels. Designed by Avard Fairbanks, they "depict noble concepts of American life, such as 'Knowledge and Service', 'Domestic Welfare', 'Progress through Direction', and so on." Fairbanks also designed bronze relief panels for the building's western façade, built in 1925.

The overall exterior design was modeled closely on a 1904 bank building, the headquarters of the Knickerbocker Trust Company, in New York City.

The southern façade, along Stark Street, is long and features a line of 14 Corinthian pilasters. The 12 window bays on this side have frames made of cast iron. Above the pilasters and fourth-floor windows are a cornice and balustrade with a design similar to that used at the eastern end. The Stark Street side includes one entrance, which was present from 1917, located at what was then the far back corner of the building, but its position became approximately midway along the Stark Street side following the 1925 expansion.

At the building's west end, constructed eight years later and facing Broadway, the façade is similar to the eastern one, but the main body of the building extends to the corners of the lot, and instead of a full-width portico there is a recessed portico with only two columns in the center. Six pilasters line the eastern façade, three to each side of the columns, all topped by Corinthian capitals, the same as on the building's other two exposed sides. Another difference from the eastern façade is that, on the western façade, "United States National Bank" is inscribed in the central section of the frieze, in place of the rinceau decoration there at the building's opposite end. Ornamental bronze lanterns flank the central entrance, which features bas relief panels cast in bronze in 1926–27 and designed by Avard Fairbanks. The panels at the western entrance "depict pivotal events in the historical development of the Columbia Basin".

The ground floor holds the main banking room (the Portland branch of U.S. Bank), and a grand room measuring with ceilings. The interior is extensively decorated with highly textured materials. Square columns of polished marble topped by Corinthian capitals that incorporate an eagle motif line all four sides of the main public space. The coffered ceiling is intricately detailed. The marble floor is patterned, and the teller windows are divided by Hauteville-marble pillars detailed with bas reliefs. A recessed mezzanine floor runs along the north and south sides, behind the columns. The bank vaults are in the basement, where the public space also has a marble floor.

The third and fourth floors are office space, centered around a courtyard. A remodeling of the fourth-floor offices in 1948, based on designs by Pietro Belluschi, incorporated Oregon myrtle in the paneling and custom furnishings. The bank's board room, located on the third floor, includes a marble fireplace and stained glass windows by the noted Portland company, Povey Brothers Studio. The room is located in the southwest quadrant of the floor, in the 1925-built section, and is in size. Its walls are covered in dark walnut. Ornamental lighting fixtures with brass wall mountings adorn the east and west ends of the room, and a bronze ring chandelier hangs above the center.

At its east end, the United States National Bank Building stands directly across 6th Avenue from another A. E. Doyle-designed bank building, the Bank of California Building, of 1925. The aforementioned building's Italianate style contrasts sharply with the U.S. National Bank Building's classical design. The northbound Portland Transit Mall passes in front of the building's east end, and during the mall's construction in 1976–77 the plain concrete sidewalk there was resurfaced in brick, and street trees were added. MAX light rail trains have passed in front of the building's east end on 6th Avenue since 2009, following a 2007–08 rebuilding of the transit mall.



</doc>
<doc id="32041228" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32041228" title="HIP 78530 b">
HIP 78530 b

HIP 78530 b is an object that is either a planet or a brown dwarf in the orbit of the star HIP 78530. It was observed as early as 2000, but the object was not confirmed as one in orbit of the star HIP 78530 until a direct imaging project photographed the star in 2008. The image caught the attention of the project's science team, so the team followed up on its initial observations. HIP 78530 b orbits a young, hot, bright blue star in the Upper Scorpius association. The planet itself is over twenty-three times more massive than Jupiter, orbiting eighteen times further from its host star than Pluto does from the Sun by the estimates published in its discovery paper. In this predicted orbit, HIP 78530 b completes an orbit every twelve thousand years.

Between 2000 and 2001, the system at the ESO 3.6 m Telescope in Chile detected a faint object in the vicinity of HIP 78530. This object was reported in 2005 and 2007, although the astronomers investigating the star were not able to tell, based on their observations, if the faint object was an orbiting companion or not. The team did not follow up on this.

The random selection of ninety-one stars in the Upper Scorpius association provided a sample of stars to be observed using the Near Infrared Imager and Spectrometer (NIRI) and Altitude conjugate Adaptive Optics for the Infrared (ALTAIR) adaptive optics system at the Gemini Observatory. Among the ninety stars selected for direct imaging was the star HIP 78530, which was first imaged by the camera on May 24, 2008. This initial image revealed the presence of the same faint object within the vicinity of HIP 78530.

Follow-up imaging took place on July 2, 2009 and August 30, 2010 using the same instruments, as astronomers hoped to reveal this companion object's proper motion, or the rate that it moves over time. Additional follow-up data was recovered in the spring and summer of 2010, but large errors in the data's astrometry led the investigating astronomers to disregard it. The observations over the three years was compiled, with the data used to filter out pixelated portions of the images and improve the images' quality. The result suggested not only that the faint object in the image was nearby the star HIP 78530, but that it was a brown dwarf or planet in size. Further study would be needed to prove its true nature.

On July 2, 2009, July 3, 2009, and August 8, 2009, use of the NIFS integral field spectrograph with ALTAIR allowed the astronomers to collect data on the spectrum of the faint object and its star. Analysis of the spectra and the objects' astrometry (how the star and the faint object change position in the sky) led to the confirmation of the companion HIP 78530 b.

The confirmation of HIP 78530 b was reported on January 24, 2011. In imaging the ninety-one stars, HIP 78530 b and 1RXSJ1609-2105b were discovered. The discoveries of these two orbiting bodies allowed astronomers to predict that bodies with such low planet/brown dwarf-to-star mass ratios (below 0.01) orbiting at a distance of hundreds of AU exists in the orbits of 2.2% of all stars. However, this number is a lower limit, as astronomers have been unable to detect smaller, low-mass planets that fit this scenario.

HIP 78530 is a bright, blue B-type main sequence star in the Upper Scorpius association, a loose star cluster composed of stars with a common origin. The star is estimated to be approximately 2.5 times the mass of the Sun. Ages of the Upper Scorpius group have been quoted at 5 million years, however a more recent estimate suggests that the group is somewhat older (approximately 11 million years old). Its effective temperature is estimated at 10500 K, less than twice the effective temperature of the Sun.

HIP 78530 has an apparent magnitude of 7.18. It is incredibly faint, if visible at all, as seen from the unaided eye of an observer on Earth.

HIP 78530 b is most likely a brown dwarf, a massive object that is large enough to fuse deuterium (something that planets are too small to do) but not large enough to ignite and become a star. Because HIP 78530 b's characteristics blend the line between whether or not it is a brown dwarf or a planet, astronomers have tried to determine what HIP 78530 b is by predicting whether it was created in a planet-like or star-like (how brown dwarves are formed) manner.

Its estimated mass is over 23.04 times that of Jupiter. Additionally, HIP 78530 b orbits its host star at an estimated average distance of 710 AU, which is 710 times the average distance between the Earth and the Sun assuming the brown dwarf has a circular orbit. The average distance between dwarf planet Pluto and the Sun is 39.482 AU, meaning that HIP 78530 b orbits its host star nearly eighteen times further than Pluto orbits the Sun. In accordance with the data, HIP 78530 b would complete an orbit approximately every 12,000 years, although the actual orbital motion of HIP 78530 b is most likely smaller than 710 AU, but it has not been directly observed long enough to know definitively.


</doc>
<doc id="32144000" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32144000" title="Playa de Oro virus">
Playa de Oro virus

Playa de Oro virus (OROV) is a probable species of orthohantavirus found in the rodents "Oryzomys couesi" and "Sigmodon mascotensis" in the Mexican state of Colima. The former is thought to be the main host. The sequences of parts of the virus's RNA-based genome have been determined; they differ by 7–10% in amino acid composition and 22–24% in nucleotide composition from closely related viruses.

Playa de Oro virus was identified as a new species in 2008 and is most closely related to Bayou virus, Catacamas virus, Muleshoe virus, and Black Creek Canal virus, found in other species of "Oryzomys" and "Sigmodon". Catacamas virus is found in a different population of "Oryzomys couesi", and the presence of different viruses in these two species has been used as an argument for classifying the two populations of the host as separate species.

Playa de Oro virus was first identified in rodents collected in 2004 as part of a survey of wild mammals at Playa de Oro in Manzanillo, Colima, western Mexico. The discovery was published in 2008 by Yong-Kyu Chu and colleagues. Among 600 small mammals, antibodies against the hantavirus Sin Nombre virus were found in 23 individuals (out of 358 studied) of "Oryzomys couesi", a rice rat that was the most common species found, six (out of 87) of the cotton rat "Sigmodon mascotensis", and one (out of 77) of the pygmy mouse "Baiomys musculus". In addition, twelve "O. couesi" and one "S. mascotensis" yielded hantavirus RNA. Viruses were found in males more often than in females. Because the amino acid sequences in sequenced parts of the virus's genome differed by as much as 7 to 10% from closely related hantaviruses, Chu and colleagues identified the virus found at Playa de Oro as a new species, called Playa de Oro virus or OROV. Although the authors could not prove that the virus fulfilled all the criteria for identifying a new virus species, they argued that it was likely that it did fulfill those criteria. It is currently treated as a probable species in the genus "Hantavirus".

Hantaviruses have a genome that consists of three segments of single-stranded, negative-sense RNA (see RNA virus: Replication), called the large (L), medium (M), and small (S) segments. The entire S segment and a fragment of the M segment have been sequenced.

The S segment consists of 1953 bases, of which 1287 (starting at position 43) code for the nucleocapsid protein. In addition, a second 192-base open reading frame occurs in the middle of this sequence (starting at position 122), as in several other hantaviruses. Among three specimens of "O. couesi", the sequence in this segment differed by only 1%, and all changes were silent mutations. The amino acids of the S segment differ by 7 to 10% from those of the related hantaviruses Bayou virus (BAYV; from the marsh rice rat, "Oryzomys palustris"), Catacamas virus (CATV; from a Honduras population of "Oryzomys couesi"), and Black Creek Canal virus (BCCV; from the hispid cotton rat, "Sigmodon hispidus"). The nucleotide sequence differs by 24% from those viruses.

Among 1537-base fragments of the sequence of the M segment, several variable sites were observed, including some non-silent mutations. The sequence differs by 8 to 10% from BAYV, CATV, and BCCV in terms of amino acids and by 22% in terms of nucleotides.

Because OROV occurs frequently in "Oryzomys couesi", Chu and colleagues suggested that it is the primary host of the virus and that infections in "Sigmodon mascotensis" are the result of spillover between these two rodent species, which occur closely together. Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, the disease caused by hantaviruses such as Sin Nombre virus, has never been reported in Mexico, but antibodies against hantaviruses have been found in human blood samples in Yucatán and various wild rodents are known to be reservoirs of hantavirus species. Thus, there is a potential risk of OROV infection in humans. Before the discovery of OROV, one hantavirus species had been identified in Mexico—El Moro Canyon virus from the small rodent "Reithrodontomys megalotis".

According to phylogenetic analyses based on the sequences of both the S and M segments, OROV is most closely related to the clade formed by BAYV, CATV, BCCV, and Muleshoe virus (MUL; from the hispid cotton rat). In 2009, Piet Maes and colleagues proposed that the closely related BAYV, BCCV, and MUL be united into a single species. Chu and colleagues were surprised to find that the same species, "Oryzomys couesi", harbored different viruses (OROV and CATV), though noted that the subspecies infected by the two viruses were different. In 2010, Delton Hanson and colleagues suggested on the basis of various lines of evidence, including the presence of different hantaviruses, that western Mexican populations of "Oryzomys couesi" represent a different species, "Oryzomys mexicanus".



</doc>
<doc id="32207689" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32207689" title="Operation Rainfall">
Operation Rainfall

Operation Rainfall, commonly known as oprainfall, was a video game-oriented fan campaign founded to promote the release of Japan-exclusive titles. Initially aimed at promoting the North American localization of three Japan-exclusive titles on the aging Wii home video game console, it later transitioned into a community blog dedicated to niche Japanese titles and further fan campaigns aimed at the localization of other Japan-exclusive titles. From inception, its stated intention was to show publisher Nintendo the demand for the three chosen titles.

Beginning in 2011, it was designed as a push for the release of "Xenoblade Chronicles", "The Last Story" and "Pandora's Tower", three titles released late in the lifespan of the Wii. The campaign was acknowledged by Nintendo, and though announcing that they initially had no plans, all three titles were eventually released overseas. Reception of the campaign has been favorable overall, and its perceived success when compared to similar earlier campaigns was also noted.

The campaign focused on three role-playing games created for Nintendo's Wii home video game console during the last years of its life: "Xenoblade Chronicles", "The Last Story" and "Pandora's Tower". "Xenoblade Chronicles", developed by Monolith Soft, was an entry in the "Xeno" series, initially announced as an original project dubbed "Monado: Beginning of the World". It was announced under this title at the 2009 Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3), but its title was changed to honor earlier "Xeno" titles created by the game's writer Tetsuya Takahashi. "The Last Story" was developed by Mistwalker, a company created by Hironobu Sakaguchi and intended to be a game that ran contrary to typical elements of the genre based on feedback from the company's previous titles "Blue Dragon" and "Lost Odyssey". "Pandora's Tower" was developed by Ganbarion, who had previously worked primarily on licensed titles and pitched the concept to Nintendo after favorably impressing them with their work on "Jump Ultimate Stars". Despite hopes from fans and journalists that the titles would be released overseas, Nintendo gave no comment on the matter. The only explanation for the lack of localization was related to "The Last Story": Nintendo stated that due to their work on "Kirby's Epic Yarn" and titles for the new Nintendo 3DS, "The Last Story" was too much effort. Nintendo of Europe did want to feature "Xenoblade Chronicles" at E3 2011, but Nintendo's American branch prevented it without explanation. In response to this and continued silence on both "The Last Story" and "Pandora's Tower", Operation Rainfall was born.

Following the announcements concerning the three titles, Operation Rainfall came into existence in an effort to persuade Nintendo to bring the titles to North America. "Xenoblade Chronicles" and "The Last Story" were chosen for their pedigree, while "Pandora's Tower" was selected due to its unique mechanics and the fact that it was also published by Nintendo for the Wii. The team also decided on the titles as they were already confirmed for an English release in Europe and had received critical acclaim in Japan, so they avoided trying to push for the release of critically and commercially unsuccessful games such as "Earth Seeker". The campaign's title stemmed from the group's wish to inundate Nintendo of America with requests. Beginning in June 2011 on the message boards of gaming site IGN, it was met with support from the gaming community. Its campaign was spread across letters and emails to Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils-Aimé, in addition to campaigns on Facebook and Twitter. Both physical and digital media were chosen for the campaign to make them more obvious and less able to be deleted, as a purely digital campaign would have been. To this end, letters and objects inspired by the titles were sent to Nintendo of America.

Operation Rainfall gave itself an eighteen-month deadline, with the conclusion of their campaign planned to coincide with the release of Nintendo's new Wii U home console in November 2012. The first phase of the campaign focused on "Xenoblade Chronicles", with a part of their campaign resulting in large numbers of pre-orders being placed for the game on Amazon.com under its placeholder title: the game reached #1 in the site's pre-order list, beating both "" and the PlayStation 3 bundle for "". The second phase of the campaign coincided with the European release of "Xenoblade Chronicles", with the aim being for fans to make Wii purchases on its release date of August 19, 2011, in addition to further letters to Nintendo of America. Following the announcement of the game's North American release, the group refocused their efforts on "The Last Story". For "Pandora's Tower", the campaign expanded to pitching to recognized publishers of niche Japanese titles, including Atlus, Xseed Games, Aksys Games and NIS America. To fund the campaign, they asked for donations, in return offering a special wallpaper, and for larger contributions a special slip case for all three titles.

While "Xenoblade Chronicles" was published in North America by Nintendo, "The Last Story" was taken up by Xseed Games. With the announcement of the North American release of "The Last Story", the fan community launched their own site. Dubbed "Oprainfall", it continued news coverage of the original three titles, in addition to extending to other similar niche titles and hosting fan petitions. "Pandora's Tower" was also eventually released in North America, again by Xseed Games. As of 2015, the site has transitioned from a fan campaign hub to a blog and news site focusing on Japanese titles considered niche in the West, in addition to continuing support for similar fan campaigns.

When it first appeared and gained popular support, Operation Rainfall drew considerable media attention, being covered by Kotaku, IGN, Eurogamer, GamesRadar, Joystiq, "Game Informer", Destructoid, and Japanese gaming sites Inside Games and ITMedia. In addition to popular and press support, it received favorable responses from Soraya Saga, the writer for "Xenogears" and "Xenosaga", and Mistwalker.

More extensive coverage has been given by some sites. VentureBeat noted that, while comparable with other similar campaigns, Operation Rainfall was notable for maintaining civility during its efforts. Zach Kaplan of Nintendo Life said that the campaign needed to make a clear mark, showing that the success of the then-announced "Xenoblade Chronicles" was not a fluke. In a later feature for the same website, Thomas Whitehead said that the otherwise niche and slightly unremarkable "Pandora's Tower" had been granted a level of mystique and anticipation among fans through its inclusion in the Operation Rainfall campaign. In an interview feature conducted after the announcement of a North American release for "Pandora's Tower", "PC World" noted that Operation Rainfall was going against the trend with its complete success in pushing to bring all three titles to North America. In particular, it compared them to the unsuccessful efforts by fans to bring Japan-exclusive entries of the "Mother" series to the West.

The campaign was also noted by the game's publishers. Nintendo acknowledged the campaign and its effort in the same month it began, but said that there were no plans to release the three games in North America. Three months into the campaign, several Nintendo employees were asking the group to stop their campaign. In 2013, speaking about "Xenoblade Chronicles", Fils-Aimé said that while the campaign had not been a decisive factor in their ultimate decision to release the game overseas, they did take it into consideration. In an interview concerning their role in localizing "The Last Story", Xseed stated that Nintendo had long been open to partnering with another company for a North American release, and that Operation Rainfall had not influenced Nintendo. Later, in their press announcement concerning "Pandora's Tower", they acknowledged that it was a title with a "vocal" fan base, but did not mention Operation Rainfall by name. They also stated that it was the positive sales and fan efforts for "The Last Story" that prompted them to release the title in North America.



</doc>
<doc id="32250175" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32250175" title="Thillana Mohanambal">
Thillana Mohanambal

Thillana Mohanambal () is a 1968 Indian Tamil-language musical drama film written, directed, distributed and produced by A. P. Nagarajan. The film stars Sivaji Ganesan, Padmini and T. S. Balaiah in the lead roles, with A. V. M. Rajan, Nagesh and Manorama in supporting roles. It tells the story of Shanmugasundaram, a "nadaswaram" player who falls in love with Mohanambal, a "Bharatanatyam" dancer who reciprocates his feelings, but unfortunate circumstances and their egoistic nature prevents them from confessing their love for one another. How they overcome their self-created obstacles and those created by the people around them forms the rest of the story.

The film was adapted from Kothamangalam Subbu's novel of the same name, which was serialised in the Tamil magazine "Ananda Vikatan" in 1957-58. The film was mostly shot in Thanjavur, Thiruvarur and Madurai. Its original soundtrack was composed by K. V. Mahadevan, and songs like "Nalandhana", "Maraindhirundhu" and "Pandian Naanirukka" became immensely popular among the Tamil diaspora.

"Thillana Mohanambal" was released on 27 July 1968. Critically acclaimed for subtly portraying the socio-cultural environment and the Thanjavur culture of dance and music prevailing at that time, it was also a commercial success, with a theatrical run of over 175 days. The film won two National Film Awards Best Feature Film in Tamil (President's Silver Medal) and Best Cinematography and five Tamil Nadu State Film Awards. "Thillana Mohanambal" has since acquired cult status in Tamil cinema, and inspired several later films with similar themes of music and dance.

"Sikkal" Shanmugasundaram is a devoted "nadaswaram" player, but is short-tempered and sensitive. He meets Mohanambal, a "Bharatanatyam" dancer, and they fall in love with each other. Sundaram's ego prevents him from developing his relationship with Mohanambal, who asks him to play a "Thillana" on his "nadaswaram" while she dances. Mohanambal's mother Vadivambal, an influential but greedy woman, wants her daughter to marry a wealthy man so that she can settle down in life properly. Blinded by love, she disobeys Vadivambal, creating a rift between them. Unaware of her feelings, Sundaram decides to leave the country along with Karuppayi, a folk dancer whom he considers to be his sister. Mohana calls him a coward and challenges him to stay, which he readily accepts. In a temple, Sundaram plays the "Thillana" and Mohana dances. Sundaram, impressed with Mohana's performance, bestows upon her the title of "Thillana Mohanambal". Suddenly Nagalingam, a landlord who wanted to marry Mohana, stabs Sundaram with a poisoned knife out of jealousy.

Sundaram is admitted to a hospital but recovers from the incident with the help of Mary, a nurse who works there. Later, he and Mohana meet in a concert programme where they perform, against Vadivambal's wishes. For his personal gains, "Savadal" Vaithi, a cunning man, befriends the Maharaja of Madhanpur, who is the programme's chief guest. Vaithi promises to make Mohana the Maharaja's mistress. Vaithi traps Mohana by telling her that the Maharaja has invited "nadaswaram" and "Bharatanatyam" performers to perform in his palace, and that Sundaram has also decided to attend. Mohana immediately accepts the offer and the two visit Madhanpur. Vaithi treats Sundaram's group badly and Sundaram decides to leave. He sees Mohana visiting the Maharaja's room. The Maharaja asks Mohana to be his mistress. but she rejects his advances and is rescued by the Maharaja's wife, the Maharani. Sundaram decides that Mohana does not love him, despite her repeated denial of the Maharaja's offer. Depressed, Mohana runs away. The Maharaja reveals the truth to Sundaram that Mohana had refused his offer and she only loves Sundaram. Realising his mistake, Sundaram rushes to apologise to Mohana, but sees her trying to hang herself from the ceiling of a room in which she had locked herself. He screams to her to stop and promises he will never doubt her love again. Sundaram breaks the door and saves Mohana. They then get married with Vadivambal's approval. Vaithi is arrested for his crimes.




"Thillana Mohanambal" was a novel written by Kothamangalam Subbu under the pseudonym "Kalaimani". It was serialised in the Tamil magazine "Ananda Vikatan" in 1957-58. The story portrayed the relationship between Mohanambal, a celebrated dancer, and Shanmugasundaram, a "nadaswaram" musician. The illustrations for the novel were done by sketch artist and cartoonist, Gopulu.

S. S. Vasan, who held the rights to the book, twice refused to allow director A. P. Nagarajan to make a film adaptation of it because Vasan wanted to produce a film adaptation himself under his banner Gemini Studios. When Nagarajan approached him for the third time, Vasan gave him the rights without any consideration. Nagarajan paid Vasan (about US$3,300 in 1968), but also went to visit Subbu with an additional (about US$1,300 in 1968). Subbu declined the money, saying that Vasan had forwarded him the money Nagarajan had paid earlier. Nagarajan's version of the film had a few creative differences from the novel; one of the significant ones was where the film ended with Mohana and Shanmugasundaram's marriage while the novel, in contrast, had a tragic ending.

Nagarajan produced the film under his production company, Sri Vijayalakshmi Pictures. K. S. Prasad was in charge of the film's cinematography, M. N. Rajan and T. R. Natarajan jointly handled the editing, and Ganga was the film's art director. R. Rangasamy was lead actor Sivaji Ganesan's make-up artist.

Padmini was cast as Mohanambal, the title character. A younger artist was suggested instead of Padmini for the role, but Nagarajan refused to replace her. Ganesan attended Carnatic music concerts, and consulted Carnatic musicians in preparation for his role. T. S. Balaiah portrayed Muthurakku, the "Thavil" player. Tiruvidaimarudur Venkatesan played the instrument "Thavil" off-screen for Balaiah. Balaiah had additional training for playing the instrument. Madurai T. Srinivasan played the "Mridangam" off-screen for the song "Maraindhirundhe Paarkum".

A. V. M. Rajan portrayed Thangarathnam, the second "nadaswaram" player in Sundaram's troupe. According to playwright Crazy Mohan, Gopulu's caricature of the character Vaithi in Subbu's novel was similar to Nagesh, who portrayed Vaithi in the film. Manorama played the wildly expressive, loud-talking but tender-hearted folk dancer Karuppayi, who has to contend with living under the shadows of landlords; she changes her identity every now and then to escape from them. In an interview with "Maalai Malar", Manorama stated that she was initially nervous acting in front of Ganesan and Balaiah, but Nagarajan assured her that whenever her character appeared she would be the centre of attention, which gave her the confidence to play her role. Serial and theatre artist M. L. Bhanumathi played the nurse who treats Shanmugasundaram. Other supporting actors included K. Sarangkapani, S. Ramarao, M. K. Murthy, Balusundaram, T. N. Sivadhanu, S. R. Dasarathan, Sivasooriyan, Senthamarai, Kallapart Natarajan, Gundu Karuppaiah, Chandranbabu, S. V. Rajagopal, A. M. Maruthappa, Udayachandrika, Ambika and Kalpalatha.

The "Nadaswaram" played by Ganesan and Rajan was played off-screen by the brothers, M. P. N. Sethuraman and M. P. N. Ponnusamy. Nagarajan had seen the duo performing at a wedding reception in Karaikudi and asked them to come to Chennai. Their rehearsals took place over 15 days in Mahadevan's recording studio in Chennai. Nagarajan then listened to a radio recital by the duo, and was impressed with their rendition of Thyagaraja's Keerthana, "Nagumomu Ganaleni". The Keerthana was later selected as one of the soundtrack instrumentals in the film. After "Thillana Mohanambal"'s release, a Russian delegation met Ganesan in person. They were surprised to hear that he was only acting and not actually playing the "Nadaswaram".

"Thillana Mohanambal", shot in Eastmancolor, was filmed in Thanjavur, Thiruvarur and Madurai, in the Cauvery delta. Many of the film's aesthetics were borrowed from Indian theatre, of which Nagarajan was an artist. The competition sequence between Ganesan and Padmini took about nine takes to be filmed. The film presented a "mise-en-scène" feel, mostly using frontal shots. The actors were lined up to face the camera and deliver their dialogue. Nagarajan, a former employee of the T. K. S. drama company, paid tribute to Shankardas Swamigalfrom whom the company had its ancestral rootsby naming a drama company in the film after the company's name. Snippets of the film's behind-the-scenes production were filmed by French film director Louis Malle as a part of his 378-minute, seven-part documentary series, "L'Inde fantôme: Reflexions sur un voyage" (1969), when he visited Madras (now Chennai).

The film shows the traditions exhibited by courtesans, "zamindars" in coaches drawn by horses, and palaces that resembled 19th century architecture. The contemporary areas of Madurai and Thanjavur, especially their railway junctions, gave the film a sense of ambiguity that was then very common in Tamil cinema. The film recreated the manner in which the "Devadasis" were portrayed in the early 20th century, and also depicts the social conditions and the upper class milieu in Thanjavur. Real locations were mixed with the fictional town of Madhanpur, which was ruled by a king portrayed by Nambiar. The film also had undertones of the Chithirai festival.
The film's soundtrack and score were composed by K. V. Mahadevan, while the lyrics were written by Kannadasan. The instrumental pieces "English Notes" and "Nadaswaram Bit" were originally composed by Muthiah Bhagavathar. After performing them at Ganesan's 42nd birthday celebrations, Ponnusamy and Seetharaman were asked to play them in the film. "Maraindhirundhu" was based on "Shanmukhapriya" raga. "Nalandhana" was based on "Nilamani" raga, which closely resembles "Shivaranjani" raga. The first line of "Nalandhana" was later used in the film "Silambattam" (2008). Under Mahadevan's supervision, Pugazhendi set the "Sangatis" for the film's soundtrack and score. The soundtrack was released by the record label Saregama.

The soundtrack received positive reviews from critics. Singer Charulatha Mani wrote for "The Hindu" on "Nalandhana" that, " ... one can feel the proximity in musicality. The Thavil beats, Nadaswara refrains and the honeyed voice all blend into an inviting melody composed by K.V. Mahadevan." For "Maraindhirundhu" she said, "The nadaswaram and thavil back-ups for this song and the "jathi"-s give it its typical classical flavour. 'Thooyane mayavaa mayane velava ennai aalum Shanmuga vaa' – these lines represent the ideal confluence of "raga", "bhava" and lyric, a perfect foil to each other." According to film critic Randor Guy, "Nalandhana" became "one of the memorable song sequences with Sivaji Ganesan and AVM Rajan, playing the ["Nadaswaram"] on screen". P. K. Ajith Kumar of "The Hindu" stated, "Just as [Susheela] does not need to know the language to sing a song perfectly, we need not know Tamil to enjoy her songs like ... Nalandaana... ( "Thillana Mohanambal" )".

"Thillana Mohanambal" was released on 27 July 1968. It was released with English subtitles in overseas countries. The film's release prints were long and were contained on 19 reels. The film was shown for six weeks at theatres in Pondicherry, and ran for 100 days in Ganesan's family-owned Shanthi theatre in Chennai. It also completed 100-day runs in theatres in Kovai, Madurai and Trichy, and was eventually shown for over 175 days.

"Thillana Mohanambal" was screened in Chennai on 21 April 2010 at the South Indian Film Chamber Theatre for the Dignity Film Festival. In November 2011, it was shown at the International Tamil Film Festival held in Uglich, Russia, alongside "Chandramukhi" (2005), "Sivaji" (2007), "Angadi Theru" (2010), "Boss Engira Bhaskaran" (2010), "Thenmerku Paruvakaatru" (2010) and "Ko" (2011).

The film received critical acclaim in India and abroad for its song and dance sequences, humour and portrayal of the prevailing socio-cultural milieu at that time. The Tamil magazine "Ananda Vikatan" carried an 11-page review of "Thillana Mohanambal" with a discussion among several prominent people, which included IAS officers, professors and actors who unanimously appreciated the film and the people associated with it. The review's conclusion was, "The director should be given a prize for making such a film".

In its original review, "The Hindu" said the film "encompasses all the traditional wealth of the culture of [Tamil Nadu]." Subha J. Rao and K. Jeshi of "The Hindu", in their article "Laughter lines", praised the train scene and the performances of Balaiah and Manorama. "The Hindu" in its Cinema Plus feature called the film "a perfect combination of music, dance and humour," while also stating that the film can be enjoyed even today. Randor Guy praised Balaiah's acting in the film, saying, "In one song, the famous Tyagaraja kriti in Abheri, ‘Nagumomu Kanaleni’, Balaiah played the thavil in excellent sync with the background song that was recorded earlier in the studio, revealing how adept he really was with the instrument". C. V. Aravind of "The News Minute" was also positive towards Balaiah's performance, in addition to those of Thangavelu, T. R. Ramachandran and Sarangkapani. On Manorama's performance, N. Kesavan of "The Hindu" wrote, "One can never forget her role as 'Jil Jil Ramamani' in ""Thillana Mohanambal"." She was on a par with Sivaji Ganesan and Padmini in the film with her acting."

The magazine "Screen" called the film "a brilliantly made entertainer". "Dina Thanthi" wrote "Not one would not have been mesmerized by the "Thillana" dance sequence". The British newspaper "Daily Mail" said "Thillana Mohanambal" is "a feast to the eyes and ears". Subhashini Pathmanathan of "Daily News Sri Lanka" praised the film's dance and music sequences. Tamil Canadian journalist D. B. S. Jeyaraj wrote for "Daily FT" that Ganesan's " ... duel over artistic superiority with Padmini, particularly during the 'Nalanthaana?' song sequence" was a scene that "remains etched in [his] memory". In 2011, film historian S. Theodore Baskaran criticised "Thillana Mohanambal" for its historical inaccuracies, saying that in the film, a Tamil king was seen wearing a Marathi costume, "The film-makers completely neglect the aspects of dress, jewels and weapons that are depicted in our sculptures. They do not even do basic research."

"Thillana Mohanambal" won two National Film Awards and five Tamil Nadu State Film Awards.

"Thillana Mohanambal" became a cult film for bringing the traditional arts of South India into prominence and achieving more popularity than the novel. It became a landmark film for Sivaji Ganesan. Padmini's titular role become so iconic that the film was identified as her "pièce de résistance". She considered "Thillana Mohanambal" to be the best film of her career. The film is notable for catapulting Manorama to stardom. A dialogue, "Enakku anga oru beeda kadai kaarana theriyum (I know a "paan" shop owner there)", which was spoken by Balaiah, became popular. According to the 2010 book "Anna: The Life and Times of C.N. Annadurai" by R. Kannan, C. N. Annadurai sister's granddaughter, Kanmani, would enquire about his well-being during his last days by singing the song, "Nalamdhana".

The film became a trendsetter and inspired several later films with similar themes of music and dance – including "Karagattakaran" (1989), "Sangamam" (1999), and "Kaaviya Thalaivan" (2014). In July 2007, S. R. Ashok Kumar of "The Hindu" asked eight Tamil film directors to list their all-time favourite Tamil films; four of them – C. V. Sridhar, K. Balachander, J. Mahendran and K. Bhagyaraj – named "Thillana Mohanambal". In May 2014, C. V. Raghavan, writing for "The Hindu", listed "Thillana Mohanambal" among his top five films. Actress Kavitha Nair, who made her debut with "Mudhal Idam" (2011), changed her screen name to Mohana because she liked the character. Actor Jayaprakash found the film to be "beautifully made". Tamil comedy actor and writer Crazy Mohan stated that the film made his top ten list, and that there was "excellence in all aspects – screenplay, dialogue, comedy, casting, music and direction. A winning combination, indeed. This gives "Thillana Mohanambal" its timeless appeal". Scriptwriter-Director Viji of "Velli Thirai" (2008) fame noted how the film showcased the culture of Thanjavur and that the acting performances and film formed a "complete package". In September 2014, Vijay Sethupathi, in an interview with Sudhir Srinivasan of "The Hindu", listed "Thillana Mohanambal" among his favourite films alongside "Ratha Kanneer" (1954), "Puthiya Paravai" (1964) and "Rajapart Rangadurai" (1973). Leader of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam political party and writer M. Karunanidhi called it his favourite film and that he "had watched it innumerable times."

The prints of the film in 16 mm format were acquired by the American Cultural Association for their archives to represent quintessential old-world Thanjavur culture, and by universities in the United States for the study of "Bharatanatyam" and "Nadaswaram" arts in particular. "Thillana Mohanambal" is included with other Sivaji Ganesan-starrers in "8th Ulaga Adhisayam Sivaji", a compilation DVD featuring Ganesan's "iconic performances in the form of scenes, songs and stunts" which was released in May 2012. Although film distributor Shanthi Chokkalingam stated in February 2012 that "Thillana Mohanambal"'s remaining prints were "totally damaged", Pradeep Sebastian of "Deccan Herald" stated in April 2015 that he "recently" saw the film through a restored print. In its obituary for Manorama, "The Hindu" noted Jil Jil Ramamani "probably bore the closest resemblance to Manorama" in terms of being able to perform "Karakattam" and "Poikkal Kuthirai".

"Thillana Mohanambal" has been parodied and referenced in many films. In a comedy scene from "Karagattakaran", Senthil would be playing the nadheswaram, while Kovai Sarala would be dancing and an onlooker compares them to Ganesan and Padmini's characters from the film, resulting in Goundamani becoming irked by the comment. "The Times of India" compared "Karagattakaran" to "Thillana Mohanambal" because in both films, the male and female lead characters are in love with each other, despite being professional rivals. In the film "Villu Pattukaran" (1992), Goundamani asks Senthil to play "Nalandhana" on his thavil, resulting in a comical argument between the two. In "Muthu" (1995), the title character (Rajinikanth), in a conversation with Malayasimman (Sarath Babu), says that Ambalarathar's (Radha Ravi) daughter, Padmini (Subhashri) looks like actress Padmini's character, Mohana, in the film.

When Vadivelu's character Kuzhandaivelu is injured in "Middle Class Madhavan" (2001), Revathi Sankaran, who plays his mother - in-law in the film, sings "Nalandhana" while enquiring about his health. In "Perazhagan" (2004), when hunchback Chinna (Suriya) talks about improving his looks, Kuzhandaisamy (Vivek) jokes that if Chinna was given a party horn to play with, he would look like 'Sikkal' Shanmugasundaram. Scenes from "Thillana Mohanambal" were parodied in "Thamizh Padam" (2010). The film's poster depicts lead actor Shiva as Ganesan's character, Shanmugasundaram and M. S. Bhaskar as Balaiah's character, Muthurakku.

Bharatanatyam in popular culture



</doc>
<doc id="32262361" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32262361" title="Loud (Rihanna album)">
Loud (Rihanna album)

Loud is the fifth studio album by Barbadian singer Rihanna. It was released on November 12, 2010, by Def Jam Recordings and SRP Records. It was recorded between February and August 2010, during the singer's Last Girl on Earth Tour and the filming of her first feature film "Battleship". Rihanna was the executive producer of "Loud" and worked with various record producers, including StarGate, Sandy Vee, The Runners, Tricky Stewart and Alex da Kid. The album features several guest vocalists, including rappers Drake, Nicki Minaj and Eminem, who is featured on the sequel to "Love the Way You Lie", titled "Love the Way You Lie (Part II)".

The album differs from Rihanna's 2009 album, "Rated R", which incorporates a prominently foreboding and angry tone and dark themes. "Loud" features up-tempo and pop genres, ranging from R&B and dance-pop to electro music, and marks the return to dancehall; a genre prominent on Rihanna's first two albums "Music of the Sun" (2005) and "A Girl like Me" (2006). It also incorporates rock in "California King Bed" and reggae in the Caribbean-inspired "Man Down".

"Loud" received generally positive reviews from music critics, who complimented its upbeat material and Rihanna's vocal performances, while others stated that although the songs were solid, they were unfocused to each other. The album was a commercial success internationally; it debuted at number three on the US "Billboard" 200 chart, with first week sales of 207,000 copies, the highest first week sales of her career at the time. The album entered the Canadian, Swiss and UK album charts at number one. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), "Loud" was the eighth global best-selling album of 2011. Since its release, it has sold over 8 million copies worldwide. 

The album produced seven singles, including the international hits "Only Girl (In the World)", "What's My Name?", and "S&M". All three singles reached number one on the US "Billboard" Hot 100. "S&M" was Rihanna's tenth number one song in the US, making Rihanna the youngest recording artist to accumulate the plateau in the shortest time, surpassing Mariah Carey. "Only Girl (In the World)" won the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording in February 2011; additionally, the album was nominated for three more Grammy Awards, including for Album of the Year. To support the album, Rihanna embarked on her third worldwide concert tour, entitled the Loud Tour.

Following a domestic violence case between Rihanna and her boyfriend American entertainer Chris Brown, media speculated as to whether any song featured on her fourth studio album would be about him. The album was released in November 2009, under the title "Rated R". Primarily a pop and R&B album, it also incorporates musical elements of hip hop, rock, and dancehall. "Rated R" was commercially successful and spawned five singles, including the international hit, "Rude Boy". Six months after releasing the record, Rihanna began planning a fifth studio album, promising that her new material would be "more energetic" than her previous works.

StarGate's Tor Erik Hermansen, said "Rihanna came to us before we started recording "Only Girl (In the World)" and said ‘I feel great about myself. I want to go back to having fun, I want to make happy and up-tempo records'." Sean Garrett compared the sound of the new tracks with her previous hit singles "Umbrella" and "Rude Boy". In an interview for MTV UK, the vice president of Def Jam Recordings compared the upcoming Rihanna album with Michael Jackson's "Thriller" saying, "Rihanna is coming along incredibly. I’m trying to push her to where every song will be a hit from one to 12. I’m talking about NO album fillers. Our bar for this album is Michael Jackson's ‘Thriller’."

Rihanna and Antonio "L.A." Reid assembled a group of songwriters and record producers at several recording studios in Los Angeles for two weeks to write songs for Rihanna; they wrote approximately 200 songs, eleven of which were included on the album. 
Def Jam rented out nearly every recording studio in Los Angeles in order to create as many songs as possible. Ray Daniels, the manager of musical duo Rock City (brothers Theron and Timothy Thomas), was present during the sessions, and stated that a writing camp typically involves the label hiring ten recording studios for two weeks at the cost of $25,000 per day. Daniels revealed that it is where songwriters have lyrics but no music, and where producers have music but no lyrics.

Singer-songwriters and producers Taio Cruz, Alex da Kid, Sean Garrett, Ne-Yo, Rico Love, Timbaland, Shontelle, David Guetta, and Drake contributed to the album. "DJ Got Us Fallin' in Love" was written for Rihanna, but the song was rejected and was subsequently sent to Usher. With regard to "What's My Name?", Rihanna thought Drake could understand the melody of the song and invited him to work on the track when she played him the finishbozed recording. The collaboration was originally planned to be a remix, but later it was decided that the version featuring Drake would be used as the original.

"Loud" was recorded in various recording studios worldwide including the Larrabee Sound Studios, The Village and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles, Platinum Sound Recording Studios, and Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and The Bunker Studios in Paris. In September 2010, during a webchat with her fansite Rihannadaily.com, Rihanna announced that the album would be called "Loud", saying "get Loud everybody, get crazy, get excited, because I'm pumped. I'm just gonna be me, because that's what you guys love the most, and that's what makes me feel best. Just being normal, normal for me is Loud! Sassy, fun, flirty, energetic." While Rihanna was filming "Battleship", she explained in an interview with "Entertainment Tonight", "Loud is, the word, the name of the album definitely reflects the attitude of it, it's really sassy and flirty and it grabs your attention and that's why I enjoy it. It takes you through a really really interesting ride. So colorful the album."

"Loud" is a departure from the personal, melodramatic themes of "Rated R". Stylistically, it is a return to the Caribbean-inspired dance-pop of Rihanna's earlier work. Ryan Burleson of Consequence of Sound described the album as "a dynamic R&B and dance-pop record". In an interview with MTV, Rihanna said "I wanted songs that were all Rihanna songs, that nobody else could do. I didn't want the generic pop record that Ke$ha or Lady Gaga or Katy Perry could just do and it'll work. I wanted a song, or songs, that were Rihanna songs, that only I could do, had that little West Indian vibe to it, had that certain tone, a certain sass and a certain energy." During the promotion of "Loud", Rihanna said that much of the music was born out of frustration. She explained: "When you go to a club and have to listen to bad music you revert to the liquor, because you want to have a good time. I hate having to skip a track. I wanted to make an album you can just play."

The opening track "S&M" is an up-tempo eurodance song produced by Norwegian producers StarGate and Sandy Vee. The song is reminiscent of Depeche Mode's 1984 song "Master and Servant" and contains lyrical thoughts of sadomasochism. Andy Kellman of Allmusic regarded "S&M" as a dance-pop song which efficiently balanced "Rihanna's playful and sinister sides". "What's My Name?" was also produced by StarGate and features guest vocals from Canadian rapper Drake. It is a mid-tempo, electro-R&B song with a back track consisting of heavy reggae. The song also sees Rihanna's return to the "Island-pop" style of her early career". "Cheers (Drink to That)" is a pop rock song produced by The Runners, and interpolates Avril Lavigne's 2002 single "I'm with You". Mark Savage from BBC News described the song as a funky, loping guitar groove for a night out on the town. "Only Girl (In the World)" was the third song from the album produced by StarGate. It is an up-tempo dance-pop song that incorporates elements of eurodance in its production. Brad Wete, a reviewer of "Entertainment Weekly", described Rihanna's vocals as "seductive" and reminiscent of a "stronger, sexier version" of her 2007 single, "Don't Stop the Music".

"California King Bed" is a rock power ballad; Ryan Dombell of Pitchfork Media compared it to the Aerosmith song, "I Don't Want to Miss a Thing". The Shama Joseph produced "Man Down" is a reggae song with an electro rhythm, in which Rihanna sings in a West Indian accent. "Raining Men" is a hip-hop song, which features rap vocals from Trinidadian rapper Nicki Minaj. Rihanna described the song as a fun song that differs from the original, referring to the 1979 single by The Weather Girls with similar title "It's Raining Men". "Complicated" was produced by Tricky Stewart and Ester Dean. Leah Greenblatt from "Entertainment Weekly" said "Even while telling a recalcitrant man how hard he is to love, she [Rihanna] sounds almost buoyant, her newly expanded vocals eager to scale the song's high-altitude house beat". The final track is the sequel to Rihanna's duet with Eminem, "Love the Way You Lie". "Love the Way You Lie (Part II)", which was produced by Alex da Kid, features Rihanna as the protagonist and lead vocalist, viewing aspects of a relationship from a female perspective, unlike the original, which featured Eminem as lead vocalist and was from a male perspective.

"Only Girl (In the World)" was released as the album's lead single on September 10, 2010. The song was sent to US mainstream and rhythmic radio on September 21, 2010. It received positive reviews from music critics, who praised its chorus and thunderous dance beats. The song reached number one on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart, in the UK, Canada, Australia, Austria, Belgium (Wallonia), Ireland, Israel, Italy, New Zealand, Norway and Slovakia, becoming one of her best charting songs to date. At the 53rd Grammy Awards, held at the Staples Center in Los Angeles on February 13, 2011, "Only Girl (In the World)" won the award for Best Dance Recording.
"What's My Name?", which features guest vocals by Canadian recording artist Drake, was released as the album's second single; it was sent to US mainstream and rhythmic radios on September 21, 2010. Music critics praised the song as some of Rihanna's best vocal work to date, noting the romantic nature of the song and its sexual tones. The song peaked at number one on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart, giving Rihanna her eighth number-one on the chart, while "Only Girl (In the World)" became her ninth number-one song two weeks after "What's My Name?". It reached number one in the United Kingdom and became Rihanna's fifth UK number one single and Drake's first.

"Raining Men", was sent to urban radio on December 7, 2010 as an urban radio single and third track from "Loud" as a single in the US. The song featured rapper Nicki Minaj. It peaked at number 48 on the US "Billboard" R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. "Raining Men" received mixed reviews from critics who praised the chemistry between Rihanna and Minaj but criticized the song for failing to create anything new or original. 

"S&M", the album's fourth US single and third international single, was solicited to US mainstream radio on January 25, 2011. Reception of "S&M" was mixed; some reviewers criticized the overt use of sexual lyrics while others noted it as a stand-out track from "Loud". A remix of the song which features guest vocals by Britney Spears, was digitally released on April 11, 2011. "S&M" reached the top ten in twenty-four countries and peaked at number one in Australia, Canada and the United States.

"Man Down" was released as the fifth international single in some European countries in July 2011. It received positive reviews from critics, who called it a return to Rihanna's Caribbean-tinged rhythm. "Man Down" reached a peak of 59 on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. In France, it peaked at number one for five consecutive weeks. 

"California King Bed" was released as the fourth international single on May 13, 2011, and as the sixth US single. It was sent to US Hot/Modern adult contemporary radio on May 16, 2011. The song peaked at number four in Australia and New Zealand and number eight on the UK Singles Chart. 

"Cheers (Drink to That)" was announced by Rihanna as the seventh single from the album on July 24, 2011. The single was released to US mainstream and rhythmic radio on August 2, 2011. The song peaked at number seven on the US "Billboard" Hot 100, and number twelve on the US Pop Songs chart.<ref name="US/|USPop/US Radio|Canadian peak"></ref>

"Loud" was released on November 12, 2010, in four separate editions: a standard edition; a deluxe edition, packaged in a digipak exclusively for the US and Australia, that features a 30-minute documentary "Making of Loud" DVD (Directed by Brian and Brad Palmer); a Couture Edition containing the deluxe edition of "Loud" with a deluxe cover art lithograph, a box set with enhanced clear couture cover and a full-size photo book. An Ultra Couture Edition was also produced, containing a copy of the Deluxe Edition of "Loud" signed by Rihanna, the MP3 download of "Loud" on street date and all the features of the Couture Edition. The Ultra Couture Edition sold out and is no longer available neither on Amazon or her online store. An explicit version of "Loud" was also released and features a Parental Advisory label due to some of the lyrical content. The Japanese edition of the album was released with two additional remixes of "Only Girl (In the World)". The piano version of "Love the Way You Lie (Part II)" was only available with the iTunes edition of the album. However, the version which features Eminem was available for purchase.

Rihanna embarked on a promotional tour across Europe and North America to promote the album's release. The singer performed "Only Girl (In the World)", the lead single, live for the first time in North America on "Saturday Night Live" on October 30, 2010, and debuted the second single, "What's My Name?", later on in the show. The following day in the United Kingdom, Rihanna sang "Only Girl (In the World)" on series seven of "The X Factor". Rihanna performed "Only Girl (In the World)" at the MTV Europe Music Awards 2010 in Madrid, Spain, on November 7, 2010, on "The X Factor" in Italy on November 9, 2010, and on "Le Grand Journal" in France on November 10, 2010. On November 11, 2010, Rihanna appeared on a pre-recorded edition of "The Graham Norton Show" in the United Kingdom, where she gave an interview and sang "Only Girl (In the World)". On November 15, before the album's US release, Rihanna reprised her performance of "What's My Name?" for MTV's "The Seven", live from Times Square, New York City. The next day, Rihanna performed "What's My Name?" on the "Late Show with David Letterman". On November 17, 2010, Rihanna was interviewed and performed "Only Girl (In the World)" and "What's My Name?" on "Good Morning America". Rihanna performed a medley of "Love the Way You Lie (Part II)", "What's My Name?" and "Only Girl (In the World)" at the American Music Awards of 2010 on November 21, 2010, where she won the award for Favorite Soul/R&B Female Artist. Rihanna opened with an a cappella version of "Love The Way You Lie Part II".

On December 11, 2010, Rihanna returned to series seven of the UK's "The X Factor", to perform "Unfaithful" with finalist Matt Cardle, as well as a solo of "What's My Name?". The finale was watched by fifteen million viewers; however, the episode generated thousands of complaints about Rihanna's choice of outfit and sexual performance. Rihanna performed the song with Drake for the first time at the 53rd Grammy Awards on February 13, 2011. Rihanna also appeared at the 2011 BRIT Awards on February 15, 2011, where she performed "S&M" for the first time, as a medley with "Only Girl (In the World)" and "What's My Name?". Rihanna was requested to "tone down" her performance of "S&M" by the show's producers, and she performed only one verse and chorus in between "Only Girl (In The World)" and "What's My Name?". The BRIT Awards corporation wanted to avoid receiving complaints similar to those received by the "X-Factor". Rihanna was a special guest at the NBA All Star Game on February 20, 2011, where she performed a medley of "Umbrella", "Only Girl (In the World)", "Rude Boy", "What's My Name?" (with Drake) and "All of the Lights" (with Kanye West).

Rihanna performed "California King Bed" in the style of a country music song for the first time with Sugarland front woman Jennifer Nettles, during the ACM Awards held by the Academy of Country Music on April 3, 2011. She was a guest on the tenth season of the US series "American Idol" on April 14, 2011, where she performed "California King Bed". Rihanna promoted "California King Bed" with performances in Milan, Paris and Hamburg, because she was appointed ambassador for Nivea skincare. Rihanna opened the "Billboard" Music Awards on May 22, 2011, performing the remix of "S&M" with Britney Spears at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas. The performance attracted complaints about the overt sexual nature of the broadcast on a publicly owned television channel. Rihanna performed on NBC's "Today" show on May 27, 2011 as part of a Summer Concert Series. She performed "S&M", "Only Girl (In the World)", "What's My Name?" and "California King Bed".

To further promote "Loud", Rihanna embarked on her fourth concert tour, the Loud Tour, in June 2011, having announced it on February 9, 2011. The tour comprised 101 show dates, 32 in North America, 1 in Central America, 4 in South America and 64 in Europe. Tickets sold well in the United Kingdom and some additional shows were added. She performed ten shows at London's O Arena. Rihanna was interviewed by Ryan Seacrest on "American Idol", and talked about the design of the stage, stating: "We've just designed the stage and we have a section that we are building ... where the fans can actually be in the show and in the stage and be closer than they've ever been. It's real VIP." The North American leg of the tour began on June 4, 2011 in Baltimore, United States. Originally, J. Cole and Cee Lo Green were planned as supporting acts for the North American leg. However, Green left the tour, citing schedule conflicts. Rappers Drake, Kanye West and Jay-Z made guest appearances on some dates to perform their collaborations "What's My Name?", "Run This Town", "All of the Lights" and "Umbrella", respectively. The tour was received positively by critics, with some calling it "Rihanna's best tour yet". Jane Stevenson of the "Toronto Sun" commented that "the two-hour, larger-than-life show lived up to the billing." Jon Brean of the Minneapolis "Star Tribune" remarked, "The Barbadian singer is more visually and vocally dynamic than she has ever been before."

"Loud" received positive reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 given to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 67, based on 22 reviews. Jon Pareles of "The New York Times" perceived a "hermetic, cool calculation" on the album, writing that it "works the pop gizmos as neatly as any album this year, maintaining the Rihanna brand". "Entertainment Weekly"s Leah Greenblatt commented that "Loud" shows Rihanna "undefeated by her worst circumstances — and finding redemption in exactly the kind of pop nirvana that made her famous in the first place". James Reed of "The Boston Globe" called the album "an unabashed return to where Rihanna belongs: the dance floor" and stated: "As if liberating herself from the depths, she's a force on these 11 songs". Stacey Anderson of "Spin" commended Rihanna's "full, healthy claim to her sexuality" and wrote that the album "offers a confident female ethos on par with the best of Shakira or Beyoncé".

Genevieve Koski of "The A.V. Club" commended Rihanna for elevating the album's generic sound, writing that she "does sound invigorated, delivering charismatic vocal performances of material that doesn’t always warrant them". Emily Mackay of "NME" felt that its "experiments feel more organic, its tone better paced" than "Rated R". Thomas Conner of the "Chicago Sun-Times" wrote that "the celebratory atmosphere of Rihanna's sassy new jams are seasoned with some of the darker flavors from "Rated R"". Pitchfork Media's Ryan Dombal complimented the album's "effervescent pop" and stated: "Her laissez-faire attitude toward hit-making on "Loud" can result in too-safe moves or semi-experiments that come off surprisingly great". Ed Power of "Hot Press" complimented its "unabashedly subtext-free" songs and found its hooks "way beyond addictive."

In a mixed review, Andy Kellman of Allmusic found the album's material "slapdash" and "uneven", and called it "more an unfocused assortment of poor-to-solid songs than a unified set". Andy Gill of "The Independent" felt that "the more interesting tracks are those with less salacious demands on her vulnerability". "Slant Magazine"s Sal Cinquemani commended that "the subtle West Indian flavor with which Rihanna and company have smartly imbued" most of the album, although he noted some flaws in its production and wrote that "Rihanna has always had trouble fitting into one genre ... and for better or worse, Rihanna continues to stylistically branch out on "Loud"". Hugh Montgomery of "The Observer" commented that "sonically, it's fairly unremarkable ... but its strident buoyancy is difficult to resist".

"Only Girl (in the World)" won the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards and the album was nominated for three awards at the 54th Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year, Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Rap/Sung Collaboration for "What's My Name?".

"Loud" debuted at number three on the US "Billboard" 200 chart, with first-week sales of 207,000 copies in the United States, giving Rihanna her highest first-week sales in the US at that time. It also debuted at number one on "Billboard"s R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. In its second week, the album dropped to number six on the "Billboard" 200 and sold 141,000 copies. By its thirteenth week, the album returned to its peak at number three and sold 62,000 copies. However, in its fourteenth week, the album dipped to number ten on the Billboard 200 with 45,000 copies sold. In its fifteenth week, "Loud" rose to number eight, selling an additional 33,000 copies in the US. By July 3, 2011, "Loud" was the eleventh-best selling album of 2011 in the United States, selling 598,000 copies between January 1, 2011 and July 3, 2011. "Loud" ranked as "Billboard" magazine's ninth-most successful album of 2011 on their year-end charts. As of March 2018, "Loud" was certified 3x Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), denoting shipments of three million album-equivalent units in the United States, including pure album sales of 1.8 million copies in the US as of June 2015.

"Loud" was also a commercial success outside of the United States. In Canada, it debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart, selling 27,000 copies in its first week. "Loud" sold more than 80,000 units in Canada, achieving platinum status by the first week of December 2010. By September 8, 2011, "Loud" had sold more than 240,000 copies in Canada. In France, the album debuted at number three with first-week sales of 17,304 copies. By its sixth week on the French charts, "Loud" achieved platinum status, reaching the 100,000 copies mark. In France, the album has sold 355,000 copies as of April 2013. In its second week on the Australian Albums Chart, "Loud" was certified platinum for shipments of over 70,000 copies. In Italy, the album reached number eleven. It became Rihanna's highest charting album there until her sixth studio album "Talk That Talk" (2011) surpassed the record, peaking at number ten. "Unapologetic" (2012) did even better, peaking at number seven. "Loud" was her third consecutive number-one album in Switzerland. "Loud" debuted at number two on the German Albums Chart.

The album debuted at number two in the United Kingdom, with first week sales of 91,000 units. In its fifth week, the album sold 306,107 copies in the United Kingdom, giving the singer her first platinum-selling week in her career. In its seventh week on the chart, "Loud" reached number one, giving Rihanna her second UK number-one album. After seven weeks of sales, the album became the fourth best-selling album of 2010 in the UK. The album had sold 1,800,000 copies in the United Kingdom by September 4, 2011. By December 16, 2011, "Loud" was certified six-times platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), marking shipments of 1.8 million copies to retailers. It was the biggest selling R&B album of 2011 in the UK. As of August 2012, "Loud" is the fifth biggest selling digital album of all time. As of March 2015, "Loud" is the 45th best-selling album of the millennium in the United Kingdom. As of November 2011, the album has sold over 8 million copies worldwide.

Notes
"Loud" (Ultra Couture edition) 

"Loud" (Couture edition) 

"Loud" (Deluxe edition) 

iTunes version
Credits for "Loud" adapted from Allmusic.





</doc>
<doc id="32267930" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32267930" title="2011–12 York City F.C. season">
2011–12 York City F.C. season

The 2011–12 season was the 90th season of competitive association football and eighth season in the Football Conference played by York City Football Club, a professional football club based in York, North Yorkshire, England. Their eighth-place finish in 2010–11 meant it was their eighth successive season in the Conference Premier. The season covers the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012.

Gary Mills, who was starting his first full season as manager, signed 11 players before the summer transfer window closed. York occupied a play-off position for most of the season, and finished the Conference Premier season in fourth place. They beat Mansfield Town 2–1 on aggregate in the play-off semi-final. Luton Town were then beaten 2–1 in the 2012 Conference Premier play-off Final at Wembley Stadium, which meant the club was promoted to League Two, returning into the Football League after an eight-year absence. Eight days beforehand, York won their first national knockout competition, with a 2–0 victory over Newport County at Wembley Stadium in the 2012 FA Trophy Final. They were knocked out of the 2011–12 FA Cup in the fourth qualifying round, after being beaten 2–1 away to Wrexham.

30 players made at least one appearance in nationally organised first-team competition, and there were 19 different goalscorers. Goalkeeper Michael Ingham, defender James Meredith and midfielder Paddy McLaughlin missed only three of the 58 competitive matches played over the season. Matty Blair finished as leading scorer with 20 goals, of which 10 came in league competition, eight came in the FA Trophy and two came in the play-offs. The winner of the Clubman of the Year, voted for by the club's supporters, was Scott Kerr for his first full season with the club.

Just over a month into the 2010–11 season, manager Martin Foyle resigned with York City 15th in the league table. Tamworth manager Gary Mills took over, and after pushing for a play-off place the team finished the 2010–11 Conference Premier in eighth place. Released following the end of the season were Neil Barrett, Chris Carruthers, Leon Constantine, Liam Darville, Michael Gash, Levi Mackin and Andy McWilliams. George Purcell, Michael Rankine, Jonathan Smith, Peter Till and Greg Young also left the club after departing for Dover Athletic, Aldershot Town, Swindon Town, Fleetwood Town and Alfreton Town respectively. Jamal Fyfield, Michael Ingham and James Meredith signed new contracts with York, with David McDermott being retained on non-contract terms.

New additions in defence ahead of the season's start included goalkeeper Paul Musselwhite from Lincoln City and defender Lanre Oyebanjo from Histon. Midfielders to sign were Paddy McLaughlin from Newcastle United, Adriano Moké from Jerez Industrial (via the Glenn Hoddle Academy), and Michael Potts from Blackburn Rovers, with winger Matty Blair joining from Kidderminster Harriers. Strikers Ashley Chambers, who had been on loan the previous season, and Liam Henderson signed from Championship clubs Leicester City and Watford respectively. Striker Jason Walker was the only player signed for a fee, having cost £60,000 from Luton Town.

New home and away kits were introduced for the second successive summer, the home kit featuring red shirts with a white 'V' shape decoration toward the top of the shirt, light blue shorts with white trims on each side and white socks. The away kit included light blue shirts with the same 'V' shape decoration, white shorts with light blue trims on each side and light blue socks. Pryers Solicitors continued as shirt sponsors for the third successive season.

Walker scored an 83rd-minute penalty kick and a 90th-minute header to give York a 2–1 victory away to Ebbsfleet United in the opening match of the season. A second victory came in York's first home match of the season, a 3–1 victory over Barrow, with Walker, McLaughlin and Blair scoring. Former Stockport County winger Danny Pilkington was signed on non-contract terms following a trial with the club. The team's first defeat of the season came after going down 1–0 at home to A.F.C. Telford United, after former York striker Craig Farrell scored an 87th-minute goal. York responded to this by defeating Kettering Town 5–1 away, with Boucaud, Walker and Moké scoring in the first half and debutant Pilkington scoring the fifth in stoppage time. Shortly after this match, Kettering midfielder Jon Challinor was signed by York on a contract until January 2012. York picked up their first clean sheet of the season after drawing 0–0 away to Fleetwood Town. A second successive defeat at home came after losing 1–0 to Alfreton Town, with former York player Levi Mackin scoring the only goal with a penalty.

Walker scored what proved to be only a consolation after scoring in the 84th minute against Tamworth, with York losing 2–1 away after conceding two penalties, both of which were awarded from fouls committed by Chris Smith. York's first victory in four matches came after Jamie Reed scored an 88th-minute winner to give the team a 1–0 win at home to Bath City. This was followed by a 3–0 win away to league leaders Wrexham, with first half goals from McLaughlin, Chambers and Reed handing York victory. York then drew 2–2 at home to Darlington; Reed opened the scoring in the second minute with a shot into the top corner from the edge of the penalty area, and in the 79th minute Walker scored with a curling shot into the top corner to equalise for York. Chambers and Walker scored first half goals as York defeated Luton 3–0 at home. After a four-match unbeaten run York were defeated 3–2 away to Gateshead, with former York loanee Jon Shaw scoring their three goals, and Walker and a Curtis own goal making up York's tally.

Following defeat to Gateshead, York beat Stockport County 2–1 away after Blair and Walker scored second-half goals. York then went on to beat Braintree Town 6–2 at home, with Chambers, McLaughlin, Fyfield, Walker and Moké scoring. Chambers scored in the 62nd minute with York's goal in a 1–1 draw away to Southport, before the home team scored an equaliser nine minutes from time. Chambers scored an 86th-minute winner in a 2–1 victory at home to Grimsby Town, in which Walker had earlier scored with a bicycle kick for York in the first half. Walker scored twice at home against Cambridge United to give York a 2–2 draw, with the equaliser being scored direct from a free kick in the 89th minute. York then beat Hayes & Yeading United 4–2 away, with Walker, Challinor, McLaughlin and Chambers scoring. York were knocked out of the FA Cup in the fourth qualifying round after losing 2–1 away to Conference Premier league leaders Wrexham, with McLaughlin scoring York's only goal.

A second match with Wrexham in eight days finished in a 0–0 draw at home, with Ingham making a number of fine saves to preserve the clean sheet. Henderson was signed by fellow Conference Premier club Forest Green Rovers on a one-month loan. York drew 0–0 draw away to Barrow, with Walker and Boucaud being sent off during stoppage time. Striker Moses Ashikodi was signed on loan from league rivals Kettering until January 2012. Reed gave York the lead away to Forest Green after scoring a penalty in the 83rd minute, before the home team scored an equaliser in the fourth minute of stoppage time. York defeated Lincoln 2–0 at home with Pilkington and McLaughlin scoring in each half.

A second successive victory came after a 7–0 win at home to Kettering, in which Ashikodi scored against his parent club for his first for York goal. The other scorers were Reed, Challinor, Blair, McLaughlin and Chambers. York were held to a 0–0 draw away to A.F.C. Telford, in which Boucaud, Blair and Walker were denied from scoring by opposition goalkeeper Ryan Young during the first 15 minutes. Challinor scored during stoppage time to secure an FA Trophy first round replay with Conference North team Solihull Moors, with the match ending a 2–2 draw at home. York won the replay away to Solihull 3–0, with Smith scoring his first goal of the season and Blair scoring twice. York suffered their first league defeat since September after losing 3–2 at home to Kidderminster. Henderson scored his first goal for York with the equaliser away to Mansfield Town on Boxing Day, which finished a 1–1 draw.

York were 2–0 down in their New Year's Day fixture at home to Mansfield until the 77th minute when Blair scored, and in the first minute of stoppage time substitute Fyfield scored the equaliser to draw the match at 2–2. Ashikodi was signed on a permanent contract until the end of the season, having scored one goal in six appearances for the club while on loan. Challinor signed an extended contract until the end of the season, while McDermott was allowed to join A.F.C. Telford after being unable to break into the team. Henderson joined Forest Green for a second loan spell, signing until the end of the season. On the same day, York signed former Fleetwood midfielder Scott Brown on a contract until the end of the season. Blair scored both of York's goals in a 2–0 victory away to Lincoln, which was the team's first win in five league matches. Striker Matthew Blinkhorn was signed on a contract until the end of the season after his contract with League of Ireland Premier Division club Sligo Rovers expired.

York won their FA Trophy second round match away to Salisbury City 6–2, with Blair, Reed, McLaughlin and Blinkhorn scoring the goals. York defeated Ebbsfleet 3–2 at home for a second successive league win, in which Blair scored twice and Meredith scored his first goal of the season. Smith scored York's goal in a 1–1 draw away to Kidderminster with a 57th-minute header, before the home team equalised in the 85th minute. York fought back from two goals down in the following match away to Darlington, with Smith and Chambers scoring in the second half. Transfer deadline day saw the departure of Boucaud to Luton for a fee of £25,000, while midfielder Erik Tønne was signed on loan from Sheffield United until the end of the season.

Free agents Chris Doig, a defender who previously played for Aldershot Town, and Ben Swallow, a winger who previously played for Bristol Rovers, were signed on contracts until the end of the season. Middlesbrough defender Ben Gibson was signed on loan until the end of the season. York progressed to the quarter-finals of the FA Trophy after Ebbsfleet were beaten 1–0 at home in the third round, courtesy of a second half Blair goal. Reed and Blinkhorn scored late goals to give York a 2–1 victory at home to Stockport, with the visitors having taken the lead earlier in the second half. York suffered their first defeat in eight league matches after losing 2–1 at home to Gateshead. Progression to the semi-final of the FA Trophy for the third time in five seasons came after York defeated Grimsby 1–0 away in the quarter-final, in which Scott Kerr scored his first goal for the club.

Oyebanjo, with his first goal for the club, and Walker scored to give York a 2–0 victory at home to Hayes. This was followed by a 0–0 home draw with Tamworth. York defeated Luton in the first leg of the FA Trophy semi-final at home, with Reed scoring a penalty in a 1–0 victory. Fyfield scored the winning goal away to Grimsby during stoppage time with a 25-yard shot, after Reed and Smith had scored York's earlier goals in a 3–2 victory. York reached the FA Trophy final for the second time in four seasons after drawing 1–1 away to Luton in the semi-final second leg, with Blair scoring a 90th-minute equaliser, meaning the team went through 2–1 on aggregate. Free agent midfielder Eugen Bopp was signed on a contract until the end of the season after a trial. York were beaten 2–1 at home to Southport, with Reed's 84th-minute goal not being enough to earn York any points, after the visitors had scored twice earlier in the second half. McLaughlin scored for the first time since December with the only goal in a 1–0 victory away to Bath, which restored York's position in the play-offs. A second goal in two matches from McLaughlin saw York equalise away to Luton in the 81st minute, before Meredith scored an 86th-minute winner in a 2–1 victory.<ref name="Luton 1-2 York 30/03/12"></ref>

McLaughlin's third goal in three matches came in a 2–1 defeat away to Newport County, with the home team scoring the winner 20 minutes from time through Romone Rose. York lost a second match in a row when being beaten 1–0 at home by league leaders Fleetwood, in which former York striker Richard Brodie scored the only goal in the 73rd minute. Blair and Oyebanjo scored in the second half to give York a 2–0 victory away to Alfreton. Swallow was prematurely released by the club because of an internal issue. York drew 1–1 at home to Newport with Walker scoring a second half equaliser, which was his first goal from open play since 22 October. Musselwhite was forced to make his debut in York's away match against Cambridge due to an injury to Ingham, with York winning 1–0 through a second half Walker goal. York were guaranteed a play-off place after beating Braintree 1–0 away, with Tønne scoring his first goal for the club in the 75th minute. The league campaign concluded after a 1–0 victory at home to Forest Green, with Moké scoring in the 82nd minute. The result meant York finished fourth in the Conference Premier table and that they would play third-placed Mansfield in the play-off semi-final. Following the match, Kerr was named as the season's Clubman of the Year, voted for by the club's supporters.

York drew 1–1 with Mansfield at home in the first leg of the play-off semi-final. Mansfield took the lead in the 26th minute after Exodus Geohaghon's long throw was headed in by Ross Dyer, before York equalised on 42 minutes after Geohaghon scored an own goal from a Challinor cross. York defeated Mansfield 1–0 after extra time in the second leg after Blair scored a header from a Walker cross in the 111th minute. With an aggregate score of 2–1 York progressed to the play-off final to play Luton.<ref name="Luton 1-2 York 20/05/12"></ref> The club won its first national knockout competition, and first piece of silverware in 19 years, after Newport were defeated 2–0 in the 2012 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium, with Blair and Oyebanjo scoring in the second half. Days after the Trophy victory, plans for a community stadium to be built at Monks Cross, which would be shared by York City and rugby league team York City Knights, were approved by City of York Council.

On 20 May 2012, York regained their Football League status with promotion to League Two after a 2–1 win over Luton in the 2012 Conference Premier play-off Final at Wembley Stadium. Luton took the lead when Andre Gray scored in the second minute, before Chambers scored the equaliser on 26 minutes with a low shot from a Smith hooked cross. The winner came two minutes into the second half after Blair, despite being in an offside position, scored from close range after latching onto Daniel Parslow's header. After the match, Blair was quoted as saying "I scored the goal and it feels unbelievable but I'm not taking anything away from the other lads today. The back five, and Daniel Parslow in front, defended like heroes and were brilliant all game". Mills summarised York's achievements by saying "To come to Wembley Stadium two weeks running and do the double is an incredible feeling. In fact, with the ground announcement, it's been a terrific treble and probably the best hat-trick ever at York City Football Club".

The day after the play-off final, thousands turned out to witness the club's players, management, staff and directors ride through York city centre on an open-topped bus, in celebration of what "The Press" described as "an unsurpassed nine days in the Minstermen's proud existence".

York occupied a play-off position for the majority of the season, briefly rising as high as first place during the first month of the season while never dropping below 14th. For the third time in the space of six seasons, York had a better record away than at home in the league. The team won 12 matches, drew eight and lost three away, compared to winning 11, drawing six and losing six at home. Ingham, McLaughlin and Meredith recorded the highest number of appearances during the season, each appearing in 55 of York's 58 matches. Blair was top scorer in all competitions with 20 goals, followed by Walker, whose 18 goals made him York's leading league scorer. Three other players, Chambers, McLaughlin and Reed, reached double figures.

Prior to the club's Football League return, York released Ashikodi, Blinkhorn, Bopp and Brown, while Meredith, Moké and Pilkington left on their own accord for Bradford City, Cambridge and Kidderminster. Challinor, Chambers, Doig, Fyfield, Ingham, Kerr and Parslow signed new contracts with the club. New players to join were defender Danny Blanchett from Burton Albion, midfielders Lee Bullock from Bradford, John McReady from Darlington and Jonathan Smith from Swindon, winger Michael Coulson from Grimsby, and striker Oli Johnson from Oxford United. Midfielder Tom Platt was promoted to the first-team squad from the youth team after signing a professional contract with the club.

League positions are sourced by Statto, while the remaining information is referenced individually.



</doc>
<doc id="32296906" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32296906" title="Meinhard Michael Moser">
Meinhard Michael Moser

Meinhard Michael Moser (13 March 1924 – 30 September 2002) was an Austrian mycologist. His life's work principally concerned the taxonomy, chemistry and toxicity of the gilled mushrooms (Agaricales), especially those of the genus "Cortinarius", and the ecology of ectomycorrhiza. His contributions to the Kleine Kryptogamenflora Mitteleuropas series of mycological guidebooks were well-regarded and widely used. In particular, his 1953 "Blätter- und Bauchpilze (Agaricales und Gastromycetes)", which became known as simply "Moser", saw several editions in both the original German and in translation.

After showing interest in natural sciences in his youth, he studied at the University of Innsbruck. However, his university career was interrupted by the need to complete military service. He was stationed as a translator in eastern Europe during World War II, before being captured and placed in a prisoner of war camp. He was released in 1948, subsequently returning to Innsbruck to complete his studies. After completing his doctorate in 1950, Moser worked in England for six months, researching the symbiotic relationships between plants and fungi. Upon his return to Austria, he took up a position with the Federal Forestry Research Institute, where he remained until 1968, taking part in influential research on the use of mycorrhizal fungi in reforestation. He began lecturing at the University of Innsbruck in 1956, and in 1972 he became the inaugural head of the first Institute of Microbiology in Austria. He remained with the Institute until his retirement in 1991. His studies continued until his death in 2002. An influential mycologist, he received a number of awards throughout his life, and numerous fungal taxa have been named in his honour.

Moser was born on 13 March 1924 in Innsbruck, Austria, to parents Margaretha and Josef Moser. His father was a teacher at a technical college in the city, while his mother was the daughter of noted botanist Emil Johann Lambert Heinricher. Moser attended primary school and grammar school in the city, and showed an interest in natural sciences from a young age. His interest was cultivated by Heinricher, and Moser's earliest paintings of mushrooms date to 1935 when he was 11 years old.

In 1942, Moser enrolled at the University of Innsbruck, taking classes in botany, zoology, geology, physics and chemistry. At this time, Austria was under the control of Nazi Germany and did not exist as an independent state. Moser became an authorised mushroom controller and instructor, and it was officially requested that he attend mycological seminars around Germany and Austria. At these seminars, he met a number of prominent mycologists, including Ernst Thirring. Thirring showed Moser some of the issues surrounding the large genus "Cortinarius", which remained an interest for the rest of his life. In 1943, aged 19 and after only three terms at Innsbruck, his studies were interrupted so he could perform military service. Having shown earlier promise in languages, he was trained as an interpreter, then sent to the Balkan Peninsula. He continued to show an active interest in mycology, collecting and identifying mushrooms and reading Rolf Singer's "Das System der Agaricales".

In 1945, when Moser was 21 years old and still carrying out active military service, he was captured in Czechoslovakia by Soviet soldiers and made a prisoner of war. He was imprisoned in a labour camp in Crimea, in the Ukraine. While a prisoner, he was involved in repairing the Institute of Biology of the Southern Seas, Sevastopol. His time at the camp was not easy; working in construction, he had to work to his physical limits, and was involved in a serious crash that killed several other prisoners. Moser was released in 1948, and chose to return to his studies at the University of Innsbruck. His first publication came in 1949; "Über das Massenauftreten von Formen der Gattung "Morchella" auf Waldbrandflächen" ["Mass-fruiting of forms of the genus "Morchella" on forest-fire areas"] was published in the journal "Sydowia". In 1950, under the supervision of Arthur Pisek, Moser completed his doctoral thesis, "Zur Wasserökologie der höheren Pilze, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung von Waldbrandflächen" ["Water relations in higher fungi with special emphasis on forest-fire areas"]. During his time at university, he became a member of both the Société mycologique de France and the British Mycological Society. Having become friends with prominent German mycologists during the War, he was keen to re-establish academic relationships throughout Europe in the years following the conflict.

Due to the quality of his doctoral work, Moser received a grant from the British Council and, in 1951, he moved to England, where he stayed for six months. There, he performed research in the laboratory of Jack Harley in Oxford, looking into the symbiosis between fungi and forest trees, and spent some time performing taxonomic studies at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. After his return to Austria, he was, in 1952, offered a post at the Federal Institute for Forestry Research at Imst, which he accepted. There, he applied what he had learnt about the symbiosis of fungi and trees to the practical issue of reforestation in the Alps, and developed a method for the use of ectomycorrhizal fungi for the "inoculation" of trees, which later became standard practice around the world. Moser remained with the institute until 1968.

In his time with the institute, Moser continued his taxonomic studies. In 1953, he published the first edition of his "Die Blätter und Bauchpilze (Agaricales und Gastromycetes)", a monograph of the Agaricales and Gastromycetes of central Europe, containing 3150 taxa. The work served as an update on Adalbert Ricken's "Vademecum für Pilzfreunde" (1918), though reflecting Moser's taxonomic views, which were highly influenced by Singer. The book was part of a series named Kleine Kryptogamenflora Mitteleuropa, edited by Helmut Gams. The work, which became known simply as "Moser", was updated and republished numerous times over the following decades, and translated into both Italian and English, with the latter translation being sponsored by Roger Phillips. His monograph on the Agaricales was also published separately from this work. René Pomerleau described a 1967 reprint of the Agaricales monograph, containing descriptions of 2547 species, as "probably the most complete and up-to-date descriptive flora of this group of fungi for central Europe". "Die Blätter und Bauchpilze (Agaricales und Gastromycetes)" became important for the study of biodiversity in and out of Europe, and was a "much used and appreciated field manual". The work continued to be used as an authoritative reference for several decades; in 1981, it was still being called "the most-used and most authoritative handbook on larger European fleshy fungi".

In 1956, while still a researcher at the Federal Institute, Moser began lecturing on microbiology at the University of Innsbruck, with the title of "Privatdozent". During this time, he continued to publish. His monograph on the genus "Phlegmacium", a taxon now considered to be part of "Cortinarius", was published in 1960 as part of Die Pilze Mitteleuropas series. Unlike the previous three books in the series, which were all written by German authors, the work addressed mushrooms that were of less interest to amateur mycologists; for instance, the genus was not considered to contain any significant edible species. The book drew upon Moser's expertise concerning mycorrhizal relationships. It listed 166 species, including some "exotic" taxa. Some of the listed species were described for the first time in that volume. The illustrations, which came in the form of a number of coloured plates, were mostly Moser's own work; Singer described these in a review of the book as "both in original execution and reproduction among the best that have been published". Discussing the book as a whole, Singer said that the volume, "outstanding for its good print, attractive appearance, and interesting contents, should be present in every mycological library".

In 1963, Moser published a second work in the Kleine Kryptogamenflora von Mitteleuropa series, "Ascomyceten (Schlauchpilze)". This work was a monograph on the Ascomycetes, focussing on the Discomycetes. Though not as well known as his earlier book, it was well received in the mycological community. The mycologist Richard Korf, reviewing the work in an article published in "Mycologia", said that "the book belongs on the shelf of every mycological library in Europe", praising the "[e]xcellent, workable keys to the orders, families, genera, and European species". Korf wrote that, "[i]f a single fault can be found, it is surely the lack of documentation provided". However, a combination of a lack of time and Moser's comparative lack of expertise in Ascomycetes prevented subsequent editions of the work.

Moser was promoted to Associate University Professor in 1964. Two years later, the Faculty of Science of the University of Innsbruck recommended that a chair of microbiology should be created at the Botanical Institute in Innsbruck. The Federal Ministry of Education accepted the recommendation. Moser was the only candidate for the position, and was unanimously named by a number of leading European botanists and mycologists for the post in 1967. Subsequently, in 1968, Moser was promoted to full professor, and, in 1972, Moser became the head of the newly established Institute of Microbiology, the first of its kind in Austria. He remained in charge of the Institute until his retirement. He taught on a wide range of subjects, including the taxonomy of fungi, ecology of fungi, mycogeography, bacteria, viruses, chemotaxonomy, molecular genetics, microbial toxicology, immunology and symbiosis. During his career at the university, he oversaw over 60 doctoral theses, in addition to a number of diploma theses. In 1970, Moser became the president of the Austrian Mycological Society, taking over after the death of the previous post-holder, Kurt Lohwag. Lohwag, in turn, had taken up the position after the death of his predecessor, Thirring, earlier that year. Moser remained the society's president for 21 years.

Moser published "Cortinarius Fr. und nahe verwandte Gattungen in Südamerika" in 1975, which was coauthored by Egon Horak. The work, along with his earlier monograph on ""Phlegmacium"", proved to be some of Moser's most important, serving to encourage others to engage with "Cortinarius" in a meaningful way. "Cortinarius Fr. und nahe verwandte Gattungen in Südamerika" was a study of "Cortinarius", "Dermocybe" and "Stephanopus", a new genus first described in that work, in South America, and was dedicated to Singer. The work contained descriptions of 276 new species. Alexander H. Smith stressed the significance of the work, saying "Anyone who has not worked in the systematics of "Cortinarius" cannot fully appreciate the magnitude and importance of this work to the general subject of the distribution and speciation of the higher fungi."

In 1983, in recognition of his forthcoming 60th birthday, an article dedicated to Moser was published in "Sydowia". The piece, compiled by Franz Schinner, C. Furrer-Siogas and Egon Horak, contained a detailed biography and a full bibliography of the 116 research publications Moser had authored or co-authored between 1949 and 1983. Moser, writing with Walter Jülich, published the first volume of the book series "Farbatlas der Basidiomyzeten" in 1985, presenting specimens of various Basidiomycota taxa. By the time of Moser's death, 19 volumes had been published; some subsequently published volumes have listed Moser as an author.

In 1991, at the earliest possible date, Moser retired from his teaching position to avoid the administrative burden and to focus on his research into "Cortinarius" and related genera. After his retirement, he continued to work heavily, typically beginning at 5 am. In 1992, he researched the presence of Agaricales in the Crimean Mountains, identifying 70 previously undocumented species, including some new to science. In 1995, in celebration of Moser's 70th birthday, a supplement of "Sydowia" was published in his honour.

Moser died on 30 September 2002. After returning from 7th International Congress in Oslo, Norway, he suffered a series of heart attacks. After being admitted to hospital, his condition rapidly declined before his death. Obituaries were published in a variety of academic journals, including "Mycological Progress", "Mycological Research", "Sydowia", "Österreichische Zeitschrift für Pilzkunde", and "Berichte des Naturwissenschaftlichen-medizinischen Verein Innsbruck". Horak and colleagues, writing for the journal "Mycological Research", described Moser's death as "an irreplaceable loss to the international community of mycological science", and, writing in "Sydowia", they said that the "mycological world has lost one of its pillars of taxonomy for agarics and boletes. His former students, assistants and collaborators at the Microbiological Institute at the University of Innsbruck, his professional colleagues in the mycological community worldwide and his many friends will deeply regret
the loss of a distinguished researcher, teacher, leader and mentor." In a short obituary of Moser as part of their report on the Eighth International Symposium on Arctic-Alpine Mycology, mycologists Cathy Cripps and Joe Ammirati called him a "gentlemanly scholar" who "led us in his quiet way across the tundra and down many dichotomous paths".

Over the course of his career, Moser collected over 25,000 mycological specimens. He first described around 420 "Cortinarius" species and around 80 other species, including both agarics and boletes. He circumscribed three new genera: "Singeromyces" (1966), "Stephanopus" (1975) and "Anamika" (2002). Much of his research covered four key areas: the taxonomy of Agaricales—including the classical morphotaxonomy and the chemotaxonomy of the order—the toxicity of the chemical constituents of members of the same order, and the ecology of ectomycorrhiza.

In the early decades of his careers, Moser sought to clarify the taxonomic identity of European fungi by collecting specimens to be described as neotypes in the localities studied by Elias Magnus Fries, but this was no longer necessary after changes to nomenclatural rules that took effect in 1981. Among the Agaricales, Moser's interest was primarily in the complex genus "Cortinarius". He published book-length works addressing "Cortinarius" taxa found in Europe and, co-writing with Horak, South America. Moser, working with Joe Ammirati, contributed to research on the genus in North America, and also examined Asian and Australasian taxa. He had a particular interest in Arctic–alpine habitats, and he documented, painted and published on his collections in these and other sites around the world. Moser initially doubted the usefulness of molecular phylogenetic analysis of the Agaricales, but later contributed to research in this area.

"Cortinarius" mushrooms are often highly colourful. Moser "made the first successful steps" towards studying the pigments in these mushrooms, hoping to find criteria for separating taxa, and some of his PhD students studied these elements in depth. Cooperating with biochemists, he produced important work on the biosynthesis of pigments. Moser was also interested in the toxicity of the Agaricales, and was—with his students—involved with research on the toxin orellanine.

Moser's work on ectomycorrhiza, though perhaps unknown to many researchers familiar with his taxonomic work, was notable due to its focus on the fungal partners in the relationship. He engaged in a large amount of research on woodland in the transitional zone between subalpine and alpine habitats. His published results included the description of new taxa. In 1960, Singer referred to Moser as "one of the pioneers of mycorrhiza research, both basic and applied".

At the end of his life, Moser lived in the village of Vill, near Innsbruck. According to some of his colleagues, "Moser was rather shy, taciturn, formal and constrained in public or in official functions. In a relaxed atmosphere among students, collaborators or friends, he became extrovert and surprised many by his sense of humour and ready wit." He had a commitment to both mycological research and mycological education, and was fluent in several languages. He was known as an intellectual and a wide-reader, with interests in fine art, classical music, literature, exploration, geography and botany. In addition to reading and walking, he enjoyed stamp collecting and growing plants from seeds he had collected on his research trips. He was a capable cook, often creating mushroom-based dishes for guests, though was on one occasion poisoned during "gastronomic experiments with "Phaeolepiota" and "Agaricus"". He was also known to make chanterelle schnapps, drinking it with his students and sharing his recipe with colleagues.

Throughout his life, Moser received a number of awards, including the Clusius Medal (Budapest 1978) and the Kardinal Innitzer Preis (Vienna 1985). In 1986, he was made a member of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. Having already been elected as an honorary member of the Ukrainian Botanical Society, he became a foreign member of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences in 1992, the first mycologist to be elected. He was recognised by a number of mycological societies, including becoming an honorary member of the Mycological Society of America in 1987, and Centenary Fellow of the British Mycological Society in 1996. He also received an honorary doctorate from the University of Lyon in 1984, and in 1990 was awarded honorary citizenship of Borgotaro, Italy.

The genera "Moserella" (Pöder & Scheuer, 1994) and "Chromosera" (Redhead, Ammirati & Norvell, 1995) were named in Moser's honour, as were the species "Acariniola moseri" (T. Majewsky & J. Wisn.), "Conocybe moseri" (Watling), "Cortinarius moseri" ((E. Horak) E. Horak), "Cortinarius moserianus" (Bohus), "Cortinarius meinhardii" (Bon), "Entoloma moserianum" (Noordel.), "Gerronema moseri" (Singer), "Gymnopus moseri" (Antonín & Noordel.), "Hebeloma moseri" (Singer), "Hydropus moserianus" (Bas), "Hygrocybe moseri" (Bon), "Lactarius moseri" (Harmaja), "Lasiosphaeria moseri" (O. Hilber), "Leucoagaricus moseri" (Wasser), "Peziza moseri" (Aviz.-Hersh. & Nemlich), "Phaeocollybia moseri" (Band.-Muñoz & Guzmán), "Psathyrella moseri" (Singer), "Psilocybe moseri" (Guzmán), "Thaxteriola moseri" (T. Majewsky & J. Wisn.), "Tricholoma moseri" (Singer), "Tricholoma moserianum" (Bon), "Tubaria moseri" (Raithelh.), and "Wardomyces moseri" (W. Gams).

A comprehensive bibliography of Moser's work published with a 2003 obituary in "Sydowia" listed over 210 sole-authored or co-authored publications, with a further eight submitted or in print at time of publication. Moser's major works include:



</doc>
<doc id="32324913" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32324913" title="Premastication">
Premastication

Premastication, pre-chewing, or kiss feeding is the act of chewing food for the purpose of physically breaking it down in order to feed another that is incapable of masticating the food by themselves. This is often done by the mother or relatives of a baby to produce baby food capable of being consumed by the child during the weaning process. The chewed food in the form of a bolus is transferred from the mouth of one individual to another, either directly mouth-to-mouth, via utensils, hands, or is further cooked or processed prior to feeding.

The behaviour was common throughout human history and societies and observed in non-human animals. While premastication is less common in present-day Western societies it was commonly practiced, and is still done in more traditional cultures. Although the health benefits of premastication are still being actively studied, the practice appears to confer certain nutritional and immunological benefits to the infant, provided that the caretaker is in good health and not infected by pathogens.

Premastication and mouth-to-mouth feeding in humans is postulated to have evolved from the regurgitation of food from parent to offspring or male to female (courtship feeding) and has been observed in numerous mammals and animals of other species. For instance, food begging behaviour observed in young wolves, wild dogs and certain gulls species, which involves the young approaching the beak or mouth of the adult with their own whereupon gaping their mouths or nuzzling, the adult would regurgitate portions of food to feed the young. However, in the aforementioned animals, this nuzzling behaviour and other types of mouth-to-mouth contact are also used for bonding, socialization, and courtship.

Young orangutans also beg for food by such contact and accordingly their caretakers regurgitate to feed them. Indeed, behaviours of mouth to mouth feeding of premasticated food and ritualized mouth to mouth contact for bonding has been observed in anthropoid great apes such as gorillas, orangutans, and chimpanzees. All of this supports the idea that human behaviours of kissing and feeding of premastication foods, either directly or indirectly from the mouth, have their behavioural roots in higher animals and ancestral great apes.

In all human cultures premastication/kiss-feeding or kissing between mother and infant has been observed in all with kissing believed to be a socially ritualized form of feeding premasticated food. There is high similarity in the execution of kiss-feeding and human kisses (e.g. French kiss); in the former, the tongue is used to push food from mother to child with the child receiving both the mother's food and tongue in sucking movements, and the latter simply forgoes the premasticated food. In fact, observations across various species and cultures confirms that the act of kissing and premastication have most likely evolved from the similar relationship-based feeding behaviours.

Written records of premastication have been found in Ancient Egypt, though the practice likely extends back into prehistoric times to non-human ancestors. For instance, in the Ancient Egyptian Ebers medical papyrus, a mother was instructed to give a medical remedy to a child through premastication. In the fifth century A.D. Roman culture, premastication of infants' food by caretakers was also common, though the lack of sanitation along with the practice contributed to infant mortality. Infants in Medieval Europe were fed an assortment of mashed, premasticated food or bread softened with liquids.

Due to attitudes in Western medicine in the 1940s and 1950s, Native American and Fijian cultures and societies were strongly dissuaded from premastication due to concerns about the hygiene of the practice. However, the lack of knowledge regarding premastication and its prohibition by missionaries and doctors instead caused severe anemia in the infants of the population, or resulted in malnourished infants and children deprived of nourishment.

Although less prevalent in modern post-industrial Western societies, the offering of premasticated foods to infants is found in many traditional cultures and offers their infants numerous benefits. In North America, premastication is still commonly used by Black and Hispanic mothers, and commonly used by women of Inuit and Aleut peoples.

In many human cultures, the act of premastication and direct mouth-to-mouth feeding is linked with the showing of affection, known as "kiss feeding". In the Manus cultures of the Admiralty Islands, the act of premastication has been used by a women to remind children and descendants of their obligations to her. Some human cultures such as the people of Papua New Guinea in fact use mouth to mouth contact primarily for feeding premasticated food, with sexual kissing only observed after the arrival of Europeans. This form of feeding is believed to have evolved into the modern human acts of kissing and French kissing.

Many Western societies have strong aversions toward premastication, which have been compared to their similar criticisms and aversion towards breastfeeding in previous generations for similar rationale, with the same societies finding breastfeeding to be a disagreeable practice performed only by the uneducated lower classes or untempered foreign cultures. For instance, in the late 1800s the medical community of Texas was embroiled in a debate on premastication, with those supporting the practice arguing its benefits and those against it stating that it is "filthy and repulsive and... barbaric".

The act of premastication is commonly found in all human societies and populations, although it is less prevalent in some than others. The evolution and selective advantage of premastication behaviours is that it supplements the infant diet of breast milk by providing access to more macro- and micro-nutrients. Although disease can be transmitted through saliva in the pre-chewed foods, the benefits conferred outweighed any risks of the practice during the evolution of human behaviour. Furthermore, discouraging premastication as prevention to disease transmittion may prove as disastrous an infant public health policy as when infants breastfeeding was discouraged in the late 1980s and early 1990s. In the end, the potential benefits and pitfalls of this practice greatly depend on the dietary and medical circumstances of the provider and child. The true scope of the benefits of premastication and its prevalences in differenct societies is still under active research, though there appears to be some consensus on the nutritional benefits of the practice.



</doc>
<doc id="32378569" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32378569" title="Inocybe godeyi">
Inocybe godeyi

Inocybe godeyi is a species of Inocybaceae fungus found in Europe. The species produces mushrooms with cone-shaped caps up to in diameter. The caps are cream, becoming browner, but they bruise red. The stem is up to long, and has a "bulb" at the base. The white flesh has a strong smell and an acrid taste. The mushrooms can be found on forest floors in autumn months; the species forms an ectomycorrhizal relationship to surrounding trees, favouring beech. "I. godeyi" is known to be poisonous, containing muscarine compounds, and consumption of the mushrooms can lead to SLUDGE syndrome. The species is sometimes mistaken for the deadly "I. erubescens".

First described by Claude Casimir Gillet, the species retains the name which it was first given, but has a number of taxonomic synonyms. Its specific name honours Louis-Luc Godey. Within the genus "Inocybe", it has been classified in a number of ways, but appears to form part of a clade (that is, a group sharing a common ancestor) with species including "I. abietis", "I. corydalina", "I. agglutinata" and "I. pudica".

"Inocybe godeyi" was first described, and given its current name, by French botanist and mycologist Claude Casimir Gillet in his 1874 work "Les Hyménomycètes ou description de tous les champignons (fungi) qui croissent en France". The specific name honours the French mycologist Louis-Luc Godey. British mycologist Mordecai Cubitt Cooke described a variety of the species, "Inocybe godeyi" var. "rufescens", in a 1909 issue of the "Transactions of the British Mycological Society". However, the name is now considered synonymous with "Inocybe godeyi". A number of other names are recognised as synonymous. Gillet's own "Inocybe rubescens", described in an 1883 issue of "Revue Mycologique", is no longer seen as a separate taxon. The same is true of Narcisse Théophile Patouillard's 1884 description of "I. rubescens" as a variety of ""Agaricus trinii"", "Agaricus trinii" var. "rubescens". Other synonyms include Roger Heim's 1931 "Inocybe rickenii" and "Inocybe boltonii".

Within the genus "Inocybe", "I. godeyi" has been classified in a number of ways. In 1986, mycologist Thom Kuyper placed the species in the supersection "Marginatae" (subgenus "Inocybe"), along with species including "I. abietis", "I. calospora" and "I. praetervisa". Rolf Singer considers "Marginatae" a section in subgenus "Inocybe", but he placed "I. godeyi" in the section "Geophyllinae" (in the subgenus "Inocibium") along with species including "I. agglutinata" and "I. pudica". A 2002 phylogenetic study found that Singer's "Geophyllinae" is probably monophyletic (that is, the taxa all come from a common, recent ancestor) and suggested that "I. godeyi" forms a clade with species including "I. abietis", "I. corydalina", "I. agglutinata" and "I. pudica". All species in the clade were "smooth-spored Inocybes with metuloid hymenial cystidia", but there were other species that fit that description, such as "I. lacera", that were shown not to be a part of the clade.

"Inocybe godeyi" produces mushrooms each of which features a cap of across. The cap is initially cone-shaped, but expands outward, and flattens somewhat. In younger mushrooms, it is a cream colour, but as the fruit bodies mature, it changes to an ochre to tan colour; however, the cap can sometimes become entirely red, the colour it turns when bruised. The cap surface of younger specimens is smooth and silky. The surface of older caps becomes increasingly fibrous, and cracks often develop, beginning at the cap margin and moving towards the centre. There is usually a small umbo. The stem attaches to the center of the cap, and measures by . Towards the base, the stem surface is covered in fine grains, and at the very base, there is an obviously defined "bulb". In colour, the stem is an off-white, becoming redder as the mushroom ages. The flesh is white, but gradually turns red when it is exposed. The gills begin as an off-white, but become gradually the colour of cinnamon. They are adnexed, which means that only part of the depth of the gills attaches to the stem, and crowded.

"Inocybe godeyi" leaves a snuff-brown spore print, while the individual spores themselves are smooth and almond-shaped. The spores measure 9 to 11.5 by 5.5 to 7 micrometres. Each basidium bares four spores. Both the cheilocystidia (cystidia found on the edges of the gills) and the pleurocystidia (cystidia found on the faces of the gills) are spindle- or bottle-shaped, with some kind of encrustation at the tip. They have thick cell walls.

It is sometimes mistaken for the deadly "Inocybe erubescens". The rarer "I. erubescens", like "I. godeyi", bruises red, though it is lighter in colour to begin with. The most distinguishing feature is that "I. erubescens" lacks a bulbous base.

"Inocybe godeyi" flesh has a strong smell, which has been variously described as "unpleasant", "earthy or mealy", and "not distinctive". The flesh has an acrid taste. The mushrooms are known to be poisonous, containing toxic compounds of muscarine. Consumption of the mushroom could lead to a number of physiological effects, including: salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastrointestinal problems and emesis (vomiting); this array of symptoms is also known by the acronym SLUDGE. Other potential effects include a drop in blood pressure, sweating and death due to respiratory failure.

"Inocybe godeyi" can be found in Europe. It is found in deciduous woodland on the ground, particularly on chalky soil. The species is ectomycorrhizal, favouring beech. Mushrooms are encountered in the autumn months of August to November, solitarily or in "trooping groups". While the mushrooms can be locally common, the species is typically uncommon.



</doc>
<doc id="32456835" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32456835" title="Legal system of Saudi Arabia">
Legal system of Saudi Arabia

The legal system of Saudi Arabia is based on Sharia, Islamic law derived from the Qur'an and the Sunnah (the traditions) of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. The sources of Sharia also include Islamic scholarly consensus developed after Muhammad's death. Its interpretation by judges in Saudi Arabia is influenced by the 18th century Wahhabism. Uniquely in the Muslim world, Sharia has been adopted by Saudi Arabia in an uncodified form. This, and the lack of judicial precedent, has resulted in considerable uncertainty in the scope and content of the country's laws. The government therefore announced its intention to codify Sharia in 2010, and significant progress has been made with the publication, on January 3, 2018, of a sourcebook of legal principles and precedents. Sharia has also been supplemented by "regulations (Arabic: "anẓima,"" although translated by the Saudi Official Bureau of Translation as ""Laws")" issued by royal decree covering modern issues such as intellectual property and corporate law. Nevertheless, Sharia remains the primary source of law, especially in areas such as criminal, family, commercial and contract law, and the Qur'an and the Sunnah are declared to be the country's constitution. In the areas of land and energy law the extensive proprietorial rights of the Saudi state (in effect, the Saudi royal family) constitute a significant feature.

The current Saudi court system was created by King Abdul Aziz, who founded the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932, and was introduced to the country in stages between 1927 and 1960. It comprises general and summary Sharia courts, with some administrative tribunals to deal with disputes on specific modern regulations. Trials in Saudi Arabia are bench trials. Courts in Saudi Arabia observe few formalities and the country's first criminal procedure code, issued in 2001, has been largely ignored. King Abdullah, in 2007, introduced a number of significant judicial reforms, although they are yet to be fully implemented.

Criminal law punishments in Saudi Arabia include public beheading, hanging, stoning, amputation and lashing. Serious criminal offences include not only internationally recognized crimes such as murder, rape, theft and robbery, but also apostasy, adultery, witchcraft and sorcery. In addition to the regular police force, Saudi Arabia has a secret police, the "Mabahith", and "religious police", the "Mutawa". The latter enforces Islamic social and moral norms, but their powers have greatly been restricted over the last few years. Western-based human rights organizations, such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, have criticized the activities of both the Mabahith and the Mutawa, as well as a number of other aspects of human rights in Saudi Arabia. These include the number of executions, the range of offences which are subject to the death penalty, the lack of safeguards for the accused in the criminal justice system, the treatment of homosexuals, the use of torture, the lack of religious freedom, and the highly disadvantaged position of women. The Albert Shanker Institute and Freedom House have also reported that "Saudi Arabia's practices diverge from the concept of the rule of law."

Sharia (or Islamic law), the primary source of law in modern Saudi Arabia, was developed gradually by Muslim judges and scholars between the seventh and tenth centuries. From the time of the Abbasid caliphate in the 8th century, the developing Sharia was accepted as the basis of law in the towns of the Muslim world, including the Arabian peninsula, and upheld by local rulers, eclipsing "urf" (or pre-Islamic local customary law). In the rural areas, "urf" continued to be predominant for some time, and, for instance, was the main source of law among the bedouin of Nejd in central Arabia until the early 20th century.

By the 11th century, the Muslim world had developed four major Sunni schools of Islamic jurisprudence (or "fiqh"), each with its own interpretations of Sharia: Hanbali, Maliki, Shafi and Hanafi. In Arabia, a preference for the Hanbali school was advocated by the Wahhabi movement, founded in the 18th century. Wahhabism, a strict form of Sunni Islam, was supported by the Saudi royal family (the Al Saud) and is now dominant in Saudi Arabia. From the 18th century, the Hanbali school therefore predominated in Nejd and central Arabia, the heartland of Wahhabi Islam. In the more cosmopolitan Hejaz, in the west of the peninsula, both the Hanafi and Shafi schools were followed.

Similarly, different court systems existed. In Nejd, there was a simple system of single judges for each of the major towns. The judge was appointed by the local governor, with whom he worked closely to dispose of cases. In the Hejaz, there was a more sophisticated system, with courts comprising panels of judges. In 1925, Abdul Aziz Al Saud of Nejd conquered the Hejaz and united it with his existing territories to form the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932. In 1927, the king introduced a new court system to the Hejaz comprising general and summary courts and ordered that Hanbali fiqh should be used. However, Nejd's traditional system of judges was left in place in the face of conservative opposition from the Nejd religious establishment.

After becoming familiar with the Hejaz court system in the following decades, the religious establishment allowed its introduction to the rest of the country between 1957 and 1960. Additionally, from the 1930s, Abdul Aziz created government tribunals or "committees" to adjudicate in areas covered by royal decrees such as commercial or labor law. The system of Sharia courts and government tribunals created by Abdul Aziz largely remained in place until the 2007 judiciary reforms (see below). Until 1970, the judiciary was the responsibility of the Grand Mufti, the country's most senior religious authority. When the incumbent Grand Mufti died in 1969, however, the then king, Faisal decided not to appoint a successor and took the opportunity to transfer responsibility to the newly established Ministry of Justice.

The Shia community of the Eastern province have a separate legal tradition. Although they follow Sharia, they apply the Shia Jafari school of jurisprudence to it. In 1913, when Abdul Aziz conquered the area, he granted the Shias a separate judiciary for dealing with religious and family law cases: one judge in Qatif, and one in Al-Hasa. This remained the position, with the two judges ministering to a population of around two million, until 2005 when the number of judges was increased to seven. For all other areas of law, the Shia community are under the jurisdiction of the regular Sunni courts.

The primary source of law in Saudi Arabia is the Islamic Sharia. Sharia is derived from the Qur'an and the traditions of Muhammad contained in the Sunnah; "ijma", or scholarly consensus on the meaning of the Qur'an and the Sunnah developed after Muhammad's death; and "Qiyas", or analogical reasoning applied to the principles of the Qur'an, Sunnah and "ijma". The Wahhabi interpretation of Islam used in Saudi Arabia uses "qiyas" only in cases of "extreme necessity".

Muslim countries that retain or adopt Sharia usually determine which parts of the Sharia are enforceable and codify (and thereby modernize) them. Unlike other Muslim countries, Saudi Arabia regards uncodified Sharia in its entirety as the law of the land and does not interfere with it. It is, therefore, unique not only when compared to Western systems, but also in comparison to other Muslim countries, and according to one source is the closest system in the modern world to the form of Sharia adopted at the advent of Islam.

The lack of codification of Sharia leads to considerable variation in its interpretation and application. Furthermore, there is no system of judicial precedent,<ref name= "Otto161/2"></ref> as Wahhabism rejects the imitation of past scholarship ("taqlid") in favor of independent reasoning ("ijtihad").
However Saudi judges are expected to consult six medieval texts from the Hanbali school of jurisprudence before reaching a decision. The Hanbali school is noted for its literalist interpretation of the Qur'an and hadith. If the answer is not found in the six Hanbali texts, the judge may then consult the jurisprudence of the other three main Sunni schools or apply his independent judgment and legal reasoning, referred to as "ijtihad".

Nevertheless, because the judge is empowered to disregard previous judgments (either his own or of other judges) and can apply his personal interpretation of Sharia to any particular case through "ijtihad", divergent judgements arise even in apparently identical cases. There is a presumption against overturning a decision when it is based on "ijtihad". This principle is crucial in two respects. Firstly, it concentrates the substance of the law in the hands of judges as, in consequence, there is a presumption that only a judge exercising "ijtihad", rather than a king or a parliament, can determine God's law. Secondly, it renders a judge's decision practically immune to reversal on appeal. The role of "ijtihad" has led to calls for the Sharia to be codified to give clarity and remove uncertainty. As a result, in 2010, the Minister of Justice announced plans to implement a codification of Sharia law, although resistance from the religious establishment is reportedly delaying its implementation.

Royal decrees ("nizam") are the other main source of law but are referred to as "regulations" rather than "laws" to indicate that they are subordinate to the Sharia. Royal decrees supplement Sharia in areas such as labor, commercial and corporate law. Additionally, other forms of regulations ("lai'hah") include Royal Orders, Council of Ministers Resolutions, Ministerial Resolutions and, Ministerial Circulars, and are similarly subordinate to Sharia.
Any Western commercial laws or institutions are adapted and interpreted from the standpoint of Shariah law.

Additionally, traditional tribal law and custom remain significant. For example, judges will enforce tribal customs pertaining to marriage and divorce.

The Sharia court system constitutes the basic judiciary of Saudi Arabia and its judges and lawyers form part of the ulema, the country's religious leadership. There are also extra-Sharia government tribunals which handle disputes relating to specific royal decrees and since 2008, specialist courts, including the Board of Grievances and the Specialized Criminal Court. Final appeal from both Sharia courts and government tribunals is to the King and , all courts and tribunals followed Sharia rules of evidence and procedure.

The Sharia courts have general jurisdiction over most civil and criminal cases. At present, there are two types of courts of first instance: general courts and summary courts dealing with lesser cases. Cases are adjudicated by single judges, except criminal cases if the potential sentence is death, amputation or stoning when there is a panel of three judges. There are also two courts for the Shia minority in the Eastern Province dealing with family and religious matters. Appellate courts sit in Mecca and Riyadh and review decisions for compliance with Sharia.

There are also non-Sharia courts covering specialized areas of law, the most important of which is the Board of Grievances. This court was originally created to deal with complaints against the government, but also has jurisdiction over commercial and some criminal cases, such as bribery and forgery, and acts as a court of appeal for a number of non-Sharia government tribunals. These administrative tribunals, referred to as "committees", deal with specific issues regulated by royal decrees, such as labor and commercial law.

The judicial establishment, in the broadest sense, is composed of "qadis", who give binding judgements in specific court cases, and "muftis" and other members of the "ulema", who issue generalized but highly influential legal opinions ("fatwas"). The Grand Mufti is the most senior member of the judicial establishment as well as being the highest religious authority in the country; his opinions are highly influential among the Saudi judiciary. The judiciary proper (that is, the body of "qadis") is composed of about 700 judges, a relatively small number (according to critics) for a country of over 23 million.

"Qadis" generally have degrees in Sharia law from an Islamic university recognized by the Saudi government with, in many cases, a post-graduate qualification from the Institute of Higher Judiciary in Riyadh. The training received from such Sharia law degrees is entirely religious in character and is based on the Qur'an and centuries old religious treatises with no reference to, for example, modern commercial issues. Although most judges have been educated and appointed under the current system, some of the older judges received the traditional "qadi's" training of years of instruction by a religious mentor in a mosque.

The capabilities and reactionary nature of the judges have been criticized. The main complaint reportedly made by Saudis privately is that judges, who have wide discretion in interpreting the Sharia, have no knowledge, and are often contemptuous, of the modern world. Reported examples of judges' attitudes include rulings banning such things as the children’s game Pokémon, telephones that play recorded music, and sending flowers to hospital patients. Saudi judges come from a narrow recruitment pool. By one estimate, 80% of the 600+ Saudi judges and almost all senior judges come from Qasim, a province in the center of the country with less than 5% of Saudi's population, but known as the strict religious Wahhabi heartland of Saudi Arabia. Senior judges will only allow like-minded graduates of select religious institutes to join the judiciary and will remove judges that stray away from rigidly conservative judgments.

The Saudi system of justice has been criticized for being slow, arcane, lacking in some of the safeguards of justice and unable to deal with the modern world. In 2007, King Abdullah issued royal decrees with the aim of reforming the judiciary and creating a new court system. With the launch of labor courts on November 25, 2018, the reforms have been completed, including the creation of the Supreme Court and the transfer of the Board of Grievances' commercial and criminal jurisdictions to the general court system. The specialist first instance courts now comprise general, criminal, personal status, commercial and labor courts. The Sharia courts have therefore lost their general jurisdiction to hear all cases and the work load of the government's administrative tribunals have been transferred to the new courts. Another important change is the establishment of appeal courts for each province. It has been claimed that the reforms will establish a system for codifying Sharia and incorporating the principle of judicial precedent into court practice.
Significant progress has been made with the publication, on January 3, 2018, of a sourcebook of legal principles and precedents.
In 2008, the Specialized Criminal Court was created. The court tries suspected terrorists and human rights activists. On 26 June 2011, the court started trials of 85 people suspected of being involved in Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula and the 2003 Riyadh compound bombings, and in September 2011 another 41 al-Qaeda suspects appeared in the court. In the same year, the court held trial sessions of human rights activists, including Mohammed Saleh al-Bejadi, co-founder of the Saudi Civil and Political Rights Association (ACPRA) and Mubarak Zu'air, a lawyer for long-term prisoners, and a protester, Khaled al-Johani, who spoke to BBC Arabic Television at a protest in Riyadh. The court convicted 16 of the human rights activists to sentences of 5–30 years on 22 November 2011.

In 2009, the King made a number of significant changes to the judiciary's personnel at the most senior level by bringing in a younger generation. For example, as well as appointing a new Minister of Justice, a new chairman of the Supreme Judicial Council was appointed. The outgoing chairman was known to oppose the codification of Sharia. The king also appointed a new head of the Board of Grievances and Abdulrahman Al Kelya as the first chief justice of the new Supreme Court. As of January 2013 royal decree, the Supreme Judicial Council will be headed by the justice minister. The chief justice of the Supreme Court will also be a member.

The police department of the Saudi Ministry of the Interior is divided into three forces: the regular police, secret police and the religious police.

The Department of Public Safety is the official name of the regular police force and handles most day-to-day police activities. It is a highly centralized force and is usually headed by a member of the royal family. The "secret police", or "Mabahith", deals with domestic security and counter-intelligence. It runs the `Ulaysha Prison in Riyadh, where it holds its prisoners. The United Nations' Working Group on Arbitrary Detention has objected to arbitrary detention by the Mubahith at `Ulaysha.

The religious police, ("mutawa" is the name used for individual religious police, the "Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice" is the name of the police organization) enforce Islamic codes of behavior. Numbering about 20,000 men untrained in law enforcement, the mutawa ensure that there is strict separation of the sexes in public, that businesses close at prayer time, pressure women to wear traditional dress and, in some areas, prevent them from driving cars. Often accompanied by a police escort, the mutawa could order the detention and arrest of "violators". Criticism of the mutawa by Saudis has grown since 2002, when 15 schoolgirls died in a fire at their school in Mecca after the mutawa allegedly prevented male rescuers from entering because the girls were not veiled. On 13 April 2016, a new regulation issued by the Saudi cabinet stripped the "mutawa" of their authority for pursuit, capture, interrogation or detainment of suspects, instead requiring them to report suspected crimes to the regular police.

Saudi Arabia is an absolute monarchy, and has no legally binding written constitution. However, in 1992, the Basic Law of Saudi Arabia was adopted by royal decree. The Basic Law outlines the responsibilities and processes of the governing institutions but is insufficiently specific to be considered a constitution. It declares that the king must comply with Sharia (that is, Islamic law) and that the Quran and the Sunna (the traditions of Muhammad) are the country's constitution. Interpretation of the Quran and the Sunna remains necessary, and this is carried out by the ulema, the Saudi religious establishment.

The Basic Law further states:

Saudi Arabia uses the bench trial system. Its courts observe few formalities. The country's first criminal procedure code was introduced in 2001 and contains provisions borrowed from Egyptian and French law. Human Rights Watch, in a 2008 report, noted that judges were either ignorant of the criminal procedure code or were aware of it but routinely ignored the code.

Criminal law is governed by Sharia and comprises three categories: hudud (fixed Quranic punishments for specific crimes), Qisas ("eye-for-an-eye" retaliatory punishments), and Tazir, a general category. Hudud crimes are the most serious and include theft, robbery, blasphemy, apostasy, adultery, sodomy and fornication. Qisas crimes include murder or any crime involving bodily harm. Tazir represents most cases, many of which are defined by national regulations such as bribery, trafficking, and drug abuse. The most common punishment for a Tazir offence is lashing.

A conviction requires proof in one of three ways. The first is an uncoerced confession. Alternatively, the testimony of two male witnesses can convict (four in the case of adultery), unless it is a hudud crime, in which case a confession is also required. Women's evidence normally carries half the weight of men in Sharia courts, however in criminal trials women's testimony is not allowed at all. Testimony from non-Muslims or Muslims whose doctrines are considered unacceptable (for example, Shia) may be discounted. Lastly, an affirmation or denial by oath can be required. Giving an oath is taken particularly seriously in a religious society such as Saudi Arabia's, and a refusal to take an oath will be taken as an admission of guilt resulting in conviction.

The Saudi courts impose a number of severe physical punishments. The death penalty can be imposed for a wide range of offences including murder, rape, armed robbery, repeated drug use, apostasy, adultery, witchcraft and sorcery and can be carried out by beheading with a sword, stoning or firing squad, followed by crucifixion. The 345 reported executions between 2007 and 2010 were all carried out by public beheading. Two executions for "witchcraft and sorcery" were carried out in 2011. There were no reports of stoning between 2007 and 2010. Stoning has, however, occurred relatively recently and, for example, between 1981 and 1992 there were four cases of execution by stoning reported.

Although repeated theft can be punishable by amputation of the right hand and aggravated theft by the cross-amputation of a hand and a foot, only one instance of judicial amputation was reported between 2007 and 2010. Homosexual acts are punishable by flogging, imprisonment or death. Lashings are a common form of punishment and are often imposed for offences against religion and public morality such as drinking alcohol and neglect of prayer and fasting obligations.

Retaliatory punishments, or Qisas, are practised: for instance, an eye can be surgically removed at the insistence of a victim who lost his own eye. This occurred in a case reported in 2000. Families of someone unlawfully killed can choose between demanding the death penalty or granting clemency in return for a payment of diyya, or blood money, by the perpetrator. There has been a growing trend of exorbitant blood-money demands, for example a sum of $11 million was reported as being recently demanded. Saudi officials and religious figures have criticized this trend and said that the practise of diyya has become corrupted.

Laws relating to marriage, divorce, children and inheritance are not codified and fall within the general jurisdiction of the Sharia courts.

Polygamy is permitted for men but is limited to four wives at any one time. There is evidence that its practice has increased, particularly among the educated Hejazi elite, as a result of oil wealth. The government has promoted polygamy as part of a return to "Islamic values" program. In 2001, the Grand Mufti (the highest religious authority) issued a fatwa, or opinion, calling upon Saudi women to accept polygamy as part of the "Islamic package" and declaring that polygamy was necessary "to fight against...the growing epidemic of spinsterhood". There is no minimum age for marriage in Saudi Arabia and the Grand Mufti reportedly said in 2009 that girls of the age of 10 or 12 were marriageable.

Men have a unilateral right to divorce their wives (talaq) without needing any legal justification. The divorce is effective immediately. The husband's obligation is then to provide financial support for the divorced wife for a period of four months and ten days. A woman can only obtain a divorce with the consent of her husband or judicially if her husband has harmed her. In practice, it is very difficult for a Saudi woman to obtain a judicial divorce. The divorce rate is high, with 50% of marriages being dissolved. In the event of divorce, fathers have automatic custody of sons from the age of 7 and daughters from the age of 9. The right for men to marry up to four wives, combined with their ability to divorce a wife at any time without cause, can translate to unlimited polygamy. King Abdul Aziz, the founder of the country, reportedly admitted to marrying over two hundred women. However, his polygamy was considered extraordinary even by Saudi Arabian standards.

With regard to the law of inheritance, the Quran specifies that fixed portions of the deceased's estate must be left to the so-called "Quranic heirs". Generally, female heirs receive half the portion of male heirs. A Sunni Muslim can bequeath a maximum of a third of his property to non-Quranic heirs. The residue is divided between agnatic heirs.

Business and commerce are governed by Sharia, commercial jurisdiction rests with the Board of Grievances composed of Sharia-trained judges, but "Special Tribunals" tasked with "finding ways to 
circumnavigate the more restrictive aspects of Shariah Law" have been established.

For foreign investors, uncertainties around the content of commercial law, because of the Sharia aspect, constitutes a disincentive to invest in Saudi Arabia. As it is governed by Sharia, contract law is not codified. Within the general limitations of Sharia, it allows considerable freedom for the parties to agree contract terms. However, contracts involving speculation or the payment of interest are prohibited and are not enforceable. If a contract is breached, Saudi courts will only award compensation for proven direct damage. Claims for loss of profit or opportunity will not be allowed as these would constitute speculation, which is not permitted under Sharia.

As of at least 2003, the non-sharia "Special Tribunals" or "Special Committees" hear "most commercial law cases" ranging from "breach of contract suits to trade mark infringement and labour disputes." The Tribunals enforce "nizam" (decrees) issued by the King. Specific modern aspects of commercial law, for example, commercial paper and securities, intellectual property, and corporate law are governed by modern regulations, and specialist government tribunals deal with related disputes. The government recently revised its intellectual property laws to meet World Trade Organization standards, as part of its admission to the WTO in 2004. Because of a lack of resources, when the new patent law went into effect in 2004, the Saudi Patent office had only registered 90 patents since 1989, with a backlog of 9,000 applications. It is believed the backlog has now been reduced.

The Saudi government is also putting greater resources into combating unauthorized distribution of software, printed material, recordings and videos. However, illegally copied material is still widely available. Enforcement efforts have been supported by a fatwa, or religious ruling, that copyright infringement of software is forbidden under Islam. Saudi Arabia had been on the Special 301 Watchlist, the U.S.'s running log of countries considered to inadequately regulate or enforce intellectual property rights, but was removed in 2010.

Saudi law recognizes only corporate or partnership entities established under Sharia or the Saudi Company Law of 1982. A contract with any other type of company will be void and the persons who made the contract in the company's name will be personally liable for it. Under Sharia, corporations can take a number of forms, but the most common in Saudi Arabia is "Sharikat Modarabah" where some partners contribute assets and others contribute expertise. In addition, the Company Law (which is based on Egyptian company law) identifies eight permissible forms of corporate entity including joint ventures, and limited liability partnerships.

Employers have a number of obligations, including at least 21 days paid holiday after a year's employment and will be 30 days after five years of continuous service. Terminated employees must receive an "end-of-service" payment of a half a months' salary for each year employed going up to one month if employed for more than 5 years.

Most land in Saudi Arabia is owned by the government and only cultivated land and urban property are subject to individual ownership. All land titles must be registered, but there is no accurate information as to the extent of registration. Real estate could only be owned by Saudi citizens until 2000, when the property laws were amended to allow foreigners to own property in Saudi Arabia. Property investments by non-Saudis of more than 30 million Saudi riyals require approval of the Council of Ministers and foreigners remain prohibited from owning property in Medina and Mecca.

Saudi Arabia has three categories of land: developed land ("amir"), undeveloped land ("mawat"), and "protective zones" ("harim"). Developed land comprises the built environment of towns and villages and agriculturally developed land, and can be bought, sold and inherited by individuals. The undeveloped land comprises rough grazing, pasture and wilderness. Rough grazing and pasture is owned in common and everyone has equal rights to its use. The wilderness is owned by the state and may be open to everyone unless specific restrictions are imposed. "Harim" land is a protective buffer between the owned land and the undeveloped land, and is defined, in the case of a town, as the area that can be reached and returned from in a day for the purposes of collecting fuel and pasturing livestock.

Saudi law utilizes the "Waqf", which is a form of land ownership whereby a Muslim can transfer property to a foundation for long-term religious or charitable purposes. The property cannot then be alienated or transferred.

Saudi Arabia's vast oil reserves are owned by the Saudi government, in effect the Saudi royal family. Article 14 of the Basic Law states:

The Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral Resources is responsible for general strategy in the oil and gas sectors and for monitoring the state-owned oil company, Saudi Aramco. The oil, gas and refining industries in Saudi Arabia are controlled by law by Saudi Aramco, which has a near monopoly in these areas. It is the world's biggest oil producer, the Middle East's biggest company and is generally considered to be the most important energy company in the world. However, in 2003, the law was changed to allow foreign companies to look for Saudi Arabia's vast reserves of natural gas, believed to represent 4% of the world's reserves. This was the first time since the 1970s that foreign companies have been permitted to search for oil or gas.

Currently, the electricity industry is in the hands of the 75% state-owned Saudi Electric Company, but plans have been announced to privatize the industry.

Human rights issues and failings in the rule of law in Saudi Arabia have attracted strong criticism. These include criminal law punishments that are considered as cruel, as well as the position of women, religious discrimination, the lack of religious freedom and the activities of the Saudi Mutaween.

Between 1996 and 2000, Saudi Arabia acceded to four UN human rights conventions and, in 2004, the government approved the establishment of the National Society for Human Rights (NSHR), staffed by government employees, to monitor their implementation. To date, the activities of the NSHR have been limited and doubts remain over its neutrality and independence. Saudi Arabia was one of only eight countries that did not accept the UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights when it was launched in 1948. Now, only Saudi Arabia remains openly opposed to the declaration. In response to the continuing criticism of its human rights record, the Saudi government points to the special Islamic character of the country, and asserts that this justifies a different social and political order.

Because Sharia, as applied by Saudi courts, is uncodified and because judges are not bound by judicial precedent, the scope and content of the law is uncertain. A study published by the Albert Shanker Institute and Freedom House has criticized a number of aspects of the administration of justice in Saudi Arabia and concluded that the country's "practices diverge from the concept of the rule of law." The study goes on to assert that qadis (judges) reach decisions without following due process and "only the bravest of lawyers ... challenge decisions of the qadis; usually appeals to the king are based on mercy, not on justice or innocence." It also claimed that members of the Saudi royal family are not forced to appear before Saudi courts.

As in many countries, those with influence may receive favorable treatment before the law. According to a former managing editor at "Arab News", the ruling House of Saud is so unwilling "to let one of their own face the consequences of his criminal activity" that on the rare occasions that they are arrested for a crime, the perpetrating prince is pardoned (Prince Fahd bin Naif, who was 19, gunned down Mundir al-Qadi in 2002) or released, and further media mention of the incident forbidden by the Ministry of Culture and Information (four princes that participated in the disruption of a 2002 Eid al-Fitr gathering on the corniche of Jeddah)

On the other hand, blue collar foreign workers have sometimes been unable to collect salaries due even when the Saudi Labor Office has ruled in their favor, since employers can stall payment until the worker' work permits have expired.

The U.S. State department considers that “discrimination against women is a significant problem” in Saudi Arabia and that women have few political or social rights. After her 2008 visit, the UN special rapporteur on violence against women noted the lack of women's autonomy and the absence of a law criminalizing violence against women. The World Economic Forum 2012 Global Gender Gap Report ranked Saudi Arabia 131st out of 135 countries for gender parity, ahead of Syria, Chad, Pakistan and Yemen.

Every adult woman has to have a close male relative as her "guardian". As a result, Human Rights Watch has described the position of Saudi women as no different from being a minor, with little authority over their own lives. The guardian is entitled to make a number of critical decisions on a woman's behalf. These include giving approval for the woman to travel, to hold some types of business licenses, to study at a university or college and to work if the type of business is not "deemed appropriate for a woman." Even where a guardian’s approval is not legally required, some officials will still ask for it. Women also face discrimination in the courts, where the testimony of one man equals that of two women, and in family and inheritance law (see above).

The religious police "mutawa" impose restrictions on women when in public. These restrictions include requiring women to sit in separate specially designated family sections in restaurants, to wear an abaya (a loose-fitting, full-length black cloak covering the entire body) and to conceal their hair. Women also risk arrest for riding in a vehicle driven by a male who is not an employee or a close male relative. Although there is no written ban on women driving cars, a Saudi driving license is required by law and these are not issued to women. Thus, it is effectively illegal for women to drive, and the ban is enforced by the "mutawa". In 2013, Saudi Arabia registered its first female trainee lawyer, Arwa al-Hujaili.

No political parties or national elections are permitted in Saudi Arabia and according to "The Economist's" 2010 Democracy Index, the Saudi government is the seventh most authoritarian regime from among the 167 countries rated. There is no legal protection of freedom of speech and Saudis are prohibited from publicly criticizing the government, Islam, or the royal family. The Saudi press is strictly censored and articles on Saudi dissidents are banned. Saudi censorship is considered among the most restrictive in the world and the country blocks broad swathes of the Internet. After protests occurred in early 2011, the government banned all public demonstrations and marches.

Western-based organisations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have condemned both the Saudi criminal justice system and its severe punishments. However, most Saudis reportedly support the system and say that it maintains a low crime rate.

Human Rights Watch, in their 2008 report on Saudi Arabian criminal justice system, noted that the criminal procedure code introduced in 2002 lacked some basic protections but, as mentioned above, had been ignored by judges in any case. Those arrested are often not informed of the crime of which they are accused or given access to a lawyer and are subject to abusive treatment and torture if they do not confess. At trial, there is a presumption of guilt and the accused is often unable to examine witnesses and evidence or present a legal defense. Most trials are held in secret, that is, without the public or press. The physical punishments imposed by Saudi courts, such as beheading, stoning, amputation and lashing, and the number of executions have also been strongly criticized.

Saudi Arabia has been condemned by various international organizations for its discriminatory legal system towards the guilty. In June 2017, Saudi officials were accused of illegally transferring a Saudi student studying in the US, who was accused of killing a teenager in Oregon. The accused faced first-degree manslaughter - with a minimum sentence of 10 years - as well as hit-and-run, reckless endangerment and reckless driving charges in the US. As per a report by BBC, Saudi authorities helped him obtain an illegal passport and fled him out of the States in a private plane. In June 2018, Saudi officials informed the US that the student was in the kingdom from the past one year.

Saudi Arabia has made bail for its nationals on several previous occasions as well, including for a man accused of rape in Utah in 2015, who also fled, and in 2013 for a Missouri resident, who was accused but later acquitted of murdering a person.

In 2010, the U.S. State Department stated that in Saudi Arabia "freedom of religion is neither recognized nor protected under the law and is severely restricted in practice" and that "government policies continued to place severe restrictions on religious freedom". No faith other than Islam is permitted to be practised, although there are nearly a million Christians, nearly all foreign workers, in Saudi Arabia. There are no churches or other non-Muslim houses of worship permitted in the country. Even private prayer services are forbidden in practice and the Saudi religious police reportedly regularly search the homes of Christians. Foreign workers must observe Ramadan and are not allowed to celebrate Christmas or Easter. Conversion by Muslims to another religion (apostasy) carries the death penalty, although there have been no confirmed reports of executions for apostasy in recent years. Proselytizing by non-Muslims is illegal, and the last Christian priest was expelled from Saudi Arabia in 1985. Compensation in court cases discriminates against non-Muslims: once fault is determined, a Muslim receives all of the amount of compensation determined, a Jew or Christian half, and all others a sixteenth.

According to Human Rights Watch, the Shia minority face systematic discrimination from the Saudi government in education, the justice system and especially religious freedom. Restrictions are imposed on the public celebration of Shia festivals such as Ashura and on the Shia taking part in communal public worship.

In March 2014, the Saudi interior ministry issued a royal decree branding all atheists as terrorists, which defines terrorism as "calling for atheist thought in any form, or calling into question the fundamentals of the Islamic religion on which this country is based".

Saudi Arabia is one of the few countries in the world where homosexual acts are not only illegal but punishable by execution. There have also been raids on "gay parties" and men have been arrested for "behaving like women". The usual penalties inflicted have been limited to flogging and imprisonment.


</doc>
<doc id="32487657" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32487657" title="German cruiser Lützow (1939)">
German cruiser Lützow (1939)

Lützow was a heavy cruiser of Nazi Germany's "Kriegsmarine", the fifth and final member of the , but was never completed. The ship was laid down in August 1937 and launched in July 1939, after which the Soviet Union requested to purchase the ship. The "Kriegsmarine" agreed to the sale in February 1940, and the transfer was completed on 15 April. The vessel was still incomplete when sold to the Soviet Union, with only half of her main battery of eight guns installed and much of the superstructure missing.

Renamed "Petropavlovsk" in September 1940, work on the ship was delayed by poor German-Soviet co-operation in crew training and provision of technical literature to enable completion of the ship, which was being carried out in the Leningrad shipyards. Still unfinished when Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, the ship briefly took part in the defense of Leningrad by providing artillery support to the Soviet defenders. She was heavily damaged by German artillery in September 1941, sunk in April 1942, and raised in September 1942. After repairs were effected, the ship was renamed "Tallinn" and used in the Soviet counter-offensive that relieved Leningrad in 1944. After the end of the war, the ship was used as a stationary training platform and as a floating barracks before being broken up for scrap sometime between 1953 and 1960.

The of heavy cruisers was ordered in the context of German naval rearmament after the Nazi Party came to power in 1933 and repudiated the disarmament clauses of the Treaty of Versailles. In 1935, Germany signed the Anglo–German Naval Agreement with Great Britain, which provided a legal basis for German naval rearmament; the treaty specified that Germany would be able to build five "treaty cruisers". The "Admiral Hipper"s were nominally within the 10,000-ton limit, though they significantly exceeded the figure.

"Lützow" was long overall and had a beam of and a maximum draft of . The ship had a design displacement of and a full load displacement of . "Lützow" was powered by three sets of geared steam turbines, which were supplied with steam by twelve ultra-high pressure oil-fired boilers. The ship's top speed was , at . As designed, her standard complement consisted of 42 officers and 1,340 enlisted men.

"Lützow"s primary armament was eight SK L/60 guns mounted in four twin gun turrets, placed in superfiring pairs forward and aft. Her anti-aircraft battery was to have consisted of twelve L/65 guns, twelve guns, and eight guns. The ship also would have carried a pair of triple torpedo launchers abreast of the rear superstructure. The ship was to have been equipped with three Arado Ar 196 seaplanes and one catapult. "Lützow"s armored belt was thick; her upper deck was thick while the main armored deck was thick. The main battery turrets had thick faces and 70 mm thick sides.

"Lützow" was ordered by the "Kriegsmarine" from the Deschimag shipyard in Bremen. "Lützow" was originally designed as a light cruiser version of the "Admiral Hipper"-class heavy cruisers, armed with twelve guns instead of the "Admiral Hipper"s eight guns. The "Kriegsmarine" decided, however, to complete the ship identically to "Admiral Hipper" on 14 November 1936. Her keel was laid on 2 August 1937, under construction number 941. The ship was launched on 1 July 1939, but was not completed.

In October 1939, the Soviet Union approached Germany with a request to purchase the then unfinished "Admiral Hipper"-class cruisers "Lützow", , and , along with plans for German capital ships, naval artillery, and other naval technology. The "Kriegsmarine" denied the request for "Seydlitz" and "Prinz Eugen", but agreed to sell "Lützow", as well as gun turrets and other weaponry. The price for the heavy cruiser was set at 150 million Reichsmarks, nearly double the original cost of the vessel, which was 83,590,000 Reichsmarks. Complete technical specifications, the results of engine trials, and spare parts were included in the sale. Eighty percent of the material was to be provided within twelve months of the transfer, with the remainder to be provided within fifteen months. "Lützow" was renamed "L", her original contract name, for the transfer to the Soviet Union.

In February 1940, when the agreement was concluded, "Lützow" was fitting-out in Bremen. Her main battery guns had been transferred to the German army and placed on railway mountings; they had to be dismantled and returned to Bremen. The ship was then towed to Leningrad on 15 April by a private German towing company. The two navies agreed that Germany would be responsible for naval escort, which included destroyers and smaller vessels. Rear Admiral Otto Feige was placed in command of the operation. Feige then led an advisory commission assigned to assist the Soviet effort to complete the ship.

At the time the ship arrived in Leningrad, only the two forward gun turrets had been installed and the bridge superstructure was incomplete. The only secondary guns installed were the 3.7 cm anti-aircraft guns. The Soviet Navy renamed the ship "Petropavlovsk" on 25 September 1940, and designated the construction effort to complete the ship "Projekt 83". The vessel's design provided the basis for a planned heavy cruiser, designated "Projekt 82", although this ship was canceled before work began. Training for the Soviet crew of the ship proved to be contentious; the Soviets wanted their personnel trained in Germany, while the Germans preferred sending instructors to the Soviet Union. Language barriers and inexperience with international training missions also hampered the training effort.

Sea trials for "Petropavlovsk" were scheduled to begin sometime in late 1941, and according to the training program, the Soviet crew would not begin training until a month before the trials. It was decided that Soviet officers would train at German naval schools in the Fall of 1941, and that five officers would train aboard "Seydlitz" when the ship was commissioned for trials. German instructors would also be sent to Leningrad to train engine-room personnel. At the time of the commissioning of "Petropavlovsk", the relevant German training and technical manuals would be sent to the Soviet Navy, albeit in German only.

By the time Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, "Petropavlovsk" was still incomplete. She was nevertheless used as a floating battery in the defense of Leningrad in August of that year. Several other ships, including the cruiser , joined "Petropavlovsk" in shelling the advancing Germans. On 7 September, the ship fired on German forces encircling the city; she fired forty salvos from her forward main battery turrets—the only two operational—expending some 700 rounds of ammunition during the attack. On 17 September 1941, the ship was disabled by German heavy artillery; after being hit 53 times, the ship was forced to beach herself to avoid sinking.

On 4 April 1942, the "I Fliegerkorps" launched a major attack on the Soviet naval forces in Leningrad: 62 Ju 87s, 33 Ju 88s, and 37 He 111s struck the ships in the harbor. "Petropavlovsk" was hit once (credited by Hans-Ulrich Rudel), suffering serious damage, and sunk. The Soviet Navy raised the ship on 17 September 1942 and towed her to the Neva where she was repaired. Renamed "Tallinn" in 1943, the ship returned to service to support the Soviet counter-offensive to relieve the Siege of Leningrad in 1944. The ship was never completed, and was used as a stationary training ship after the end of the war. She was later used as a floating barracks in the Neva, and renamed "Dniepr" in 1953. The date of her disposal is uncertain; Erich Gröner reports the ship survived until being broken up for scrap in 1960, while "Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships" states that the vessel was scrapped in 1958–1959. Tobias Philbin reports that the ship was broken up in 1953.

Notes

Citations



</doc>
<doc id="32511516" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32511516" title="This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like">
This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like

"This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" is the debut single of American industrial singer-songwriter Porcelain Black, featuring American rapper Lil Wayne. This song serves as the lead single from the singer's debut studio album, "Mannequin Factory". Produced by Moroccan-Swedish producer RedOne, who had originally discovered Black, "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" is influenced by the genre of rock, lyrically stating how the listener should be proud of who they are. The song was released digitally in the United States on March 29, 2011, and managed to chart at number forty-four on the US "Billboard" Hot Dance Club Songs.

A music video for "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like", shot and directed by Sanaa Hamri, was released on March 27, 2011. The music video pays homage to Porcelain Black's high school experiences, where she was constantly teased by "snobby rich kids", but never gave in to the pressure of her peers around her. The video serves as a form of revenge for Porcelain Black against high school tormentors. "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" garnered mixed reviews from critics, most of whom were shocked by Porcelain Black's image and sounds but favored her apparent perception of herself as the "offspring" of fellow musicians Britney Spears and Marilyn Manson and their individual styles. Porcelain Black performed the song on the "Late Show with David Letterman", marking her debut televised appearance.

The song was featured in an episode of "Beavis and Butthead" and in the 2013 film "The Smurfs 2".

"This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" was written by Porcelain Black, Lil Wayne, RedOne, Bilal Hajji, with RedOne providing the song's production. In the song's writing credits, Porcelain Black and Lil Wayne are credited under their real names, Alaina Beaton and Dwayne Carter, Jr. respectively. After being introduced to Lil Wayne's manager, Derrick "EI" Lawrence, by producer RedOne, Porcelain Black stated that she met Lil Wayne in New York City when he heard "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like", where he expressed an interest in adding his vocals to the song. The single cover for "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" was revealed on March 21, 2011, alongside a snippet of the song.

"This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" was released digitally through the United States iTunes Store on March 29, 2011. Following the release of Porcelain Black's second single, "Naughty Naughty," Dutch DJ, remixer and house music producer R3hab produced a remix of "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like," making it available for free download through SoundCloud on January 24, 2012. R3hab went on to compliment Porcelain Black's original song, stating, "The original vibe is crazy, and I am a big fan of Lil Wayne. This track makes you wanna rage like the lyrics say! I see [the remix] as a rollercoaster ride. Breaks slow it down. Then there is a climb, and the big drop!" Porcelain Black complimented R3hab's remix in an interview with MTV News: "I wish[ed] his remixes were the official singles because they really pop off next level. I love all the spooky horror pop synths he throws in the mixes, and the breakdowns make me wanna throw back shots of whiskey and hair whip. If I could have sex with a song I'd def be tappin’ dat remix!"

Described as "in-your-face", "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" is influenced by the genres of rock, dance-pop, and power pop, while containing "roaring" guitars and lyrics which aim to remind listeners to be proud of who they are. Vocally, Porcelain Black sings as if straining through "a maze of razorblades," according to Steven J. Horowitz of "YRB Magazine". The RedOne-produced track employs a beat that is reminiscent of his work with Lady Gaga. Porcelain Black screams in the chorus "Hey hey hey if you're ready to rage / Raise your hands up, this what rock and roll looks like / Yeah yeah yeah, wearing leather and lace / Raise your hands up, this what rock and roll looks like." While being interviewed by the "Los Angeles Times", Porcelain Black discussed in depth about the genre mix in "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like":

Although the song's title references the physical appearance of what rock and roll looks like, Porcelain Black revealed in an interview with AOL's "NoiceCreep" that rock and roll is not dependent on the physical appearance of someone. She stated:

"This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" received generally mixed reviews by critics, most of whom were surprised with Porcelain Black's outgoing persona and the pop production by RedOne. Gerrick D. Kennedy of "Los Angeles Times" complimented the song's production by stating that it could have been used by Lady Gaga. Ian Drew of "Us Weekly" called the single "shocking" and "electric". Allison Stewart of "The Washington Post" gave "This Is What Rock ‘n’ Roll Looks Like” a mixed review, describing Porcelain Black as a "girl-fronted version of Mötley Crüe circa Dr. Feelgood". Jon Wiederhorn of "Inked" dubbed the song "a euphoric digital feast of raspy melodic vocals, four-to-the-floor beats, and keyboards that buzz like electric guitars."

"This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" debuted on the U.S. "Billboard" Hot Dance Club Songs at number forty-six, on the week ending July 18, 2011. The following week, the song went up two spots, peaking at number forty-four. The following two weeks, "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" remained stationary at number forty-four on the weeks ending August 1, 2011 and August 8, 2011, respectively.

 A music video for "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" was shot and directed by Sanaa Hamri at Citrus College in Glendora, California. Porcelain Black discussed the idea behind the music video for "This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" with AOL's Carlos Ramirez, stating it was based on real life experiences. After Porcelain Black's mother had re-married, she was forced to move to Rochester, Michigan, which Porcelain Black described as "a really rich area". Attending high school, Porcelain Black was surrounded by "snotty rich kids" who would tease her saying "You're a fucking freak, what's your problem?", to which Porcelain Black would reply "You're boring and fake, get away from me." Reviewing her past, Porcelain Black realized it would make for a good music video. A behind the scenes look at shooting the music video was released on May 12, 2011.

In an interview with AOL Music's Contessa Gayles, Porcelain Black discussed the concept of the video as revenge. She stated:
It was about getting revenge. People were always hating on me, because I was different. I was like, "I'm going to sing, I'm going to do this, I'm going to do that," they were like "OK, sure you are." And I was like "No, I'm serious. This is what I'm going to do." And everybody was like, "Yeah right." Even when I told everyone I was moving to LA to do music and had a going away party, only one person showed up, because no one believed that I was really going away. They were like, "You'll be back." So it was kind of just like my revenge, and just a statement, like throwing it back in their face.
The music video debuted on March 27, 2011. The music video begins with a young Porcelain Black being teased by a group of blonde girls, who resemble "The Plastics" in "Mean Girls" (2004). As Porcelain Black is being teased, a young version of Lil Wayne comes to the defense of Porcelain Black, scaring away the group of blonde girls. The video then fast forwards nine years where Black, accompanied by her own entourage, walks past a group of snobby girls, giving them the middle-finger as she walks away leaving them in shock. As the video continues, Black gets revenge on her high school enemies by tearing up the school's library and cafeteria. During Lil Wayne's verse, the two are seen raging in the school's gym. Rapper Birdman makes a cameo appearance in this scene.

Porcelain Black performed the song as the opening act for Lil Wayne on the "I Am Music II" tour. Porcelain Black made her first ever television appearance on the "Late Show with David Letterman" on Thursday, July 21, 2011. Porcelain Black wore a leather, leotard-like bustiere number, complete with mesh, fringe and metallic studs as she whipped her black-and-blonde hair around, while prancing across the stage with her gothic dancers. While making her debut televised performance, Lil Wayne did not appear alongside Porcelain Black. In an interview with AOL's "NoiseCreep", Porcelain Black described her first televised appearance as "intense, amazing, surreal", revealing that prior to the performance she was very nervous stating "Oh my god! I'm about to give birth to a panic attack!" Becky Bain of Idolator compared Black's styling to that of Lady Gaga's. Contessa Gayles of "AOL" described Porcelain Black's choreography as "racy," later complimenting Porcelain Black on her "two-toned, Cruella De Vil-inspired coiffure." Porcelain Black walked down the runway in a camouflage corset designed by Falguni and Shane Peacock at the 2012 Spring Fashion Week, as her song played in the background. Her appearance there was used to promote the single.

"This Is What Rock n' Roll Looks Like" appeared in the tenth episode of the eighth season of Beavis and Butthead. Expecting the duo to comment on the disparity between the song's title and its genre, R.L. Shaffer of "IGN" noticed that no such comparison was made; instead, the classroom setting was criticized while the presence of Lil Wayne was appreciated. The song was also used in the 2013 film, "The Smurfs 2".



</doc>
<doc id="32565903" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32565903" title="Cheers (Drink to That)">
Cheers (Drink to That)

"Cheers (Drink to That)" is a song recorded by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna, from her fifth studio album, "Loud" (2010). The song impacted US mainstream and rhythmic radio on August 2, 2011, as the seventh and final single released from "Loud". The song was written by Andrew Harr, Jermaine Jackson, Stacy Barthe, LP, Corey Gibson, Chris Ivery, Lauren Christy, Graham Edwards, Avril Lavigne and Scott Spock, while production of the song was completed by Harr and Jackson under their stage name, The Runners. The song also contains samples from Lavigne's song "I'm with You," which is featured on her debut album "Let Go" (2002). Lyrically, "Cheers (Drink to That)" is a party-drinking song, with multiple references to drinking alcohol, including Jameson Irish Whiskey.

The song has received positive reviews from music critics, who praised the interpolation of Lavigne's "I'm with You" and also commented that it would be a successful club song due to its lyrical content. "Cheers (Drink to That)" peaked inside the top ten in New Zealand and Australia, and charted at numbers 5 and 6, respectively. The song also peaked at number 7 on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart, becoming the singer's nineteenth top ten song on the chart. The music video for the song, directed by Evan Rogers and Ciara Pardo, shows footage of Rihanna on tour and different activities during her homecoming trip to Barbados. "Cheers (Drink to That)" was included on the set list of the Loud Tour (2011).

Rihanna first announced that "Cheers (Drink to That)" would be the next single to be released from "Loud" via her official Twitter account, when she tweeted to celebrity internet blogger Perez Hilton that his "favourite song" from the album would become the next single. The song was sent to mainstream and rhythmic radio in the United States on August 2, 2011. "Cheers (Drink to That)" was written by hip hop production duo Andrew Harr and Jermaine Jackson, Stacey Barthe, Laura Pergolizzi, Corey Gibson, Chris Ivery, Lauren Christy, Graham Edwards, Avril Lavigne and Scott Spock, and the main vocal track(s) were produced by Makeba Riddick, while its instrumental & backing vocal track(s) was produced by Harr and Jackson under their stage name, The Runners.

In an interview with MTV News in late 2010, Rihanna spoke of how "Cheers (Drink to That)" was one of her favorite songs on the album, saying "I love that song ['Cheers']. That is one of my favorite songs on the album. It makes you feel like celebrating ... It gives you a great feeling inside, like you want to go out and have a drink ... People can't wait for the weekend." Also in an interview with MTV News in late 2010, Avril Lavigne spoke about being included on the song, saying, "It was really exciting because 'I'm With You' is one of my favorite songs that I've done, I always love performing it."

"Cheers (Drink to That)" is a pop rock and reggaeton song. It contains samples of Lavigne's song "I'm with You", which is featured on her album "Let Go" (2002). According to the digital music sheet published at musicnotes.com, the song is written in the key of E major and is set in simple time with a moderated hip-hop groove. Rihanna's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of E to the high note of B. Lyrically, "Cheers (Drink to That)" is a party-drinking song, which is exemplified by the verse "Life's too short to be sittin' around miserable/ People are gonna talk whether you're doin' bad or good/ Don't let the bastards get you down/ Turn it around with another round." According to Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork, the lyrics sum up the general sentiment of "Loud" and there's no tabloid back story, as it was in most cases on her previous release "Rated R" (2009).

Upon its release as a single, "Cheers (Drink to That)" received positive reviews from music critics. Mark Savage of BBC Music described the song as "a funky, loping guitar groove for to a night out on the town," which Rihanna dedicated to "all the semi-alcoholics in the world." Robert Copsey of Digital Spy praised the use of the interpolation of Lavigne's song, calling it "unbelievably catchy", as well as commenting that it will be a success in bars and clubs, due to the references of alcohol and going out of a weekend in the lyrics. Jon Pareles of "The New York Times" commented that "Cheers (Drink to That)" is written for "barroom singalongs." According to Leah Greenblatt from "Entertainment Weekly", "the Jameson-swilling, TGIF-toasting 'Cheers (Drink to That),' folds a left-field Avril Lavigne sample into a crunked party anthem."

Amy Sciarretto of PopCrush also commended "Cheers (Drink to That)" and its musical style, saying "The song is infused with the tropical, island groove that she has explored on 'Loud' and which harks back to her upbringing in Barbados." Sciarretto also noted that "Cheers (Drink to That)" would be very popular in bars and clubs because of the lyrical content. Andy Gill of "The Independent" called the song an anthem with which the weekend can start. Thomas Conner of the "Chicago Sun-Times" said that "Cheers (Drink to That)" is the best song on the album, saying "[the song is] a wise, world-weary paean from a gal at the bar who's seen some stuff, has moved on and wants to buy everybody a round of fruity shots." However, Chris Richards of "The Washington Post" stated that "Cheers (Drink to That)" did not meet his expectations and commented that the song is a lowlight in Rihanna's career, stating "'Turn it around with another round,' Rihanna bellows over the mid slog, as if setting ad copy to music."

In the issue dated August 3, 2011, "Cheers (Drink to That)" debuted on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart at number 91, and leaped to a new peak of 50 on August 10, 2011. The following week, the song rose to number 25 and by its fourth week, "Cheers (Drink to That)" rose again to number 17, giving Rihanna her twenty-second top-twenty single on the chart. In its fifth week, the song rose to number 11, where it remained in its sixth week. On its seven-week, the song charted at number 10, its current peak. "Cheers" (Drink To That) also debuted on the US Pop Songs chart at number 35 in the issue dated August 3, 2011. The following week, the song climbed ten positions to a new peak of 25, and became that week's "Greatest Gainer" on the chart and Rihanna's 26th song to reach the top 40. In its third week, the song reached a new peak of 16, and rose to number 11 the following week, where it remained for another week. The song has peaked at number seven, making "Cheers (Drink to That)" the singers fourth top ten Hot 100 hit from "Loud" and nineteenth overall top ten song in the US. On December 13, 2011, "S&M" was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), denoting shipments of over two million copies. "Cheers (Drink to That)" ranked at number 77 on "Billboard" magazine's Hot 100 songs of 2011. In Canada, the song debuted at number 89 on August 17, 2011, and advanced to 37 the following week, ultimately peaking at number 6 in its third week on the charts.

In Australia, the song debuted at number 46 on the Australian Singles Chart on August 14, 2011, and peaked at number eighteen the following week. In its seventh week on the chart, the song reached a new peak of number 6. The song has been certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association, denoting shipments of over 35,000 units. In New Zealand, the song debuted at number fourteen on the New Zealand Singles Chart on August 8, 2011 and reached a peak of number 5 the following week, however it fell to number 8 in its third week. In the United Kingdom, the song also debuted inside the top 40 of the UK R&B Chart at number 38 on August 27, 2011, after having charted at number 47 the week before. The following week, the song rose to number twenty-one, sitting one position lower than Rihanna's previous single, "California King Bed." In its sixth week, the song climbed to number 4. The song has so far peaked at number fifteen on the UK Singles Chart. In Ireland, the song debuted at number 30 on the Irish Singles Chart on September 8, 2011, and has peaked at number sixteen. In France, the song debuted at number eighty-eight on September 3, 2011, rose to eighty-two the following week and peaked at 67 in its subsequent week.

During the Loud Tour concert in Kensington Oval, Barbados, on August 5, 2011, Rihanna announced that a taping of "Cheers (Drink to That)" had been recorded during the show for the song's music video. It was later announced that the video would be expected to feature footage of her homecoming, as well as clips of her performing during the North American leg of the tour. Via Rihanna's official Twitter account, she replied to a fan's tweet, announcing that the video would premiere on August 24, 2011, on iTunes. However, it was later announced that the video would premiere the following day on August 25, 2011. The video premiered officially via iTunes and Vevo on August 26, 2011. A 15-second teaser video was released the day before it officially premiered, and featured Rihanna applying make-up before taking to the stage, as well as fans screaming her name while fireworks were launched into the night sky. The video was directed and edited by New York based director Evan Rogers and Ciara Pardo.

The video begins with Rihanna's fans screaming and cheering her name before a concert is about to start, while Rihanna is shown walking to her dressing room, preparing to perform by doing her make-up and changing outfits. As a firework explodes in the sky, scenes of Rihanna driving through her hometown and having a drink at the bar are intercut. As the song starts to play, Rihanna is seen in a variety of different outfits from various parts of the concert, whilst also showing clips of the audience dancing and singing. Rihanna is also seen holding a handheld camera, which she uses to film herself and other people, as well as goings-on backstage. Avril Lavigne, who makes a cameo appearance in the video, is seen raising her glass to the camera before being pushed fully clothed into a swimming pool while on a skateboard. Jay-Z, Kanye West and CeeLo Green are also featured in the various clips of the video, as the former two were special guests at Rihanna's tour on certain dates, while the latter was an opening act on selected dates during the North American leg of the tour. Shots of Rihanna flying on a private jet, avoiding paparazzi and participating in the Barbados Kadooment Day are also intercut throughout the video. Other scenes include her taking pictures together with her mother and grandmother, swimming, relaxing, partying with her brother, and spending time with her friends and family. The video ends with Rihanna on a boat shouting "Rihanna Navy!", referring to her fan group.

Upon its release, the video received general acclaim from critics. Iona Kirby of "Daily Mail" praised the documentary-style video, which gives fans an opportunity to see the life of Rihanna and insight into what she likes to do. A reviewer from "Rap-Up" praised the video, commenting that it is a "real blast in a glass!" According to PopDash's Giovanna Falcone, the video shows "Rihanna goofing around with friends and family, on stage and loving life, you can't help but smile throughout." Robbie Daw of Idolator commented that the music video looks "like one big, drunken night out." A reviewer from "Rolling Stone" magazine also commented that the video "finds Rihanna in an appropriately celebratory mood... it's mostly a lot of shots of her partying backstage with friends and celebrities." Sarah Maloy of "Billboard" magazine commented "there are no special effects, storylines – and no chance of lawsuits," referring to one of Rihanna's previous music videos, "S&M", which was faced with two lawsuits. Maloy also noted that the video presents Rihanna's ordinary life just as it is.

A reviewer of "OK!" commented that "Rihanna gets buddy Avril Lavigne on board in the video for the track 'which will be our anthem for the Bank Holiday weekend." Brad Wete of "Entertainment Weekly" simply commented that "It's party time, folks! And that's exactly what the video makes apparent." With regard to the cameo appearance of several celebrities and Rihanna's colleagues, Leah Collins of "The Vancouver Sun" stated "Rihanna shows that she has more celebrity friends than hairstyles (which is saying something considering she manages to change her weave approximately every 5 seconds in the clip)." According to William Goodman from "Spin" magazine "Barbadian pop queen Rihanna leads a charmed life. But at heart, she's just a hometown party girl, and her new video for 'Cheers (Drink to That)' proves it." In reference to raising glasses in the video, Rebeca Ford from "The Hollywood Reporter" commented "the singer can also be seen raising a [glass] to her audience, probably thanking them for their support with her own personal 'cheers.'"

"Cheers (Drink to That)" was included on the set list of the Loud Tour (2011). Rihanna also performed the song at V Festival in the United Kingdom on August 20 and 21, 2011.

Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Loud".



</doc>
<doc id="32580207" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32580207" title="Love On Top">
Love On Top

"Love on Top" is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé for her fourth studio album "4" (2011). Inspired from her state of mind while playing Etta James in the 2008 musical biopic "Cadillac Records", Beyoncé wrote the song alongside Terius Nash and Shea Taylor; its production was handled by Taylor and Beyoncé. A throw-back to 1980s music, the uptempo R&B song exhibits style similar to that of Stevie Wonder, Whitney Houston and The Jackson 5, among others. While incorporating four key changes, Beyoncé adopts a high range when repeating the song's chorus towards the end of the song. She sings about a person whom she can always call, even after facing grief and hard work, finally earning their love and respect.

The song's musical composition, as well as Beyoncé's vocals and versatility, positively surprised critics. Beyoncé sang "Love on Top" live at 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, announcing her pregnancy at the end of her performance. This caused the upsurge of the song on several charts worldwide. It reached the top ten in Hungary and South Korea, and the top twenty in Australia, Italy, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. It also debuted and peaked at number 20 on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and became the second highest debut of Beyoncé's career as a solo artist. "Love on Top" remained at number one on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for seven consecutive weeks, and has sold over one million copies. At the 55th Grammy Awards, Beyoncé won her 17th Grammy Award with Best Traditional R&B Performance for "Love on Top".

Mainly inspired by the work of the American band New Edition, the accompanying music video for "Love on Top" shows Beyoncé along with five male dancers, performing choreographed moves in a penthouse studio in New York City overlooking the Hudson River towards New Jersey. Critics generally commended the simplicity of the video, the wardrobe changes with every key change, and Beyoncé's youthful exuberance throughout the clip. The song was part of the singer's set lists on the residency shows 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé (2011) and (2012), as well as The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour (2013–14) and The Formation World Tour (2016).

"Love on Top" was written by Beyoncé, Terius Nash and Shea Taylor while production was handled by Beyoncé and Taylor. From June 16 to June 27, 2011, the songs from "4" were available to listen to in full each day on Beyoncé's official website, paired with its accompanying photo spread from the album packaging and a quote. On June 26, 2011, "Love on Top" was the eighth song to be chosen. The quote found Beyoncé elaborating on the song's inspiration:
"When I played Etta James [in the 2008 musical biopic, "Cadillac Records"] it was the most I'd learned about myself until the recording of this album. When I went into the studio I used the same passion, honesty, and approach with my vocals I channeled as Etta James. It does not sound like the vocals on my past albums. It's a lot rawer. It comes from a deep place."
Beyoncé, who has covered "At Last" which is a song originally recorded by James, portrayed the artist in the 2008 musical biopic, "Cadillac Records" and won critical acclaim for her portrayal. She told "Billboard" magazine: "I realized that Etta James was so unapologetic, bold and strong that playing her was a big risk for me. It gave me the confidence and the push to challenge myself a little more with my music." "Love on Top" impacted Urban radio in the United States on January 10, 2012, as the fourth single from the album in that country.
"Love on Top" is an up-tempo R&B and disco song viewed as a modern take on old school music. It also exhibits elements of retro-soul music, retro-pop, the 1980s pop music, funk music, jazz, and the 1970s classic disco music, as stated by Joanne Dorken of MTV UK, Cameron Adams of the "Herald Sun" and Thomas Conner of "Chicago Sun-Times". According to "Slant Magazine" Eric Henderson, "Love on Top" is a "bright, breezy tribute to the freshness of mid-[19]80s, pre-new-jack-FM R&B reminiscent of Whitney Houston and Anita Baker." He also noted the song to be the "perfect and totally inverted fraternal twin" of another song on "4", being "Rather Die Young". "Love on Top"s retro elements are further illustrated by its use of finger snaps, a "distorted" bass groove, and a melding of horns as well as sweet backing harmonies, especially in the bridge and the chorus of the song. It is instrumentally complete with a thumping bassline, synthesizers, tribal drums, an arena-rock music piano, a guitar, a peppy saxophone, and some backing vocals. Rich Juzwiak of "The Village Voice" compared "Love on Top" to Raydio's "You Can't Change That" (1979) and New Edition's "Mr. Telephone Man" (1984). Priya Elan of "NME" noted that "Love on Top" echoes Janet Jackson's "Whoops Now" (1995), Lionel Richie's "Dancing on the Ceiling" (1986) and the theme from "My Two Dads".
According to the digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing, "Love on Top" is mainly written in the key of C major with a tempo of 99.2 beats per minute. Beyoncé's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of G to the high note of B. "Love on Top" is set as "both a sweet love song and an expression of girl power" as stated by Georgette Cline of AOL Music. Genevieve Koski of "The A.V. Club" and David Amidon of PopMatters noted that "Love on Top" features "mature lyrics" alongside Beyoncé "sounding vocally giddy and aggressive while portraying the message." Lyrically, the song finds Beyoncé as the female protagonist expressing the happiness she feels to have her love interest in her life. "The languid, synth-soul smoocher allows for enjoyably euphoric tone" before she chimes in with "Bring the beat in!", introducing "a mid-album interlude of mid-[19]80s pop", as stated by Andy Gill of "The Independent" as well as Hamish MacBain of "NME".

Rich Juzwiak noted that Beyoncé "ecstatically and hyperactively" changes keys four times during the entire song. As stated by Scott Shetler of PopCrush, she constantly sings praises of her love interest in the first verse where she also seemingly sends him subtle digs as he did not give her his full attention in the past, this being illustrated in lyrics such as, "after fighting through my fears [...] finally you've put me first." The chorus, complimented with sweet backing harmonies, then arrives, with Beyoncé chanting, "Baby it's you, you're the one I love / You're the one I need / You're the only one I see / Come on baby it's you / You're the one that gives your all / You're the one I can always call / When I need you make everything stop / Finally you put my love on top." The chorus carries the final two minutes of the song through four key changes, proceeding to D major, then to D major, E major and finally to E major. This was highlighted by Henderson who wrote that "the spirit carries both her and the song into a Stevie Wonder-reminiscent climax of continually rising key changes." In this way, the word "baby" is said about 24 times throughout the song. As soon as the synthesizers drop out, the song fades out almost instantaneously.

"Love on Top" was highly acclaimed by critics. Rich Juzwiak of "The Village Voice" complimented it as "easy listening/easier dancing boogie vibe". Genevieve Koski of "The A.V. Club" viewed "Love on Top" as an exception on the album due to its up-tempo nature, calling it "a first-listen earworm with its breezy, retro-soul style." Matthew Horton of BBC joked about the climax of the song, stating that the album "4" "was named after the four key changes in the final, teetering chorus of 'Love on Top' to ram the point home." Greg Kot of the "Chicago Tribune" commended the song for putting a "bounce" in Beyoncé's step. Similarly, Matthew Perpetua of "Rolling Stone" named "Love on Top" "a blast" as Beyoncé creates a modern take on old-school Whitney Houston. Hamish MacBain of "NME" favored the song's up-tempo style, stating that it was much needed after the "ballad-heavy" first half of the album. Priya Elan of the same publication commented that it has "100 watt smile lyrics". Stating that "Love on Top" is reminiscent of 1980s R&B, Erika Ramirez of "Billboard" magazine complimented the song as a "Halcyon love song, perfect to be whisked away to". Spence D. of IGN commented that Beyoncé's "cheery disposition" and the "brash horns" will remind listeners of "damn good" mid-1980s R&B can be. While including the song as a "must hear" from the album, Andy Gill of "The Independent" named "Love on Top" as "a small footnote to Stevie Wonder's innovatory genius." Alexis Petridis of "The Guardian" praised Beyoncé's vocals and called "Love on Top" a "well-written" song.
Eric Henderson of "Slant Magazine" also gave "Love on Top" a positive review, favoring its "infectious upbeat spirit" and comparing it to the styling of Stevie Wonder, Anita Baker and Whitney Houston. He also complimented the fact that the various key changes throughout the song "force Beyoncé out of her scold range and into some winningly girlish soprano whoops." Similarly, Joey Guerra of the "Houston Chronicle" commented that "Love on Top" is a "bouncy jam" which finds Beyoncé in "feel-good diva mode". He added that it might have turned up on early albums from Natalie Cole, Whitney Houston or Mariah Carey. Guerra concluded that Beyoncé "rarely has sounded so charming, even as she soars through several key changes." Mikael Wood of "Spin" magazine noted that the song "imagines a perfect genetic splice" of Whitney Houston's eponymous debut album and Michael Jackson's "Off the Wall". Ricky Schweitzer of One Thirty BPM stated that "Love on Top" is instantaneously reminiscent of Michael Jackson, Janet Jackson and Stevie Wonder, and favored Beyoncé's numerous key changes, writing:
'Love On Top' employs a similar pacing [to 'Party'], though tonally, this track reminds one more immediately of Michael and Janet Jackson, as well as Stevie Wonder. This effervescent throwback escapes corniness by reveling in its pure joy and as such, it becomes one of the highlights of the album. The numerous key changes that flood the end of the song could seem masturbatory, but Beyoncé is not proving that she can sing as high as Mariah [Carey] or Whitney [Houston] because we already trust her to. It is energy and not ego that drives the constantly rising progression. 
Becky Bain of the website Idolator viewed "Love on Top" as "joyful tune that doubles as a throwback to a simpler time" and added that Beyoncé's energy is "infectious". Conrad Tao of Sputnikmusic showed high favoritism towards "Love on Top", writing: "[...] as she forces herself into a rarely used high range, she sets for a perfect catharsis for the burgeoning sexual passions of the album's first two thirds", and describing the outcome as "absolutely magnificent". Melinda Newman of HitFix commented "the soulful, exuberant, mid-tempo finger snapper, 'Love on Top' is deliciously sunny and sweet." James Reed of "The Boston Globe" wrote that "Love on Top' sounds like the pretty young thing of Michael Jackson's 'P.Y.T.' grew up to make a sequel to that 1983 hit." Similarly, Joanne Dorken of MTV UK who described "Love on Top" as "scream[ing] 'classic disco', catchy, [being] more uptempo and differing from the rest of the album", concluded that the song shows Beyoncé's versatility and that it is "very Jackson 5". Ben Cardew of "Music Week" stated that "Love on Top" is summery and "laidback, rather than massively immediate". However, he added that it proves to be a grower as it "ratchets up the key changes on the final third", further writing that Beyoncé's voice sounds "particularly impressive". A mixed review came from Adam Markovitz of "Entertainment Weekly", who compared Beyoncé's work on "Love on Top" to that of past idols such as Luther Vandross and Diana Ross, but felt the tone overshadowed her style, stating "she gets lost in her idols' polyester-swathed shadows." Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" noted that the song was "slinky but nowhere near sexy" adding that it sounds like a song young Brandy Norwood would release.

James Montgomery of MTV News placed "Love on Top" at number nine on his list of the 25 Best Songs Of 2011. He called it "a throwback jam" to Beyoncé's older R&B material, stating that "[it's] big, bold, brassy and blissed-out, [and] it represents everything B was going for on her "4" album". Montgomery also noted that the song was an "absolute lifesaver" and "as is the case with all of her best tunes, Beyoncé belts here". "Slant Magazine"s staff members listed "Love on Top" as the 24th best song of the year, with Eric Henderson commenting that "somewhere between ["4"'s] copious ballads and its few, hyperventilating dance tracks, Beyoncé strikes a perfect balance with this breezy midtempo tribute to the 1980s." On "The Village Voice"s Pazz & Jop critic year-end list in 2011, "Love on Top" was ranked at number 51. Additionally, Nick Murray of the same publication included the song on his list of 53 Great Songs From 2011. In 2017, ShortList's Dave Fawbert listed Love on Top as containing "one of the greatest key changes in music history".

The song was nominated in the category for Viewer's Choice at the 2012 BET Awards and in the category for R&B/Hip-Hop Song at the 2012 Teen Choice Awards. Beyoncé won her 17th Grammy Award with Best Traditional R&B Performance for "Love on Top" at the 55th Grammy Awards. At the 26th ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Music Awards in 2013, "Love on Top" received the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Song award.

For the week July 2, 2011, "Love on Top" debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Singles Chart at number 3, selling 89,942 digital downloads. The song remained at that position in its second and third week, selling 52,462 downloads and 42,261 downloads respectively. It charted inside the top ten positions of the chart for five consecutive weeks.

After Beyoncé's performance of "Love on Top" at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, the song was propelled into the top five positions of the US iTunes Store; its sales picked up by 221 percent. Despite not being a single at that time, it became the highest charting song from "4" on the US iTunes Store. For the week ending September 10, 2011, "Love on Top" consequently debuted at number 135 on the US Hot Digital Songs chart, and charted at number 22 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart. The following week, the song soared number 10 on the Hot Digital Songs chart, selling 113,000 downloads; digital sales went up by 803%. This prompted the entry of "Love on Top" at number 20 on the Hot 100 chart. The Hot 100 debut of "Love on Top" became Beyoncé's second highest among her 29 solo career entries; only "Ring the Alarm" began at a higher position, at number 12 in 2006. It fell to number 70 on the Hot 100 chart issue dated September 24, 2011. "Love on Top" was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on March 5, 2012. "Love on Top" passed one million digital copies in the U.S. in February 2013.

For the week September 17, 2011, "Love on Top" debuted at number 85 on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. It moved to number 9 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart issue dated February 11, 2012, and became the third song from "4" to chart inside the top ten of that chart. For the week ending March 3, 2012, the song earned the Greatest Gainer/Airplay title as it lifted from number 4 to number 2 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart with 30 million audience impressions, which went up by 22%, according to Nielsen BDS. "Love on Top" topped the chart for the week ending March 10, 2012; it was Beyoncé's sixth song during her solo career to reach number one on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. It spent six consecutive weeks on the top of the chart. Before being sent for adds on any format on US radios, "Love on Top" debuted at number 36 on the BDS Urban AC National airplay chart issue dated October 29, 2011, having amassed 106 spins, including 55 in 7 days. According to Nielsen BDS, 18 Urban AC radio stations added the song to their playlists for that week ending. For the week ending March 3, 2012, it became Beyoncé's first number-one on the US Adult R&B Airplay chart.

Similarly owing to the live performance, "Love on Top" debuted at number 65 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart issue dated September 17, 2011. The song also entered at number 75 on the UK Singles Chart and at number 23 on the UK R&B Chart on September 4, 2011, It debuted at number 14 on the New Zealand Singles Chart the following day, and spent seven non-consecutive weeks on the chart. In Ireland, "Love on Top" made its debut at number 47 on September 8, 2011. The song also entered at number 40 on the Australian Singles Chart on September 12, 2011. The following week, it debuted at number 9 of the Australian Urban Singles Chart, and was the most added song to radios in Australia. "Love on Top" peaked at number 20 on the singles chart on November 6, 2011, and number 4 on the urban chart on October 17, 2011. Having spent 16 consecutive weeks on the Australian Singles Chart, the song was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA), denoting sales of 140,000 copies.

After having been announced as a single in the UK, "Love on Top" re-entered the UK Singles Chart at number 154 on November 13, 2011, and moved to number 87 the following week. It also moved from number 63 to number 38 on the UK R&B Chart. On December 4, 2011, "Love on Top" climbed from number 54 to number 28 on the UK Singles Chart and from 16 to number 7 on the UK R&B Chart, where the song has peaked. The following week, it moved to number 22 on the UK Singles Chart, where it remained until January 1, 2012. On January 8, 2012, "Love on Top" reached number 20, selling 15,660 digital copies and bringing its total sales to 120,648 copies. The single peaked at number 13 on the UK Singles Chart the following week. On June 9, 2015, the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) certified "Love on Top" platinum, denoting sales of 600,000 copies in the country.

The music video for "Love on Top" was directed by Ed Burke and Beyoncé. A preview of the clip was shown on the Australian television program, "Sunday Night", on October 9, 2011. The visuals showed Beyoncé in a black leotard, stockings, high-top sneakers, and medal-adorned Czech military cap. Together with her five male dancers, they perform choreographed moves at Canoe Studios, a penthouse studio in West Chelsea overlooking New York City. The preview was inspired by the music video for "If It Isn't Love" by American band New Edition and was described as "stripped-down" by Tom Ayres of Digital Spy. The full video was initially supposed to be premiered on October 17, 2011, on Australia's "Today Show". However, the release date was pushed up a day and it was released on October 16, 2011, instead. That same day, Beyoncé posted the following statement regarding the video on her official website:
I am excited to give my Australian fans the World Premiere of 'Love On Top'! Thank you for the amazing response to the song at radio. I have worked very hard on this video, this song is special to me and I had an idea for the video based on some of my favorite male groups. I remember seeing videos from New Edition, The Jackson 5 and the Temptations, bands I love for their beautiful harmonies, and precise choreography and I always wanted to make a video and be part of a boy group myself. It was so much fun. I put my heart and soul into 'Love On Top' and I hope you love it.
After the release of the sneak peek, Michael Bivins of the New Edition told Theybf.com, "When I saw Beyonce on the MTV awards in the sequined jacket this year and with the dancers in R&B group positions, I knew then she was showing love to NE! The video teaser was part two... the classic video 'If It Isn't Love' reference." After the release of the full video, Johnny Gill told "S2S" magazine that he considers "Love on Top"s video to be a tribute and that Beyoncé as well as her backup dancers did a great job of capturing New Edition's essence. In his opinion, that is why "she is one of the greatest living performers." He went on to say, "[The video] was so cool. There's no more Michael Jackson but I think she's a beast to begin with. It's such an honor to have someone who knew, and knows, her history and to be aware of where it all started."

Although the song is 4 minutes and 27 seconds long, the video is 3 minutes and 17 seconds long due to the omission of the second verse. Erika Ramirez of "Billboard" magazine and Melissa Maerz of "Entertainment Weekly" highlighted the fact that Beyoncé wears several different clothes including the dress that was worn during her performance at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards. The clip starts with a casually dressed Beyoncé moving in coordination with her male back-up dancers who are also wearing casual clothes and Nike Dunks. Wearing a black body suit with black hose, Beyoncé puts on a display of footwork before breaking into the song. About halfway through, the visuals suddenly switch to night as the singer lights up the space in various formal looks, including a gold pantsuit, white suit, and finally a tuxedo complete with coattails, top hat, and cane. The choreography from here resembles that of the 1960s male groups. The wardrobe changes in fact correspond with every key change, except the final one. The video ends with Beyoncé yelling "cut!" and the shot returns to them at rehearsal.

"Consequence of Sound"s Alex Young praised the simplicity of the concept adding that it costs "more money than your entire life fortune." That was echoed by Andrew Martin of "Prefix Magazine" who called the video "super-simplistic, albeit effective." Sarah Fitzmaurice of "Daily Mail" also gave a positive review for the video praising its simple and energetic concept accompanied by the "fierce outfits". A writer of "OK!" compared the video with Will Smiths work in "The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air" adding that Beyoncé "has gone back to video basics." A writer of "The Huffington Post" called the video a "fresh take on a New Edition classic" and concluded that it was a "lot more simple than it sounds." Lisa Potter of "Marie Claire" also praised the energy and Beyoncé's figure in the video, writing, "The pregnant superstar puts on another energetic performance during the video, showing off her fabulous figure in a skimpy black leotard complete with a military fetish cap and Isabel Marant sneakers, before changing into a series of tailored suits." Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV Buzzworthy wrote that the video was similar to Michael Jackson's "Dangerous" era adding, "While some might say the basic concept of Beyoncé's 'Love on Top' video is too straightforward, we actually think it's amazing – just let Beyoncé sing, dance, look fuhLAWless and wear a cute hat! What else do you people need?!" Maura Johnston of "The Village Voice" described the video as a direct homage to New Edition's "If It Isn't Love" but added that when the song's key changes start, "Beyoncé and her posse of backup dancers get a bit brassier and fancier". She further wrote that the video was something that Phil Collins "would be proud" of.

Comparing the video with works by Stevie Wonder, Matthew Perpetua of "Rolling Stone" wrote, "compared to the over-the-top sensory overload of 'Countdown, ' the 'Love on Top' clip is very simple and straightforward, with the singer performing with backup singers and dancers in a spare room. Still, she changes wardrobe with every key change as the song reaches its euphoric climax." Similarly, Leah Collins of "Dose" magazine wrote, "New jack swing dance moves and costume changes are pretty much the focus of this one. [...] Still, Beyonce reveals a talent we never knew she had: the ability to switch costumes every time she switches keys. (This, it turns out, is a good thing. That pantsless African dictator look in the first scene? Maybe we're the only ones, but we're not really feeling Idi Amin-chic this season.)" Georgette Cline of "The Boombox" found similarities between the video for "Love on Top" and the earlier videos that Beyoncé made with Destiny's Child while Sarah Anne Hughes of "The Washington Post" called the video fancy and an "obvious homage to New Edition's 'If It Isn’t Love.'" A more mixed review was given by Amanda Dobbins of "New York" magazine who wrote that "The video will do nothing to silence Beyoncé plagiarism or baby bump conspiracy theorists; the first half borrows from an old New Edition video, and the entire thing was clearly filmed before her bump began to show." However, she added, "Still, Vulture salutes any artistic undertaking that requires a costume change with every key change." The video was nominated in the category for Video of the Year at the 2012 BET Awards and in the category for Best Female Video at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards. It won Best Dance Performance at the 2012 Soul Train Music Awards.

Beyoncé performed "Love on Top" live for the first time on August 14, 2011, during her residency show 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé held at Roseland Ballroom in New York City. Wearing a gold dress, she performed the song in front of 3,500 people and she was backed by her all-female band and her backing singers, called the Mamas. For the performance, "Love on Top" was given an "uptempo overhaul" and eventually got everyone "moving to the catchy [synthesizers]", as stated by Mike Wass of Idolator. Wass also wrote that "Love on Top" was one of the highlights of the concert. Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" gave Beyoncé critical acclaim, favoring performances of "underdog tracks" such as "Party" and "Love on Top". Jody Rosen of "Rolling Stone" also complimented Beyoncé's performance of the song, commending how she turned "the groovy 'Love on Top' into a vintage soul showcase, dropping on bended knee to unleash melismas at the top of her vocal range." Jozen Cummings of "The Wall Street Journal" commented that "the focus was on her voice [on] 'Love on Top' [...] she changes key four times — impressive on the album but even more so in person." Yolanda Sangweni of "Essence" magazine stated that the fact that Beyoncé goes through four key changes is "quite a feat for any singer." The live performance was later included on the DVD "" which chronicled the concert. It premiered online and released on the iTunes Store on January 11, 2012.

In May 2012, Beyoncé performed "Love on Top" during her residency show in Atlantic City. Beyoncé started singing the song by saying, "Atlantic City, snap your fingers". According to Maura Johnston of "The Village Voice", the crowd "sang the chorus of 'Love on Top' and even... tried its endlessly modulating key-change while Beyoncé watched with bemusement and delight". Chuck Darrow of "The Philadelphia Inquirer" was positive about the performance of the song during the concert, saying, "As for the music, Beyonce kept the needle in the red zone for much of the show, dealing primarily in such full-throttle, groove-intensive signature tracks as 'Love on Top'". Tris McCall of New Jersey On-Line noted that she "made the most of each modulation and break" while performing the song. Rebecca Thomas of MTV News was also positive about the performance, writing, "Without missing a step of the New Edition-inspired choreography, B powered through the song's modulations in an extended vocal showcase." The performance of "Love on Top" on the concert was later included on the concert film "Live in Atlantic City" (2013).

Beyoncé sang the chorus of the song a cappella during the opening of her Super Bowl XLVII halftime show performance. In 2013 and 2014, the song was part of the set list of Beyoncé's The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour. On May 8, 2013, while performing the song in Manchester, she held her microphone out a random audience member, which turned out to be British singer Joe McElderry, who sang a line of the song through the microphone, Beyoncé responding "Wow, you sound beautiful" and holding her microphone out to him again. An a cappella version of the song was performed in 2016 as part of the setlist of The Formation World Tour.

At the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, Beyoncé performed "Love on Top" after having said on the black carpet about an hour previous to going on stage that she would be making an announcement. Before beginning her live performance, she said to the audience: "Tonight I want you to stand up on your feet, I want you to feel the love that's growing inside of me", giving a hint about the news that she had alluded to on the black carpet. She took the stage in "a purple spangly tuxedo jacket, black pants and white tuxedo shirt, still rocking her fierce six-inch heels of old, pregnant or not", as stated by Gil Kaufman of MTV News. As she performed, her blond hair blowing in the wind, and backed by six dancers wearing similar shimmering tuxes, Beyoncé gave new meaning to the lyrics: "Now everybody asks me why I'm smiling out from ear to ear." She kept her dancing to a minimum for most of the song as she held onto the microphone stand while singing "Love on Top". Eventually making her way to the extended lip in front of the stage and throwing down, she encouraged the audience to put their hands together. Beyoncé ended the performance by dropping the microphone, opening her jacket, rubbing her belly, and thus announcing her pregnancy to the world.

Describing Beyoncé as "a veteran on the VMA stage", Kaufman wrote that "the audience was clearly feeling the love also" and praised how she "[got] a bit wild as she brought the tune home with some of her signature." Staff members of the AOL's "The Boombox" commented that the lyrics of the song "felt especially meaningful" to announce her pregnancy to the world. Staff members of "Rolling Stone" called the performance "spectacular" while Todd Martens of the "Los Angeles Times" called it "rousing". Claire Suddath of "Time" magazine commented that "this offering from the reigning queen of pop music is relatively toned down and yet she still looked and sounded better than nearly everyone else at the awards." Similarly, Darren Franich of "Entertainment Weekly" wrote that "If you had to pick one defining moment, it would have to be Beyoncé’s baby bump. The diva's rendition of 'Love on Top' might not have been her best VMA performance ever, but there’s no denying the sheer electricity in the room when she ended her set by proudly revealing her pregnant tummy." A critic of "Essence" magazine concluded that "[Beyoncé's] performance of 'Love on Top' at the 2011 VMAs [...] will surely be one of the year's most memorable pop culture moments." The writers of MTV News placed the performance at number 4 on their list of Best Live MTV Performances of 2011. It was stated that Beyoncé was in "typical Sasha Fierce fashion" while the performance was described as "ebullient". Erika Ramirez of "Billboard" magazine put the performance at number two on her list of "Beyonce's 5 Biggest TV Performances" adding that it was "one of the most memorable TV moments of her career". Dan Hyman from "Rolling Stone" listed the performance and Beyoncé's announcement of her pregnancy at number 17 on the list of "The 24 Wildest Moments in VMA History", while "Billboard" listed it at number 7 on its list of "MTV VMAs' 10 Best Performances Ever" in 2013.

On March 18, 2012, the girls on the Australian talent show "Young Talent Time" team, opened the show with a performance of "Love on Top", while the boys performed as backing vocalists. Diana Rouvas performed the song on "The Voice" (Australia) on May 21, 2012. Michelle Graffin of "The Age" called it the "song of the night", writing that Rouvas was "so good she can wrestle 'Love on Top' from Beyoncé's iron grip and transform it into a smokey nightclub number worthy of the young Liza Minnelli". Rouvas' version of "Love on Top" peaked at number 22 on the Australian Singles Chart on June 3, 2012. On 17 September 2012, Nathaniel Willemse performed "Love on Top" during the first live show of the fourth season of "The X Factor" in Australia. A writer for Take 40 Australia called it a "smooth performance". On February 22, 2013, Novita Dewi performed "Love on Top" during the first gala show of the first season of "X Factor Indonesia".

Amber Holcomb, a contestant of the 12th season of "American Idol" covered the song on April 10, 2013, during an episode of the show. Brian Mansfield of "USA Today" praised her performance writing that she was "comfortable and confident and happy" but added that in the end, the high melody of the song "puts a little strain on her voice toward the end". That was somehow echoed by Bobby Olivier of "The Star-Ledger" who noted that the performance was "pitchy, but a lot of fun". However, he wrote that Holcomb "seemed to struggle a little with keeping up with the melody" and that her version was different from the original, but concluded that it was a solid performance. On April 8, 2013, Zendaya and Val Chmerkovskiy performed a samba dance to the song during the 16th season of the American show "Dancing with the Stars". Morissette Amon and Penelope Matanguihan performed the song on the first season of "The Voice of the Philippines" on June 23 and July 14, 2013 respectively. In 2018 Dami Im released a version on her album, "I Hear a Song".

Credits to the song were adapted from "4"s liner notes.

!scope="col" colspan="3"| Streaming




</doc>
<doc id="32615025" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32615025" title="Miles Morales">
Miles Morales

Miles Gonzalo Morales () is a fictional comic book superhero appearing in publications by the American publisher Marvel Comics, and one of the characters known as Spider-Man. The character was created in 2011 by writer Brian Michael Bendis and artist Sara Pichelli, with input by Marvel's then-editor-in-chief Axel Alonso.

Miles Morales first appeared in "Ultimate Fallout" #4 (August 2011), following the death of Peter Parker. An Afro-Latino teenager, Miles is the second Spider-Man to appear in Ultimate Marvel, an imprint with a separate continuity from the mainstream Marvel Universe. Although Morales featured in the "Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man" comic book series, he is not the lead character in the "Ultimate Spider-Man" animated TV series that debuted in April 2012 on Disney XD, but he was later added to the main cast in 2016, and is the main character in the 2018 feature film, "", which won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. After Marvel ended the Ultimate imprint in 2015, Miles was made a character in the main Marvel Universe, and began appearing in stories under the All-New, All-Different Marvel branding that debuted that same year.

Reaction to the character varied, with some, including Spider-Man's co-creator, Stan Lee, approving the creation of a positive role model for children of color, and others expressing displeasure at the replacement of Peter Parker, with some critics decrying it as a publicity stunt motivated by political correctness, a charge Alonso denied. Alexandra Petri of "The Washington Post" called for the character to be judged on the quality of its stories, which have garnered positive reviews.

The character possesses powers similar to those of the original Spider-Man, which were derived from the bite of a spider genetically engineered by Spider-Man's nemesis Norman Osborn in an attempt to duplicate those abilities.

The concept of a black Spider-Man was first discussed a few months before the November 2008 election of Barack Obama as President of the United States. Marvel Comics' then-editor-in-chief Axel Alonso describes the catalyst, "When we were planning 'Ultimatum,' we realized that we were standing at the brink of America electing its first African-American President and we acknowledged that maybe it was time to take a good look at one of our icons." This new Spider-Man would replace Parker as Spider-Man only in Ultimate Marvel, an imprint whose storyline is set in a universe separate from the mainstream Marvel universe, in which Marvel's characters were reimagined for a 21st-century audience. The replacement of Ultimate Peter Parker was considered as a possible part of the 2008–09 "Ultimatum" story arc that restructured much of the Ultimate Marvel universe, but those early thoughts were abandoned because the story for that character had not yet been developed. When Marvel's editorial staff decided that the Ultimate universe's Peter Parker would be killed in the 2011 storyline "", the character Miles Morales was created. Although Morales is the first black Spider-Man, he marks the second time a Latino character has taken the Spider-Man identity. Miguel O'Hara, who is of half-Mexican descent, was the title character in the 1990s series "Spider-Man 2099".
Miles Morales was created by writer Brian Michael Bendis and artist Sara Pichelli. Bendis's thoughts about the character, and the way he looked in his first appearance, were heavily influenced by African-American actor Donald Glover's appearance in Spider-Man pajamas in "Anthropology 101", the second-season premiere of the television comedy series "Community". This was a reference to an unsuccessful online campaign that attempted to secure Glover an audition for the lead role in the 2012 film "The Amazing Spider-Man". Bendis said of Glover, "He looked fantastic! I saw him in the costume and thought, 'I would like to read that book.' So I was glad I was writing that book."

In creating the visual look for Miles, Pichelli followed her usual practice of approaching the design by giving thought to the character's personality, including the background that influenced it, and the distinctive traits that he would exhibit, such as the clothing he wears, his body language and expressions. Pichelli also designed Spider-Man's new costume, a mostly black outfit with red webbing and a red spider logo. Pichelli had worked on four issues of "Ultimate Spider-Man" before she was approached to work on the new title with Miles Morales. Pichelli, who works with a Cintiq 12wx graphic tablet, added more screentones to her illustrations to give what she called "a more 'pop' feeling to the book", which she felt would be fitting to the series.

Morales was born and raised in Brooklyn, New York City, the then-13-year-old son of an African American father and a Puerto Rican mother. Axel Alonso has described Miles as an intelligent nerd with an aptitude for science similar to his predecessor, Peter Parker. The character made his debut in the fourth issue of the "Ultimate Fallout" miniseries, which was released on August 3, 2011. He later starred in the relaunched "" series, written by Bendis and drawn by Pichelli, in September 2011.

In contrasting Miles with Peter Parker, Bendis has depicted different conflicts and anxieties for the character. Right after acquiring his superhuman abilities from a spider bite at the home of his uncle, Aaron, whom Miles admires but he does not initially know is a career criminal, Miles' father, Jefferson, explains to Miles that before Miles was born, Jefferson and Aaron were thieves who spent time in prison, and that while Jefferson reformed when he got older, Aaron has not. According to Bendis, this gives Miles cause to wonder if the traits that lead to criminal behavior are hardwired into his DNA, leading him to question whether he is essentially a good person or not, and what his future holds for him. These issues further haunt Miles after he becomes disillusioned with Aaron, and Aaron dies from an accidental explosion triggered during a battle between the two of them, saying, "You are just like me" to Miles before dying.

In 2012, Morales appeared in the miniseries "Spider-Men", in which he encounters the Spider-Man of the mainstream Marvel universe. In June 2013, the character appeared in the climax of "Age of Ultron" #10, which was also written by Brian Michael Bendis. Though mostly set in the mainstream Marvel universe, or Earth-616 as it is known in dialogue, the story depicts major changes to the space-time continuum as a result of the time travel on the part of characters, resulting in Miles witnessing the coming of the mainstream Marvel Galactus, an entity that consumes planets, to Earth.

Despite its initial press and critical reception, "Ultimate Comics Spider-Man" was not a huge hit in the direct market. By August 2013, sales on the title had slipped, and sales for the other two Ultimate titles, "Ultimate Comics X-Men" and "Ultimate Comics The Ultimates", had dropped to numbers at which mainstream Marvel titles are cancelled. That November, "Ultimate Comics Spider-Man" ended its run with issue #28, and the other two titles ended along with it, to make way for the miniseries "Cataclysm: Ultimate Spider-Man", one of the books in the crossover storyline "Cataclysm", in which the heroes of the Ultimate universe face the threat of the Earth-616 Galactus, and Miles is transported to the mainstream Marvel universe.

Following "Cataclysm", Miles starred in a new title called "Miles Morales: Ultimate Spider-Man", again with Bendis as writer, as part of Ultimate Marvel Now, an initiative with which Marvel relaunched the Ultimate Marvel line. Miles Morales was also made a member of the eponymous team in "All-New Ultimates", a series written by Michel Fiffe and drawn by Amilcar Pinna. Both series ran for 12 issues. The twelfth and final issue of "Miles Morales: Ultimate Spider-Man" concluded with a cliffhanger that led directly into the 2015 "Secret Wars" storyline.

Marvel ended the Ultimate Marvel imprint with the "Secret Wars" storyline, in which the Marvel Universe was merged with other alternate universes, including the Ultimate Universe. Following "Secret Wars", Miles was made a character of the mainstream Marvel Universe, and a member of the titular team in "All-New, All-Different Avengers". He also headlines his third solo series, titled simply "Spider-Man", which debuted February 3, 2016, with Bendis and Pichelli returning as the creative team. Pichelli would be succeeded by Nico Leon and Oscar Bazaldua. In the storyline, Peter Parker expands the scope of his activities globally, while the now-16-year-old Miles continues to patrol New York City, and deals with issues such as confrontations with Parker's rogues gallery, the public's reaction to his ethnicity, and his love life. Each issue was numbered sequentially beginning with issue 1, and ending with issue 21, when the numbering switched to legacy numbering, in order to assume an unbroken numbering from 2000's "Ultimate Spider-Man" #1, with the following issue continuing with issue 234. On November 7, 2017, it was announced that Bendis, having signed an exclusive contract with DC Comics, would be leaving Marvel in early 2018, and "Spider-Man" cancelled with issue #240 (May 2018). 

On September 13, 2018, Marvel announced that Saladin Ahmed and Javier Garron would be the writer and artist, respectively on a fourth ongoing solo series, "Miles Morales: Spider-Man", the first issue of which was released on December 12, 2018.

Miles Morales first appeared in "Ultimate Comics: Fallout" #4, which was published in August 2011, in which he foils a murder by Kangaroo, a short time after Peter Parker's death. He wears a Spider-Man costume similar to Parker's, but considers changing it when spectators tell him it is in "bad taste".

The opening story arc of "Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man", which premiered in September 2011, is set prior to "Ultimate Fallout" #4, and establishes the character of Miles Morales, a grade-schooler who lives with his mother Rio Morales, a nurse, and his father, Jefferson Davis, and details how he received his superhuman abilities. After Oscorp scientist Dr. Conrad Markus uses Parker's blood to recreate the formula that created Spider-Man, the Prowler (Aaron Davis) steals the formula, and in the process, one of the spiders created by Markus crawls into the Prowler's duffel bag. Days later, the Prowler's nephew, Miles Morales, is bitten by the spider during a visit to Aaron's apartment. Morales develops superhuman abilities similar to those Peter Parker has, but does not tell his parents, due to his father's distrust of superheroes, confiding only in his best friend, Ganke Lee.

Miles, who just wants a normal life, is unhappy about having these abilities, and initially nauseated at the idea of risking his life to engage in superheroics, a reaction that Bendis wrote to further contrast Miles with Parker. However, after witnessing Spider-Man's death at the hands of the Green Goblin, the guilt-ridden Miles realizes he could have helped. After Ganke suggests he assume the mantle of Spider-Man, and learns from Gwen Stacy why Parker did what he did, Miles is inspired to try his hand at costumed crimefighting. During his first foray into costumed superheroics, he is confronted not only by those who feel his use of the Spider-Man costume is in bad taste, but also by Spider-Woman, a member of the government superhuman team, the Ultimates, over his use of the Spider-Man identity.

Spider-Woman unmasks and arrests Miles and takes him to S.H.I.E.L.D. headquarters, where Nick Fury reveals that he knows all about Miles and his family, including his uncle's criminal activity. After he helps S.H.I.E.L.D. subdue the escaped supervillain Electro, S.H.I.E.L.D. releases Miles and gives him a modified black and red version of the Spider-Man costume, which Ganke feels makes Miles "officially" the new Spider-Man. He also receives the blessing of the Earth-616 Peter Parker during the 2012 "Spider-Men" miniseries, in which Parker briefly visits the Ultimate Marvel universe and meets Miles. After the newspapers begin reporting the emergence of a new Spider-Man, Aaron deduces that it is really Miles, and offers to train Miles and work with him. After Aaron uses Miles in his ongoing conflict with the Mexican crime lord Scorpion, Miles realizes he is being exploited, and refuses to assist his uncle further, despite Aaron's threat to inform Miles' father of his secret. This leads to an altercation between the uncle and nephew that results in the malfunction of Aaron's weapons, which explode, killing Aaron.

In subsequent storylines, Miles becomes acquainted with Peter Parker's loved ones, May Parker, Gwen Stacy and Mary Jane Watson, who know of his secret identity, and give him Parker's web shooters. He also encounters Captain America, who reluctantly agrees to train Miles.

In a 2013 storyline, when investigative journalist Betty Brant incorrectly concludes that Miles' father, Jefferson, is the new Spider-Man, she is murdered by Markus, who has become the newest host to the Venom symbiote. In the subsequent "Venom War" storyline, Venom confronts Jefferson at his home, where Spider-Man repels the creature. Jefferson is critically injured and hospitalized in this battle, and when Venom pursues him at the hospital, Spider-Man again confronts him, during which Miles' mother, Rio, also learns that her son is Spider-Man. By the end of the brawl, Markus killed by police gunfire, as is Rio, who tells Miles not to reveal his secret to his father before dying. Miles quits being Spider-Man as a result. A year later he has a girlfriend named Katie Bishop, and is planning on telling her about his former life as Spider-Man. Though he has not engaged in heroics in a year, he is pressured to return to that life by S.H.I.E.L.D. He reluctantly does so, after Ganke and Spider-Woman convince him that there needs to be a Spider-Man. After he and his allies expose the criminal activity of Roxxon executive Donald Roxxon, Miles thanks Ganke for his support, and affirms in earnest that he is Spider-Man.

In the "Cataclysm" storyline, the mainstream Marvel Galactus comes to Earth to consume it for its energy. During the course of this story, Miles comes to believe the world is coming to an end, and reveals his double life to his father, who believes he is responsible for the death of Aaron and Rio, and disowns him. Miles also journeys to the mainstream Marvel universe with Reed Richards to acquire information on how to repel Galactus.

During the course of his second solo series, "Miles Morales: Ultimate Spider-Man", Miles encounters a very much alive Peter Parker, who cannot explain his reappearance, and who does not intend to return to his former life. Together, the two Spider-Men defeat Norman Osborn, who is also revealed to be alive, but who is killed during the course of the story. After witnessing Miles courageously battle Osborn, Peter acknowledges Miles a worthy successor, and decides to retire from superheroics for a life with his family and Mary Jane.

Miles' father also reappears, and relates to his son that as a young man, he and Aaron went to work for a criminal named Turk after Jefferson was recruited by S.H.I.E.L.D. as a spy in order to infiltrate the organization of the then-up-and-coming international criminal Wilson Fisk. Jefferson did this for a time, but after the Kingpin was arrested and convicted for his crimes, and Jefferson offered a chance to be a full-fledged S.H.I.E.L.D. agent, he refused, not wanting any part of his brother's world. He met Rio a week later and fell in love with her. Jefferson fled after learning that Miles was Spider-Man because it brought back unresolved issues from that earlier time in his life, and tells Miles that he does not blame Miles for his mother's death, and regrets abandoning him.

When Miles reveals his secret identity to his girlfriend, Katie Bishop, she and her parents are revealed to be sleeper agents for the terrorist group Hydra, who then kidnap Miles, his father and Ganke, as part of a plan involving Dr. Doom. Miles and the other prisoners are freed, however, in part with help from Miles' dorm mate, Judge, Maria Hill, and other superhuman colleagues.

During the events of the 2015 "Secret Wars" storyline, both the Ultimate Marvel universe and the mainstream Earth-616 universe are destroyed. Miles manages to survive the destruction by infiltrating an escape ship designed by the Cabal. After eight years in stasis, Miles awakens on the planet Battleworld, a new planet created from the remains of the various alternate Earths that had been destroyed. Miles is reunited with Earth-616's Peter Parker and the other surviving 616 heroes, who battle against Doctor Doom, who has used newly acquired powers to appoint himself a God Emperor over the planet. At the conclusion of the storyline, the Molecule Man, in gratitude for Miles' earlier compassion to him, arranges for Earth-616 to be restored, with Miles and his family among its inhabitants, including his mother, who has been restored to life in the process. Miles' uncle, Aaron Davis, is also later revealed to have been restored to life, retaining his knowledge of Miles' dual identity, and assumes the identity of the costumed villain Iron Spider. Both Miles and Peter share the mantle of Spider-Man in the new universe, though the now-16-year-old Miles patrols New York City, while Peter Parker acts globally. Miles is also a member of the latest team of Avengers, which debuts in the 2016 series "All-New, All-Different Avengers", and is being trained by Peter Parker to act as New York's resident spider-themed hero while Parker's work with Parker Industries allows his own activities as Spider-Man to benefit humanity on a global scale.

In this new continuity, Miles and his loved ones initially have no memories of their origins in the Ultimate universe, though Miles eventually learns of his past life there, including details such as Rio's "death". Miles' father Jefferson is aware of his double life, but his mother, Rio, is not, nor is S.H.I.E.L.D., though Rio eventually learns the truth. During the series' first year, Miles' circle of fellow superheroes who know of his double identity also expands to include Kamala Khan, the fourth Ms. Marvel, and the former X-Man Fabio Medina, aka Goldballs, who becomes a roommate to him and Ganke at school. This group of confidants later includes the teen superhero Bombshell. His relationship with Katie Bishop apparently did not occur in this continuity, as Miles begins seeing classmate Barbara Rodriguez, whom he calls his "first serious girlfriend", who is unaware of his double life. Miles is a central figure in the 2016–2017 "Civil War II" storyline, in which Ulysses Cain, an Inhuman with precognitive powers, experiences a vision that is interpreted by the superhero community to mean that Miles would kill Steve Rogers, though this scenario does not come to pass. Following "Civil War II", Miles joins other teenage superheroes to form a new incarnation of the Champions, who star in their self-titled series.

Bitten by a slightly different genetically engineered spider than the one that granted Peter Parker superhuman powers, Miles Morales possesses abilities similar to the original Spider-Man's, including enhanced strength and agility, the ability to adhere to walls and ceilings with his hands and feet, and a "spider sense" that warns him of danger with a buzzing sensation in his head. Though his strength and agility are similar to those of the original Spider-Man, his spider-sense is not as strong, as it only warns him of immediate danger.

He has two abilities that the original Spider-Man does not have: the ability to camouflage himself, including his clothing, to match his surroundings, making him effectively invisible, and a "venom strike" that can temporarily paralyze almost anyone with just a touch. The venom strike does not employ actual venom, but is a type of directed energy that can be conducted through Miles' gloves, and can be used against an opponent at a distance by conducting it through a material in which both Miles and his opponent are in contact, such as the webbing of the Earth-616's Spider-Man. It can break chains being used to restrain Miles and even repel non-ferrous objects, such as plastic Lego bricks. The venom strike is powerful enough to render unconscious a person as large as Hank Pym's Giant-Man. It is powerful enough to drive away the symbiotic villain Venom during Miles' first encounter with the creature, but by their second encounter, Venom has developed such a tolerance to the strike that Miles has to be completely enveloped by the symbiote before the venom strike can separate the symbiote from its host. Doctor Octopus also developed a set of tentacles that would not conduct the venom strike. The effect of the venom strike manifests itself a few seconds after it is implemented, and is described by Bendis as being comparable to the feeling of being kicked in the testicles. Miles can effect a more powerful version of the strike, which he calls a "mega venom blast". When Miles employs this ability, his eyes glow with yellow energy, which then explodes outwards in a radiant burst that can not only repel a large group of opponents, but also destroy thick ropes and chains that have been used to restrain him. This application of the strike leaves him "dizzy and useless", and cannot be used multiple times in rapid succession without a "recharging" period for Miles, though he can still make use of the conventional strike against people during this period. The conventional venom strike is mostly useless against the supervillain Armadillo, but during Miles' encounter with that villain, his venom blast manifests itself in a form similar to Miles' webbing, and Miles uses it like a lasso to pull Armadillo towards him and knock him unconscious with a venom strike-powered punch.

Miles' body also possesses a strong resistance to injury. During an altercation with the Roxxon mercenary Taskmaster, Miles is thrown through a brick wall without any apparent serious injury, though the experience is painful for him.

Miles wears a costume given to him by S.H.I.E.L.D., and initially uses Peter Parker's web shooters, which are given to him by May Parker. He is eventually given a new set of webshooters by S.H.I.E.L.D. as well.

The character Miles Morales was first reported by "USA Today" on August 2, 2011, shortly before the character officially debuted in "Ultimate Fallout" #4. The announcement received international coverage in the mainstream media and was met with mixed reactions by audiences. Chris Huntington of "The New York Times" lauded the creation of Morales, relating that it gave his adopted Ethiopian son Dagim a superhero who looks like him. Some fans and commentators felt the decision was an attempt by Marvel Comics to exhibit political correctness and that the introduction of a minority Spider-Man was simply a publicity stunt to attract more readers, while others felt that a person of color as Spider-Man would set a positive example for minority readers, particularly children. Many Spider-Man fans were disappointed that Peter Parker was killed, regardless of who replaced him. The wide-ranging critical reception prompted "The Washington Post" to run an article called, "Sorry, Peter Parker. The response to the black Spider-Man shows why we need one", in which writer Alexandra Petri wrote that the character should be judged on the quality of its stories rather than on his appearance or ethnicity.

Similarly, conservative talkshow host Glenn Beck, claiming that Miles resembled President Barack Obama, argued that the new Spider-Man was a result of a comment from Michelle Obama about changing traditions. However, Beck said he did not care about Miles' race, and also acknowledged that this was not the mainstream Spider-Man. Axel Alonso denied the character was created out of political correctness, stating "Simple fact is Marvel comics reflect the world in all its shapes, sizes and colors. We believe there's an audience of people out there who is thirsty for a character like Miles Morales." Bendis also denied that the character's ethnicity was an attempt to generate publicity. Original Spider-Man co-creator Stan Lee approved of Miles, stating that "Doing our bit to try to make our nation, and the world, color blind is definitely the right thing."

In a review for the first issue, David Pepose of Newsarama wrote, "The biggest victory that Bendis scores with Miles Morales is that he makes us care about him, and care about him quickly. Even though we're still scratching the surface of what makes him tick, we're seeing the world through his eyes, and it's similar to Peter Parker's but a whole lot tougher. But that kind of Parker-style guilt—that neurotic, nearly masochistic tendency for self-sacrifice that comes with great power and greater responsibility—is still intact." Jesse Schedeen of IGN wrote that "Miles still feels like a bit of an outsider in his own book. Bendis never quite paints a complete picture of Miles—his thoughts, motivations, personality quirks, and so forth. Miles is largely a reactionary figure throughout the book as he confronts struggles like registering for a charter school or dealing with family squabbles." Schedeen also opined that "Miles occupies a more urban, racially diverse, and tense landscape. All the story doesn't pander or lean too heavily on elements like racial and economic tension to move forward. Miles is simply a character who speaks to a slightly different teen experience, and one not nearly as well represented in superhero comics as Peter's". James Hunt of CBR.com rated the issue #1 four and a half out of five stars, lauding Bendis for emphasizing Morales' character and his supporting cast instead of rushing him into costume. The first issue holds a score of 8.0 out of 10 at the review aggregator website Comic Book Roundup, based on 13 reviews, while the final issue, #200, holds a score of 8.4, based on 14 reviews, and the series overall holds an average issue rating of 8.3.

The second solo series, "Miles Morales: Ultimate Spider-Man", has an average issue rating of 8.2 out of 10 at Comic Book Roundup, while the third series, "Spider-Man", holds a rating of 7.6, and the most recent series, "Miles Morales: Spider-Man", holds a rating of 8.2.

In the 2012 miniseries "Spider-Men", the mainstream Marvel Universe Peter Parker briefly visits the Ultimate Marvel universe and meets Miles Morales. When Parker returns to his home universe, he does a Google search to see if his universe has a version of Miles Morales, and is shocked by what he finds, but the exact nature of what he finds is left unrevealed to the reader. This is followed up in the 2017 sequel miniseries "Spider-Men II", in which the Earth-616 version of Miles Morales makes his first appearance, and is revealed to be a fully-grown adult with a scarred face. The storyline further establishes that this version of Miles became a close friend and confidant to the mob enforcer Wilson Fisk when he saved Fisk's life in prison, an event that resulted in the scars on Miles' face. Miles worked for Fisk following their time in prison, aiding him during Wilson's usurpation of Don Rigoletto's place as crime boss in New York. Years later, after Miles fell in love with a woman named Barbara Sanchez, Fisk arranged to have all traces of Miles' existence erased from searchable records in order help Miles leave his criminal life behind him. Years later, after Barbara died, Fisk informs a grief-stricken Miles that he has knowledge of a parallel universe in which Barbara might still be alive. Miles hires the Taskmaster, who confirms not only that the Ultimate Universe still exists following the events of the "Secret Wars" storyline, but that its version of Barbara is still alive. The adult Miles journeys to the Ultimate Universe to reunite with his lost love, essentially switching places with his younger counterpart.

In "Deadpool Killustrated" #1 (January 2013), Miles Morales' corpse is seen among those of various Spider-Men across various dimensions of the multiverse that an alternate Deadpool has killed.

In the 2017 "Sitting in a Tree" storyline that ran in "Spider-Man" and "Spider-Gwen", Miles is transported to Earth-8, where that dimension's versions of him and fellow costumed crimefighter Gwen Stacy have been married for 20 years, and have two children.


Writer Brian Michael Bendis stated in 2014 that he favored adapting Miles into a feature film in some way, as did actor Andrew Garfield, who played Spider-Man in "The Amazing Spider-Man" duology. Producers Avi Arad and Matt Tolmach have indicated in 2014 that they did not intend to have Miles or any other character replace Peter Parker in the role. However, after Marvel brokered a deal with Sony that resulted in the addition of Peter Parker to the films of the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), producer Kevin Feige stated that, while Miles Morales would not be appearing in the MCU for the foreseeable future, he was interested in opportunities to explore the character. In 2017, Feige confirmed that Miles Morales does exist in the MCU, and that "" alludes to him. In that film, Aaron Davis, played by Donald Glover, mentions to Peter Parker that he has a nephew, who is revealed in a deleted post-credits scene to be named Miles.

In 2018 Miles Morales was the main character in "", the first animated feature film to feature him, in which he is voiced by Shameik Moore. The film enjoyed both box office success and widespread critical acclaim, as well as numerous awards and nominations, among them Academy Award for Best Animated Feature.


Miles Morales is the main character of the 2017 novel "Miles Morales: Spider-Man", written by Jason Reynolds.

In March 2018, Sideshow Collectibles debuted a Miles Morales Premium Format Figure, a 17"-tall polystone statue depicting Morales jumping over the gaping jaws of the Venom symbiote. The statue features two removal heads, with and without the mask, and an extra hand holding the mask. At its debut the statue was priced at $520.



</doc>
