<doc id="23983975" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23983975" title="Becky McDonald">
Becky McDonald

Becky McDonald (also Granger) is a fictional character from the British soap opera "Coronation Street", played by Katherine Kelly. Becky was created by producer Steve Frost as a recurring character. She made her debut in the episode airing on 5 February 2006. Kelly was initially contracted to appear for three months, but became a series regular after impressing the serial's producers. In April 2011, Kelly announced her decision to leave the soap. Producer Phil Collinson created dramatic storylines in the build-up to her exit.

Becky's storylines have focused on her friendship with Roy (David Neilson) and Hayley Cropper (Julie Hesmondhalgh), which helped change public opinion of the character, and her relationships with Jason Grimshaw (Ryan Thomas) and Steve McDonald (Simon Gregson), with the latter producing two wedding storylines which were highly publicised by ITV. Other notable storylines have included her drunken rampages, two miscarriages and her desire to adopt a child. Becky is portrayed as a no-nonsense character, whose time on the show has been described as a journey. Viewers have seen her change from a "thieving ex-con" into a vulnerable woman. The character has been praised by crime-reduction charity Nacro for changing opinions on former prisoners. She has been referred to as a ""Coronation Street" icon", and one of the serial's most popular characters, with critics often praising her activities. However, her tendency to smoke when under stress and litter the streets with cigarettes has been criticised by UK environmental agencies. Kelly has garnered various awards and nominations for her portrayal of Becky.

Becky was created as a short-term recurring character, working in the Underworld sewing factory. The character was deemed popular so producers decided to bring her back, with executive producer Steve Frost initially pitching the idea of bringing in her family, stating: "Becky will leave Weatherfield for a short period of time and shock the Street's residents when her relatives return with her." However, this never materialised and Becky returned without any relatives. It was also thought that producers were going to kill the character off, in her early stages.

Auditions were held for the role of Becky which required the auditionee to look deliberately scruffy. Actress Katherine Kelly commented: "I was told to turn up looking as crap as possible, with no make-up. But that morning I'd also been for an audition where I had to look really glamorous. So I sat on the Tube putting grease in my hair and wiping my make-up off with everyone looking at me. By the time I got there I looked a right state!". Kelly was initially only cast for a three-month period when she began filming in 2006, but impressed producers and was offered an extended contract as a regular character. On 17 June 2008, after further impressing the producers, Kelly was signed for an additional 12 months. In February 2009, Kelly again had her contract extended, securing her role in the soap until August 2011. However, in 2010 Kelly was signed to a new 18-month contract by new producer Phil Collinson, a contract which was described as "unprecedented" at the time.

In 2011, Kelly decided to quit the role. She said it was one of the "hardest decisions of her life" but felt it was the right time to "say goodbye to Becky". Executive producer Phil Collinson remarked that Kelly was talented and managed to make Becky into a "firm favourite" with viewers. Kelly finished filming her final scenes as Becky on 9 December 2011.

The "Daily Mirror" Beth Neil has observed that during her time on "Coronation Street", Becky has morphed "from a thieving tearaway into a vulnerable young woman, clearly damaged from a troubled upbringing." Kelly has commented that Becky finds it hard to rely on others, as she is: "Very out of sorts, because she's a very independent, feisty sort of character." She has stated that she loves Becky's "trailer trash" appearance.

Becky is not an aspirational character, she strives to be normal, satisfied with a "hard up lifestyle". She has changed since her early days, having calmed down a little in terms of her often out of control behaviour. Of this Kelly comments: "If someone had said to me that in three years' time she'd be Becky McDonald and would be behind the bar in the Rovers, I wouldn't have believed it [...] When Becky first came in she was a totally different character, but she's calmed down a lot and her softer side has come out."

Becky became the 50th barmaid at the Rovers Return Inn in June 2008. Kelly opined that the character's ex-con personality would give her an advantage behind the bar, explaining: "The previous producer, Steve Frost, loved the idea of a barmaid who could lose her temper and throw a punch. Becky's an ex-con so she can fight dirty like nobody else." The character's chain smoking tendencies often play out onscreen when she is experiencing stress, something which drew off-screen criticism for her disregard of littering the streets with her cigarette butts. ITV publicity has described Becky as having many different levels to her persona, stating that she loves drinking cider, and that she isn't bothered by how she looks—though when she dresses up she "dresses to the nines" with big earrings, gold rings, logo belts and hair pieces. She dislikes anyone ordering her about, as she cannot handle being told what to do.

Kelly has also revealed that she often changes the material within scripts to play out best how she thinks Becky would act in certain situations. Kelly stated she didn't think Becky would slap other characters, rather opting for punches. She stated: "The script often says, 'Becky slaps Steve' but we try to find a different way to do it. I always think she wouldn't slap, she would punch" Kelly was behind other violent scenes featuring her character, adding "The slap is too common in soaps".

Becky formed a friendship with local residents Roy (David Neilson) and Hayley Cropper (Julie Hesmondhalgh). Becky's on-screen partnership with Roy was particularly successful. Kelly stated it was the turning point in her character's development that won public affection, whilst Neilson stated that it was an "arranged marriage" by producers, delighted with its outcome. Becky's first serious romantic relationship in the soap was with builder Jason Grimshaw (Ryan Thomas). Their relationship was a turning point in what has been described as a "journey" for the character. Kelly spoke of Becky's different attributes in their relationship, during an interview stating: "She absolutely believes that she's 100% in love with him. I see it as a very teenage relationship because of the on-off status. Becky's very mature in many ways – she's very streetwise and if you needed something, you'd go to Becky and she'd find it for you. But emotionally, she's very immature. That's a lot to do with why she gets on so well with Roy because he's quite emotionally immature, too. It's probably the one level that they do connect on." Fans approached the actress in the streets, claiming they were jealous of her because of her on-screen romance with Jason. Following her breakup with Jason, and the aftermath which was highly publicised in the media, such as the "Daily Mirror", and "The Sun" commenting on the plot.

She then embarked on an affair with fellow resident Steve McDonald (Simon Gregson). Kelly stated during an interview that she felt Becky was "punching above her weight" with Jason. Kelly revealed that she felt Steve was the best man for Becky over her previous lover Jason, stating: "Both boys bring out different things in Becky. With Jason, they liked going clubbing, and it was no strings attached, I think Becky needs more than that, even though she wouldn't admit it. I think, long-term, Steve's better for her." When Gregson was interviewed by entertainment website "Digital Spy", he was asked if he thought that his character has had a positive impact on Becky's life. In reply he stated: "I think he's turned it around. She was all over the place getting into trouble all the time but he's made her grow up. And having a little girl there in Amy, that's made her grow a bit, too. She's got responsibilities now. She's besotted with him. She's still a total pisshead, though!" Steve and Becky attempted to marry twice in 2009; their first wedding was given a promotional push from "ITV", which aired adverts for the first wedding episodes. Their relationship was featured in a serious of romantic plots in which "ITV" dubbed the "Summer of Love" season of the soap, with advertisements airing.

In 2009 Slug (Marshall Lancaster), who had been seen on-screen dating Becky in her early appearances, returned. The two characters share a backstory, which was partially created by Lancaster and Kelly themselves. During an interview with "Digital Spy" Kelly spoke the impact Slug has had on Becky stating: "Marshall and I have invented a whole back story between us. It's nice to remember where Becky came from and what a journey she's had. Slug was an important part of Becky's life – they’ve got a lot of history. They grew up together and looked out for each other." The storyline progresses into Slug confessing his love for Becky. Kelly points out that Becky has been on a journey, subsequently changing, stating that "Becky and Slug didn't know what love was" and that she proves she has changed by rejecting his advances.

Becky later forged a friendship with Claire Peacock (Julia Haworth), of this unlikely love/hate friendship Kelly stated: "Claire and Becky strike up a weird, weird friendship because the kids are a similar age, Josh and Amy. [...] So the trouble begins, One minute [Becky and Claire] are good friends and the next, they're really not." Becky's relationship with her mother was never shown onscreen, but when she died Kelly stated: "Becky hated her, and the death has brought back a lot of bad memories." In 2010 it was announced that Becky's half sister would join the cast, with Kelly stating: "We've got some really, really exciting stuff happening. Becky's going to get a half-sister – a younger sister". Kelly had stated that her family was not introduced on-screen because producers didn't want to "pin her character down" with one set of characters.

In 2010, the character underwent changes in appearance and direction with Becky suffering two miscarriages. Kelly branded the storyline challenging, admitting she felt a huge responsibility to get it right, stating: "It's definitely been the hardest thing I've done since I've been here. I think the responsibility to do it well that you feel is huge." Kelly also spoke of the sadness she felt for the impact the plot has on her character adding: "She can't really put up any barriers about this – it's the worst thing that's ever happened. She goes from being a girl to a woman, I think. I'm just devastated for her". Kelly brands the storyline as her hardest, "Most of Becky’s storylines have an element of fun in there somewhere, but with this one it was just like a cloud was hanging over me for six weeks."

However, Becky and Steve decide to adopt, in a storyline which was originally meant for Liz McDonald (Bev Callard). It was revealed that Becky was given the storyline because producer Kim Crowther was determined to feature such a plot. Becky does not like the idea at first thinking she would make a bad mother, later changing her mind. The storyline saw various character changes implemented to Becky, in real life Kelly was forced to reduce the length of her hair. This was written into scripts to fit with the adoption storyline, which saw Becky changing her wardrobe to fool social workers. Of this Kelly stated: "With the adoption storyline, she borrows Claire Peacock's clothes for a while because she wants to look good for the social worker coming round. We thought it was a good opportunity for her to have a slight image change." Kelly further spoke of her admiration of her characters former image adding: "I love Becky with long hair and if it could have been possible I'd have kept her with long blonde hair forever but sometimes nature and practicalities take over!"

In an interview with tabloid newspaper "Daily Mirror", Kelly revealed that she researched the storyline at the "Manchester Adoption Society", who expressed their delight that two high-profile characters were given such a plot. Kelly initially thought Becky would not be able to adopt because of her criminal record, but the society pointed out that the storyline would highlight the fact that adoption is possible for previous offenders, with Kelly stating: "They said the two main things they look for are stability in a family and a lot of back-up at home, which Becky and Steve have with Roy, Hayley and Liz." On what kind of mother Becky will be, Kelly added: "She'd either palm it off on Roy and Hayley and the Barlows, or she would be over-protective and not want it to have the life she had."

Producers later introduced a half-sister for Becky, in the form of Kylie Turner (Paula Lane). Kylie was initially described as having a "full on" personality, similar to Becky. When she arrives, she ruins her and Steve's plans for adoption. She and Kylie brawl violently over the incident; Lane received bruising from filming the scenes. They were so violent that they were toned down before transmission. Kelly described Kylie and Becky as having a love-hate relationship with her, but at the time she "wants to kill her". Lane herself stated that Kylie loves Becky but "feels resentful that she left home when she was only eight. Becky was like a mother to Kylie."

It is then revealed Kylie has a son, Max (Harry McDermott) who is in foster care. Lane stated that when she gets Max back, Kylie takes advantage of Becky's bond with him. In another storyline, Kylie makes a pass at Steve. Steve decides not to tell Becky because he knows Kylie will take Max away, as she is trouble. Kylie plays on the fact Becky is desperate for a child and offers to sell Max to her. Gregson said he felt it immoral to buy a child, but stressed "Kylie isn’t an ordinary mother – she only cares about herself." He said that Steve believes Max would be better off with him and Becky. Steve is first to take Kylie seriously, Gregson believed this was because Kylie has "proved herself ruthless" and "not the best mum". Lane was so shocked with the storyline that she had to take breaks from filming scenes.

Over the course of the series elements of Becky's backstory are revealed to the viewer. The character is stated to have been raised by an abusive, alcoholic mother until leaving home at the age of fourteen after being raped by her mother's boyfriend. Becky was left to fend for herself until she was taken into care. Becky has mentioned living with numerous foster families, but stated that none of them were willing to adopt her as she was somewhat of a "wild child". Becky had a heavily disrupted education, having attended many schools, several of which she was expelled from.

Becky first appears in "Coronation Street" as an old friend of factory worker Kelly Crabtree (Tupele Dorgu), who first encounters Becky begging on the streets, and then later at the police station after she has been arrested for shoplifting and Kelly is retrieving her stolen handbag after previously being mugged. Kelly feels sorry for Becky and gives her some money. She then helps get Becky a job at the Underworld lingerie factory but Becky later frames Kelly for theft. After betraying Kelly, she leaves the area for several months, returning later in the year when she meets former workmate Hayley Cropper, who is teaching an ex-offenders literacy class. Becky promises Hayley she will reform, and is offered a job at Roy's Rolls, the cafe owned and run by Hayley's partner, Roy. She doesn't change as promised and soon begins breaking the Croppers' property, threatening customers and stealing money from the till. Slug, a former acquaintance of Becky's, arrives in Weatherfield and the two joyride in the Croppers' newly acquired Morris Minor. Becky loses the couple's trust and her job. Hayley refuses Becky's apologies and when the cafe catches fire and Becky is rescued from the burning building, the Croppers assume she was responsible. Hayley apologises to Becky on learning that the fire was caused by an electrical fault and the two resume their friendship, with Becky re-employed at Roy's Rolls.

Becky starts dating builder Jason Grimshaw, but after being with him for several months, she cheats on him with pub landlord Steve McDonald. Jason and Becky move in together, but when Jason's ex-wife Sarah Grimshaw (Tina O'Brien) reveals she is considering coming home, he ends things with Becky. Becky attacks Jason in The Rovers Return pub and then goes on a pub crawl, getting drunk and stealing a girl's purse in a nightclub, flashing her breasts in public, and vandalising a travel agency window and a police car. When the police bring Becky in for questioning over her actions, she encounters DC Hooch (Dominic Carter), an adversary from her past. Becky claims to have been with Steve on the night of her rampage and blackmails him to give her a false alibi, threatening to tell his partner Michelle Connor (Kym Marsh) about their one-night stand.

Becky reveals to Steve that Hooch arrested her for shoplifting when she was fifteen, and attempted to molest her. She filed a complaint against him at the time, and Hooch is determined to get his revenge as this harmed his promotion prospects. During Becky's trial, Steve develops genuine feelings for her and they begin an affair, with Steve promising to leave Michelle. Although he keeps his promise, Becky reunites with Jason, eventually leading to him proposing to her. She accepts but reconsiders when Steve proposes as well. Becky ultimately breaks up with Jason and moves in with Steve. His daughter, Amy Barlow (Amber Chadwick), initially dislikes Becky, prompting her to put their wedding on hold though Steve eventually convinces her to set a date. Becky turns up to her wedding so drunk that the vicar refuses to perform the ceremony. They plan a second ceremony, Slug returns, seemingly reformed but actually working for Hooch. Slug plants drugs on Becky. At Becky and Steve's 2nd wedding, the reception is raided by police, and Becky is arrested for drug possession. Steve hires lawyers to free Becky and after Steve and Becky find Slug and convince him to tell them what Hooch has on him that he would even consider framing Becky, they use it to blackmail Hooch into calling a truce and drop the charges.

Becky tells Steve that she is pregnant and he later discovers that Becky has already told Claire and Steve tells his mother, Liz. Unfortunately Becky miscarries twice, although she was unaware of her 2nd pregnancy, and medical tests reveal an abnormality of the womb, meaning she is unable to carry a child full-term, making Becky decide that she wants to adopt. During the process, Steve needs a reference from Amy's mother, Tracy Barlow (Kate Ford), who promptly uses it to cause trouble, making Becky threaten, in return, that Tracy will never see Amy again. Unfortunately Becky and Steve are refused the right to adopt because her estranged half-sister Kylie gave a bad reference and the fact that Social Services feel that it is too soon after her miscarriages. She confronts Kylie, but the sisters eventually reconcile and Becky helps Kylie reclaim custody of her son, Max. Becky becomes very attached to Max, whilst Kylie becomes more irresponsible. Kylie announces plans to move to Cyprus with her new boyfriend and Becky begs her to reconsider, so Kylie offers to sell Max to her and Steve for £20,000, which they agree to. On the night of the tram crash, Kylie returns and demands more money, so Becky steals £5,000 from the ruins of Dev Alahan's (Jimmi Harkishin) corner shop, to pay Kylie off. Tracy is released from prison and the two start feuding again, particularly after Tracy discovers Max's sale and agrees to keep quiet in exchange for Amy. When Tracy is brutally attacked, Becky is arrested for the incident until Claire admits she was responsible but Becky admits looting Dev's shop, Sunita Alahan (Shobna Gulati) is furious but does not report her. When Liz finds out she makes life hard for Becky. Becky gets drunk and attacks Kylie and forces Liz out of the pub. Jim McDonald (Charles Lawson) offers to buy the Rovers — with the money Becky and Steve decide to start a new life abroad and steal Amy. Jim's attempts to rob a bank fail and they are forced to cancel their plans. Steve calls Social Services to check on Max and they take him into care. Becky believes Tracy made the call and smashes her front room up with a sledge-hammer. Before she can hit Tracy, Steve confesses. Becky walks out on Steve and goes off the rails once more.

Becky, still crushed over her betrayal by Steve, stays with Roy and Hayley. While Fiz Stape (Jennie McAlpine) is in prison, Becky takes part in helping Hayley take care of baby Hope (Harriet Atkins and Sadie Pilbury), whom she grows very close to and struggles to hand her back to Fiz. Becky is upset when she discovers that Tracy is pregnant with Steve's twins. While not wishing for anything bad to happen to the twins, she still knows that any chance of getting back together with Steve is well and truly finished because of this. Becky goes on a business meeting with Steve and attempts to seduce him, while Tracy suffers a miscarriage with Deirdre by her side. Tracy assumes Steve is sleeping with Becky and goes to see her. While at Becky's apartment, Becky admits she still loves Steve and would do anything to get him back. This angers Tracy and she attempts to leave the apartment, an emotional wreck. While leaving, Tracy falls down the stairs. Becky calls the ambulance and when Tracy arrives at the hospital, she tells Steve that she lost the babies because of Becky pushing her down the stairs. Deirdre is shocked, knowing that Tracy lost the babies before this incident. Steve believes Tracy. When most of the street turns against Becky, including Roy and Hayley, she is miserable and lonely on Christmas Day. She overhears Steve propose to Tracy which further upsets her. Becky gets drunk by herself in her apartment and burns photographs of her and Steve on their wedding day. While burning the pictures, she falls asleep on the couch and a fire starts in her flat. Becky is saved from the fire by Nick Tilsley (Ben Price) and later vows to gain revenge on Tracy once and for all. Becky begins dating Danny Stratton (Jeremy Sheffield), the man she met on the business meeting with Steve. She gets along perfectly with Danny as well as his young son. Just as things looked perfect for Becky, Danny reveals that he is moving to Barbados because of his hotel business. When he spots Tracy outside the Rovers, he recognises her and reveals to Becky that Tracy lost the babies before her fall. Gail McIntyre (Helen Worth) helps Becky retrieve Tracy's medical records which confirm she is lying. Gail and the rest of the Platts can't wait to see the smile ripped off of Tracy's face when Becky reveals the medical records, and Becky tells them that she is going to do it on Tracy and Steve's wedding day. Becky exposes Tracy's lies after the wedding reception at the Rovers. Tracy is hysterical, and nobody believes her anymore. After exposing Tracy, she says her goodbyes to Kylie, Roy and Hayley and takes up Danny's offer to fly to Barbados with him. Realising he still loves Becky, Steve tries to stop her, to no avail. Becky boards the flight with Danny and departs. She later becomes engaged to Danny. Becky intends to return to Weatherfield for Kylie's funeral, however, she is unable to make the long trip due to an ear infection.

The character has been praised by Nacro, a crime reduction charity which aims to tackle social exclusion and reintegrate offenders. Kelly was concerned they may find Becky to be a caricature, but was pleased to learn they enjoyed Becky being portrayed in a positive light. Media website "Digital Spy" deemed Kelly a "Coronation Street" "icon" when the "Radio Times" had her recreate Manet's famous painting, A Bar at the Folies-Bergère. Kris Green of the same website branded Becky's rampage storyline as a repeat of a previous plot in which David Platt (Jack P. Shepherd) smashed up Coronation Street, while Daniel Kilkelly had branded Becky as a "hellraiser".

TV critic Nancy Banks-Smith praised the character in 2008, calling Becky "the strongest new character since Raquel (Watts) of blessed memory", while The "Daily Mirror" Beth Neil called Becky "Coronation Street" "most outrageous character", as well as "one of the soap's most popular characters". Kelly credited the producers' decision to pair her character with Roy and Hayley Cropper as the moment public support for Becky rose, stating: "The Croppers were the making of Becky, and without them I actually don't think Becky would still be in the show. The Croppers, especially Roy, were the thing that really turned public opinion [about Becky] around to being positive." Grace Dent of "The Guardian" commented on Becky's wedding describing her appearance as: "[Wearing an] Oil-stained pink princess frock carrying a two litre bottle of street-drinker fuel, shouting football chants, with the words eruditely swapped to honour the groom. Becky's beehive lurched like a detonated high rise, her lip colour swept westward on to her earlobe, a Regal King Size blazed in her gob." With their wedding ruined, Dent commented that although it was karma, they didn't deserve it because "Viewers want Steve and Becky to be together". Telecommunication company Orange state that Becky is well known for "her love of cheap cider and Regal King Size's".

Ruth Deller of entertainment website Lowculture often praises Becky in her monthly columns featuring popular and unpopular soap opera characters. Of Becky she states: "Every scene she's in sparkles and she's been a very welcome presence in the Street this past year or so. Long may Queen Becky reign." Deller has also praised her friendship with Claire branding it as good direction for the characters, stating: "Claire has made the very smart move of becoming mates with HRH Queen Becky recently. This can only be a good thing, as everything Becky touches turns to gold." Francine Cohen of the "Daily Mirror" commented on Becky's storylines stating: "Becky’s plots have ranged from drug busts to drunken rampages, but the most poignant yet has been her recent pregnancy, miscarriage and subsequent infertility." Channel 5's soap opera reporting website Holy Soap recall Becky's most memorable moment as being her failed wedding attempt and joked: "She might not remember her first wedding day but we all do!"

The storyline which featured the character's old nemesis DC Hooch drew criticism of Becky's excessive littering of her cigarette butts. Environmental agencies 'Keep Britain Tidy' and 'CleanupUK' commented: "It is disappointing that "Coronation Street" chooses to allow one of its characters to throw a butt on the floor and suggest that it is okay to treat our streets like a giant ashtray. We understand the writers are concerned with realism but Becky is a role model to many viewers. We all have a responsibility to keep our local area clean and we would hope that producers of programmes such as Coronation Street would support our call to encourage the public to keep our country tidy." A spokesperson for the show defended Becky's actions, stating they were portraying the character's high levels of stress realistically. "Inside Soap" readers voted in a poll to find out which character would be missed the most after they depart. Becky won with sixty percent of the vote, whilst up against Eve Jenson (Emmerdale) and Ronnie Mitchell (EastEnders). Julie Richardson writing for Orange U.K. said she "loved a good TV scrap" and the serial had "a corker" with Becky and Kylie's fight which took place in 2011. Jim Shelley of the "Daily Mirror" praised Becky's feud with Tracy, explaining it was a "perfectly poised, barbed battle". Though he said it was ruined by Kylie's return.

Kevin O'Sullivan of the "Sunday Mirror" said that Becky had a "seismic departure" as she "checked out of soapland's asylum in characteristically crazy style". He added that "barking Becky" left "hell town Weatherfield" after much soul-searching. O'Sullivan opined that the "corrie cobbles" would not be the same with out Becky. Although, he felt it was a "shame the only storyline she ever had was the stuck record of her rancid relationship with mad Mr McDonald." Christopher Couture, founder of self-titled celebrity gossip blog "ChristopherCouture.co.uk", described Kelly as "the new Bet Lynch" on Twitter, following her final episode. Laura Morgan of "All About Soap" said that Becky's exit will "go down in soap history as one of the best". In September 2012, "Inside Soap" named Becky's exit as their number 2 happy ending, "Becky believed the world expected the worst of her, and thought it her duty to deliver the goods — generally with a strain of White Diamond cider spending down the front of her wedding dress. Steve loved Becky, but her inability to have kids made her insecure — and Tracy exploited that pain in order to drive the pair apart. Happily, Becky won her revenge in the end, and moved to Barbados with Jeremy Sheffield [who played Danny]. The jammy so-and-so."

Kelly has won and been nominated for a variety of awards for her portrayal of Becky. In 2009, she was named "Best Female Soap Star" at the TV Now Awards, "TV Soap Personality of the Year" at the Television and Radio Industries Club awards and "Best Actress" at the British Soap Awards. At the 2009 TV Choice & TV Quick Awards, Kelly was named "Best Actress". 2010 saw Kelly and co-star Gregson win the "Bride And Doom" partnership award at the "All About Soap Awards".
In 2008, Kelly was nominated for the "Outstanding Serial Drama Performance" award at the National Television Awards. At the British Soap Awards, Kelly was nominated for "Best Actress", "Best Comedy Performance" and "Best On-Screen Partnership" with Neilson. The following year she was again nominated for "Best On-Screen Partnership", this time with Gregson and "Sexiest Female". At the 2009 "Inside Soap Awards", Kelly received a nomination for "Best Actress". The following year at the Inside Soap Awards Kelly was nominated "Best Actress" and Becky and Steve were nominated for "Best Wedding". Also in 2010, Kelly was nominated for "Serial Drama Performance" at the National Television Awards. Kelly also garnered nominations for "Best On-Screen Partnership" with Gregson and "Best Actress" at the British Soap Awards. In February 2011, Kelly was nominated for Best Actress at the Soap Bubbles Awards. Kelly was again nominated for "Best Actress" at the 2011 British Soap Awards. At the "TVTimes" "Corrie Awards", Becky and Steve were nominated in the category of "Best Couple", whilst Becky herself was nominated for "Best Female Character". In January 2012, Kelly won the award for "Best Serial Performance" at the National Television Awards. In April 2012 Kelly won the award for 'Best Exit' at the 2012 British Soap Awards, whilst 'Becky's Final Farewell' was voted best single episode.



</doc>
<doc id="23992469" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23992469" title="Pilot (Numbers)">
Pilot (Numbers)

"Pilot" is the first episode of the American television show "Numb3rs". Based on a real-life serial rape case, "Pilot" features two brothers, an agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and a mathematics professor at a Southern California university, using their individual skills to capture a serial rapist who has begun to kill his victims. "Pilot" also introduces the theme of mathematics being used to solve crimes.

Written by series creators Cheryl Heuton and Nicolas Falacci, the episode was filmed twice, once in Boston, Massachusetts and once in Los Angeles, California, with two different casts using two somewhat different scripts. The test audience could not believe that the three men who portrayed the family could be related to each other, so the producers made cast changes to the family. They also made several changes to the rest of the cast to accommodate the changes in the script. Heuton and Falacci changed the script to focus on the brothers' relationship with each other. When filming finished, CBS picked up the episode and the series three weeks later.

"Pilot" first aired in the United States on January 23, 2005. The episode received mixed reviews. Mathematicians and students at California Institute of Technology enjoyed the episode and were impressed with the mathematics in it. In contrast, television critics felt as though the episode's plot about a serial rapist was unoriginal, although one critic called the math boring.

FBI Special Agents Don Eppes (Rob Morrow), Terry Lake (Sabrina Lloyd) and David Sinclair (Alimi Ballard) investigate a serial rapist who has begun killing his victims. With the twelfth victim, Karen Silber (Kate Norby), changing her story again and the thirteenth victim's car missing, Don runs out of viable leads. Taking a map and a case file with him, Don goes to his childhood home, owned by his father Alan Eppes (Judd Hirsch), to take a shower. Don's younger brother, Dr. Charlie Eppes (David Krumholtz) of CalSci's mathematics department, finds and studies the map which Don lays on the dining room table. As Don prepares to return to the office, Charlie tries to talk Don into letting him help with the investigation and is inspired by the pattern of drops emanating from the family's sprinkler. He tells Don that he can use a mathematical model to find the neighborhood where the rapist resides. Skeptical, Don agrees to let Charlie assist him in the investigation.

Charlie develops the model needed to find the rapist and refines it with graduate student Amita Ramanujan's (Navi Rawat) assistance. Charlie's model yields what he calls a "hot zone", an area in which the suspect probably lives. As the case progresses, Silber is found dead in her house. Don and his team resort to comparing DNA samples of men who live in the hot zone to samples of the rapist/killer. Using statistical analysis, Charlie deduces that Silber lied about where her rape took place. After Don learns from Silber's colleagues where Silber was raped, Charlie refines his equation, which yields a smaller area within the original hot zone. DNA, however, clears everyone in the original hot zone. As a result, Assistant Director in Charge (ADIC) Walter Merrick (Anthony Heald) pulls Don and his team from the investigation. At the same time, Dr. Larry Fleinhardt (Peter MacNicol), Charlie's colleague and friend, encourages Charlie to make his equation "less elegant" and to evaluate the worth of his consultation work.

Back at the Eppes house, Charlie and Don discuss what went wrong. Alan is confident that the math is correct. Don tells Charlie that if Charlie ran his model on Don, the model will not show Don at his apartment. Instead, it would zone in on his office, where he spends most of his time. Charlie then realizes that he needs to modify his model to identify two hot zones, one where the suspect possibly resides and one where he possibly works. Using the new equation and a list of potential suspects who work in the new hot zone, Don, Terry, and David confront the suspect and find his latest victim, who is still alive. After Don kills the suspect in a hostage situation, he calls Charlie down to the crime scene to tell Charlie that the suspect lived in the original hot zone but moved three weeks earlier. This revelation proves that Charlie's models are correct.

Two pilots were filmed. Fascinated by mathematicians, creators Cheryl Heuton and Nicolas Falacci decided to create a show about one. With the encouragement of CBS development executives, they wrote several pilots revolving around mathematicians and scientists, including the pilot for "Numb3rs", over the course of 14 years. Knowing that mathematics would not be readily accepted by the general public on its own, Heuton and Falacci in 2003 decided to use the police procedural format to facilitate the acceptance. When Falacci and Heuton pitched the pilot, CBS agreed to produce it about halfway through their presentation.

Although they had considered several story ideas, Heuton and Falacci wanted to feature a case in which math was used to solve a traditional type of crime. They decided to base the episode on a real-life serial rapist case in which police asked Dr. Kim Rossmo to assist them in the investigation. In 1998, Rossmo, then with the Vancouver Police Department, was called in to help Lafayette, Louisiana, police investigator McCullan Gallien find the South Side Rapist. Rossmo and Gallien visited the crime scenes, and Rossmo used criminal geographic targeting, a mathematical model used to find the area in which the suspect would most likely reside. Together, Rossmo and Gallien developed a map indicating the most likely location of the rapist's residence. After DNA cleared everyone living in the area, Gallien learned that a sheriff's deputy in a neighboring department, Randy Comeaux, was a potential suspect. He had lived in the area during the time frame of the rapes but moved to a residence in the neighboring jurisdiction some time later. DNA on a cigarette butt left by Comeaux confirmed that he was the rapist, and Comeaux was arrested.

The pilot was originally filmed in Boston, which was selected because of Falacci's familiarity with the area and because of the contrast between academia and the working class. Filming began in the spring of 2004. Although the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) refused to allow filming on campus, the cast and crew spent two days filming in the city. Dr. Tony Chan of UCLA's physical science department consulted on the original pilot episode. Although initially hesitant about auditioning, David Krumholtz was the first person cast and won the role of Charlie Eppes. Other original cast members were Len Cariou as Alan; Gabriel Macht as Don; Peter MacNicol as Charlie's mentor; Anna Deavere Smith as Don's boss; Jennifer Bransford, Michael Rooker, and Alimi Ballard as FBI agents; and Navi Rawat as a MIT graduate student. When filming was completed, executive producers Ridley Scott and Tony Scott and producer Skip Chaisson added graphics and music to the footage. They also added transitions to assist the storytelling. To accommodate these changes, CBS allowed the producers to delay the delivery of the pilot to the studio by two weeks.

When previewed, the focus group liked the concept but hated the way the pilot was produced. Among the problems with the original pilot was the believability of the Eppes family in terms of both physical appearance and chemistry, with the chemistry of the actors being the larger issue. Although Heuton and Falacci liked Cariou, Macht, and Krumholtz, Heuton and Falacci did not know how the three actors playing the Eppes family would interact with each other until filming began.

Since both the focus group and network executives liked the concept of the pilot, CBS decided to recast and reshoot it. Filming began again in September 2004. To accommodate the budget for the new pilot, the second pilot was set and filmed in Los Angeles. Administrators at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) agreed to allow producers to film the academic scenes at Caltech. Dr. Gary Lorden, one of Caltech's math professors, served as math consultant of the second pilot. The producers kept Krumholtz, MacNicol, Rawat, and Ballard. Rooker and Macht left the cast, and Rob Morrow replaced Macht as Don. Other casting changes included the addition of Sabrina Lloyd as a FBI agent, Judd Hirsch as Alan, and Anthony Heald as Don's boss.

The producers rewrote the script to accommodate changes in story, characters, and basic idea of the series. They decreased the role of Don's boss to focus the main conflict on the brothers' worldviews. They rewrote the structure and composition of Don's team. They also revised the start of Charlie's involvement with the investigation to incorporate Heuton and Falacci's original idea of Don taking the work home with him. When the second pilot was presented to the focus group, the group liked it. CBS picked up the pilot three weeks after filming ended.

The second pilot was screened at Caltech on January 10, 2005, and Heuton, Falacci, Hirsch, Morrow, Krumholtz, and Lorden participated in a panel discussion after the preview. The students who saw the screening at Caltech enjoyed the episode. The pilot was then previewed during the Joint Mathematics Meeting in Atlanta, Georgia from January 12 through January 14, 2005. Ed Pegg, Jr., a member of the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) who watched the episode at the conference, stated that he liked it and that he was impressed with the decision to depict the mathematics accurately. As for premiering on network television, the pilot initially was to air on January 21, 2005, but it was moved to January 23, 2005, after the AFC Championship game in order to be seen by a larger audience. When it premiered on TV on January 23, 2005, 25 million people watched the pilot episode of "Numb3rs", beating the audience for the pilot episode of "Desperate Housewives" by about 4 million viewers.

Reception of the pilot varied according to the audience in question. The pilot was very well received by the mathematics community. Within a couple of weeks of Pegg's article for the MAA, Keith Devlin, another member of the association, gave the pilot a very favorable review.

As for the mainstream media, the reviews for the pilot were mixed. Gillian Flynn of "Entertainment Weekly" commented that, given that the case was about a serial killer, the pilot did not show the math in an original way. John Leonard of the "New York Magazine" called the cast "superb" but criticized the pilot for being too busy. Melanie McFarland, the "Seattle Post-Intelligencer"'s TV critic, asserts that the pilot's storyline was an "unfortunate choice" for the pilot episode. Robert Bianco of "USA Today" stated that the pilot's storyline was unoriginal. Tim Goodman of the "San Francisco Chronicle", however, stated that the pilot and the cast were excellent but that the math was uninteresting.

On the "Numb3rs" season one DVDs, three features address both pilots. The bonus feature "Point of Origin: Inside the Unaired Pilot" on the Numb3rs: The Complete First Season DVDs highlights the differences between both pilots and features clips from the original pilot. In the feature, creators Heuton and Falacci, executive producers Ridley Scott and Tony Scott, co-executive producer David W. Zucker, casting director Mark Saks, and producer Skip Chaissom detail the changes in cast, filming, wardrobe, and makeup. On the audio commentary for the "Pilot", Heuton, Falacci, Morrow and Krumholtz discuss not only additional changes in the pilot but also additional production trivia from the second pilot. Although the bonus feature "Crunching Numb3rs: Season One" features clips and discussions for other episodes throughout the season, it also addresses the production of the second pilot.



</doc>
<doc id="24006445" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24006445" title="Tropical Storm Ana (2009)">
Tropical Storm Ana (2009)

Tropical Storm Ana was the first named storm of the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season and the first tropical cyclone to impact the Caribbean islands during 2009. Forming out of an area of low pressure associated with a tropical wave on August 11, Ana briefly attained tropical storm intensity on August 12 before weakening back to a depression. The following day, the system degenerated into a non-convective remnant low as it tracked westward. On August 14, the depression regenerated roughly 1,075 mi (1,735 km) east of the Leeward Islands. Early on August 15, the storm re-attained tropical storm status, at which time it was named Ana. After reaching a peak intensity with winds of 40 mph (65 km/h) and a barometric pressure of 1003 mbar (hPa; 29.65 inHg), the storm began to weaken again due to increasing levels of wind shear and the unusually fast movement of Ana. In post-storm analysis, it was discovered that Ana had degenerated into a tropical wave once more on August 16, before reaching any landmasses.

Numerous tropical storm watches were issued for the Lesser Antilles, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic between August 15 and 17. Several islands took minor precautions for the storm, including St. Croix which evacuated 40 residents from flood-prone areas ahead of the storm. In the Dominican Republic, officials took preparations by setting up relief agencies and setting up shelters. Impact from Ana was minimal, mainly consisting of light to moderate rainfall. In Puerto Rico, up to of rain was reported, causing street flooding and forcing the evacuation of three schools.

On August 9, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) began monitoring a tropical wave associated with a small area of convective activity between the Cape Verde Islands and the western coast of Africa. The system eventually spawned an area of low pressure as it tracked towards the west. After slowly organising for a few days, the NHC reported early on August 11, that the system had developed into a tropical depression. The system at this time was located about 280 mi (455 km), west of the Cape Verde Islands. The depression developed deep convection around the center of circulation and continued to track generally towards the west in response to a mid-level subtropical ridge to the north. The depression was expected to gradually intensify as it moved over marginally warm sea surface temperatures and into an area of low wind shear; however it was anticipated that dry air would hamper the depressions chances of intensifying further.

By August 12, the NHC reported that Tropical Depression Two was near tropical storm intensity after a burst of deep convection over the center. At this point, the system was not upgraded to a tropical storm; however, in a post-storm analysis, it was determined that the system had attained tropical storm-force winds, peaking at 40 mph (65 km/h) for 12 hours on August 12. Several hours later, the system became disorganized due to increased wind shear. By the afternoon of August 13, the system had weakened to a tropical depression and shortly thereafter, degenerated into a non-convective remnant low-pressure area as it failed to maintain convection around the center for 24 hours. At this time, the NHC issued their final advisory on the system but noted that there was the possibility of regeneration.
On August 14, roughly 24 hours after degenerating into a remnant low, convection began to redevelop over the system. Later that day, a Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance plane deployed dropsondes into the system. They found that the system was regenerating and shortly after, the NHC began re-issuing advisories on the depression when it was located roughly 1,075 mi (1,735 km) east of the Leeward Islands. The depression continued to track westward in response to an upper-level high over the north Atlantic. Early on August 15, the NHC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm, giving it the name "Ana" as deep convection developed around the center of circulation. Later that day, wind shear caused convection to become displaced from the circulation, exposing the center of Ana again.

By August 16, the forward motion of Ana began to increase, and the storm quickly entered a region of dry, stable air. By the afternoon, a Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance mission did not find any evidence of tropical storm-force winds, resulting in Ana being downgraded to a tropical depression. It was determined in post-storm analysis, that Ana had degenerated into a tropical wave shortly afterwards, and was no longer a tropical cyclone. Several hours later, the system redeveloped convection as it raced towards the west-northwest at 26 mph (42 km/h). Early on August 17, radar imagery from Guadeloupe and San Juan, Puerto Rico depicted a system without a closed, low-level circulation. Despite this, the NHC continued operational advisories until confirmation could be made with visible satellite imagery. Later that day, a final reconnaissance plane flew into the storm and did not find a low-level circulation. Following this, the NHC stated that Ana had dissipated off the coast of Puerto Rico, despite having already degenerated into a tropical wave the previous day. The remnants of Ana were once more monitored for signs of regeneration, but land interaction with Hispaniola and Cuba destroyed any chance of redevelopment.

On August 15, a tropical storm watch was issued for much of the Leeward Islands. Two days later, the watch was expanded to include Puerto Rico and areas in the eastern Dominican Republic between Cabo Engaño and Cabo Beata. As Ana weakened and dissipated, the watches were discontinued.
In San Maarten, cruise agencies redirected ships to avoid the storm and secured vessels docked at port. Several ships were moved to Simpson Bay Lagoon where waves are generally small. In St. Kitts, officials evacuated 40 families in flood-prone areas to shelters ahead of the storm. On August 17, the National Weather Service in San Juan, Puerto Rico issued an Urban and Small Stream Flood Advisory for all of the eastern municipalities on the island. Flights in the area were delayed by several hours to avoid the depression. In the Dominican Republic, officials posted flood alerts for 12 provinces as the remnants of Ana were forecast to produce up to of rain in the country. General Luna Paulino of the civil army activated relief agencies ahead of the storm and notified residents of possible mandatory evacuations. Officials inspected the dams threatened by the storm to protect several towns and villages. Emergency officials stated that roughly 35,000 personnel were on standby in case of a disaster. Shelters were also prepped throughout the country; however, these were not opened and the residents who had voluntarily evacuated had returned home by the afternoon of August 17. In nearby Haiti, officials placed the country under yellow alert as the remnants of Ana could produce heavy rainfall over mountainous areas.

In St. Thomas, sustained winds reached 28 mph (45 km/h) and gusts peaked at 40 mph (65 km/h). In Puerto Rico, rainfall was limited due to the storms' fast motion, triggering minor flooding but little damage. A maximum of of rain fell in Río Grande. The rains caused the Río Fajardo to rise, resulting in the issuance of an alert as officials warned it could overflow its banks. Several streets were temporarily shut down due to flooding, including one tunnel, and three schools had to be evacuated. Throughout the island, roughly 6,000 people were left without power as numerous branches were snapped off trees and knocked down power lines. There were also reports of waterspouts and tornadoes associated with Ana in Puerto Rico. Winds on the island gusted up to 42 mph (67 km/h). The remnants of Ana produced widespread rainfall across Hispaniola; however, there were no reports of damage from the system.




</doc>
<doc id="24048897" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24048897" title="Giveamanakick">
Giveamanakick

Giveamanakick—typeset as giveamanakick and abbreviated as GAMAK— were an Irish rock music duo from Limerick. The two band members were Stephen Ryan (Steveamanakick), the vocalist and guitarist, and Keith Lawler (Giveamanakeith), the drummer.

Giveamanakick performed regularly in Ireland, toured the United Kingdom with The Undertones and also performed in Germany during their existence. The duo featured at festivals such as Electric Picnic, Indie-pendence and Hard Working Class Heroes and also took part in the 2fm 2moro 2our. They released three albums; "Is it ok to be loud, Jesus?" (2003), "We Are the Way Forward" (2005) and "Welcome to the Cusp" (2008) before the end was announced in August 2009.

Remaining in Limerick throughout the existence of Giveamanakick, the duo were declared "the best hard-rock band in the country" by rock critic Eamon Sweeney and received the approval of "Hot Press", "No Disco"s Leagues O'Toole and Fight Like Apes.

Giveamanakick formed in 2001 following the demise of Tooth. Left with several songs, Ryan performed as a solo artist with an electric guitar. One night, he encountered Keith Lawler, who played guitar in another band at the time, and Lawler began drumming with Ryan. In 2002, the duo released a split single with Mr. Creosote titled "Darko Filopovic", a song which would later feature as the final track on their debut album. By 2003, they had supported several more established acts, including Yeah Yeah Yeahs and Rocket from the Crypt. In 2003, there were reports that the duo's debut album, titled "Is it ok to be loud, Jesus?", would be released on a label called Larry Gogan Records but this later emerged to be a joke published by a fledgling "Foggy Notions". The duo's debut album was in fact published on 3 July 2003 with that same title by the independent label Out On A Limb Records as the label's first release, with Giveamanakick having finished recording it in January that year. It received two out of five stars in a review by RTÉ's Tom Grealis who wrote, "this is what happens when rawness comes without any real sense of purpose". The "Hot Press" reviewer said listening to the album was "something akin to being battered round the head with a plank of wood for half an hour" but, nonetheless, "bloody fantastic".

A second album, "We Are the Way Forward", was recorded over an eight-day period and released by Out On a Limb in 2005. It received three from five stars in a review by RTÉ's Harry Guerin who said: "you'll get what you paid for from their stomp and swing". Phil Udell's "Hot Press" review gave the album 4.5 out of five stars, saying it "gives you that much sought after visceral thrill" and that the duo "wrote it, recorded it, fucked off. A classic". Their live performances also came in for increasing critical acclaim. When Eamon Sweeney of the "Irish Independent" attended a show by The Presidents of the United States of America in May 2006, his review stated that they "were well and truly blown off the stage by the support band" who were Giveamanakick. Stephen Ryan has said in several interviews that their early Sunday morning performance at Electric Picnic in 2006 was "one to remember" with so many festival-goers coming to view them. He described the performance as a" bit of a blur" as they "pretty dumbfounded by the reaction" and the idea of "playing with some of our musical heroes such as Dinosaur Jr. and Deftones was a dream come through".

In 2007, Giveamanakick toured Germany before beginning to record their follow-up album. They did the 2fm 2moro 2our with The Flaws and Messiah J & The Expert. In October that year, rock critic Eamon Sweeney, bemoaning the lack of original Irish music that year, singled out Giveamanakick as " the best hard-rock band in the country" and said they "could teach all those Dublin chancers with stupid haircuts and no ideas a thing or two".

Giveamanakick were described as a "promising act" for 2008 by Eamon Sweeney of the "Irish Independent" in January of that year. They performed several Irish dates in January that year. Their third album, "Welcome to the Cusp", was recorded over a ten-day period in Letterkenny, County Donegal and released on 2 May 2008 on the duo's own label, Monkeyheart Recordings. It received three from five stars in a review by RTÉ's Harry Guerin who described the music as "immediate and memorable". Other publications called it "the best Irish record of 2008". The track "Brittle Bones", released as the second single from the album, marked the first use of an acoustic guitar by the duo. Ryan claimed that "Welcome to the Cusp" was the album which "most accurately represents what the Giveamanakick sound actually is" and described the songs as "possibly the most structurally challenging ones so far".

Giveamanakick performed a nationwide tour following the release of "Welcome to the Cusp", including a date at Indie-pendence in August 2008. Prior to their Friday night performance at Electric Picnic in 2008, Tony Clayton-Lea, writing in "The Irish Times", recommended festival-goers to see them, remarking that "despite keeping a profile lower than a Dachshund's belly, Giveamanakick have managed to keep things grooving along by virtue of their innate boisterousness and musical flash-bang-wallop".

In September 2008, Giveamanakick played Hard Working Class Heroes, at which the organisers selected them alongside acts such as The Blizzards and Heathers to play the CMJ Festival in New York City the following month. On 3 April 2009, the duo appeared on Phantom FM alongside Royseven to perform cover versions of Nirvana songs. Giveamanakick's end came with an announcement on 17 August 2009. The final shows are scheduled to take place in Cork, Dublin, Galway and Limerick in November and December 2009.\\
In June 2013, it was announced that giveamanakick were to reform for one night only to celebrate their label's 10th birthday.

The duo were described as "noise rock's version of The Odd Couple" by RTÉ. Ryan once described himself as a "Beastie Boys fanatic" and the duo were compared to acts such as Pixies. His lyrics regularly featured references to popular culture. However, the opening track on their debut album, titled "Ger Canning", was not a reference to the broadcaster of the same name. They wrote self-described pop songs, where "Keith hits his drums really hard and I [Steve Ryan] like my guitars turned up very loud but we do this with a pop sensibility", and employed techniques such as using gas masks to distort their vocals when playing live, performing with streamers and encouraging their audience to disorientate themselves by clapping their own ears. They lived in Limerick throughout their existence, citing a positive music scene, the humour and the hurling as being some of their reasons for liking their home city.

Stephen Ryan was the guitarist and vocalist. He is originally from Castletroy. He grew up in a background of traditional music, listened to The Beatles on his father's record player, learned how to play the keyboard at the age of ten, the guitar at the age of fifteen and joined a band called Tooth in his early twenties. He has also performed as Windings.

Keith Lawler was the drummer. He is from Parteen, Co. Clare. He liked Nirvana when he was fourteen years of age, and learned how to play the guitar when he was a teenager but began to learn the drums at the age of sixteen when he realised that there was a surplus of guitarists in his area. Tooth used to rehearse near his house and he often listened to them from outside. Two of his cousins were already drummers, having performed with The Charming and The Cranberries.

Giveamanakick released three albums.




</doc>
<doc id="24086468" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24086468" title="Market Forces (The Spectacular Spider-Man)">
Market Forces (The Spectacular Spider-Man)

"Market Forces" is the fourth episode of the animated television series "The Spectacular Spider-Man," which is based on the comic book character Spider-Man, created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko. In the episode, Spider-Man is hunted by Shocker, whose suit allows him to fire intense sonic blasts.

"Market Forces" was written by Andrew Robinson and directed by Dan Fausett. It incorporated computer-generated imagery in the sonic blasts used by Shocker, which mixed in with the other, traditional animation style used in the show. Shocker's secret identity was completely changed from that of his original comic book appearance, but his design stayed close to the original costume used.

The episode originally broadcast on March 22, 2008, on the Kids WB! block for the CW Network. It received generally positive reviews from television critics. IGN praised it for its imagery and storytelling, while "iF Magazine" said "Even the Shocker was more interesting on this show, so I continue to have high hopes for future episodes, characters, and villains."

Montana and The Enforcers steal a powered suit from an armored Tri-Corp truck after gassing the guards. Montana hands it to Hammerhead, who insists that Montana dons the suit to complete the "Big Man"'s contract to kill Spider-Man. The next day, Peter Parker gets across town as Spider-Man, unaware that Montana and his men are watching him. He then hangs out at Harry's apartment, discussing the upcoming Fall Formal, until he receives an e-mail from J. Jonah Jameson of the "Daily Bugle" informing Peter that Jonah wants to purchase his photos of Spider-Man. He leaves and promises to help Harry with homework later. At the "Bugle" building, Jonah mistakenly kicks Peter out before realizing who he is. Jonah pays him and makes him exit the building.

While heading back, Peter hears an alarm coming from a landfill and investigates. It ends up being a trap and he is attacked with sonic blasts by Montana, now wearing the suit and calling himself "Shocker". When he is close to moving in for the kill, one of the thugs used as bait, Alex O'Hirn, accidentally gives Spider-Man time to recover. Shocker then knocks him into a machine and, satisfied, leaves via helicopter. Spider-Man, however, survives but his paycheck was torn to shreds. The next day after school, where Harry is outraged with him over missing out on studying, Peter goes to replace his check at the "Bugle" where assistant editor Joe Robertson suggests getting a better camera. After Jonah takes a photo of Spider-Man covered in garbage as Peter's submission, Peter goes after O'Hirn and his partner Flint Marko as Spider-Man. He defeats them and tells them to inform Shocker he wants a rematch.

Peter makes it home in time for his curfew and spots Aunt May struggling with the bills, but must use the money he has to buy a new camera. When he goes to school the next day, he finds Harry is furious with him once more over forgetting their studying arrangements once more. At night, Hammerhead tells Shocker the Big Man is displeased with his failure. Meanwhile, Peter unsuccessfully tries to ask out Jonah's assistant, Betty Brant. After a tremor rattles the entire city, Peter, as Spider-Man, discovers it is the Shocker, leaving him a trail that leads to a condemned theater. During their fight, Spider-Man unsuccessfully tries to find out who hired him before finally bringing the building down and defeating the Shocker.

Meanwhile, Harry returns home where his father Norman tells him to take responsibility and study by himself. Norman then goes to meet with Hammerhead, revealing that he helped them steal the suit from Tri-Corp as they are his company's competitor. He talks over speaker phone with the Big Man, who wants him to create new supervillains in return for funding. At his house, Peter sends his photos to the "Bugle" and tries to give Aunt May the money, but she insists that he uses 10% of every paycheck to save for a new camera.

"Market Forces" was written by Andrew Robinson and directed by Dan Fausett. Though the show is done in the style of traditional animation, computer-generated imagery was used to produce the green sonic beams made by Shocker. In the original comic book publications, Shocker's secret identity was a man named Herman Schultz. For "The Spectacular Spider-Man," they changed his identity to that of Enforcer Montana, who had, in the comics, been a prominent character already. Using Montana allowed the writers to not have to come up with a completely new origin for Shocker. His suit was generally the same as that done in the comic books, but had extra features including goggles and vibrators. His voice was provided by veteran voice performer Jeff Bennett.

Greg Weisman, one of the producers for the series, came up with the idea to do a title scheme for each arc. For "Market Forces" and its arc, the scheme is economics. A line in the episode asks how deep a location is, using the Mariana Trench and the Ninth Circle of Hell in Dante's "Inferno" as comparisons.

"Market Forces" originally broadcast on March 26, 2008, on the Kids WB! block for the CW Network, at 10:00 a.m. It received generally positive reviews from television critics. Eric Goldman of IGN gave the episode an 8.5 out of 10 and wrote "Sometimes change can be fun, and this episode was a great example of that." Goldman enjoyed the design of Shocker which he felt stayed true to his original design and was "intrigued" by changing his secret identity. He praised the usage of CGI, the portrayal of Peter's life, and the "cool" ending.

Sean Elliot, the senior editor of "iF Magazine," gave the episode an "A-" and said about the change of Shocker's secret identity, "saves the writers from having to come up with a completely different origin for a character that pretty much is a second tier villain anyways. " Elliot wrote that having Norman making a deal to produce new supervillains was "an extremely useful" convention that allows the introduction and creation of enemies for Spider-Man to fight.




</doc>
<doc id="24088837" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24088837" title="Triangle (The Beau Brummels album)">
Triangle (The Beau Brummels album)

Triangle is the fourth studio album by American rock band The Beau Brummels. Produced by Lenny Waronker and released in July 1967, it was the band's first album to include songs that vocalist Sal Valentino and guitarist Ron Elliott composed together. The band incorporated fantasy elements and surreal characters into the album's song titles and lyrics, and worked with a variety of session musicians to create "Triangle"'s psychedelic musical style. The Beau Brummels were reduced to a trio—Valentino, Elliott, and Ron Meagher—at the time "Triangle" was recorded, as former group members Don Irving (guitars) and John Petersen (drums) left the band following the release of the group's previous album, "Beau Brummels '66".

"Triangle" reached number 197 on the "Billboard" 200 albums chart and received mostly positive reviews; critics commended Elliott as a songwriter and compared Valentino's vocals to those of Bob Dylan. The single "Magic Hollow" was ranked one of "The 100 Greatest Psychedelic Classics" in a 1997 issue of "Mojo" magazine. Warner Japan released this album as WPCP-5252 in 1993. Collectors' Choice Music reissued the album in 2002.

In July 1966, the Beau Brummels released their third album, and first with Warner Bros. Records. Titled "Beau Brummels '66", the album was a collection of cover songs and was a commercial disappointment. Critics questioned Warner Brothers' decision to not release the band's original material, which had been recorded by the band in early 1966 as their previous label, Autumn Records, collapsed. These recordings eventually appeared on the 2005 compilation album "San Fran Sessions". Following the release of "Beau Brummels '66", guitarist Don Irving left the group when he received an induction notice into the armed forces. 
Drummer John Petersen quit to join pop rock band Harpers Bizarre. 
By early 1967, the three remaining members—vocalist Sal Valentino, guitarist Ron Elliott, and bassist Ron Meagher—quit touring to focus on studio work. For their next album, "Triangle", the band met with Warner Bros. producer Lenny Waronker, who gave the band freedom to resume recording original material. According to Elliott, "Lenny Waronker wanted to do something creative, and I was up for that." 
During the album's recording sessions, Meagher left the group when he was called to active duty in the Army Reserves.

Valentino said "Triangle" was partially inspired by several day trips he took to the California Palace of the Legion of Honor, a fine art museum in San Francisco. 
He admired the collection of 17th century Flemish portraits and landscape paintings at the museum, from which dark yet incandescent hues emanated. Elliott described the album as a "mythological cartoon about love written from some weird spaces", and explained it as "sort of a mood swing into the world that was around us at the time. It was sort of dissolving into this drug culture. So the music became very ethereal, mystic, and mysterious". In contrast with the band's generally straightforward recordings for the Autumn label, "Triangle"'s lyrics are more abstract, containing Tolkienesque fantasy elements and dream-like characters, such as the gypsy in "Only Dreaming Now", the "Painter of Women", "The Keeper of Time", and "The Wolf of Velvet Fortune", as well as the destination of "Magic Hollow".

Elliott, the band's principal composer, sought to move away from the formulaic songs that Autumn Records wanted. 
Having regained artistic freedom in the studio, and with the band no longer touring, Elliott and Valentino focused on creating an album of songs which were written and recorded specifically for that purpose. 
The resulting sessions for "Triangle" saw Elliott and Valentino collaborate as songwriters for the first time. Four of the album's tracks were written by Elliott with frequent collaborator Bob Durand. The album also contained the Randy Newman composition "Old Kentucky Home" and a cover version of Merle Travis's "Nine Pound Hammer", both of which hinted at the country rock direction explored more heavily by the band on their 1968 album, "Bradley's Barn". Session musicians included guitarist James Burton, drummer Jim Gordon, bassist Carol Kaye, and Van Dyke Parks, who played harpsichord on "Magic Hollow", adding to the album's psychedelic musical style. 
Elliott returned the favor, playing guitar on Parks' 1968 debut album, "Song Cycle". 
"Triangle" also features strings, brass, accordion, woodwinds, and numerous types of percussion.

Released in July 1967, "Triangle" spent two weeks on the "Billboard" 200 albums chart, peaking at number 197. 
Though not a commercial success, 
the album gained an underground following and received critical acclaim. Sal Valentino's "expressive" vocals were compared to those of Bob Dylan by "Crawdaddy!"'s Paul Williams in 1968 and by "Perfect Sound Forever"'s Steve Cooper in 2004. 
A 2007 review in "Electric Roulette" stated that Valentino's voice resembles Gene Clark of The Byrds, "but superior in tone and emotion". 
Williams, Cooper, and Allmusic's Stansted Montfichet praised Ron Elliott as a songwriter, with Montfichet adding that Elliott's "lyrical imagery ... is particularly striking" in the songs "Only Dreaming Now", "Painter of Women", and "The Wolf of Velvet Fortune". 
Australian journalist and author Lillian Roxon wrote in her 1969 "Rock Encyclopedia" that "Triangle" "was the album that astonished everyone and blew a million minds". 
Music journalist Jon Savage named the song "Magic Hollow" in his list of the "100 Greatest Psychedelic Classics" in the June 1997 issue of "Mojo" magazine. 
In 2006, Joel Selvin of the "San Francisco Chronicle" called the album a "cult classic", 
while "SF Weekly"'s Justin F. Farrar remarked that it "has aged far more gracefully than that almighty concept record from '67, "Sgt. Pepper's [Lonely Hearts Club Band]"." 
Brendan McGrath of "The Rising Storm" wrote in a 2007 review that ""Triangle" has everything: it's a tightly produced country record that is rooted in rock; it's straight and folky and underlined by psychedelic imagery". 
Author Tom Moon selected the album for his 2008 book, "1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die", in which he wrote that "Triangle" "captured the crisscrossing events of 1967" and was "the rare bridge between the sunny straightforwardness of mid-60s pop and the fuzzy opaqueness of psychedelia". 
During a 2005 broadcast of "Fresh Air", National Public Radio's Ken Tucker said that "Triangle" comes "perilously close to stuffy art rock." 
The album was re-released in 2002 by Collectors' Choice Music. Kim Cooper of "Scram" magazine said the reissue was "long overdue" and noted that "the remaster really brings out the arrangements' complexity".


Works cited



</doc>
<doc id="24089659" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24089659" title="Call My Name (Third Day song)">
Call My Name (Third Day song)

"Call My Name" is a song recorded by the Christian rock band Third Day. Written by Mac Powell and produced by Third Day, it was released as the lead single from the band's 2008 album "Revelation" through Essential Records. "Call My Name" has been considered a pop rock and "AC-friendly" song with a basic drum track and a "solid" melody. Lyrically, it has been alternately described as being set from the perspective of God or being a cry out to God.

"Call My Name" received positive reception from critics, some of whom praised the arrangement of the song. Third Day has performed the song live and it has been covered by Australian country singer Keith Urban. The song was a hit on Christian radio, peaking atop the "Billboard" Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts and the "Radio & Records" Christian AC Monitored, Christian AC Indicator and Christian CHR charts. "Billboard" magazine ranked it second on the 2008 year-end Hot Christian Songs chart and third on the 2008 year-end Hot Christian AC chart and at twenty-seventh on the decade-end Hot Christian Songs chart and at thirty-sixth on the decade-end Hot Christian AC chart.

"Call My Name" was one of the first songs that Third Day worked on in their writing session for "Revelation" in Charlottesville, Virginia. The lyrics to the song were written by Mac Powell, while the music was composed by Third Day. It was produced and programmed by Howard Benson and recorded by Mike Plontikoff at Bay 7 Studios in Valley Village, Los Angeles and at Sparky Dark Studio in Calabasas, California. Pre-production was handled at Haunted Hollow Studio in Charlottesville, Virginia by Rob Evans and Steve Miller, at Tree Sound Studios in Norcross, Georgia by Don McCollister, and at Sonica Recording in Atlanta, Georgia by Jon Briglevich. The song was mixed by Chris Lord-Alge at Resonate Music in Burbank, California and mastered by Bob Ludwig at Gateway Mastering in Portland, Maine. Digital editing was conducted by Paul DeCarli, while audio engineering was handled by Ashburn Miller and Hatsukazu Inagaki.

"Call My Name" is a song that lasts for four minutes and two seconds. It was composed using common time in the key of E major, with "driving rock" tempo of 78 beats per minute. Mac Powell's vocal range spans from the low note of B to the high note of F. The lyrics to the song have been described as being from the perspective of God, although the members of Third Day have described them differently; David Carr, the drummer for Third Day, described the lyrics as "crying out to God and calling out his name", while Mac Powell described them as "kind of a prayer. It's about when people are going through hard times and going through struggles that we've gotta call out to someone, and for us as people of faith it's calling out to God and hearing his voice... and for someone else it could be a friend or a family member that you've gotta reach out to kind of help share those burdens you go through". Carr also described the drum part on "Call My Name" as "basic", and the song itself has been described as "pop rock", "AC-friendly", and "pop".

Critical reception to "Call My Name" was positive, with some critics praising the arrangement and vocals. Deborah Evans Price of "Billboard" magazine called the single a "well-crafted number", while Matt Conner of "CCM Magazine" praised the song as "brilliantly crafted". Russ Breimeier of "Christianity Today" regarded the song as a "big AC-friendly single" and praised it as having "smart hooks, a strong melody, and some of Powell's most impressive vocal work to date during the closing vamp, belting out notes I didn't know he was capable of". John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout called the song "an unashamedly catchy pop rock anthem that surprisingly has a similar lyrical message to ['Cry Out to Jesus'], just presented from Christ's own perspective this time around".

On the "Billboard" Hot Christian Songs chart, "Call My Name" debuted at No. 15 for the chart week of 26 April 2008. It advanced to No. 8 in its fourth charting week and to No. 3 in its sixth charting week. In its eighth chart week, "Call My Name" advanced to the top spot, holding the No. 1 spot for a total of thirteen consecutive weeks. The song dropped to No. 3 in its twenty-first chart week, supplanted from the top spot by Brandon Heath's "Give Me Your Eyes". After spending twenty-nine weeks on the chart, "Call My Name" dropped out.

On the "Billboard" Hot Christian AC chart, "Call My Name" spent eleven weeks at No. 1. It also topped the "Radio & Records" Christian AC Monitored and Christian AC Indicator charts for eleven weeks each, and the "Radio & Records" Christian CHR chart for six weeks.

"Billboard" magazine ranked "Call My Name" second on their 2008 year-end Hot Christian Songs chart and third on their 2008 year-end Hot Christian AC chart. "Radio & Records" ranked it third on their 2008 year-end Christian AC Songs chart and fifth on their 2008 year-end Christian CHR songs chart. "Billboard" magazine also ranked "Call My Name" twenty-seventh on their decade-end Hot Christian Songs chart and thirty-sixth on their decade-end Hot Christian AC chart.

"Call My Name" has been featured on the compilation albums "WOW Hits 2009" and "Now That's What I Call Faith", as well as on Third Day's live CD/DVD "Live Revelations". Australian country singer Keith Urban covered the song, including it as a bonus track on his 2009 album "Defying Gravity".

Prior to the release of "Revelation", Third Day performed "Call My Name" at several of their concerts on the Third Day LIVE Tour; in particular, the band performed the song on 3 April 2008 at the Mid-Hudson Civic Center in Poughkeepsie, New York, where they were joined on stage by Scotty Wilbanks. At the benefit concert Nashville4Africa, held on 4 April 2009 at the Schermerhorn Symphony Center in Nashville, Tennessee, the band performed the song with fellow Christian rock artists Jars of Clay. On the 2010 Winter Jam tour, Third Day performed "Call My Name" as part of their set list on 28 and 30 January.

Credits adapted from the album liner notes



</doc>
<doc id="24121635" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24121635" title="Tropical Storm Danny (2009)">
Tropical Storm Danny (2009)

Tropical Storm Danny was a weak and disorganized tropical cyclone that formed in August 2009. The fourth tropical system and third named storm of the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season, Danny developed on August 26 from the interaction between a westward-moving tropical wave and an upper-level trough while situated east of the Bahamas. The storm never fully matured, and resembled a subtropical cyclone. It meandered generally northwestward before being absorbed into another weather system on August 29.

Danny had only minor effects on land. However, it triggered high surf and rip currents from Florida through the Mid-Atlantic states, leading to the death of a 12-year-old boy in North Carolina. The cyclone's remnants contributed to widespread rainfall in the northeast United States. At one point, some weather forecasts predicted Danny to rapidly strengthen, and hit Nantucket as a Category 1 hurricane, although this never occurred. Localized flooding was reported, particularly in Pennsylvania. It later caused heavy precipitation and power outages in Atlantic Canada.

Danny originated in a tropical wave that exited the west coast of Africa on August 18. Convective activity associated with the system briefly began to organize on August 22, but wind shear soon halted further development. On August 24, thunderstorms once again increased as the disturbance interacted with an upper-level trough. On August 25, a Hurricane Hunters mission into the system revealed a broad area of tropical-storm force winds, but no closed circulation center. However, around 0900 UTC on August 26, satellite imagery and QuikSCAT data indicated that a closed low had formed. While situated about east of Nassau, Bahamas, the feature was declared a tropical storm—skipping the tropical depression stage.

Due to the interaction of the initial wave and the upper-level trough, Danny maintained a "non-classical" structure resembling that of a subtropical cyclone. Even after its designation as a tropical storm, the storm was highly disorganized. Little or no deep thunderstorm activity surrounded the center, and the highest winds were confined to a rainband in the northern semicircle of the cyclone. The storm moved erratically northwestward throughout the day on August 26, strengthening only slightly. Danny's center reformed several times, making it difficult to determine its direction of movement.

By early on August 27, the tropical storm became slightly better organized, although the most intense winds were still removed from the center. Danny peaked with maximum sustained winds of 60 mph (95 km/h) and a minimum pressure of 1006 mbar (hPa; 29.71 inHg). It held this strength for about 12 hours before reinvigorated shear caused the storm to gradually weaken as it meandered northward. By August 28, Danny further deteriorated, and reconnaissance aircraft found that it was barely a tropical storm. After stalling during the afternoon, the center resumed a north or north-northwestward drift.
A strong upper-level trough moving through the southeastern United States forced Danny northeastward. It also triggered the formation of another low pressure system near the coast of North Carolina early on August 29. Although this low formed within Danny's cyclonic envelope, satellite imagery indicated that it did not have the characteristics of a tropical cyclone. Therefore, it is not considered to be a continuation of Danny. The new low caused the tropical storm to degenerate into a trough about 275 mi (445 km) southeast of Wilmington, North Carolina, and Danny's remnants were absorbed into a developing frontal zone shortly thereafter.

In advance of the cyclone, a tropical storm watch was posted for North Carolina from Cape Lookout to the town of Duck at 2100 UTC on August 27. It was discontinued on August 29.

As the storm remained offshore, its effects were limited. However, it generated strong rip currents and high waves along the U.S. East Coast which may have resulted in the drowning death of a 12-year-old boy near Corolla, North Carolina, on August 28. On September 1, the Currituck County Sheriff's Office reported that the boy's body was found on the beach about north of where he went missing. Farther south, swells reached Florida's Atlantic coast. High surf and rip currents also affected the Mid-Atlantic states, prompting officials to issue bathing restrictions. A surfer in Monmouth County, New Jersey, broke his leg in the rough conditions.

The remnants of the storm interacted with a frontal boundary, triggering widespread precipitation across numerous states. In Delaware County, Pennsylvania, torrential rainfall produced flash flooding that trapped one family in their basement. A creek near Philadelphia overflowed its banks and caused minor flooding. Several roads in Lehigh County, including one lane of U.S. Route 222, were closed due to flood waters. Flooding also took place in New Jersey; numerous basements were submerged and motorists in Camden County had to be rescued from their vehicles. In Maryland, rainfall peaked at . The extratropical system impacted New England with high winds and heavy rainfall. At least of rain fell in Massachusetts and Rhode Island. Some roads throughout the region became impassable due to standing water. A site in the Nantucket Sound recorded a wind gust to . The former tropical cyclone produced wind gusts of in Maine, toppling trees and ripping boats from their moorings at a harbor in Eastport.

Danny's remnants later caused heavy rain across Atlantic Canada. At Saint John, New Brunswick, of rain flooded at least 50 basements. The Meteorological Service of Canada hoisted several weather advisories for New Brunswick, Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia. In Nova Scotia, over 16,000 residences lost power at the height of the storm.




</doc>
<doc id="24179592" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24179592" title="Future of Earth">
Future of Earth

The biological and geological future of Earth can be extrapolated based upon the estimated effects of several long-term influences. These include the chemistry at Earth's surface, the rate of cooling of the planet's interior, the gravitational interactions with other objects in the Solar System, and a steady increase in the Sun's luminosity. An uncertain factor in this extrapolation is the ongoing influence of technology introduced by humans, such as climate engineering, which could cause significant changes to the planet. The current Holocene extinction is being caused by technology and the effects may last for up to five million years. In turn, technology may result in the extinction of humanity, leaving the planet to gradually return to a slower evolutionary pace resulting solely from long-term natural processes.

Over time intervals of hundreds of millions of years, random celestial events pose a global risk to the biosphere, which can result in mass extinctions. These include impacts by comets or asteroids, and the possibility of a massive stellar explosion, called a supernova, within a 100-light-year radius of the Sun. Other large-scale geological events are more predictable. Milankovitch theory predicts that the planet will continue to undergo glacial periods at least until the Quaternary glaciation comes to an end. These periods are caused by variations in eccentricity, axial tilt, and precession of the Earth's orbit. As part of the ongoing supercontinent cycle, plate tectonics will probably result in a supercontinent in 250–350 million years. Some time in the next 1.5–4.5 billion years, the axial tilt of the Earth may begin to undergo chaotic variations, with changes in the axial tilt of up to 90°.

The luminosity of the Sun will steadily increase, resulting in a rise in the solar radiation reaching the Earth. This will result in a higher rate of weathering of silicate minerals, which will cause a decrease in the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. In about 600 million years from now, the level of carbon dioxide will fall below the level needed to sustain C carbon fixation photosynthesis used by trees. Some plants use the C carbon fixation method, allowing them to persist at carbon dioxide concentrations as low as 10 parts per million. However, the long-term trend is for plant life to die off altogether. The extinction of plants will be the demise of almost all animal life, since plants are the base of the food chain on Earth.

In about one billion years, the solar luminosity will be 10% higher than at present. This will cause the atmosphere to become a "moist greenhouse", resulting in a runaway evaporation of the oceans. As a likely consequence, plate tectonics will come to an end, and with them the entire carbon cycle. Following this event, in about 2–3 billion years, the planet's magnetic dynamo may cease, causing the magnetosphere to decay and leading to an accelerated loss of volatiles from the outer atmosphere. Four billion years from now, the increase in the Earth's surface temperature will cause a runaway greenhouse effect, heating the surface enough to melt it. By that point, all life on the Earth will be extinct. The most probable fate of the planet is absorption by the Sun in about 7.5 billion years, after the star has entered the red giant phase and expanded beyond the planet's current orbit.

Humans play a key role in the biosphere, with the large human population dominating many of Earth's ecosystems. This has resulted in a widespread, ongoing mass extinction of other species during the present geological epoch, now known as the Holocene extinction. The large-scale loss of species caused by human influence since the 1950s has been called a biotic crisis, with an estimated 10% of the total species lost as of 2007. At current rates, about 30% of species are at risk of extinction in the next hundred years. The Holocene extinction event is the result of habitat destruction, the widespread distribution of invasive species, hunting, and climate change. In the present day, human activity has had a significant impact on the surface of the planet. More than a third of the land surface has been modified by human actions, and humans use about 20% of global primary production. The concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has increased by close to 30% since the start of the Industrial Revolution.

The consequences of a persistent biotic crisis have been predicted to last for at least five million years. It could result in a decline in biodiversity and homogenization of biotas, accompanied by a proliferation of species that are opportunistic, such as pests and weeds. Novel species may also emerge; in particular taxa that prosper in human-dominated ecosystems may rapidly diversify into many new species. Microbes are likely to benefit from the increase in nutrient-enriched environmental niches. No new species of existing large vertebrates are likely to arise and food chains will probably be shortened.

There are multiple scenarios for known risks that can have a global impact on the planet. From the perspective of humanity, these can be subdivided into survivable risks and terminal risks. Risks that humanity pose to itself include climate change, the misuse of nanotechnology, a nuclear holocaust, warfare with a programmed superintelligence, a genetically engineered disease, or a disaster caused by a physics experiment. Similarly, several natural events may pose a doomsday threat, including a highly virulent disease, the impact of an asteroid or comet, runaway greenhouse effect, and resource depletion. There may also be the possibility of an infestation by an extraterrestrial lifeform. The actual odds of these scenarios occurring are difficult if not impossible to deduce.

Should the human race become extinct, then the various features assembled by humanity will begin to decay. The largest structures have an estimated decay half-life of about 1,000 years. The last surviving structures would most likely be open pit mines, large landfills, major highways, wide canal cuts, and earth-fill flank dams. A few massive stone monuments like the pyramids at the Giza Necropolis or the sculptures at Mount Rushmore may still survive in some form after a million years.

As the Sun orbits the Milky Way, wandering stars may approach close enough to have a disruptive influence on the Solar System. A close stellar encounter may cause a significant reduction in the perihelion distances of comets in the Oort cloud—a spherical region of icy bodies orbiting within half a light year of the Sun. Such an encounter can trigger a 40-fold increase in the number of comets reaching the inner Solar System. Impacts from these comets can trigger a mass extinction of life on Earth. These disruptive encounters occur at an average of once every 45 million years. The mean time for the Sun to collide with another star in the solar neighborhood is approximately , which is much longer than the estimated age of the Milky Way galaxy, at . This can be taken as an indication of the low likelihood of such an event occurring during the lifetime of the Earth.

The energy release from the impact of an asteroid or comet with a diameter of or larger is sufficient to create a global environmental disaster and cause a statistically significant increase in the number of species extinctions. Among the deleterious effects resulting from a major impact event is a cloud of fine dust ejecta blanketing the planet, blocking some direct sunlight from reaching the Earth's surface thus lowering land temperatures by about within a week and halting photosynthesis for several months (similar to a nuclear winter). The mean time between major impacts is estimated to be at least 100 million years. During the last 540 million years, simulations demonstrated that such an impact rate is sufficient to cause 5–6 mass extinctions and 20–30 lower severity events. This matches the geologic record of significant extinctions during the Phanerozoic Eon. Such events can be expected to continue into the future.

A supernova is a cataclysmic explosion of a star. Within the Milky Way galaxy, supernova explosions occur on average once every 40 years. During the history of the Earth, multiple such events have likely occurred within a distance of 100 light years; known as a near-Earth supernova. Explosions inside this distance can contaminate the planet with radioisotopes and possibly impact the biosphere. Gamma rays emitted by a supernova react with nitrogen in the atmosphere, producing nitrous oxides. These molecules cause a depletion of the ozone layer that protects the surface from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. An increase in UV-B radiation of only 10–30% is sufficient to cause a significant impact to life; particularly to the phytoplankton that form the base of the oceanic food chain. A supernova explosion at a distance of 26 light years will reduce the ozone column density by half. On average, a supernova explosion occurs within 32 light years once every few hundred million years, resulting in a depletion of the ozone layer lasting several centuries. Over the next two billion years, there will be about 20 supernova explosions and one gamma ray burst that will have a significant impact on the planet's biosphere.

The incremental effect of gravitational perturbations between the planets causes the inner Solar System as a whole to behave chaotically over long time periods. This does not significantly affect the stability of the Solar System over intervals of a few million years or less, but over billions of years the orbits of the planets become unpredictable. Computer simulations of the Solar System's evolution over the next five billion years suggest that there is a small (less than 1%) chance that a collision could occur between Earth and either Mercury, Venus, or Mars. During the same interval, the odds that the Earth will be scattered out of the Solar System by a passing star are on the order of one part in 10. In such a scenario, the oceans would freeze solid within several million years, leaving only a few pockets of liquid water about underground. There is a remote chance that the Earth will instead be captured by a passing binary star system, allowing the planet's biosphere to remain intact. The odds of this happening are about one chance in three million.

The gravitational perturbations of the other planets in the Solar System combine to modify the orbit of the Earth and the orientation of its spin axis. These changes can influence the planetary climate. Despite such interactions, highly accurate simulations show that overall, Earth's orbit is likely to remain dynamically stable for billions of years into the future. In all 1,600 simulations, the planet's semimajor axis, eccentricity, and inclination remained nearly constant.

Historically, there have been cyclical ice ages in which glacial sheets periodically covered the higher latitudes of the continents. Ice ages may occur because of changes in ocean circulation and continentality induced by plate tectonics. The Milankovitch theory predicts that glacial periods occur during ice ages because of astronomical factors in combination with climate feedback mechanisms. The primary astronomical drivers are a higher than normal orbital eccentricity, a low axial tilt (or obliquity), and the alignment of summer solstice with the aphelion. Each of these effects occur cyclically. For example, the eccentricity changes over time cycles of about 100,000 and 400,000 years, with the value ranging from less than 0.01 up to 0.05. This is equivalent to a change of the semiminor axis of the planet's orbit from 99.95% of the semimajor axis to 99.88%, respectively.

The Earth is passing through an ice age known as the quaternary glaciation, and is presently in the Holocene interglacial period. This period would normally be expected to end in about 25,000 years. However, the increased rate of carbon dioxide release into the atmosphere by humans may delay the onset of the next glacial period until at least 50,000–130,000 years from now. On the other hand, a global warming period of finite duration (based on the assumption that fossil fuel use will cease by the year 2200) will probably only impact the glacial period for about 5,000 years. Thus, a brief period of global warming induced through a few centuries worth of greenhouse gas emission would only have a limited impact in the long term.

The tidal acceleration of the Moon slows the rotation rate of the Earth and increases the Earth-Moon distance. Friction effects—between the core and mantle and between the atmosphere and surface—can dissipate the Earth's rotational energy. These combined effects are expected to increase the length of the day by more than 1.5 hours over the next 250 million years, and to increase the obliquity by about a half degree. The distance to the Moon will increase by about 1.5 Earth radii during the same period.

Based on computer models, the presence of the Moon appears to stabilize the obliquity of the Earth, which may help the planet to avoid dramatic climate changes. This stability is achieved because the Moon increases the precession rate of the Earth's spin axis, thereby avoiding resonances between the precession of the spin and precession of the planet's orbital plane (that is, the precession motion of the ecliptic). However, as the semimajor axis of the Moon's orbit continues to increase, this stabilizing effect will diminish. At some point, perturbation effects will probably cause chaotic variations in the obliquity of the Earth, and the axial tilt may change by angles as high as 90° from the plane of the orbit. This is expected to occur between 1.5 and 4.5 billion years from now.

A high obliquity would probably result in dramatic changes in the climate and may destroy the planet's habitability. When the axial tilt of the Earth exceeds 54°, the yearly insolation at the equator is less than that at the poles. The planet could remain at an obliquity of 60° to 90° for periods as long as 10 million years.

Tectonics-based events will continue to occur well into the future and the surface will be steadily reshaped by tectonic uplift, extrusions, and erosion. Mount Vesuvius can be expected to erupt about 40 times over the next 1,000 years. During the same period, about five to seven earthquakes of magnitude 8 or greater should occur along the San Andreas Fault, while about 50 magnitude 9 events may be expected worldwide. Mauna Loa should experience about 200 eruptions over the next 1,000 years, and the Old Faithful Geyser will likely cease to operate. The Niagara Falls will continue to retreat upstream, reaching Buffalo in about 30,000–50,000 years.

In 10,000 years, the post-glacial rebound of the Baltic Sea will have reduced the depth by about . The Hudson Bay will decrease in depth by 100 m over the same period. After 100,000 years, the island of Hawaii will have shifted about to the northwest. The planet may be entering another glacial period by this time.

The theory of plate tectonics demonstrates that the continents of the Earth are moving across the surface at the rate of a few centimeters per year. This is expected to continue, causing the plates to relocate and collide. Continental drift is facilitated by two factors: the energy generation within the planet and the presence of a hydrosphere. With the loss of either of these, continental drift will come to a halt. The production of heat through radiogenic processes is sufficient to maintain mantle convection and plate subduction for at least the next 1.1 billion years.

At present, the continents of North and South America are moving westward from Africa and Europe. Researchers have produced several scenarios about how this will continue in the future. These geodynamic models can be distinguished by the subduction flux, whereby the oceanic crust moves under a continent. In the introversion model, the younger, interior, Atlantic ocean becomes preferentially subducted and the current migration of North and South America is reversed. In the extroversion model, the older, exterior, Pacific ocean remains preferentially subducted and North and South America migrate toward eastern Asia.

As the understanding of geodynamics improves, these models will be subject to revision. In 2008, for example, a computer simulation was used to predict that a reorganization of the mantle convection will occur over the next 100 million years, causing a supercontinent composed of Africa, Eurasia, Australia, Antarctica and South America to form around Antarctica.

Regardless of the outcome of the continental migration, the continued subduction process causes water to be transported to the mantle. After a billion years from the present, a geophysical model gives an estimate that 27% of the current ocean mass will have been subducted. If this process were to continue unmodified into the future, the subduction and release would reach an equilibrium after 65% of the current ocean mass has been subducted.

Christopher Scotese and his colleagues have mapped out the predicted motions several hundred million years into the future as part of the Paleomap Project. In their scenario, 50 million years from now the Mediterranean sea may vanish and the collision between Europe and Africa will create a long mountain range extending to the current location of the Persian Gulf. Australia will merge with Indonesia, and Baja California will slide northward along the coast. New subduction zones may appear off the eastern coast of North and South America, and mountain chains will form along those coastlines. To the south, the migration of Antarctica to the north will cause all of its ice sheets to melt. This, along with the melting of the Greenland ice sheets, will raise the average ocean level by . The inland flooding of the continents will result in climate changes.

As this scenario continues, by 100 million years from the present the continental spreading will have reached its maximum extent and the continents will then begin to coalesce. In 250 million years, North America will collide with Africa while South America will wrap around the southern tip of Africa. The result will be the formation of a new supercontinent (sometimes called Pangaea Ultima), with the Pacific Ocean stretching across half the planet. The continent of Antarctica will reverse direction and return to the South Pole, building up a new ice cap.

The first scientist to extrapolate the current motions of the continents was Canadian geologist Paul F. Hoffman of Harvard University. In 1992, Hoffman predicted that the continents of North and South America would continue to advance across the Pacific Ocean, pivoting about Siberia until they begin to merge with Asia. He dubbed the resulting supercontinent, Amasia. Later, in the 1990s, Roy Livermore calculated a similar scenario. He predicted that Antarctica would start to migrate northward, and east Africa and Madagascar would move across the Indian Ocean to collide with Asia.

In an extroversion model, the closure of the Pacific Ocean would be complete in about 350 million years. This marks the completion of the current supercontinent cycle, wherein the continents split apart and then rejoin each other about every 400–500 million years. Once the supercontinent is built, plate tectonics may enter a period of inactivity as the rate of subduction drops by an order of magnitude. This period of stability could cause an increase in the mantle temperature at the rate of every 100 million years, which is the minimum lifetime of past supercontinents. As a consequence, volcanic activity may increase.

The formation of a supercontinent can dramatically affect the environment. The collision of plates will result in mountain building, thereby shifting weather patterns. Sea levels may fall because of increased glaciation. The rate of surface weathering can rise, resulting in an increase in the rate that organic material is buried. Supercontinents can cause a drop in global temperatures and an increase in atmospheric oxygen. This, in turn, can affect the climate, further lowering temperatures. All of these changes can result in more rapid biological evolution as new niches emerge.

The formation of a supercontinent insulates the mantle. The flow of heat will be concentrated, resulting in volcanism and the flooding of large areas with basalt. Rifts will form and the supercontinent will split up once more. The planet may then experience a warming period, as occurred during the Cretaceous period.

The iron-rich core region of the Earth is divided into a radius solid inner core and a radius liquid outer core. The rotation of the Earth creates convective eddies in the outer core region that cause it to function as a dynamo. This generates a magnetosphere about the Earth that deflects particles from the solar wind, which prevents significant erosion of the atmosphere from sputtering. As heat from the core is transferred outward toward the mantle, the net trend is for the inner boundary of the liquid outer core region to freeze, thereby releasing thermal energy and causing the solid inner core to grow. This iron crystallization process has been ongoing for about a billion years. In the modern era, the radius of the inner core is expanding at an average rate of roughly per year, at the expense of the outer core. Nearly all of the energy needed to power the dynamo is being supplied by this process of inner core formation.

The growth of the inner core may be expected to consume most of the outer core by some 3–4 billion years from now, resulting in a nearly solid core composed of iron and other heavy elements. The surviving liquid envelope will mainly consist of lighter elements that will undergo less mixing. Alternatively, if at some point plate tectonics comes to an end, the interior will cool less efficiently, which may end the growth of the inner core. In either case, this can result in the loss of the magnetic dynamo. Without a functioning dynamo, the magnetic field of the Earth will decay in a geologically short time period of roughly 10,000 years. The loss of the magnetosphere will cause an increase in erosion of light elements, particularly hydrogen, from the Earth's outer atmosphere into space, resulting in less favorable conditions for life.

The energy generation of the Sun is based upon thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium. This occurs in the core region of the star using the proton–proton chain reaction process. Because there is no convection in the solar core, the helium concentration builds up in that region without being distributed throughout the star. The temperature at the core of the Sun is too low for nuclear fusion of helium atoms through the triple-alpha process, so these atoms do not contribute to the net energy generation that is needed to maintain hydrostatic equilibrium of the Sun.

At present, nearly half the hydrogen at the core has been consumed, with the remainder of the atoms consisting primarily of helium. As the number of hydrogen atoms per unit mass decreases, so too does their energy output provided through nuclear fusion. This results in a decrease in pressure support, which causes the core to contract until the increased density and temperature bring the core pressure into equilibrium with the layers above. The higher temperature causes the remaining hydrogen to undergo fusion at a more rapid rate, thereby generating the energy needed to maintain the equilibrium.
The result of this process has been a steady increase in the energy output of the Sun. When the Sun first became a main sequence star, it radiated only 70% of the current luminosity. The luminosity has increased in a nearly linear fashion to the present, rising by 1% every 110 million years. Likewise, in three billion years the Sun is expected to be 33% more luminous. The hydrogen fuel at the core will finally be exhausted in five billion years, when the Sun will be 67% more luminous than at present. Thereafter the Sun will continue to burn hydrogen in a shell surrounding its core, until the luminosity reaches 121% above the present value. This marks the end of the Sun's main sequence lifetime, and thereafter it will pass through the subgiant stage and evolve into a red giant.

By this time, the collision of the Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies should be underway. Although this could result in the Solar System being ejected from the newly combined galaxy, it is considered unlikely to have any adverse effect on the Sun or its planets.

The rate of weathering of silicate minerals will increase as rising temperatures speed up chemical processes. This in turn will decrease the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, as these weathering processes convert carbon dioxide gas into solid carbonates. Within the next 600 million years from the present, the concentration of carbon dioxide will fall below the critical threshold needed to sustain C photosynthesis: about 50 parts per million. At this point, trees and forests in their current forms will no longer be able to survive, the last living trees being evergreen conifers. However, C carbon fixation can continue at much lower concentrations, down to above 10 parts per million. Thus plants using photosynthesis may be able to survive for at least 0.8 billion years and possibly as long as 1.2 billion years from now, after which rising temperatures will make the biosphere unsustainable. Currently, plants represent about 5% of Earth's plant biomass and 1% of its known plant species. For example, about 50% of all grass species (Poaceae) use the photosynthetic pathway, as do many species in the herbaceous family Amaranthaceae.

When the levels of carbon dioxide fall to the limit where photosynthesis is barely sustainable, the proportion of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is expected to oscillate up and down. This will allow land vegetation to flourish each time the level of carbon dioxide rises due to tectonic activity and respiration from animal life. However, the long-term trend is for the plant life on land to die off altogether as most of the remaining carbon in the atmosphere becomes sequestered in the Earth. Some microbes are capable of photosynthesis at concentrations of carbon dioxide of a few parts per million, so these life forms would probably disappear only because of rising temperatures and the loss of the biosphere.

Plants—and, by extension, animals—could survive longer by evolving other strategies such as requiring less carbon dioxide for photosynthetic processes, becoming carnivorous, adapting to desiccation, or associating with fungi. These adaptations are likely to appear near the beginning of the moist greenhouse (see further).

The loss of plant life will also result in the eventual loss of oxygen as well as ozone due to the respiration of animals, chemical reactions in the atmosphere, and volcanic eruptions. This will result in less attenuation of DNA-damaging UV, as well as the death of animals; the first animals to disappear would be large mammals, followed by small mammals, birds, amphibians and large fish, reptiles and small fish, and finally invertebrates. Before this happens, it's expected that life would concentrate at refugia of lower temperature such as high elevations where less land surface area is available, thus restricting population sizes. Smaller animals would survive better than larger ones because of lesser oxygen requirements, while birds would fare better than mammals thanks to their ability to travel large distances looking for colder temperatures.

In their work "The Life and Death of Planet Earth", authors Peter D. Ward and Donald Brownlee have argued that some form of animal life may continue even after most of the Earth's plant life has disappeared. Ward and Brownlee use fossil evidence from the Burgess Shale in British Columbia, Canada, to determine the climate of the Cambrian Explosion, and use it to predict the climate of the future when rising global temperatures caused by a warming Sun and declining oxygen levels result in the final extinction of animal life. Initially, they expect that some insects, lizards, birds and small mammals may persist, along with sea life. However, without oxygen replenishment by plant life, they believe that animals would probably die off from asphyxiation within a few million years. Even if sufficient oxygen were to remain in the atmosphere through the persistence of some form of photosynthesis, the steady rise in global temperature would result in a gradual loss of biodiversity.

As temperatures continue to rise, the last of animal life will be driven toward the poles, and possibly underground. They would become primarily active during the polar night, aestivating during the polar day due to the intense heat. Much of the surface would become a barren desert and life would primarily be found in the oceans. However, due to a decrease in the amount of organic matter entering the oceans from land as well as a decrease in dissolved oxygen, sea life would disappear too following a similar path to that on Earth's surface. This process would start with the loss of freshwater species and conclude with invertebrates, particularly those that do not depend on living plants such as termites or those near hydrothermal vents such as worms of the genus "Riftia". As a result of these processes, multicellular life forms may be extinct in about 800 million years, and eukaryotes in 1.3 billion years, leaving only the prokaryotes.

One billion years from now, about 27% of the modern ocean will have been subducted into the mantle. If this process were allowed to continue uninterrupted, it would reach an equilibrium state where 65% of the current surface reservoir would remain at the surface. Once the solar luminosity is 10% higher than its current value, the average global surface temperature will rise to . The atmosphere will become a "moist greenhouse" leading to a runaway evaporation of the oceans. At this point, models of the Earth's future environment demonstrate that the stratosphere would contain increasing levels of water. These water molecules will be broken down through photodissociation by solar UV, allowing hydrogen to escape the atmosphere. The net result would be a loss of the world's seawater by about 1.1 billion years from the present. This will be a simple dramatic step in annihilating all life on Earth.

There will be two variations of this future warming feedback: the "moist greenhouse" where water vapor dominates the troposphere while water vapor starts to accumulate in the stratosphere (if the oceans evaporate very quickly), and the "runaway greenhouse" where water vapor becomes a dominant component of the atmosphere (if the oceans evaporate too slowly). In this ocean-free era, there will continue to be surface reservoirs as water is steadily released from the deep crust and mantle, where it is estimated that there is an amount of water equivalent to several times that currently present in the Earth's oceans. Some water may be retained at the poles and there may be occasional rainstorms, but for the most part the planet would be a dry desert with large dunefields covering its equator, and a few salt flats on what was once the ocean floor, similar to the ones in the Atacama Desert in Chile.

With no water to serve as a lubricant, plate tectonics would very likely stop and the most visible signs of geological activity would be shield volcanoes located above mantle hotspots. In these arid conditions the planet may retain some microbial and possibly even multicellular life. Most of these microbes will be halophiles and life could find refuge in the atmosphere as has been proposed to have happened on Venus. However, the increasingly extreme conditions will likely lead to the extinction of the prokaryotes between 1.6 billion years and 2.8 billion years from now, with the last of them living in residual ponds of water at high latitudes and heights or in caverns with trapped ice. However, underground life could last longer. What proceeds after this depends on the level of tectonic activity. A steady release of carbon dioxide by volcanic eruption could cause the atmosphere to enter a "super-greenhouse" state like that of the planet Venus. But, as stated above, without surface water, plate tectonics would probably come to a halt and most of the carbonates would remain securely buried until the Sun becomes a red giant and its increased luminosity heated the rock to the point of releasing the carbon dioxide.

The loss of the oceans could be delayed until 2 billion years in the future if the atmospheric pressure were to decline. A lower atmospheric pressure would reduce the greenhouse effect, thereby lowering the surface temperature. This could occur if natural processes were to remove the nitrogen from the atmosphere. Studies of organic sediments has shown that at least of nitrogen has been removed from the atmosphere over the past four billion years; enough to effectively double the current atmospheric pressure if it were to be released. This rate of removal would be sufficient to counter the effects of increasing solar luminosity for the next two billion years.

By 2.8 billion years from now, the surface temperature of the Earth will have reached , even at the poles. At this point, any remaining life will be extinguished due to the extreme conditions. If all of the water on Earth has evaporated by this point, the planet will stay in the same conditions with a steady increase in the surface temperature until the Sun becomes a red giant. If not, then in about 3–4 billion years the amount of water vapour in the lower atmosphere will rise to 40% and a "moist greenhouse" effect will commence once the luminosity from the Sun reaches 35–40% more than its present-day value. A "runaway greenhouse" effect will ensue, causing the atmosphere to heat up and raising the surface temperature to around . This is sufficient to melt the surface of the planet. However, most of the atmosphere will be retained until the Sun has entered the red giant stage.

With the extinction of life, 2.8 billion years from now it is also expected that Earth biosignatures will disappear, to be replaced by signatures caused by non-biological processes.

Once the Sun changes from burning hydrogen at its core to burning hydrogen around its shell, the core will start to contract and the outer envelope will expand. The total luminosity will steadily increase over the following billion years until it reaches 2,730 times the Sun's current luminosity at the age of 12.167 billion years. Most of Earth's atmosphere will be lost to space and its surface will consist of a lava ocean with floating continents of metals and metal oxides as well as icebergs of refractory materials, with its surface temperature reaching more than . The Sun will experience more rapid mass loss, with about 33% of its total mass shed with the solar wind. The loss of mass will mean that the orbits of the planets will expand. The orbital distance of the Earth will increase to at most 150% of its current value.

The most rapid part of the Sun's expansion into a red giant will occur during the final stages, when the Sun will be about 12 billion years old. It is likely to expand to swallow both Mercury and Venus, reaching a maximum radius of . The Earth will interact tidally with the Sun's outer atmosphere, which would serve to decrease Earth's orbital radius. Drag from the chromosphere of the Sun would also reduce the Earth's orbit. These effects will act to counterbalance the effect of mass loss by the Sun, and the Earth will probably be engulfed by the Sun.

The drag from the solar atmosphere may cause the orbit of the Moon to decay. Once the orbit of the Moon closes to a distance of , it will cross the Earth's Roche limit. This means that tidal interaction with the Earth would break apart the Moon, turning it into a ring system. Most of the orbiting ring will then begin to decay, and the debris will impact the Earth. Hence, even if the Earth is not swallowed up by the Sun, the planet may be left moonless. The ablation and vaporization caused by its fall on a decaying trajectory towards the Sun may remove Earth's mantle, leaving just its core, which will finally be destroyed after at most 200 years. Following this event, Earth's sole legacy will be a very slight increase (0.01%) of the solar metallicity.

After fusing helium in its core to carbon, the Sun will begin to collapse again, evolving into a compact white dwarf star after ejecting its outer atmosphere as a planetary nebula. The predicted final mass is 54.1% of the present value, most likely consisting primarily of carbon and oxygen.

Currently, the Moon is moving away from Earth at a rate of 4 cm (1.5 inches) per year. In 50 billion years, if the Earth and Moon are not engulfed by the Sun, they will become tidelocked into a larger, stable orbit, with each showing only one face to the other. Thereafter, the tidal action of the Sun will extract angular momentum from the system, causing the lunar orbit to decay and the Earth's spin to accelerate. In about 65 billion years, it is estimated that the Moon may end up colliding with the Earth, due to the remaining energy of the Earth–Moon system being sapped by the remnant Sun, causing the Moon to slowly move inwards toward the Earth.

If Earth is not destroyed by the expanding red giant Sun in 7.6 billion years, then on a time scale of 10 (10 quintillion) years the remaining planets in the Solar System will be ejected from the system by violent relaxation. If this does not occur to the Earth, the ultimate fate of the planet will be that it collides with the black dwarf Sun due to the decay of its orbit via gravitational radiation, in 10 (Short Scale: 100 quintillion, Long Scale: 100 trillion) years.





</doc>
<doc id="24190481" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24190481" title="5 euro note">
5 euro note

The five euro note (€5) is the lowest value euro banknote and has been used since the introduction of the euro (in its cash form) in 2002. 
The note is used in the 25 countries which have it as their sole currency (with 23 legally adopting it); with a population of about 343 million. In August 2018, there were approximately 1,871,000,000 five euro banknotes in circulation around the eurozone. It is the fifth most widely circulated denomination, accounting for over 8% of the total banknotes. Estimates suggest that the average life of a five euro banknote is less than a year before it is replaced due to wear.

Measuring 120 x 62 mm, it is the smallest of the euro notes, and has a grey colour scheme. The five euro banknotes depict bridges and arches/doorways in Classical architecture (up to the fifth century). The five euro note contains several complex security features such as watermarks, invisible ink, holograms and microprinting that document its authenticity.

On 8 November 2012, the European Central Bank announced the first series of notes will be replaced by the Europa series, starting with the 5 euro note on 2 May 2013.

The euro was founded on 1 January 1999, when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe. For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency, only used in accountancy. Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002, when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the countries in eurozone 12, such as the Irish pound and the Austrian schilling.

Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, Estonia in 2011 and Latvia on 1 January 2014.

The changeover period during which the former currencies' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months, going from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002. The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state. The earliest date was in Germany, where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001, though the exchange period lasted for two months more. Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender, they continued to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from ten years to forever.

Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank, Wim Duisenberg, who was replaced on 1 November 2003 by Jean-Claude Trichet, whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 to March 2012. Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank, incumbent Mario Draghi.

Until May 2013 there was only one series of euro notes, however a new series, similar to the first one, is planned to be released. The bank notes are going to be replaced in ascending order. Therefore, the first new note is the 5 euro note which is in circulation since 2 May 2013. Its new design was made public on 10 January 2013 in the Archaeological Museum of Frankfurt (Germany). While broadly similar to the current notes, minor design changes include an updated map and a hologram of Europa.
Moreover, the new notes will reflect the expansion of the European Union; the current issues do not include the recent members Cyprus and Malta (Cyprus is off the map to the east and Malta was too small to be depicted). 
It will be the first time when the Bulgarian Cyrillic alphabet is going to be used on the banknotes as a result of Bulgaria joining the European Union in 2007. Therefore, the new series of Euro banknotes will include "ЕВРО", which is the Bulgarian spelling for EURO as well as the abbreviation "ЕЦБ" (short for "Европейска централна банка" in Bulgarian).
The European Central Bank will, in due time, announce when banknotes from the first series lose legal tender status.

The five euro note is the smallest at with a grey colour scheme. All bank notes depict bridges, arches or doorways in a different historical European style; the five euro note shows the Classical era (up to the fifth century). Although Robert Kalina's original designs were intended to show real monuments, for political reasons the bridge and art are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era.

Like all euro notes, it contains the denomination, the EU flag, the signature of the president of the ECB and the initials of said bank in different EU languages, a depiction of EU territories overseas, the stars from the EU flag and twelve security features as listed below.

As a lower value note, the security features of the five euro note are not as high as the other denominations, however, it is protected by: 


The European Central Bank is closely monitoring the circulation and stock of the euro coins and banknotes. It is a task of the Eurosystem to ensure an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes and to maintain their integrity throughout the euro area.

In January 2019, there were €5 banknotes in circulation around the Eurozone. for €.

This is a net number, i.e. the number of banknotes issued by the Eurosystem central banks, without further distinction as to who is holding the currency issued, thus also including the stocks held by credit institutions.

Besides the date of the introduction of the first set to January 2002, the publication of figures is more significant through the maximum number of banknotes raised each year. The number is higher the end of the year, except for this note in 2002.

The figures are as follows (Nov. 3, 2017):

On May 2013, a new 'Europe' series was issued.

The first series of notes were issued in conjunction with those for a few weeks in the series 'Europe' until existing stocks are exhausted, then gradually withdrawn from circulation. Both series thus run parallel but the proportion tends inevitably to a sharp decrease in the first series.

The latest figures provided by the ECB are the following :

Legally, both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the 7 different euro banknotes. In practice, only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes. The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations.

There are several communities of people at European level, most of which is EuroBillTracker, that, as a hobby, it keeps track of the euro banknotes that pass through their hands, to keep track and know where they travel or have travelled. The aim is to record as many notes as possible to know details about its spread, like from where and to where they travel in general, follow it up, like where a ticket has been seen in particular, and generate statistics and rankings, for example, in which countries there are more tickets. EuroBillTracker has registered over 155 million notes as of May 2016, worth more than €2.897 billion.


</doc>
<doc id="24257148" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24257148" title="September 2009 Vietnam tropical depression">
September 2009 Vietnam tropical depression

The September 2009 Vietnam tropical depression was a weak tropical depression that caused deadly flooding throughout central Vietnam in early September. Forming out of an area of low pressure on September 3, the depression hardly intensified as it meandered off the coast of Vietnam. Initially situated in a favorable environment, convective banding features began to develop and shower and thunderstorm activity formed near the center. On September 4, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert; however, a sudden increase in wind shear caused the system to rapidly become disorganized, leading to the cancellation of the alert the next day. The system continued to slowly track off the coast of Vietnam, nearly dissipating on September 5, before becoming better organized. However, the depression remained weak, with the JTWC reporting on September 7 that the depression had dissipated, though the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) continued to issue advisories until the depression dissipated during September 9.

Although the depression did not make landfall, the outer rainbands of the storm led to heavy rainfall throughout central Vietnam, peaking at . The ensuing floods killed at least six people and left three others missing. Large areas of cropland were inundated by the waters and numerous homes were damaged. In Quảng Nam Province, damages from the system were estimated at 45 billion (VND; $2.52 million USD).

The tropical depression originated from an area of low pressure in the South China Sea on September 1. Scattered convection was associated with the system, with the center devoid of showers and thunderstorms, as the low slowly tracked westward in a weak steering environment. Weak outflow had formed along the northern edge of the system; however, intensification was not anticipated. The following day, convection began to form around the center of circulation and weak diffluence was noted around the system due to an anticyclone to the north. With low wind shear, convective banding features began to develop and the possibility of the system becoming a tropical cyclone increased. Early on September 3, the JMA began issuing advisories on the cyclone, classifying it as a tropical depression, the twentieth depression to be monitored by the JMA during the season.

Although the system had a partially exposed low-level circulation center, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert (TCFA) as the depression was likely to intensify as it was situated over high sea surface temperatures and in a favorable environment. However, by September 4, wind shear quickly increased and dislocated all of the convection associated with the depression from the center of circulation. This led to the JTWC canceling their TCFA as the environment was no longer favorable for development. The following day, the JTWC declared that the system had dissipated and was no longer a suspect area for tropical cyclone development as the system was virtually stationary off the coast of Vietnam. The JMA, on the other hand, continued to monitor the cyclone as a tropical depression. Although previously declaring that the system dissipated early on September 6, the JTWC began monitoring the re-developing system later that day. Convective banding had reformed, wind shear had decreased and the cyclone had less interaction with land as it slowly moved further into the South China Sea. However, late on September 8, both agencies declared that the depression had dissipated off the coast of Vietnam.

At least six people were killed, three were left missing and nine were injured by the depression throughout Vietnam. Rainfall from the storm exceeded , triggering widespread flash flooding. A maximum of fell in Huế. Sixty-one tons of fish were swept away during the floods and 8,700 hectares of rice fields were destroyed. The city of Da Nang sustained the worst flooding from the storm, with some areas reporting flood depths of . Schools throughout the area were closed as many residents were unable to pass through flooded streets. A sixth grader drowned in the city after the boat he was on overturned in flood waters. In Huế, a two-year-old drowned in flood waters on September 4. A large section of highway 14B, connecting Nam Đông and Huế was washed away. In Quảng Ngãi Province, two fishermen were left missing and five other people were injured by the storm. At least three homes sustained severe damage. Residents throughout Quảng Trị Province were advised to evacuate to safer areas as numerous landslides threatened homes.

Numerous bridges were washed away by flood waters exceeding , isolating several communities. In the Sơn Tịnh District, 76 structures were destroyed by flooding and high winds. More than 200 homes were inundated by up to of flood waters in the communities of Hoa Tho Dong and Hoa Phat. At least one ship sank and officials lost contact with two others; officials stated that 1,178 boats were in the South China Sea in the storm. In the valleys of Tam Kỳ and Phú Ninh, nearly 1,000 homes were inundated by water. Roughly 20% of the 373,000 students starting school were told to remain home as their schools were closed due to flood waters. By September 7, officials in Quảng Nam Province estimated that property damages from the depression had reached 20 billion (VND; $1.12 million USD) and agricultural losses amounted to 25 billion (VND; $1.4 million USD). Throughout other regions, at least 100 structures were damaged and more than 20,000 hectares of crops were submerged in flood waters. Damages to irrigation systems throughout the county amounted to 3 billion (VND; $168,000 USD).




</doc>
<doc id="24302334" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24302334" title="Mycena galericulata">
Mycena galericulata

Mycena galericulata is a mushroom species commonly known as the common bonnet, the toque mycena, or the rosy-gill fairy helmet. The type species of the genus "Mycena" was first described scientifically in 1772, but was not considered a "Mycena" until 1821. It is quite variable in color, size, and shape, which makes it somewhat difficult to reliably identify in the field. The mushrooms have caps with distinct radial grooves, particularly at the margin. The cap's color varies from grayish brown to dark brown and the shape ranges from bell-like to bluntly conical to flattened with an umbo. The stem is hollow, white, tough and thin, without a ring and often roots deeply into the wood on which it grows. The gills are white to grayish or even pinkish when mature and are connected by distinct cross-veins. The caps can reach in diameter, and have a mealy odor and taste. The spore print is white and the gills are pink at maturity, which can lead to possible confusion with species of the genus "Pluteus". "M. galericulata" mushrooms grow mostly in clusters on the well-decayed stumps of deciduous and coniferous trees from spring to autumn. The species can generally be considered inedible. It is common and widespread in the entire temperate zone of the Northern Hemisphere, but it has also been reported from Africa.

The fungus was first described scientifically as "Agaricus galericulatus" by Italian mycologist Giovanni Antonio Scopoli in 1772, and sanctioned under this name by Elias Magnus Fries in his 1821 "Systema Mycologicum". That same year, Samuel Frederick Gray transferred the species to the genus "Mycena". Synonyms for the species include "Agaricus conicus" named by William Hudson in 1778, "Agaricus crispus" described by August Johann Georg Karl Batsch in 1893, "Stereopodium galericulatum" by Franklin Sumner Earle in 1909, and "Prunulus galericulatus" by William Alphonso Murrill in 1916.

"Mycena galericulata" is the type species of the genus "Mycena". It is classified in section "Mycena" of "Mycena" in the infrageneric scheme of Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus. In the older (1947) classification of Alexander H. Smith, he placed it in the subgenus "Eumycena", section "Typicae"—"a most monotonous series of blackish, brown, gray, bluish-gray, or brownish-gray species mostly with ascending gills and generally large to moderate stature."

The specific epithet "galericulata" is derived from the Latin "galer", and means "with a small hat". Gray called it the "helmetted high-stool". It is commonly known as the "common bonnet", the "toque mycena", or the "rosy-gill fairy helmet".

The cap of "M. galericulata" is roughly conical when young, and eventually becomes broadly bell-shaped or with a broad umbo that can reach diameters of . The cap margin is initially somewhat curved inward, but soon evens out or even becomes uplifted, and often splits radially in age. The surface has radial grooves that extend nearly to the center, and feels greasy but not sticky. The color is somewhat buff-brown on the margin, and fades gradually to pale dirty tan to dirty cinnamon-brown. The flesh is thick in the center of the cap and tapers evenly to the margin, and is watery gray, with a cartilage-like texture. The odor and taste are mildly to strongly farinaceous (similar to the smell of freshly ground flour), to radish-like.

The gills are narrowly attached (adnexed) to broadly attached or sinuate. The gill spacing ranges from close to somewhat distantly spaced, with 26–36 gills reaching the stem; there are additionally three or four tiers of lamellulae (short gills that do not extend completely from the cap margin to the stem). The gills are strongly intervenose (possessing cross-veins), moderately broad (5–7 mm), white or grayish white, soon flushed with pale pink, with even edges. The stem is long, thick, equal in width throughout, and with a cartilaginous texture. It is hollow, not hairy, either smooth or twisted with longitudinal striations, often with a long pseudorrhiza (a subterranean elongation of the stem) at the base. The stem color is pale grayish white on the upper portion, and pale grayish black below; the base becomes somewhat dirty brown in age, but does not develop reddish stains.

"Mycena galericulata" produces a white spore print. The spores are ellipsoid, 8–10 by 5.5–7 μm, and amyloid—which means they will turn blue-black to black when stained with Melzer's reagent. The basidia (spore-bearing cells) have stout sterigmata, and measure 34–40 by 7–9 μm. They may be either two-spored or four-spored. There are numerous club-shaped to rounded cheilocystidia (cystidia on the gill edge), that measure 32–40 by 8–12 μm; their apices or the entire enlarged portion bear rodlike projections that become increasingly elongated and branched in age. There are no pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face). The gill tissue has a very thin cuticle, under which is a narrow hypoderm, while the remainder of the tissue comprises densely matted tufts of mycelia, and stains deep vinaceous-brown in iodine. Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of the four-spored forms.

Opinions on the edibility of the mushroom vary. One source considers them to have a "delicate flavor and texture", and suggests that they are good when "stewed gently in their own juice and then seasoned with salt, pepper and butter." Others list the species as inedible, and notes that they have a "mildly rancid" smell, and with a taste ranging from rancid to farinaceous. Another says "unknown, but not recommended." At any rate, the species falls into the general category of brownish Mycenas that are generally unappetizing as food due to their small size and delicate consistency.

The winter bonnet ("M. tintinnabulum") is a northern European species that is much smaller (cap diameter up to across) and has a brown cap, and has ragged hairs at the base. It generally appears in late autumn to early winter on the stumps of deciduous trees, especially beech. It has pip-shaped spores that are smaller than "M. galericulata", around 4.5–5.5 by 2.5–2.8 µm. "M. maculata" develops pink stains on its gills as it matures; its spores are 7–9 by 4–5 μm. Another similar species is "M. inclinata", which can be distinguished by gills bearing reddish spots, which may become entirely red with age. It also has whitish, slender, threadlike flecks on the stalk. "M. parabolica" is thinner, and more fragile. Another "Mycena" that grows in clusters on decaying hardwoods is "M. haematopus", but this species has a vinaceous-brown cap with a scalloped margin, and a stem that bleeds reddish-brown juice when injured. "M. excisa" closely resembles "M. galericulata", but can be distinguished microscopically by the presence of both smooth and roughened cystidia (bearing finger-like projections).

"Mycena galericulata" is saprobic, and grows on decaying hardwood and softwood sticks, chips, logs, and stumps. It can also grow from submerged wood, which may give it a terrestrial appearance. It typically grows in small clusters or sometimes singly. The fungus fruits from late spring to early winter. A study of litter-decomposing fungi in a coniferous forest in Finland showed that "M. galericulata" produces extracellular hydrolytic enzymes in the humus and eluvial soil, including β-glucosidase, β-xylosidase, α-glucosidase, butyrate esterase and sulphatase. The enzymes form complexes with inorganic and organic particles in the soil and break down (depolymerize) biopolymers such as cellulose, hemicellulose, and starch, which contributes to the cycling of carbon and nutrients. The presence of lead contamination in the soil decreases both the growth and the extracellular hydrolytic enzyme activity of "M. galericulata".

"Mycena galericulata" is a very common and widely distributed species, found throughout the entire temperate zone of the Northern Hemisphere. In the United States, it occurs throughout eastern North America and also along the Pacific Coast. It has also been collected in Edo State, Nigeria. Although the mushroom has occasionally been reported from Australia, these collections are probably based on misidentifications, and "Australian records of "Mycena galericulata" are best regarded as erroneous".


</doc>
<doc id="24302451" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24302451" title="Family Goy">
Family Goy

"Family Goy" is the second episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series "Family Guy". It originally aired on Fox in the United States on October 4, 2009. In the episode, Lois discovers that her mother is Jewish and begins her struggle to adapt to her newfound heritage. Meanwhile, Irish Catholic Peter begins to embrace his wife's new religion, but after a spiritual visit from his deceased stepfather, Francis, he becomes increasingly anti-semitic towards Lois and the family.

First announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic-Con International, the episode was written by Mark Hentemann and directed by James Purdum. It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and cultural references, in addition to receiving criticism from the Parents Television Council. According to Nielsen ratings, it was viewed in 9.66 million homes in its original airing. The episode featured guest performances by Jeff Bergman, Max Burkholder, Charles Durning, Ben Stein and Bill Woodson, along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series. "Family Goy" was released on DVD along with seven other episodes from the season on June 15, 2010.

While at the Drunken Clam, Peter falls in love with a cardboard cutout of Kathy Ireland. He takes her home and has an 'affair' with her. Soon he is caught by Lois who calls him an idiot. Peter introduces Kathy to the kids as their new mom, but after finding that Chris took her into his room, he angrily confronts her and ends up ripping her in half. He tearfully buries her in the yard and begs Lois for forgiveness. Lois forgives him and they have sex and Lois is shocked when Peter discovers a lump on her breast, causing her to go to the hospital the next day to have it tested for breast cancer. The test comes back negative, but while looking through her medical records, Dr Hartman discovers that Lois' mother is a Jewish Holocaust survivor, making Lois and her children Jewish by heritage. Barbara confirms her heritage, and Carter admits he kept it a family secret so that they could join the country club. Despite not being Jewish himself, Peter takes to it eagerly, much to Lois' frustration. That night, Peter is visited by the ghost of his adoptive father, Francis, who warns him that he will go to Hell for not being Catholic. The next day, Peter decides to re-convert the family to Catholicism and becomes prejudiced against Lois' heritage, becoming anti-Semitic.

Taking advice from her mother not to let Peter suppress her identity, like her own husband did to her, Lois decides to hold a Passover Seder, which Peter tries to ruin so he can celebrate Easter. He shows up in an Easter bunny costume while drunk. Jesus appears, revealing he himself is Jewish, and points out that Catholicism and Judaism are very similar. He then tells Peter that he should treat people of different faiths as fairly as he wants to be treated. Peter and Lois apologize to each other, but are at a loss for what religion they should follow. After being asked this by Peter, Jesus answers "Six of one, they're all complete crap", and then Brian, himself an atheist, (offscreen) chimes in from the other side of the room, responding "Thank you!"

First announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic-Con International in San Diego, California on July 25, 2009, by future showrunner Mark Hentemann, the episode was directed by supervising director James Purdum, written by Hentemann, shortly after the conclusion of the seventh production season.

"Family Goy", along with the seven other episodes from "Family Guy"s eighth season, were released on a three-disc DVD set in the United States on June 15, 2010. The sets included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes, a collection of deleted scenes, a special mini-feature which discussed the process behind animating "Road to the Multiverse", and mini-feature entitled "Family Guy" Karaoke. This episode uses a story element from "Death is a Bitch", an episode written by Ricky Blitt, in which Lois discovers a lump on Peter's breast, thinking it would be cancer, whereas the opposite occurred in this episode.

Actors Ben Stein and Charles Durning guest starred in the episode as Rabbi Goldberg and Francis Griffin, respectively. Rabbi Goldberg and Max Weinstein, two Jewish characters whom Lois and Peter seek advice from after discovering Lois's heritage, made their second appearance in the series, having previously appeared in the third season episode "When You Wish Upon a Weinstein", which was originally banned from airing on network television. However, Peter Riegert did not reprise his role of Max Weinstein. Instead, voice actor Jeff Bergman, notable for playing Fred Flintstone in the show, voices him. In addition to Stein, Durning, Bergman, and the regular cast, child actor Max Burkholder and voice actor William Woodson guest starred in the episode. Recurring guest voice actors Johnny Brennan, actor Ralph Garman, writer Mark Hentemann, writer Danny Smith, writer Alec Sulkin, and writer John Viener also made minor appearances.

"Family Goy" contained various cultural references. The episode opens with a parody of the opening sequence of "The All-New Super Friends Hour", with the central characters of "Family Guy" replacing "The All-New Super Friends Hour"s main characters, except for Meg. When Peter first sees the Kathy Ireland cutout, he starts to sing the Billy Ocean song, "Suddenly". As Lois collects the mail Peter attempts to shoot her, topless and armed with a sniper rifle, but instead hits the mailbox which is reminiscent of a scene in "Schindler's List" of Amon Göth shooting down Jews in the Kraków-Płaszów concentration camp in occupied Poland. Stewie's prayer over the candles is a real prayer that women recite before a non-Sabbath festival's start; however, the prayer turns into a reference to the 1984 adventure film "Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom", where Indian priest Mola Ram takes out a man's heart during a ritual. Peter references William Shakespeare's play "Macbeth", but the cutaway gag shows a battle in a spaceship, at which Peter admits that he is not very familiar with Shakespeare's works.

"Family Goy" was first broadcast in the United States and Canada on Fox on October 4, 2009. The episode was viewed by 9.66 million people and received a 5.4/8 Nielsen Rating, making "Family Goy" the ninth most-watched show of the night it was broadcast.

The episode was met with mixed critical responses. Ahsan Haque of IGN praised the second half of the episode but felt that the Kathy Ireland plot was too long. In his review, he commented "It's definitely meant for people who are open-minded to this kind of humor, and can make sure they treat the subject matter purely as comedy and not any manner of social commentary or prejudice. Take away the slow start, and this episode managed to really deliver some memorable shocking comedy." "TV Guide" critic Alex Rocha praised the show's "League of Justice" opening sequence and the Kathy Ireland plot but reacted negatively to the second half of the episode, stating that he "dozed off" during the last fifteen minutes. "TV Guide" also listed the episode on the "TV hot list" of October 4. "The Toronto Star" noted the episode was "worth watching". Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" gave the episode a negative review, giving it a C– grade and concluding that, "Overall, the episode was just an excuse to drag out a bunch of tired Jewish jokes and also have Peter briefly descend into anti-Semitism". Though he mostly disliked the episode, VanDerWerff praised Stewie's part in the episode, as well as the Shakespeare cutaway gag and a cutaway that featured Peter getting into fight with a cat. "Jewish Journal" critic Adam Willis commented "My hope is that the series will roast the familiar Jewish themes introduced in “Family Goy,” rather than continuing on the Jews-as-targets route. The show has regularly featured some inspiring Jewish gags – both in good taste and bad. And while Hebrew community in-jokes would be better received by Jewish viewers, the likely reality is the Holocaust humor will continue to dominate."

Media watchdog group the Parents Television Council, a frequent critic of the show, named "Family Goy" its "Worst TV Show of the Week" for the week ending October 9, 2009, criticizing what it saw as an anti-Semitic plot.



</doc>
<doc id="24330006" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24330006" title="Nicholas Mayall">
Nicholas Mayall

Nicholas Ulrich Mayall (May 9, 1906 – January 5, 1993) was an American observational astronomer. After obtaining his doctorate from the University of California, Berkeley, Mayall worked at the Lick Observatory, where he remained from 1934 to 1960, except for a brief period at MIT's Radiation Laboratory during World War II.

During his time at Lick, Mayall contributed to astronomical knowledge of nebulae, supernovae, spiral galaxy internal motions, the redshifts of galaxies, and the origin, age, and size of the Universe. He played a significant role in the planning and construction of Lick's reflector, which represented a major improvement over its earlier telescope.

From 1960, Mayall spent 11 years as director of the Kitt Peak National Observatory until his retirement in 1971. Under his leadership KPNO, and the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, developed into two of the world's top research observatories, equipped with premier telescopes. Mayall was responsible for the construction of the Kitt Peak reflector, which was named after him. When Mayall died in 1993, his ashes were spread high on an empty ridge of Kitt Peak.

Mayall's father, Edwin L. Mayall, Sr., was an engineer for a manufacturing company in Illinois. His mother, Olive Ulrich Mayall, despite never attending college herself, set high educational standards for Mayall and his younger brother (Edwin, Jr., born 1907). Sometime between his brother's birth and 1913, the family moved to California's Modesto area, where Mayall entered first grade. Some time before 1917, they moved again, to Stockton where they remained until 1924 and Mayall's graduation from Stockton High School (except for a brief return to Peoria, Illinois during 1918–1919). During this period, presumably during his high school years, Mayall's parents divorced.

During his senior year, in the fall of 1923, Mayall was secretary of the school science club and set up a club visit to the Lick Observatory. His father permitted him to use his car, a Moline Knight, to transport the club members up the dirt and gravel winding mountain road leading to the observatory. This was Mayall's first visit to the observatory where he would spend much of his career. After visiting, he read all the astronomy books available in the local libraries, although he did not at that time imagine making astronomy his profession.

Mayall began college in the fall of 1924 at the University of California, Berkeley, studying for a degree in mining. He took up residence with his mother in an apartment on Durant Avenue, and worked at the UC Berkeley library to help support them both. Mayall generally did well at university, and was eventually elected to the Sigma Xi and Phi Beta Kappa honor societies. However, at mid-term examinations of his second year, he achieved poor grades in mineralogy and chemistry laboratory. At a meeting with the dean to discuss his grades the latter became aware that Mayall was color blind, which prevented him from observing small color changes in bead and flame tests, and also kept him from seeing small color changes in precipitations and titrations. Mayall's adviser recommended that he change his major, as he would not be able to graduate as a mining engineer with such a handicap.

Mayall's mother encouraged him to study whatever interested him the most, and to do it well, so he considered astronomy as an alternative to mining. After asking many professors in the astronomy department whether they enjoyed their work and whether they made a satisfactory wage, and being content with their answers, he transferred to the College of Letters and Science to major in astronomy. This did not set him back in his degree requirements because almost all of his first year studies had been in basic physical sciences and mathematics. Eventually Mayall discovered that he greatly enjoyed astronomy, and decided upon a course of graduate level study followed by a career as a research scientist.

After graduating in 1928, Mayall decided to remain at Berkeley, as it had the best astronomy graduate program of the day. However, he took a hiatus from pursuing his advanced degree and went to work as a human computer at the Mount Wilson Observatory from 1929 to 1931, where he assisted luminaries such as Edwin Hubble, Paul W. Merrill, and Milton L. Humason. This activity resulted in him co-authoring papers on Pluto's mass and orbit with Seth Barnes Nicholson and others, shortly after Pluto's discovery

Mayall returned to Berkeley in 1931 to pursue graduate studies. His thesis topic, suggested by Hubble, was to count the number of galaxies per unit area on the sky as a function of position on direct plates taken with the Crossley reflector at Lick. This should have supplemented the counts Hubble himself was making using the and telescopes at Mt. Wilson. Mayall successfully completed his thesis and was awarded his PhD degree in 1934. Hubble complimented Mayall for his work, although significant results were never achieved (nor by Hubble either) due to the lack of accurate magnitude standards for the faint galaxies that were measured and by the (then unrealized) very strong tendency of galaxies to cluster.

While working on his thesis, Mayall had an idea of designing a small, fast slitless spectrograph, optimized for nebulae and galaxies. He believed that if it were used in conjunction with the Crossley reflector it would make that facility competitive for at least some of the work that Humason and Hubble were doing with the larger Mt. Wilson telescopes. It was never expected to compete with the Mt. Wilson instrument for stars or elliptical galaxies, which have condensed and relatively bright nuclei. The spectrograph was to be used instead to study extended, low-surface-brightness gaseous nebulae or irregular galaxies. Mayall's thesis advisor, William Hammond Wright, and the then head of the Lick stellar spectroscopy program, Joseph Haines Moore, encouraged him to develop his spectrograph. The device was constructed by the Lick Observatory's own workshop, and proved to be more efficient for extended, low-surface-brightness objects, particularly in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum, thus confirming the expectations of Mayall. With Wright's strong encouragement, Mayall had used fused quartz to make ultraviolet transmitting optics, whereas the Mt. Wilson spectrographs used heavy glass lenses and prisms, which absorb ultraviolet radiation.

While Mayall hoped to join the Mount Wilson team upon earning his doctorate, there were no openings during the Great Depression. Instead, he began his career at Lick, which was afforded by the number two janitor resigning and Mayall being given a one-year position as observing assistant with janitorial duties limited to maintaining the darkrooms and keeping instrument rooms clean. The following year, one of the senior astronomers joined the Berkeley department and his salary was split between Mayall and another young astronomer, Arthur Bambridge Wyse.

On June 30, 1934, Mayall married Kathleen (Kay) Boxall from Los Angeles, who he had met during his two years in Pasadena. They lived in a small apartment that was part of the little astronomy village on the Mount Hamilton summit, where all Lick astronomers resided at that time.

Using his newly built spectrograph, Mayall was the first to determine the radial velocities of many knots of gas in the Crab Nebula. Using these data and the previously published angular rate of expansion of the nebula, he was able to estimate its distance. Consequently, he became the first person to recognize and demonstrate that the Crab Nebula was the remnant of a supernova observed and recorded in 1054 (SN 1054), rather than a classical nova. Walter Baade was instrumental in stimulating and counseling Mayall after around 1939, taking on the role previously filled by Hubble.

In 1941, together with Arthur Wyse and Lawrence Aller, Mayall studied the rotation of nearby galaxies and found that there was much matter that was too faint to be observed, but which could be detected by way of its gravitational effect. He spent about three years until 1942 researching 50 Milky Way globular clusters, and found the Milky Way had about one half of the mass previously supposed.

While at the Lick Observatory, Mayall collaborated on a 20-year project with astronomers at Mount Palomar and Mount Wilson on the Big Bang theory of the beginning of the Universe. Together with Milton L. Humason and Allan R. Sandage, he wrote a 1956 paper concluding that the age of the Universe was six billion years (three times the prior estimate, and about half the modern value), and its size three times larger than thought.

After the United States entered World War II, Mayall accepted a position at the MIT's Radiation Laboratory in Cambridge, Massachusetts to work on radar development. He began his work early in 1942 in Cambridge, which was the only time during his adult life that he resided outside California or Arizona. However, the climate of Massachusetts was unlike that of California, which he and his family were accustomed to, and in the middle of 1943 he arranged a transfer to the Pasadena Mt. Wilson Observatory offices. Many wartime Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD) projects related to optics, aerial gunnery, aerial photography, and bombing tactics were already in progress there. Unhappy with the management of his project and feeling his talents were not being well used, he transferred again in February 1944 to Caltech to work on the development of large rockets. There he became an expert on high-speed photography, which was used to analyze rocket trajectories. In the spring of 1945, he was transferred to a secret atomic bomb project that also required high-speed photography. He visited Los Alamos twice, including once around the time of the Trinity test. By October 1, 1945, the war had ended and Mayall had returned to astronomical research at Lick.

During World War II Mayall became an important influence on Lick Observatory's future. Ever since 1931, when he had returned to Lick and Berkeley after serving two years as an assistant at Mount Wilson, he had felt strongly that Mount Hamilton required a larger telescope. The astronomers at Lick were proud of their ability to achieve important results with Lick's small Crossley reflector. Its diminutive size first became apparent in 1908, when Mount Wilson's telescope saw first light. This was accentuated by the opening of the Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in 1917, and Mount Wilson's even larger Hooker telescope in 1919. Mayall was adept at working with the small Crossley, but understood that it could never really stand up to a competing telescope that collected nine times the amount of light. This was only going to get worse when the Hale Telescope was completed at Palomar Observatory. Mayall and other young faculty at Lick thought that the older faculty such as Moore and Wright were too committed to the small telescopes and should have tried harder to obtain a larger reflector.

Unknown to Mayall, Lick observatory director William H. Wright and his predecessor, Robert G. Aitken, had both tried in secret to raise money for a larger reflector to replace the Crossley Reflector. They tried both private sources as well as trying to get Robert Gordon Sproul, the University of California President, to provide for one in the budget. Despite multiple attempts, they continued to fail, primarily due to the Great Depression. However, in 1942, Sproul asked Paul W. Merrill from Mt. Wilson to succeed Wright, but was turned down. Agitated by the refusal, Sproul changed his stance and told the regents that they had to find a way to raise money for a new telescope once the war ended. At about this time, Sproul promised or secretly appointed C. Donald Shane as director of Lick, to take over when the war ended.

The plan for a large telescope was leaked around September 1944 in the form of the University's budget proposals. Wright and Joseph H. Moore, interim wartime Lick director, imagined an or reflector based upon the funds proposed in the budget by Sproul. Mayall and Gerald E. Kron sent a letter to Sproul representing the younger Lick staff members, in which they requested a meeting to discuss the kind of telescope to be built. They met with Sproul in December 1944 in Sproul's Los Angeles office. Mayall spoke of the key need for a telescope exceeding . At the Caltech optical shop in Pasadena he had seen the nearly completed Pyrex glass disc that was initially planned to be used as a flat in the auto-collimation test of the Palomar mirror and urged Sproul to have the Lick telescope use a mirror of that size. Much to their surprise, Sproul agreed.

Shane was appointed chairman of a committee formed by Sproul in the beginning of 1945, to plan the new reflector. Other committee members included Mayall, Moore, Walter S. Adams and Ira S. Bowen. The committee functioned primarily through correspondence. Mayall's first letter helped to convince Shane that was feasible instead of just . Mayall helped to bridge the gap between the experienced team of telescope designers in Pasadena and Shane, who was more experienced as a university administrator and professor. Adams and the executive officer of the project, John August Anderson, shared their experience, drawings and plans with the Lick design committee. On March 6, 1945, with both Mayall and Shane present, the committee decided upon the basic parameters of what would become the C. Donald Shane telescope. On March 7, Mayall joined Shane, Wright and Moore (not present at the March 6 meeting), at Mt. Hamilton to choose the location upon which to build the reflector.

During the long period of building the telescope, Mayall continued to use Lick's Crossley Reflector and focused his efforts on utilizing his slitless spectrograph, which was optimized for extended, low-surface-brightness clusters, galaxies, and nebulae. In 1946, he completed his pre-war effort to get integrated spectra of globular clusters and published the work. His paper was key in demonstrating that the system of Milky Way globular clusters shares only slightly the galactic rotation found in the flattened disc of interstellar matter and young stars in our galaxy. In 1948, Mayall serendipitously discovered a type II supernova while conducting other research.

Other research Mayall performed included the 20 year collaboration (formulated in 1935 by Hubble) with Milton Humason, to gather redshift values for all northern galaxies brighter than +13 visual magnitude. Mayall handled the brighter galaxies on the Crossley, while Humason tackled the fainter ones using the Mount Wilson . This work resulted in the 1956 paper he co-authored with Humason and Allan Sandage, on the rate of expansion of the Universe. The paper listed over 800 redshift values (300 determined by Mayall) for galaxies measured from 1935 to 1955 at Lick, Wilson and Palomar.
At Lick, he also studied galactic dynamics, such as the rotational motion of the Andromeda and Triangulum galaxies. He presented this work at a symposium on the structure of the Milky Way on June 23, 1950, at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. This work demonstrated the inner solid-body rotation and the outer Keplerian motion. In 1953, together with O.J. Eggen, Mayall identified six likely globular clusters (including Mayall II) around the Andromeda galaxy in a Palomar 48-inch schmidt plate exposed in 1948 that was provided to them by Hubble.

Gerry Kron marveled at the sensitivity of Mayall's eyes that could reach down to +17 visual magnitude using the telescope. Mayall's eyesight later deteriorated to the point that he could no longer read.

The new telescope became operational at the beginning of 1960. Mayall immediately began using it, although he left Lick in September of that year.

Mayall moved on from the University of California (after more than 25 years progressing from student to astronomer), to become the second director of Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO). With financial support from the National Science Foundation, several universities had formed a consortium — the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA). Its purpose was to create and run a research observatory for American astronomers. The first director was Aden B. Meinel, who chose the site near Tucson at the Kitt Peak, and oversaw the building of its first telescope, the reflector which was completed in the spring of 1960.

However, the AURA board decided that Meinel was not well suited for the job and chose Mayall to replace him on October 1, 1960, even though he had no previous administrative experience. Mayall had previously been appointed (in 1958) as a consultant to AURA, due to his experience in planning the Lick telescope. The board's president was Shane, who was representing the University of California, and he helped convince Mayall to accept the offer.

As director, Mayall oversaw the building of the Kitt peak reflector. It was still being built when he retired in 1971, and was completed in 1973, at which point it was named the Nicholas U. Mayall Telescope in his honor. Mayall was intimately involved in the expansion of the national observatory to the Southern hemisphere in what eventually became the Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory (CTIO). The Victor M. Blanco Telescope at CTIO (identical to the Mayall Telescope at Kitt Peak) saw first light in 1974 and was completed in 1976.

Mayall retired in 1971, at the age of 65, an event that was honored by a symposium held on his birthday, May 8. During his retirement, he continued to play an active role in many organizations, including the overview committee for Fermilab. He died on January 5, 1993, of complications caused by diabetes; his ashes were spread high on an empty ridge of Kitt Peak. Mayall was survived by his wife of 58 years, Kathleen Boxall, and their two children: Bruce Ian Mayall (1939) and Pamela Ann Mayall, their two grandchildren: Shane Nicholas Oakes (1977) and Bryce Oakes Mayall (1979).

Honor Societies

Named after Mayall




</doc>
<doc id="24396789" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24396789" title="Erik Gjems-Onstad">
Erik Gjems-Onstad

Erik-Ørn Gjems-Onstad, MBE (22 February 1922 – 18 November 2011) was a Norwegian resistance member, officer, lawyer, sports official, politician, author and anti-immigration activist.

Gjems-Onstad joined the Norwegian resistance movement after Nazi Germany invaded Norway in 1940. He was arrested in Sweden for his involvement with Norwegian resistance activity in the country in 1941, and was sent to the United Kingdom where he joined the Norwegian Independent Company 1 ("Kompani Linge") and received British military training. He was deployed to Norway in 1943 as part of Lark, assigned with establishing radio connection with London. He led Lark in Trøndelag between 1943 and 1945, which constituted the leadership of Milorg in the region. His other activities included to assist with weapons smuggling, prepare the sinking of the German battleship "Tirpitz" and plotting to assassinate Nazi collaborator Ivar Grande. He also founded the Durham organisation for conducting psychological warfare towards the end of the war, and he took part in blowing up railway tracks. Gjems-Onstad's efforts during the Second World War led him to become one of Norway's highest decorated war heroes.

He joined the Norwegian Home Guard after the war, where he served as a captain. He completed education in law, and also worked as a judge and lawyer. He ultimately reached the rank of colonel in the military, as military lawyer of a branch of the Royal Norwegian Air Force. For some years he was CEO of a project that planned to develop the Vaterland neighbourhood in Oslo. Gjems-Onstad also had a career in sports, representing the sports club SK Rye in cycling and racewalking. He later worked as a sports official as board member and chairman of various national sports bodies.

A former member of the Conservative Party and the libertarian organisation Libertas, Gjems-Onstad joined Anders Lange's Party when it was founded in 1973 and became the party's deputy leader. He was elected a Member of Parliament in the 1973 parliamentary election, and became the party's parliamentary leader following Anders Lange's death in 1974. Many of his views and proposals caused controversy, and he got in conflict with the new leadership of the party, which was eventually headed by Carl I. Hagen. Gjems-Onstad was expelled from the party in 1976, and finished his term as an independent. He also became known for criticising the Norwegian government's policy in Africa, and for defending the governments of countries such as Rhodesia and South Africa. In the 1980s he worked as a defender for several anti-immigration activists, and from the late 1980s he became involved in anti-immigration politics himself. He stood in election for the Stop Immigration party in 1989 and for the Fatherland Party in 1991, and he was later involved in the militant organisation "Folkebevegelsen mot innvandring" ("Peoples movement against immigration") and later Stop Islamisation of Norway. He was briefly active locally in the Conservative Party and the Pensioners' Party in the late 2000s.

Erik-Ørn Gjems-Onstad was born in Kristiania (modern-day Oslo) to jurist and civil servant Olaf Gjems-Onstad (1882–1945) and architect Ågot Urbye (1886–1959). He worked at sea as a cabin boy in 1937, and went to port in both Africa and Asia. He finished his secondary education in 1940.

Gjems-Onstad was active in the boy scouts before the invasion, and he was because of his experience there asked to instruct in map and compass for a volunteer military training program in late 1939. He thereafter became scout leader as the former leader went to fight in the Winter War. Due to the war in Europe, the scout exercises became increasingly serious, and the scout movement arguably had a big part in the early organisation of the Norwegian resistance. In the winter of 1939/40, Gjems-Onstad commenced training in orienteering and signaling during the night. The weekend before the invasion, he and a friend prepared "for war" by training and sleeping in a tent in the snow in the forest Vestmarka, which was seen as unusual to do at the time.

On 9 April 1940, Nazi Germany invaded and occupied Norway as a part of the Second World War. Gjems-Onstad became aware of the German presence when he and his family saw German planes flying right over their home. They did not get any notification of what was happening, and only music was played on the radio. Gjems-Onstad took his bike and cycled to his school, the Oslo Cathedral School, only to find it closed and in a chaotic state. He thereafter went to the city centre and "Karl Johans gate", where he witnessed the Germans marching through. The next (or possibly the same) day, a German Junkers plane crashed near him and his friend when they were on their way from Lysaker to get a closer view of the captured Fornebu Airport. He briefly found himself in the situation of attempting to rescue the Germans trapped inside the plane, but the heat was unbearable and the two were told by the Germans to run away and get in safety just moments before the plane exploded. The proclamation by Norwegian Prime Minister Johan Nygaardsvold on 10 April (that rejected the German claim to appoint Vidkun Quisling as Norwegian Prime Minister), was according to Gjems-Onstad received with great disappointment by him and his friends. He thought it contained nothing but verbiage, with no remarks about mobilisation, defence, fighting or war. He thereafter wanted to join the resistance, but on his way met a man who told him that he would be rejected if he had not been through recruit training, and he thus returned home. After a few days, he and a friend nevertheless set out for Northern Norway. They came as far north as Nord-Trøndelag, where they however gave up and returned home.

Gjems-Onstad started studying at the University of Oslo in late 1940, and he got in touch with students who wanted to organise a resistance movement. One time, he and other youth who sympathised with the resistance disrupted a public meeting held by the fascist party "Nasjonal Samling" (NS). They deliberately clapped their hands so relentlessly (they considered that they could not get punished for "cheering") that the speakers could not speak, and thereafter started leaving the room. Many were however blocked from leaving, and Gjems-Onstad and a few others were arrested and fined due to their role in the event. In September he participated in a clash between students and a group of "Hird" members (the NS's paramilitary organisation) outside the university. A young boy came by during the initial stand-off, asking Gjems-Onstad what was happening. Gjems-Onstad responded that the others were traitors, and "Hird" members thus captured him and beat him up. Later, due to an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in December, Gjems-Onstad took part in digging mass graves for slaughtered cows in Dikemark and in Nesøya.
In late 1940, an engineer had created some military inventions which Gjems-Onstad's group wanted to bring to the Allied forces. It was decided that one of them was to travel to the UK, while Gjems-Onstad was to travel to Stockholm. Gjems-Onstad was joined by three others, and they decided to let themselves be arrested in Östmark in Sweden. They were transported to Stockholm, but the Norwegian legation was not interested in the inventions. Gjems-Onstad was later tipped to contact the British military attaché. He got in contact with Major Malcolm Munthe, who in turn was interested in the inventions. Gjems-Onstad was arrested by Swedish police in Stockholm on 25 March 1941, as parts of Munthe's organisation had been exposed. Gjems-Onstad was imprisoned at the Stockholm police station for 13 days, and then for 59 days in the Stockholm Remand Prison. On 23 May 1941 the government decided that he was to be expelled and banned from entering Sweden (the ban was repealed after the war). He was originally scheduled to be deported to Canada via Moscow and China, but the plans were halted due to the German invasion of the Soviet Union. He was instead sent to the Norwegian refugee camp in Öreryd. He was ordered by the British to escape from Öreryd in October 1941 and travel to Norway. He was captured by the Swedish Home Guard close to the Norwegian border, but was sent by plane to the UK by Swedish authorities in December.

After arriving in the UK, Gjems-Onstad joined the Norwegian Independent Company 1 ("Kompani Linge") and took British military education. The British decided in 1943 to deploy him to Trøndelag in Norway together with Odd Sørli, Johnny Pevik and Nils Uhlin Hansen. The deployment was necessary as Evald Hansen and Herluf Nygaard had been captured and tortured in December 1942 (Nygaard later escaped, Hansen died at Falstad). Sørli and Gjems-Onstad were set to maintain Lark, establish radio connection with London and get intelligence about the German battleship "Tirpitz", at the time located in the Trondheimsfjord. When he was training at Glen More Lodge near Aviemore, Gjems-Onstad was ordered to go to London, where he was supplied with a 20 kg radio transmitter and other equipment. Together with Sørli he travelled to Inverness by train, and to Shetland by plane, under stormy weather conditions. They initially set out with the fishing boat "Harald II" from Scalloway in late February, but due to unusually stormy weather they were driven back to Shetland three times after three unsuccessful attempts to reach Ålesund; the last attempt destroyed their equipment as the boat was bursted open. They had their equipment replaced, and set out for Kristiansund in March instead on a bigger boat. With easier, yet still poor weather, the voyage took two days. When they reached land they noticed that they had reached Kya Lighthouse, much farther to the north of their original destination, but they decided to make landfall anyway. From there they travelled with fake identification via Namsos to Trondheim, where they reunited with fellow Lark members Johnny Pevik and Nils Uhlin Hansen, the other group sent from London. Gjems-Onstad thereafter assisted Pevik and Hansen with transporting five tons of weapons from an uninhabited island near Lyngvær to Trondheim.

Lark received missions from London (sometimes via Stockholm), and constituted the leadership of Milorg in Trøndelag where they in practice were the same entity. Gjems-Onstad started his operations in Trondheim by establishing radio connection with London and operating the radio transmitter, and he soon became one of the most important persons in the leadership of Milorg. His saboteur activity included to prepare the sinking of "Tirpitz", but the plans were never realised as the ship had left the Trondheimsfjord in early 1943. Sørli commanded Gjems-Omstad to a spontaneous assassination of Nazi collaborator Ivar Grande after spotting him incidentally, but Gjems-Onstad aborted after noticing a division of Russian POWs, fearing for what in turn might happen to them if he went through with the assassination. Some days later he again plotted to assassinate Grande together with Sørli and Ingebrigt Gausland. They delivered a box booby trapped with an egg hand grenade to his home, but Grande foiled the attempt with advice Norwegian Gestapo agent Henry Rinnan (who was present at the time) had received on not to open such boxes. Following the attempted assassination, he was ordered to not get himself involved in any further such attempts, as it was considered too risky for him. Gjems-Onstad took over as leader of the group from Sørli in October 1943, and it was decided to pull him out of Norway and close the radio station following news that Pevik had been arrested. He left Trondheim for Stockholm later that month, and received training in psychological warfare.

When Sørli came to Stockholm in January 1944 he took over for Gjems-Onstad, while Gjems-Onstad was to take over the leadership of Lark as well as to reorganise Milorg. Gjems-Onstad also founded the propaganda organisation Durham when he came back to Trondheim in March 1944. Lark and Durham were to be kept completely separate, with Gjems-Onstad as their only mutual connection. Durham's mission was to influence the moral of the enemy, mainly through distributing brochures (an estimated 115,000 copies in total) and posters (an estimated 257,000), while also to cause irritation by minor sabotage. The brochures were chiefly distributed in the enemy's quarters, and the posters were put up throughout Trondheim. Members of the group also tore down Nazi posters, sabotaged German vehicles, threw stink bombs into restaurants and cinemas, and applied itching powder—notably in condoms for sale to German soldiers. Sabotage on a bigger scale had to be authorised from London, and was largely discouraged as it would risk unnecessary German reprisals. Gjems-Onstad reported back in Stockholm at the end of June. Eager to bring supplies to Trondheim, he and Sørli soon decided to transport propaganda material, handguns and explosives to the Norwegian border. After finding a lost resistance member in the mountains, Gjems-Onstad joined a course in Alby near Stockholm where he worked as instructor in "silent killing" for a month. He went for a short mission to Trondheim in July in order to insert Egil Løkse as Lark's new radio operator there.

By his next time in Trondheim, the Gestapo had gained knowledge of Gjems-Onstad's activities, and did their outermost to capture him. Gjems-Onstad went back to Trondheim at the end of October. He was to establish a new radio station, and investigate if Milorg and Lark could be rebuilt, as the organisation had been severely damaged by multiple arrests and murders. Durham was however largely intact. The mission went into a new phase, as the Norwegian resistance started organising defence against potential destructions during the now largely inevitable German withdrawal. A continuation of the scorched earth policy practiced in Northern Norway was particularly feared. Gjems-Onstad and Lark were not to lead the defence, but rather to organise it and train new recruits. In November he authorised the creation of the illegal newspaper "For Friheten" by his own initiative, the first in Trondheim in years. He also operated the paper "DFP", or "Deutsche Freiheitspartei", a form of black propaganda distributed to German soldiers and officers. He became increasingly frustrated with the damages caused by Rinnan and his gang of Nazi collaborators, and he vocally advocated their assassination. He reported back to Stockholm in November, and as he saw it, little remained of Milorg in Trøndelag after this. He however noted the importance of Durham, which he considered to have grown very powerful.

In early 1945 Gjems-Onstad took part in blowing up railway tracks on the stretches around Støren Station, but the group had a limited supply of explosives, and the practical effects of the bombings could thus not cause as much effect as wanted. They could for instance not go through with blowing up the railway bridge near Hovin, which they sought as their main target. He was transferred back to Stockholm in March 1945, and Durham was dissolved. He reacted with shock that London had decided that it was too dangerous for him to return to Trondheim. He was uneasy about being set on the sideline, and headed a mission of four men from Stockholm to Namsvatnet at the end of the month to receive British sabotage supplies. They established a base of operations, as well as radio connection to the UK by the station "Quail". The mission returned to Stockholm in early April, and Gjems-Onstad was transferred to a mission in Northern Norway. He was in Troms at the time of the German capitulation.

In 1944 Gjems-Onstad was promoted to second lieutenant ("fenrik"). He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire in 1941, and decorated with the Haakon VII 70th Anniversary Medal in 1942, the St. Olav's Medal With Oak Branch in 1944, the Defence Medal, War Medal 1939–1945, 1939–45 Star and the Norwegian Defence Medal in 1945 and the Norwegian War Cross with Sword in 1947. As such he was one of Norway's highest decorated war heroes. In 1947 he played himself in the documentary film "Det grodde fram" about the Norwegian resistance movement in Trondheim.

Gjems-Onstad became critical of the "retracted regional leadership" of the Home Front ("hjemmefronten") which he became aware of in late 1944. According to him, he and his fellow resistance members had not even heard of their existence. He sent a wire to London requesting that they should take over what remained of Milorg, rather than remaining passive during the occupation only to step forward as leaders of Milorg when the war was over. He became more critical when he became aware that they had started entering the administration in London and Stockholm, according to him without the necessary experience from practical fieldwork. He was shocked at the recklessness of one of them who arrived at one of their bases in Trondheim, concluding that they "obviously had no idea about how strong the infiltration really was in Trondheim, nor how we worked." The regional leadership that stepped forward after the war was according to Gjems-Onstad not identical with the actual leadership of Lark and Milorg during the war.

Historians have noted that it was "very surprising" that Erling Gjone stepped forward as the leader of the Home Front in Trøndelag after the German capitulation. He had entered the administration in Stockholm in February 1945, but he had not been contacted whatsoever by Lark. The decision of putting Gjems-Onstad on the sideline in March 1945 led him to become increasingly critical of the leadership in London, which had gradually become more Norwegian than British, and subsequently decayed into what Gjems-Onstad considered to be a lack of professionality. He also questioned Norway's military abilities in a possible future war in Norway, based on post-war developments. According to Gjems-Onstad, what influenced him and his contemporaries to join the resistance was a national feeling that—speaking some 60 years after war—he then considered that was "almost gone."

Gjems-Onstad deliberated his post-war views on the war in a 2008 ten-minute television special. As he saw it, the Norwegian Labour Party government before the war stood "entirely on the side of the Soviet Union." He pointed to the Soviet Union as the greatest murderer of the war, and considered that nobody had "opened their eyes" to the fact that the Soviet Union was the only country that won territorial gains following the war. While he maintained that the coup headed by Vidkun Quisling was both bad and illegal, he considered that Quisling should be judged softer in light of the situation at the time. He pointed to the government fleeing the country, and what he considered the "pitiful" reaction of Prime Minister Johan Nygaardsvold. He also noted that while some of the figures in the Quisling regime had acted out far too harshly, some others had tried to maintain Norway's interests against the occupiers; the alternative of letting the Germans run the country completely unopposed under Josef Terboven could in his mind have ended up far worse. Gjems-Onstad said he believed that the treason by Quisling should be compared with the lack of preparations for war by Nygaardsvold and the Labour Party government. Gjems-Onstad also complained that he for unexplained reasons had been kept away from public arrangements related to the Second World War. He said he had not been invited to a single such event. He was also in possession of a large archive of wartime material from the resistance movement in Trøndelag, but said he had not been approached with interest by any public institution.

Gjems-Onstad joined the Norwegian Home Guard after the war. From 1947 to 1959 he held the rank of captain there. He was mobilisation manager as military lawyer colonel at Strike Command Southern Norway ("Luftkommando Sør-Norge"), one of the Air Commands of the Royal Norwegian Air Force, from 1970 to 1980. He also completed his education in law, graduating with a cand.jur. degree in 1948. He worked as a judge in southern Buskerud from 1948 to 1949, and in 1949 he opened a law firm in Oslo. From 1957 he had access to work with Supreme Court cases. He was also a consultant or secretary for "Norsk Gartnerforening", "Bruktbilhandlerforeningen/Autoriserte Bruktbilhandleres handelsforbund" and for the local branch of the Norwegian Bar Association. He was a board member of the local Bar Association chapter from 1960 to 1964 and of Max Manus AS, the eponymous company belonging to former resistance member Max Manus, from 1965 to 1969. Gjems-Onstad had served with Manus in the Norwegian Home Guard after the war, and had met his later wife Tikken Manus for the first time in 1943 when she worked as a military attaché in Stockholm. The three remained lifetime close friends ever since they met during the war.

In 1961 Gjems-Onstad left his lawyer's firm to work as a consultant in Den norske Creditbank. He became a central figure in the DnC's plans to develop the Vaterland neighbourhood in Oslo. AS Vaterland was created soon after the DnC had been granted construction rights in 1965, and was a project designated for planning to develop the Vaterland neighbourhood into a business and office centre. Gjems-Onstad was a board member of AS Vaterland from 1966 to 1972, and was its CEO from 1970. He soon got the nickname the "Vaterland King" ("Vaterlandskongen"), after a local 1930s house owner. After a while, the plans for the development was dropped, as neither the bank nor the municipality saw it to be in their interests to realise the plans. Gjems-Onstad was removed from his position with a golden parachute of in 1972 and lost his faith in the project.

From 1972 to 1977 he operated a lawyer's firm in Oslo again, and from 1977 he moved his office to Hvalstad and worked as a defender in Asker and Bærum District Court. He retired as a defender in 1990, but remained a lawyer until 2001. During the 1980s he defended several anti-immigration activists, including Vivi Krogh, Jan Ødegård and Arne Myrdal. He also stated that he by 1994 had helped draft the wills of several anonymous persons who wanted to designate their fortunes, ranging from to , to persons and organisations working against immigration.

Gjems-Onstad had an active career in sports. He represented the club SK Rye which he joined on 1 August 1936, and was made an honorary member of the club in 1986. He became the Norwegian junior champion in cycling in 1939. He was also an active race walker, with two sixth places in the Norwegian championships achieved between 1967 and 1969. He chaired the Norwegian Cycling Federation from 1959 to 1965 and the Norwegian Walking Association from 1967 to 1973. He was a member of the Norwegian Olympic Committee from 1959 to 1973 and a deputy board member of the Norwegian Confederation of Sports from 1965 to 1967. He was an official for Norway at the Summer Olympics in 1960 and 1972, and in 1993 he sat on the committee that organized the 1993 UCI Road World Championships. In 1967 he initiated Styrkeprøven, a yearly cyclosportive from Trondheim to Oslo. He completed the race himself more than fifteen times; the last times with the starting number "1".

From 1960 to 1964 Gjems-Onstad was a member of the school board in Oslo, representing the Conservative Party. He was also a member of the libertarian organisation Libertas, but had left it by 1971 as he considered that it had become "too tame." When Anders Lange's Party (ALP) was founded in 1973 he joined the party and became deputy leader under Anders Lange. He had been present at the founding meeting at "Saga kino", and was offered a place in the party's central leadership by Anders Lange after they one day incidentally met outside Gjems-Onstad's lawyer's office. From then on he was the most central person in the party after Lange himself. Besides his leading positions in business and sports, Gjems-Onstad had for years expressed his political views in newspapers and journals, which broadly coincided with Lange's views. By offering him positions in the party, Lange particularly thought that Gjems-Onstad could help develop the party politically and organisationally. In the 1973 parliamentary election he won a seat in the Norwegian Parliament from Akershus, and became a member of the Standing Committee on Finance and the Election Committee. During his term he set a new record for number of times speaking to the assembly—325 times in one year.

At the start of his parliamentary term he made some proposals that were opposed by the entire parliament, including his own party. He proposed in November 1973 to introduce gun and shooting training as an optional course for students in high school, and to separate church and state (with its financial implications). The proposals were criticised in a press statement by Anders Lange and the party's two other MPs. Turmoil later also erupted in the Akershus and Bærum chapters of the party, and calls were made for expelling Gjems-Onstad due to his proposals in parliament; this wing however left the party in 1975 after being in clear minority. Gjems-Onstad and Lange nonetheless stood together in their conflict with Carl I. Hagen and Kristofer Almås, who sought to strengthen the party's deliberately loose organisation. After Lange's death in 1974, Gjems-Onstad became leader of the party's parliamentary group. While Hagen and Almås had broken out and formed the Reform Party earlier the same year, Gjems-Onstad welcomed Hagen back to the party in 1975 for "constructive cooperation". He thereafter changed to support the work led by Hagen and Arve Lønnum of strengthening the party organisation.

Gjems-Onstad's cooperation with Hagen was however not to last. In early 1976 Gjems-Onstad voiced his discontent with the ever-ongoing conflicts within the party, and he had by mid-year not decided whether or not he wanted to run for re-election. He eventually felt squeezed out of the party, and wanted no part in the intriguing he considered Hagen to represent. He was replaced as parliamentary leader of the party at the start of October. After he in turn recommended voters to rather vote for the Conservative Party in an interview with "Aftenposten", he was finally expelled from the party by a unanimously approved motion put forward by Carl I. Hagen later the same month. Gjems-Onstad finished his term as an independent.

Before the 1973 election Gjems-Onstad advocated a restrictive immigration policy in an interview with "Morgenbladet". After being elected to parliament, he was the sole member of the Finance Committee to oppose agreements of raising fuel taxes in 1973. He proposed steep budget cuts in 1974, notably in press support and in the Office of the Prime Minister. He proposed to abolish the Ministry of the Environment and the Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Administration, as well as 22 laws the same year. Gjems-Onstad also wanted to abolish conscription. In 1975 he criticised parliament for violating the Norwegian Constitution by regularly holding session with less than half of the representatives present. Prime Minister Trygve Bratteli in turn claimed that Gjems-Onstad "undermined democracy" because he was present and spoke in parliament too much.

Gjems-Onstad was among the signatories of a petition in 1974 that called on the Norwegian government to secure Israel's existence. He wanted to terminate the Norwegian government's support of liberation movements in Portuguese Guinea the same year. He proposed to end all public foreign aid, and instead grant tax deduction to private donations. He also proposed to prioritise Norwegian interests in Antarctica higher, and to align Norway's ambassador to Thailand with South Vietnam. He advocated expelling the five Soviet KGB spies who had been exposed in Norway in 1975, but gained no support from the government. He was criticised by the Norwegian Foreign Minister the same year for claiming that Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere used Norwegian taxes for "national socialist" experiments of forcibly moving populations.

Gjems-Onstad travelled extensively in Africa. He toured Angola for a week in 1973, and was in Guinea-Bissau in 1974. He later claimed that blacks and whites had lived peacefully together in these countries when he had visited them before their decolonisation—after which he considered the conditions to be grim—and that the standard of living among blacks had been higher there than in many other places in Africa. He came to regard it as a life's mission to work for Africa, and believed that the Norwegian government's policy in Africa contributed to destroy the continent through supporting "wars of liberation" and failed foreign aid. He maintained that his prime concern was to warn against the entrenchment of socialism and communism in Africa.

He also travelled extensively throughout South Africa, and said that conditions for blacks were better there than in other African countries. He was introduced to a South African official visiting Norway in 1974 by Anders Lange, and visited the country himself in 1975 after being invited by the South African Department of Information. He met with figures including Connie Mulder, and following Lange's death he considered himself as the continuation of Lange's legacy with regards to the country. He supported the South African policy since the 1970s of gradually dismantling the apartheid system, which included the granting of independence to tribal homelands. He was in the country in April 1976 for a conference that was to prepare the establishment of Transkei. He later considered the homelands to be true democratic states governed by the rule of law, which he considered that many other African states were not. Gjems-Onstad strongly opposed the African National Congress and the Norwegian government's support of the group, as he believed their agenda would lead to civil war and a government led by revolutionary socialists—as had happened in other African countries. He later pointed to the development in former Rhodesia, Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe. He arranged several study trips to South Africa, and was part of a group of eight Norwegians who toured the country in 1987 and issued an "apology" to the South African government for the Norwegian government's policy towards the country.

He went to Rhodesia in April 1979 as the sole Norwegian observer of the general election, after he had been invited by the Rhodesian Department of Information. He admitted at the same time that he for years had corresponded with the Rhodesian government about how he considered various institutions and individuals in Norway, particularly in the news media. The relationship was initiated after Gjems-Onstad had written a letter of sympathy to Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith some years ahead. When in Salisbury, he met with Smith, Foreign Minister P. K. van der Byl and Head of the Military Peter Walls. Eager to participate with the government army during the Rhodesian Bush War, he was authorised by Walls to patrol with Rhodesian Security Forces around a garrison near Lake Kariba for two days. While he earlier had written he did not think democracy and human rights was optimal in the country—he considered Botswana to be one of the better countries—he considered rule of law to be better than in countries the Norwegian government had supported financially, such as Idi Amin's Uganda.

Carl I. Hagen wrote in his book "Ærlighet varer lengst" in 1984 that he would put his office on the line in order to prevent Gjems-Onstad from making a "comeback" to the Progress Party (ALP's successor), despite his alleged requests. Gjems-Onstad criticised Hagen strongly for his complicity in the establishment of a Labour Party government in 1986, and was a member of the Conservative Party by 1988. He supported prospects of a Conservative Party government led by Jan P. Syse, but criticised the Norwegian political system for being a "caricature" of democracy, instead considering it a particracy. Gjems-Onstad had according to his own statement in 1987 not seen any reason for getting himself involved in the public debate about immigration until then. The reaction followed a comment by Conservative Party student politician Knut Albert Solem, in which he "presupposed" that anti-immigration sentiment was based on feelings of "foreign-hate", something which Gjems-Onstad disputed. Gjems-Onstad contested the 1989 parliamentary election for the Stop Immigration party in Akershus, and chaired its regional chapter from 1988 to 1990. He was expelled from the party together with Hege Søfteland and Torfinn Hellandsvik due to their vocal criticism of the leadership of the party's leader Jack Erik Kjuus. In 1991 Gjems-Onstad ran unsuccessfully in the local election for the Fatherland Party, and he was later active in "Folkebevegelsen mot innvandring". He was also present at the meeting at Godlia kino in 1995. Gjems-Onstad expressed his outrage at the Lund Report in 1996 after it was revealed that he had been under surveillance by the Norwegian Police Security Service (POT), considering it defamatory and demanding an apology.

Gjems-Onstad came to believe that the recent mass immigration to Norway was a greater threat than the Nazi invasion of Norway, although he made clear he had nothing against "normal immigration" and individuals, nor about Norwegians finding spouses in other countries. What he stated he was concerned about was increasing ethnic tensions and Norwegians being outnumbered in Norway in the course of the 21st century, and he stated that what worried him the very most was the growth of Islam. Gjems-Onstad praised Progress Party MPs Vidar Kleppe and Øystein Hedstrøm at their election campaign rally in 1999, and participated in the non-partisan demonstration against Muslim prayer calling in 2000. He was involved in the Conservative Party in Asker from 2005 to 2007, but joined the Pensioners' Party in 2007 as their top ballot candidate for the municipal election. As Gjems-Onstad called for a halt of immigration to Asker, he was instantly denounced by his own party. He also maintained that "Norway is the fatherland of the Norwegians, and Norwegians are a nation within the white race," and during a television debate with fellow lawyer and politician Abid Raja said that he could not call himself a Norwegian, only a Pakistani-Norwegian—they both nevertheless affirmed that they had great respect for each other. Gjems-Onstad was expelled from the Pensioners' Party before the election, but removal from the ballot is legally impossible. As the election was held the Pensioners' Party did not win any seats, and the local party leadership expressed their delight. Gjems-Onstad was also a member of Stop Islamisation of Norway, and participated in a demonstration alongside the organisation's leader Arne Tumyr in 2009.

Gjems-Onstad made news in 2008 when he had talks with the disturbed man who fired a gun towards a refugee centre. He was also involved in an heritage distribution controversy. In her will, millionaire Clara Westin declared that be given to anti-immigration activists, and that the distribution be decided by a board consisting of four people. Egil Karlsen backed out and gave up his vote to Gjems-Onstad, and the other three were Gjems-Onstad, Norvald Aasen of "Folkebevegelsen mot innvandring" and Bjarne Pettersen. It surfaced that suggestions by board members included the mother of child murder convict Ole Nicolai Kvisler. While the background for involving Kvisler was his anti-immigration views, the pressing issue was the matter of his court ruling. Having followed the case closely as a former lawyer, Gjems-Onstad had disputed the court ruling as he believed there was not evidence to conclude that Kvisler had any more than possibly a subsidiary role in the murder; he thus explained the suggestion with providing funds for reopening his case. Gjems-Onstad maintained that it was only the other convict, Joe Erling Jahr, who had committed the murder. Pettersen had in addition wanted to distribute money to people from his circle around Vigrid (a group Gjems-Onstad loathed), such as Tore Tvedt and Øyvind Heian, but was squeezed out of the board after this was opposed by Gjems-Onstad and Aasen. The left-wing anti-racist organization SOS Rasisme petitioned the Norwegian state to confiscate Gjems-Onstad's war decorations, but to no avail. After all disputes were resolved, it was not made public who actually received any money.

Gjems-Onstad was married in 1949 to Borgny Pedersen (9 November 1921 – 2 July 2003). They divorced in 1973. He was married for the second time to Inger Opseth (born 2 October 1937) in 1974. Gjems-Onstad met Inger when he worked for the Vaterland-project, where she worked as an interior architect. Gjems-Onstad had three children, including his son, jurist Ole Gjems-Onstad.

He lived in Hvalstad, Asker, where he owned a nine decare small farm. The property included three equal parts of garden, forest and arable land. He often cut lumber from the forest to build his own furniture. At various times, he had rabbits, sheep, cows, calves, piglets and a fish pond of brown trout at his property. According to himself, he kept the livestock largely in protest against tax authorities, while also as a hobby.

Erik Gjems-Onstad died in November 2011 after short illness at the Bærum Hospital. He left behind his wife, children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

Gjems-Onstad has authored several books. He wrote about the psychological warfare of the Norwegian resistance movement in "DURHAM: hemmelige operasjoner i Trøndelag mot tysk okkkupasjonsmakt 1943-45", released in 1981. Durham was the codeword for the operations which to a large extent consisted of distributing flyers, brochures and posters with the purpose of demoralising the Germans. This was also the topic in "Psykologisk krigføring i Norge under Annen Verdenskrig 1940-45", published in 1994. In 1990 he wrote about the resistance group Lark in "LARK: Milorg i Trøndelag 1940-1945".
He released the book "Krigskorset og St. Olavsmedaljen med ekegren" in 1995, which gives an overview of all the holders of Norway's highest wartime decorations. The reasons given for awarding the War Cross (Norway's highest decoration) was in the book also made public for the first time.

In 1984 he published the books "Dagbok fra Tanzania: U-hjelp uten mening", a travel diary from Tanzania discussing what he considered to be failed foreign aid, and a travel diary from Israel, "Dagbok fra Israel: Reiser og tanker". He wrote about alternative Norwegian policies towards South Africa in the 1985 book "Syd-Afrika i dag: Boikott eller samarbeid". These books were published by Afrikainstituttet, of which he was board chairman from 1983 to 1990. In 1994, he chronicled the trials against Arne Myrdal in "Myrdal-sakene". Gjems-Onstad has in addition released his own periodical, "Nytt og kommentarer".




</doc>
<doc id="24431453" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24431453" title="Xerocomellus zelleri">
Xerocomellus zelleri

Xerocomellus zelleri, commonly known as Zeller's Bolete, is an edible species of mushroom in the family Boletaceae. First described scientifically by American mycologist William Alphonso Murrill in 1912, the species has been juggled by various authors to several genera, including "Boletus", "Boletellus", and "Xerocomus". Found solely in western North America from British Columbia south to Mexico, the fruit bodies are distinguished by their dark reddish brown to nearly black caps with uneven surfaces, the yellow pores on the underside of the caps, and the red-streaked yellow stems. The fungus grows in summer and autumn on the ground, often in Douglas fir forests or on their margins. The development of the fruit bodies is gymnocarpic, meaning that the hymenium appears and develops to maturity in an exposed state, not enclosed by any protective membrane.

"Xerocomellus zelleri" was first described by American mycologist William Alphonso Murrill in 1912, based on specimens he found on the campus of the University of Washington. Murrill named it "Ceriomyces zelleri" before switching the genus later that year to "Boletus". In 1944, Walter Henry Snell thought the taxon would be more appropriate in the genus "Xerocomus". In 1959, mycologists Rolf Singer, Snell and Esther A. Dick transferred the species to "Boletellus", explaining that the microstructure of the trama and the faint ornamentation of the spores were inconsistent with placement in "Xerocomus". American mycologist Harry D. Thiers, in his 1976 monograph on North American boletes, claimed that he failed to consistently find ornamentation on the spores of material he collected, and preferred to retain the species in "Boletus". In 2011, it was moved to the genus "Xerocomellus.

The specific epithet "zelleri" was chosen by Murrill to honor Professor Sanford Myron Zeller, mycologist at Oregon State University. Zeller accompanied Murrill in his Seattle expedition, and discovered the first specimens of the mushroom.

The cap is typically between in diameter, initially convex but flattening somewhat in maturity. It is fleshy, with an uneven velvety surface, and dark brown to nearly black; the margin of the cap is a pale cream color. Young specimens are covered by a grayish bloom.
The tubes that comprise the undersurface of the cap (the hymenium) are up to long and angular, yellow, becoming dirty yellow and finally greenish-yellow; there are 1–2 pores per millimeter on the hymenium surface. They do not change color when bruised, although they may turn slightly brownish when exposed to the air for a time. The flesh is yellow to dirty yellow, up to thick, and inconsistently bruises blue when cut or broken. The stem is up to tall, thick, and swollen toward the base. The stem surface is red or yellowish with red lines, often white or yellow at the base, and solid (that is, not hollow), with fibrous flesh; in maturity the stem ages to yellowish-red to dark red. The spore print is olive-brown; one source notes that creating a spore print may result in "a lot of yellow juice on the paper".

The spores are ellipsoid in shape, smooth, and have dimensions of 12–16 by 4–6 µm, although occasionally there will be some "giant spores" with lengths of up to 24 µm. The basidia, the spore-bearing cells, are 26–35 by 9.5–12 µm, and four-spored. The cystidia are roughly cylindrical and thin-walled, with dimensions of 38–77 by 5.5–14.8 µm. There are no clamp connections present in the hyphae. The fruit body tissue stains a greenish color when a drop of ammonia solution is applied.

"Xerocomellus zelleri" is an edible species, although care should be taken to ensure that specimens collected for consumption are free of fly larvae. In his book "100 Edible Mushrooms", Michael Kuo gave the mushroom an edibility rating of "mediocre". There is no distinguishable odor, and the taste is alternately described as pleasant, mild, or "slightly acidic". The original species description noted that the texture was "slightly mucilaginous". The mushroom is suitable for preserving or drying, or as a "filler" to add bulk to a dish. It is harvested and sold commercially in local markets in British Columbia, Canada.

The red-cracked bolete ("Xerocomellus chrysenteron") has an olive-brown cap that cracks, exposing flesh that ages to pinkish red. "Boletellus chrysenteroides", found only in eastern North America, has a velvety to smooth, dark reddish brown, cracked cap with pale exposed flesh.

In 1914, Zeller published a study of the development of the mushroom, made possible by the prolific fruiting of the fungus in Seattle in the fall of 1912. Development was studied by examining thin sections of tissues in different stages of development, and the differentiation of tissues and structures followed by using histological stains. The growth form of "Xerocomellus zelleri" is called gymnocarpic, meaning that the hymenium appears and develops to maturity in an exposed state, not enclosed by any protective membrane. In this type of development, the cap is formed from hyphae at the top of the stem and subsequently expands by growth along the margins; the hymenium forms later beneath the cap in a direction away from the center.

The mushrooms originate as minute fruit bodies (called "pins" due to their shape) from a yellow mycelium that forms a mat and tends to engulf pine needles. The pins, typically 1–2 mm in diameter, lengthen vertically until they are roughly three or four times longer than they are thick. Until this point, the fruit body is a homogenous mass of tissue. It differentiates simultaneously into cap and stem along a cleavage plane (an axis along which any cell division occurs) from the outside inward, which gives rise to deep furrow encircling the fruit body. The hymenium is formed in the roof of this furrow, growing inward and upward from the outside edge. The cap develops from the upper section of this division, the stem from the lower.

This species grows solitarily or in small groups on the ground or in forest duff in mature coniferous forests, occasionally abundant on grassy edges of the forest, rarely on badly decayed conifer logs. It is an ectomycorrhizal mushroom, meaning that the fungal hyphae form sheaths around the rootlets of certain trees, exchanging nutrients with them in a mutualistic relationship. The fungus associates with alder, poplar and other hardwoods, and has been shown in laboratory culture to form ectomycorrhizae with Western Hemlock ("Tsuga heterophylla"). However, the fungus may have saprobic tendencies, as it has been noted to grow under California Redwood (sometimes in the rotted wood of old trunks), a tree not known to form mycorrizhae. It is known to form long rhizomorphs (aggregations of hyphae that resemble roots), and has been noted to be more abundant in sites with buried wood than without. In British Columbia, it occurs from summer to early winter, although it also appears infrequently in early spring. In California, the mushroom often fruits after the rainy period in autumn through to March or April. The dark coloring of the cap make this species difficult to notice, "unless a glimpse of the yellow hymenium is obtained". Fruit bodies are eaten by the American shrew-mole.

"Xerocomellus zelleri" is distributed in North America in the Pacific Northwest south to California and Mexico. In Mexico, it has been reported in high-altitude cloud forests of Mexican Beech ("Fagus mexicana"), a rare and endangered habitat. It has also been reported from Tibet, but this may be based on a misidentification.

"Xerocomellus zelleri" has been shown to contain the phenethylamine alkaloid compounds tyramine, "N"-methyltyramine, and hordenine, although the chemotaxonomic significance of this is not clear.




</doc>
<doc id="24437494" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24437494" title="Ramariopsis kunzei">
Ramariopsis kunzei

Ramariopsis kunzei is an edible species of coral fungi in the Clavariaceae family, and the type species of the genus "Ramariopsis". It is commonly known as white coral because of the branched structure of the fruit bodies that resemble marine coral. The fruit bodies are up to tall by wide, with numerous branches originating from a short rudimentary stem. The branches are one to two millimeters thick, smooth, and white, sometimes with yellowish tips in age. "Ramariopsis kunzei" has a widespread distribution, and is found in North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia.

The species was first described as "Clavaria kunzei" by pioneer mycologist Elias Magnus Fries in 1821. E.J.H. Corner transferred the species to "Ramariopsis" in 1950, and made it the type species. In general, coral fungi often have extensive taxonomic histories, as mycologists have not agreed on the best way to classify them. In addition to "Clavaria" and "Ramariopsis", the "R. kunzei" has been placed in the genera "Ramaria" by Lucien Quélet in 1888, and "Clavulinopsis" by Walter Jülich in 1985. According to the taxonomic database MycoBank, the species has acquired a sizable list of synonyms, listed in the taxobox. It is commonly known as white coral because of the branched structure of the fruit bodies that resemble marine coral.

A phylogenetic analysis of clavarioid fungi concluded that "R. kunzei" is in a phylogenetic lineage together with several "Clavulinopsis" species (including "C. sulcata", "C. helvola" and "C. fusiformis"), and that this clade (the "ramariopsis" clade) is nested within a group of species representing the Clavariaceae family.

The fruit bodies of "Ramariopsis kunzei" are white to whitish-yellow in color, and are highly branched structures resembling coral; the dimensions are typically up to tall and wide. Older specimens may have a pinkish tinge. The tips of the branches are blunt, not crested as in some other species of coral fungi, like "Clavulina cristata"; branches are between 1 and 5 millimeters thick. The branch tips of mature specimens may be yellow. A stem, if present, may be up to long and scurfy—covered with small flakes or scales. The texture of the flesh may range from pliable to brittle. This fungus does not undergo any color changes upon bruising or injury, however, a 10% solution of FeSO (a chemical test known as "iron salts") applied to the flesh will turn it green.

In deposit, the spores are white. Viewed with a light microscope, the spores are translucent and have an ellipsoid to roughly spherical shape with spines on the surface, and dimensions of 3–5.5 by 2.5–4.5 µm. Spores are non-amyloid, meaning that they do not absorb iodine when stained with Melzer's reagent. The spore-bearing cells, the basidia, are usually 25–45 µm long by 6–7 µm wide, and 4-spored. Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of this species.

The species is edible, but "fleshless and flavorless." Other authors concur that the odor and taste are not distinctive.

The "crested coral" ("Clavulina cristata", edible) is similar in appearance to "R. kunzei", but its branches have fringed, feathery tips. The "jellied false coral" ("Tremellodendron pallidum", edible) has whitish, tough, cartilaginous branches with blunt tips.

The species is thought to be saprobic and can be found growing on the ground, in duff, or less frequently on well-decayed wood. Fruit bodies may grow singly, in groups, or clustered together. David Arora has noted a preference for growing under conifers, as well as a prevalence in redwood forests of North America. In contrast, an earlier author claimed this species grows "rarely in coniferous woods."

In Europe, "Ramariopsis kunzei" has been collected in Scotland (specifically, on the islands of Arran, Gigha and Kintyre peninsula), the Netherlands, Norway, former Czechoslovakia, Germany, Poland, and Russia (Zhiguli Mountains). It has also been found in China, India, Iran, the Solomon Islands, and Australia. In North America, the distribution extends north to Canada, and includes the United States (including Hawaii and Puerto Rico).


</doc>
<doc id="24439968" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24439968" title="2009 AAA 400">
2009 AAA 400

The 2009 AAA 400 was the twenty-eighth stock car race of the 2009 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series and the second in the ten-race season-ending Chase for the Sprint Cup. It was held on September 27, 2009 at Dover International Speedway, in Dover, Delaware before a crowd of 110,000 people. The 400-lap race was won by Jimmie Johnson of the Hendrick Motorsports team after he started from pole position. His teammate Mark Martin finished second and Matt Kenseth came in third.

Johnson won the pole position and maintained his lead on the first lap to begin the race. After a competition caution on lap 25, Ryan Newman became the leader of the race. Chase for the Sprint Cup participants Kurt Busch and Jeff Gordon were in the top ten for most of the race. Johnson reclaimed the lead, after passing Kurt Busch. Johnson maintained the first position to lead the most laps of 271, and to win his fourth race of the season. There were nine cautions and six lead changes among four different drivers during the course of the race.

The race was Johnson's fourth win of the 2009 season, as well as the forty-fourth of his career. The result kept Martin in the lead in the Drivers' Championship, ten points ahead of Johnson, and sixty-five in front of Juan Pablo Montoya. Chevrolet maintained its lead in the Manufacturers' Championship, forty-five ahead of Toyota and seventy-five in front of Ford, who bumped Dodge, with one-hundred and twenty-two points, to fourth place. The race attracted 5.08 million television viewers.

Dover International Speedway is one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races; the others are Bristol Motor Speedway, Richmond International Raceway, Martinsville Speedway, and Phoenix International Raceway. The NASCAR race makes use of the track's standard configuration, a four-turn short track oval that is long. The track's turns are banked at twenty-four degrees, and both the front stretch (the location of the finish line) and the backstretch are banked at nine degrees.

Before the race, Mark Martin led the Drivers' Championship with 5,230 points; Jimmie Johnson and Denny Hamlin were tied for second with 5,195 points each, 35 points behind Martin. Juan Pablo Montoya was fourth with 5,175 points, ten ahead of Kurt Busch and nineteen ahead of Tony Stewart in fifth and sixth respectively. Ryan Newman with 5,151 was eleven points ahead of Brian Vickers, as Greg Biffle with 5,138 points, was ten ahead of Jeff Gordon. Carl Edwards and Kasey Kahne rounded out the top twelve positions in the Chase for the Sprint Cup with 5,117 and 5,069 points respectively. In the Manufacturers' Championship, Chevrolet was leading with 199 points, thirty-nine points ahead of their rivals Toyota in second place. Dodge, with 118 points, were one point ahead of Ford in the battle for third place. Johnson was the race's defending champion.

Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race—one on Friday, and two on Saturday. The first session lasted 90 minutes, and the second 45 minutes. The final session lasted 60 minutes. In the first practice session, Johnson was fastest, placing ahead of Newman in second and Montoya in third. Biffle took fourth position and Kurt Busch placed fifth. A. J. Allmendinger, David Reutimann, Kevin Harvick, Martin and David Gilliland rounded out the top ten fastest drivers in the session. During the session, Bowyer broke a rocker arm, and his team changed engines as a consequence.

Although forty-four drivers were entered in the qualifier; according to NASCAR's qualifying procedure, only forty-three could race. Each driver ran two laps, with the starting order determined by the competitor's fastest times. Johnson clinched his third pole position of the season, with a time of 22.878. He was joined on the grid's front row by Montoya. Newman qualified third, Biffle took fourth and Reutimann started fifth. Kahne, Gordon, Bowyer, Sam Hornish, Jr. and Paul Menard completed the top ten positions. The driver that failed to qualify was Scott Wimmer. During qualifying, Elliott Sadler's changed his car's engine, after one failed during the session. After the qualifier Johnson said, "A pole today will make the start of the weekend much better and give us a lot of direction and momentum moving into tomorrow, It does carry you, and there is an aspect of momentum. But at the same time, you've got to go out and perform."

On Saturday morning, Kurt Busch was fastest in the second practice session, ahead of Montoya in second, and Newman in third. Johnson was fourth quickest, and Bowyer took fifth. Kyle Busch managed sixth. Stewart, Hamlin, Matt Kenseth and Gilliland followed in the top ten. Of the other drivers in the Chase, Biffle finished with the eleventh fastest time, while Kahne set the fourteenth fastest time. Kahne set the fastest time in the final practice session, while Montoya and Joey Logano followed in second and third respectively. Martin was fourth quickest, ahead of Biffle and Johnson. Kurt Busch was seventh fastest, Jamie McMurray eighth, Gilliland ninth and Martin Truex, Jr. tenth. Other chase drivers included Newman in eleventh and Hamlin in eighteenth.

The race, the twenty-eighth of a total of thirty-six in the 2009 season, began at 2:00 p.m. and was televised live in the United States on ESPN. Around the start of the race, weather conditions were cloudy with the air temperature ; a moderate chance of rain was forecast. Pastor Dan Schafer began pre-race ceremonies by giving the invocation. Country music group and Show Dog-Universal Music recording artists Trailer Choir performed the national anthem, and Sergeant Major John Jones of the Pennsylvania National Guard gave the command for drivers to start their engines. During the pace laps, Bowyer, Sadler and Tony Raines all had to move to the rear of the grid because of them changing their engines. NASCAR announced that a competition caution would take place on lap 25, meaning drivers would make mandatory pit stops.

Johnson maintained his pole position lead into the first corner. One lap later, Newman passed Montoya for the second position. After starting the race in twelfth, Martin had lost four positions to run eighteenth by lap 4. By the 10th lap, Johnson had built up a 1.2 second lead over Newman. Bowyer, who began the race at the rear of the grid, had moved up thirteen positions to twenty-ninth by lap 15. Two laps later, Raines drove to his garage. On lap 18, Kurt Busch passed Vickers for ninth, as Kahne claimed fourth position from Biffle, two laps later. On lap 25, the competition caution came out. During the caution, all of the leaders made pit stops; Gilliland became the new leader on lap 28. After pit stops, Newman claimed the first position and held it at the restart.

On lap 31, a multi-car collision occurred in turn 3 as Logano was bumped by Stewart, causing him to flip sideways, which collected Truex, Robby Gordon and Reed Sorenson, prompting the second caution. On the same lap, the red flag was shown to allow race officials to clear the track of debris. The race was restarted 24 minutes later under caution. Newman maintained his lead at the restart, followed by Kurt Busch and Menard. Three laps later, Montoya and Gordon passed Menard for fifth and sixth respectively. On lap 43, Jeff Burton fell to ninth after being passed by Hamlin and Martin. Four laps later, Martin passed Hamlin for the thirteenth position.

By lap 50, Johnson passed Reutimann to move back into the top ten. On lap 58, Kurt Busch passed Newman to claim the lead. Three laps later, Jeff Gordon claimed fifth position off Kahne, while Menard was passed by Johnson for eighth. On lap 63, Montoya moved into the third position after passing Biffle, while Gilliland went to his garage to retire from the race. Two laps later, Kyle Busch claimed seventh position off Kahne, as Montoya passed Newman for second on lap 66. On lap 67, Gordon and Biffle passed Newman for third and fourth positions. Four laps later, Johnson claimed seventh from Kahne. On lap 80, Reutimann ran out of fuel, forcing him to make a pit stop.

On lap 83, Biffle was passed by Johnson for the fourth position. One lap later, Michael Waltrip lost his car's right-front tire and collided with the wall, causing the third caution. All of the leaders elected to make pit stops. Kurt Busch remained the leader at the restart, ahead of Biffle and Kyle Busch. On lap 93, Kyle Busch passed Biffle for second position, while McMurray was passed by Kahne for ninth on lap 96. Three laps later, Biffle dropped to sixth after being passed by Jeff Gordon, as Montoya passed Kyle Busch for the third position on lap 113. Sixteen laps later, Kahne passed Jeff Gordon for sixth, while Stewart moved into the eighteenth position on lap 137. On the 147th lap, Kurt Busch was blocked by Bobby Labonte, allowing Johnson to claim the lead. By the 150th lap, Kyle Busch dropped three positions to sixth after being passed by Martin, Kahne and Jeff Gordon.

Green flag pit stops began on lap 152, when Hornish made a pit stop. Eleven laps later, the fourth caution came out. During the caution, which was caused by liquid on the track, all of the leaders made pit stops. Kurt Busch reclaimed the lead for the lap 168 restart. Stewart moved into the eleventh position on lap 170. Six laps later, Johnson reclaimed the lead off Kurt Busch. By the 183rd lap, Johnson opened out a 1.6 second lead over Kurt Busch. Twenty-four laps later, Kyle Busch collided with the wall in turn 3 and turn 4, prompting the fifth caution. All of the leaders chose to make pit stops during the caution. The race resumed on lap 211, with Johnson leading from Jeff Gordon and Kurt Busch.

By the 223rd lap, Johnson had a lead of 1.6 seconds. Twenty-seven laps later, Sorenson rejoined the race track. On lap 252, Stewart passed Allmendinger for the ninth position. Seven laps later, Stewart moved into eighth after passing Newman, and passed Bowyer for seventh on the 262nd lap. On lap 272, Johnson's lead of 3.5 seconds was reduced to nothing when the pace car moved on track. During the caution, which was caused by David Stremme making contact with the wall at turn 4, all of the leaders made pit stops. Johnson remained the leader at the restart. On lap 286, Kahne was passed by Newman for ninth. By lap 290, Johnson built up a lead of two seconds. Seventeen laps later, Martin passed Kenseth for the fourth position. Johnson's lead had increased to 2.2 seconds by lap 319. Five laps later, debris was spotted on the track and the seventh caution was prompted. All of the leaders elected to make pit stops during the caution.

Johnson maintained his lead at the restart, followed by Martin and Kenseth. One lap later, Montoya moved into the second position, as Martin fell to fifth. On lap 336, Martin moved into fourth after passing Kurt Busch, and passed Kenseth for third two laps later. On lap 341, the eighth caution came out when Regan Smith spun off, collecting Stremme, Truex and Sadler. Johnson kept the lead at the lap 347 restart. One lap later, Kenseth moved into the second position, as Stewart and Gordon moved into fourth and tenth respectively. On lap 349, Gordon passed Newman for ninth, before falling to eleventh position after contact with Newman one lap later. On the 354th lap, Stewart was passed by Martin for the fourth position, as Johnson had built a 2.2 second lead by lap 357. One lap later, Jeff Gordon moved into the ninth position after passing Newman.

On the 368th lap, Hornish, spun on the backstraightaway, prompting the ninth and final caution of the race. During the caution, some of the leaders made pit stops. Johnson maintained the lead on the lap 373. Four laps later, Newman passed Mears for eighth, as Edwards was passed by Stewart for twelfth. On the 383rd lap, Kahne, Allemndinger and Stewart passed Newman for seventh, eighth and ninth respectively. On the next lap, Kenseth was passed by Martin for second position. On the 391st lap, Kahne was passed by Allmendinger for the second position. Two laps later, Johnson's lead had increased to 2.2 seconds and held it to win the race. Martin finished second, ahead of Kenseth in third, Montoya fourth, and Kurt Busch fifth. Gordon, Allmendinger, Kahne, Stewart and Newman rounded out the top ten finishers.

Johnson appeared in victory lane to celebrate his fourth victory of the season in front of 110,000 people who attended the race. Johnson also earned $276,076 in race winnings. Afterward, he said, "I woke up (on Sunday) morning very optimistic. By about lap two or three I knew we had a very balanced car and we'd be competitive all day long, get a solid finish.", he continued, "I see guys get so worried about what other people think, what other people say and spend a lot of time in those areas. That's not what works for me. (I) don't watch television; don't watch or read any of the trade papers or magazines. Just ignore, ignore, ignore and focus on my world and what's going on with my race car. That's what I'll do through the rest of the Chase."

Martin, who finished second, was candid about the result, "We did really well to finish second. I just don't think we were in [Johnson's] league today." In the post-race press conference, Kenseth said of his result, "We didn't qualify very good, but we were really happy with our car. When the race started, I didn't think we were quite as good as we were yesterday (in practice), but we were able to have really good pit stops." Logano, who was involved in the biggest accident of the race, "The biggest thing was, I was fine the whole time, [but] I'm not really sure what happened. The spotter was clearing me low. When I got down there, they checked up going into the corner and I got tagged from behind."

The race result kept Martin in the lead of the Drivers' Championship with 5,400 points. Johnson, who won the race, stood in second, ten points behind Martin, and sixty-five ahead of Montoya. Kurt Busch moved into fourth position with 5,325 points. Stewart with fifth, Hamlin sixth, and Newman, Jeff Gordon, Biffle and Vickers followed in the top-ten positions. The final two positions available in the Chase for the Sprint Cup were occupied by Edwards in eleventh and Kahne in twelfth. In the Manufacturers' Championship, Chevrolet maintained their lead with 208. Toyota remained second with 163. Ford followed with 123 points, one point ahead of Dodge in fourth. 5.08 million people watched the race on television. The race took three hours, twenty-two minutes and eleven seconds to complete, and the margin of victory was 1.970 seconds.



</doc>
<doc id="24440047" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24440047" title="2009 Checker O'Reilly Auto Parts 500">
2009 Checker O'Reilly Auto Parts 500

The 2009 Checker O'Reilly Auto Parts 500 was the thirty-fifth and penultimate stock car race of the 2009 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series and the ninth in the ten-race season-ending Chase for the Sprint Cup. It was held on November 15, 2009 at Phoenix International Raceway, in Avondale, Arizona before a crowd of 90,000. The 312-lap race was won by Jimmie Johnson of the Hendrick Motorsports team after starting from third position. Jeff Burton finished second and Denny Hamlin came in third.

Martin Truex, Jr. won the pole position, although he was passed by Kurt Busch by the end of the first lap. Fifty-six laps later, Johnson became the leader of the race. Many Chase for the Sprint Cup participants, including Jeff Gordon and Mark Martin ran in the top ten for most of the race. Johnson maintained the first position to lead the most laps of 238, and to win his seventh race of the season. There were four cautions and nine lead changes among four different drivers during the course of the race.

The race was Johnson's seventh win of the 2009 season, and the forty-seventh of his career. The result kept Johnson in the lead of the Drivers' Championship, one-hundred and eight points ahead of Mark Martin and one-hundred and sixty nine in front of Jeff Gordon. Chevrolet maintained their lead in the Manufacturers' Championship, fifty-eight ahead of Toyota, ninety-five in front of Ford and one-hundred and eight ahead of Dodge. The race attracted 5.17 million television viewers.

Phoenix International Raceway is one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races, the others being Richmond International Raceway, Dover International Speedway, Bristol Motor Speedway, and Martinsville Speedway. The standard track at Phoenix International Raceway is a four-turn short track oval that is long. The track's turns are banked at eleven degrees, while the front stretch, the location of the finish line, was banked at three degrees. The back stretch, which has a dogleg shape instead of a straight, has nine degrees of banking.

Before the race, Jimmie Johnson led the Drivers' Championship with 6,297 points, and Mark Martin stood in second with 6,224 points. Jeff Gordon followed in third with 6,185 points, fifty-nine ahead of Kurt Busch, and ninety-eight in front of Tony Stewart in fourth and fifth. Juan Pablo Montoya with 6,061 was eleven points ahead of Greg Biffle, as Denny Hamlin with 5,975 points, was two ahead of Ryan Newman, and seventy-seven in front of Kasey Kahne. Carl Edwards and Brian Vickers in eleventh and twelfth with 5,857 and 5,777 points rounded out the contenders for the Chase for the Sprint Cup. In the Manufacturers' Championship, Chevrolet were leading with 247 points, fifty-five ahead of their rival Toyota. Ford, with 158 points, were seven points ahead of Dodge in the battle for third. Johnson was the race's defending champion.

Two practice sessions were held before the Sunday race—both on Saturday. A practice session scheduled for Friday morning was cancelled because of rain. The first session lasted 45 minutes, and the second and final session lasted 60 minutes.

Although forty-six drivers were entered in the qualifier; according to NASCAR's qualifying procedure, only forty-three could race. Each driver ran two laps, with the starting order determined by the competitor's fastest times. Martin Truex, Jr. clinched his third pole position of the season, with a time of 26.643. He was joined on the grid's front row by Kurt Busch. Johnson qualified third, Kahne took fourth, and Hamlin started fifth. Biffle, Kyle Busch, Stewart, Casey Mears and Martin completed the top ten positions. The three drivers that failed to qualify were Regan Smith, Kevin Conway and Brandon Ash. After the qualifier Truex said, "(Today) we were pretty good in practice. This is a weird track where you go out in practice, then expect to pick up a half-second somehow (in qualifying). We did. It's strange, but it felt good."

In the first practice session, Sam Hornish, Jr. was fastest, placing ahead of Kahne in second, and Kyle Busch in third. Biffle was fourth fastest, and Hamlin placed fifth. Montoya, Johnson, Martin, Stewart and Gordon rounded out the top ten fastest drivers in the session. Of the other drivers in the chase, Vickers was fifteenth fastest, while Newman placed seventeenth. Later that day, Johnson was fastest in the second and final practice session, ahead of Martin in second, and Dale Earnhardt, Jr. in third. Truex was fourth quickest, and Kurt Busch took fifth. Jeff Burton managed sixth. Gordon, Jamie McMurray, Joey Logano and Kahne followed in the top ten. Other chase drivers included Montoya in seventeenth and Edwards in twenty-third. Kahne scraped the turn two wall and sustained minor damage to his right-hand quarter.

The race, the thirty-fifth of a total of thirty-six in the 2009 season, began at 3:15 p.m. EST and was televised in the United States on ESPN. Around the start of the race, weather conditions were sunny. Phoenix International Raceway chaplin Ken Bowers began pre-race ceremonies by giving the invocation. Former J Records recording artist Tyrese Gibson performed the national anthem, and Senator John McCain commanded the drivers to start their engines. No driver had to move to rear of the grid at the start of the race.

Truex retained his pole position lead into the first lap. On the same lap, Kurt Busch passed Truex to become the new race leader. One lap later, Martin, who started tenth, fell to eleventh. On the 4th lap, Hornish had moved up to seventh position after passing Kyle Busch and Gordon. Two laps later, Montoya moved into the sixteenth position, as Martin passed Stewart for tenth on lap 7. By the 9th lap, Kurt Busch had a one-second lead over Truex One lap later, Kurt Busch increased his lead to 1.5 seconds. On lap 13, Martin passed Kyle Busch to claim ninth. Two laps later, Martin moved into eighth.

Gordon who began the race in fourteenth, had moved up eight positions to sixth by lap 22. Three laps later, Truex had reduced Kurt Busch's lead to one second, as Martin moved into seventh on lap 28. One lap later, Kurt Busch extended his lead over Truex to 1.6 seconds, as Gordon moved into fifth position. On lap 33, Johnson passed Truex for second; Martin passed Gordon to claim fifth on lap 38. Four laps later, Johnson closed to half a second from Kurt Busch. Twelve laps later, Earnhardt dropped to twentieth position. On lap 57, Johnson passed Kurt Busch to claim the lead, with Martin moving to fourth one lap later.

By lap 60, Johnson built up a 1.5 second lead over Kurt Busch, while Hamlin moved into the third position. Green flag pit stops took place from lap 65 to 73; Kurt Busch reclaimed the lead at the end of the cycle. On lap 90, Johnson passed Kurt Busch to take over the lead position. One lap later, Hamlin took over fifth position. On the 102nd lap, Martin and Gordon moved into third and fourth respectively. Four laps later, Montoya moved into fourth. Having started on pole position, Truex clinched sixth position on lap 107. On lap 115, the pace car moved on track because debris was spotted on the track. During the caution, most of the leaders made pit stops.

Johnson maintained his lead on the restart, followed by Martin and Gordon. Also, the second caution was prompted when Michael Waltrip damaged his car on that restart, Brad Keselowski was hit from behind and David Ragan spun sideways. None of the leaders chose to make pit stops, as the clean-up crew came on track to clear debris and fluids. Johnson held the lead at the lap 127 restart. Gordon accelerated slower than the leaders and dropped to sixth position by the next lap. On lap 129, Kyle Busch and Gordon made contact, but both managed to continue, without damaging their cars. By the next lap, Hamlin passed Martin for second position. On lap 134, Johnson had a 1.5 second lead, as Clint Bowyer moved into the fifth position. By the 138th lap, Johnson's lead was increased to 2 seconds.

Kurt Busch and Montoya moved into fourth and ninth positions respectively on lap 141. By the 150th lap, Johnson had built up a 2.7 second lead over Hamlin. On lap 162, Johnson's lead of 3.4 seconds was reduced to nothing when debris was spotted on the track, causing a caution. During the caution, some of the leaders elected to make pit stops. Johnson remained the leader on the restart, ahead of Bowyer and Hamlin. Two laps later, a multi-car collision occurred on the front straightway as Earnhardt lost control of his car, and collected Logano, Scott Speed, Hornish, Bobby Labonte, Kenseth, Stewart, Vickers and Keselowski. The damaged cars headed to the pit road during the caution as crews cleaned up debris.

Johnson maintained his lead at the restart. On lap 179, Earnhardt headed for his garage because of an oil leak. Three laps later, Vickers and Labonte retired from the race, and Gordon dropped to tenth position. By the 186th lap, Johnson rebuilt his lead to 2.3 seconds, as Bowyer passed Gordon to claim third. Five laps later, Martin and Gordon moved into sixth and ninth positions respectively. Johnson's lead over Kurt Busch was three seconds by lap 196. Four laps later, Edwards moved up to eighteenth position, while Montoya moved to eighth, one lap later. By lap 203, Johnson mainained a 3.4 second lead, while Burton was passed by Martin for fifth position five laps later. Johnson's lead was increased to 4.3 seconds by the 215th lap.

On lap 219, Hamlin moved into the third position, and one lap later, Martin moved up another place to fourth. On lap 222, Johnson increased his lead over Kurt Busch to almost five seconds. Six laps later, Earnhardt rejoined the race. Green flag pit stops began on lap 240; Johnson made a pit stop on lap 242, giving the lead to Kenseth. After pit stops, Johnson regained the first position. By lap 277, the drivers reported their cars becoming loose as track temperatures began to drop. Twelve laps later, Burton passed Hamlin for the second position. On lap 296, Gordon passed Ambrose to claim ninth, while Truex moved into the fifth position. By lap 302, Johnson maintained a 1.8 second lead over Burton. Two laps later, David Reutimann moved back into the top ten after passing Ambrose, while Kurt Busch moved up to sixth on lap 310. Johnson maintained his lead to win his seventh race of the 2009 season. Burton finished second, ahead of Hamlin in third, Martin in fourth, and Truex in fifth. Kurt Busch, Bowyer, Montoya, Gordon and Reutimann rounded out the top ten finishers.

Johnson appeared in victory lane to celebrate his seventh win of the season in front of 90,000 who attended the race. Johnson also earned $267,001 in race winnings. Afterward, he said, "I guess it could have been a statement we were sending. There was a lot of pressure. All week long, we wondered if we could step up like we did today. I'm very proud how we rose to the occasion.", he continued, "When I go home tonight, I'm going to be (mentally) driving laps, what I think I need to do in qualifying trim so I can put my best effort in on Friday. Same thing for race practice on Saturday, and go racing Sunday. Texas was such a good lesson. And I hope that the points we lost in Texas isn't what keeps us from winning this championship."

Burton, who finished second, was happy with his performance, " [New crew chief] Todd Berrier has come in and done a great job, the team’s done a great job. We had one hiccough early on pit road but the rest of them we picked out our spots every single time, and that’s what it takes; it takes a team effort." In the subsequent post-race press conference, Hamlin said, "Anytime that Jimmie is down is not usually because of performance, it's usually because of an incident like last week. There was no doubt in my mind they were going to come this week and make a statement. Obviously leading all the laps pretty much and winning the race sends a statement out there that he is the best, that they're not going to be denied this year."

The race result left Johnson maintaining the lead in the Drivers' Championship with 6,492 points. After the race, Martin who finished fourth, was less optimistic about his championship chances, "We've still got to go to Homestead and run like this again because we've still got that threat behind us, Jeff Gordon, especially." Gordon maintained third with 6,323 points, forty-two ahead of Kurt Busch and one-hundred and sixteen in front of Stewart. In the Manufacturers' Championship, Chevrolet maintained the lead with 256 points. Toyota remained second with 198 points. Ford followed with 161 points, six ahead of Dodge in fourth. 5.17 million people watched the race on television. The race took two hours, forty-nine minutes and twenty-six seconds to complete, and the margin of victory was 1.033 seconds.



</doc>
<doc id="24454141" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24454141" title="Encyclopedia of Chicago">
Encyclopedia of Chicago

The Encyclopedia of Chicago is an historical reference work covering Chicago and the entire Chicago metropolitan area published by the University of Chicago Press. Released in October 2004, the work is the result of a ten-year collaboration between the Newberry Library and the Chicago Historical Society. It exists in both a hardcover print edition and an online format, known as the Electronic Encyclopedia of Chicago. The print edition is 1117 pages and includes 1400 entries, 2000 biographical sketches, 250 significant business enterprise descriptions, and hundreds of maps. Initially, the internet edition included 1766 entries, 1000 more images and sources.

The concept was fueled by other regional encyclopedias that had met with commercial success in 1980s and 1990s. Eventually, the vision to create the book found initial financing from the National Endowment for the Humanities. The book was well received and became a bestseller during the 2004 Christmas season following its October 2004 release. The following May the "Electronic Encyclopedia of Chicago" was released. Northwestern University joined the Newberry Library/Chicago Historical Society collaboration to publish the internet edition. The internet edition was the second of its kind for a U.S. city.

Individual entries were compiled by historians, graduate assistants and authors. Most contributors were professors. About 600 people contributed entries at a rate of $.10/per word. The contributors consulted reliable secondary sources, such as newspapers, to compile historical accounts. The book was edited by James R. Grossman, Ann Durkin Keating, and Janice L. Reiff. At the time, Grossman was the vice president for research and education at the Newberry Library and visiting professor of history at the University of Chicago. Keating was a professor of history at North Central College. Reiff was an associate professor of history at the University of California, Los Angeles.

Unlike resource compilation efforts for the cities that inspired this encyclopedia, the work was not bounded by the city limits. Instead, every suburb was provided an entry, as were each of Chicago's 77 official community areas. Entries ranged from 50 to 4000 words long. Eventually, the coverage of the subject matter expanded to include Southwest Michigan and Northwest Indiana. Newberry Library describes the work as "one of the most significant historical projects undertaken in the last twenty years".

Inspired by encyclopedia compilation efforts of cities such as New York City, Indianapolis and Cleveland, Keating approached the Newberry Library in 1991 to strategize on how to best to study and teach Chicago history. Eventually she and Grossman agreed to prepare a funding request from the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH). Their initial proposal was declined, but after working with Grossman to refine the specifics of their proposal, the NEH accepted their idea. The book venture was originally announced in 1994 as a project funded by a NEH US$200,000 ($ today) grant. The grant also included a $300,000 challenge grant to be met by Newberry Library for the first three years of work. The original plan was to publish a hardcover book by 2001 and then to follow with what at the time was referred to vaguely as "hypermedia" in reference to possible internet and CD-ROM auxiliary products. After Grossman and Keating obtained the initial grant, Reiff, a computer technology expert, and encyclopedia veteran Carol J. Summerfield all became part of the team. The editors sought the advice of Chicago-area librarians who were organized into focus groups to determine the proper components for the planned publication. The editors also organized into task forces of experts in dozens of specialized fields. Early on they sought the expertise of University of Chicago cartographer Michael P. Conzen, who helped develop 56 original maps. Conzen is credited as the cartographic editor.

By 1997, the text had taken shape and the plan was that the average biographical entry would be 150 words. The longest biographical entries, about 450 words, were written for former Chicago Mayors Harold Washington and Richard J. Daley. Neither Richard M. Daley nor Michael Jordan had entries because only notable deceased persons were included. By 1998, the editors had settled on the table of contents and begun the job of assigning, editing, fact-checking and re-editing the hundreds of entries, some of them as long as 4000 words. By March 2000, 1100 of the targeted 1400 entries were completed. Also, the growth of the internet had clarified the vision of an online version of the print edition. In 2000, the final volume was expected to be 1300 pages set for release in fall 2002. The internet version was expected the following year. By June 2001, nearly 1300 of the entries had been submitted and a third had been edited and reviewed for accuracy. The effort had become a $2.5 million effort and was aspiring towards the success of earlier encyclopedic efforts projecting a fall 2003 publication of a 1.3-million-word 1300-page edition. At this time, the final electronic form available through the Chicago Historical Society had been conceptualized.

By 2001, two editions of "The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History" (1987) had sold 24,000 copies; "The Encyclopedia of Indianapolis" (1994) had sold 9000 copies and "The Encyclopedia of New York City" (1995) had sold 70,000 (50,000 in its first year). Hardcover versions of these works had sold for $59.95 and up. The commercial success of these other regional encyclopedias made it clear that there is a market for such products. Several university presses released regional encyclopedic publications in 2004. In April, Rutgers University Press published "The Encyclopedia of New Jersey". In September, the University of Nebraska Press published "Encyclopedia of the Great Plains". In October, the University of Chicago Press released "The Encyclopedia of Chicago". Additionally, Yale University Press was scheduled to publish both "Encyclopedia of New England" and the second edition of "The Encyclopedia of New York City".

Using press releases from the Copley News Service, the book was widely publicized throughout the state of Illinois, and it was even reviewed by "The Wall Street Journal". When first published in 2004, the book was on the "USA Today" recommended Christmas gifts list. That year it was at the top of the Chicago area bestseller lists at bookstores during the Christmas holiday season. Major funding for the $65 list price four-color print version of the publication, which cost $1.7 million in the end, was provided by the NEH, the MacArthur Foundation, the City of Chicago and the State of Illinois.

At the time of the print release, the online version, known as the "Electronic Encyclopedia of Chicago", was being developed to include additional features, which relied on hyperlinks, that were not available in the print edition. At the time, it was expected to be released by the Chicago Historical Society in April 2005. On May 11, the Electronic edition, which cost nearly $1 million to create and is continuously available for free to the public, was released. It included hundreds of additional entries (bringing the total to 1766), more than 1000 additional images, video of historic figures and events, and extensive primary source material. The online version includes 1000 more sources than the print edition. The Web site includes many tables and maps that date to the 19th Century. Northwestern University media specialists developed the Web architecture for the electronic version. The electronic edition made Chicago the second major U.S. city (following Cleveland) with an extensive Internet encyclopedia dedicated to its history and its release was covered by newspapers throughout the Midwest. The extra features of the online edition would have required 10,000 pages to produce in print-edition format. Initially, the online edition was a static version, but updates and adjustments were planned.

"USA Today"' referred to it as a good coffee table book. "Chicago Tribune" journalist Rick Kogan describes this as a massive undertaking with the natural foibles of the human element in it selections and accuracy, and by nature of its attempt to serve as a historical compilation an immediately dated product due to the dynamic nature of the city. However, he feels it is sure to amaze its audience. A "Chicago Sun-Times" reviewer describes it as a scholarly product that is "easily the most comprehensive reference book on the Chicago region ever published". "The State Journal-Register", the Springfield, Illinois newspaper, reviewers complain that downstate cities and regions are neglected in the book. A "Daily Herald" review describes it as a book accurately "billed as the city's most definitive historical reference book". The "Peoria Journal Star" notes that although there are complaints about omissions and underserved topics, the online version should quell the demands for further knowledge.

The online version was noted for its "large number of tables and maps that date to the 19th Century" by the "Chicago Tribune". Dubuque, Iowa's "Telegraph Herald" newspaper and Indiana's "Post-Tribune" referenced an Associated Press press release that described the online version as a compilation assembled "with more than Chicagoans in mind". The "Chicago Tribune" described the online version as an extension of "the most comprehensive reference book on the Chicago region ever published" that is unlimited by physical bounds.

"Journal of American History" along with the website History Matters: The U.S. Survey Course on the Web published a review by University of Southern California professor Philip J. Ethington that spoke glowingly about both versions of the encyclopedia describing it as "one of the finest collective works (with 633 listed authors) of North American historical scholarship of our era". They praised it for its breadth and coherence. The online version was noted for its meticulous hyperlinking. The online review was cursory in the sense that it did not realize the expansion of the online version. However, the review notes that the online version provides "powerful and substantive" interactive resources that are not possible in the print edition. The review is especially respectful of the cartographic contributions, which it describes in detail. It dismisses the alphabetical structure of the online version as an unnecessary complication. The review also complains about biographical omissions that necessitate extensive navigation to related articles. The review felt some of the online foibles left open the possibility that the production might get overshadowed by future ventures that leverage the electronic possibilities more fully.

"The Chronicle of Higher Education" reviewed the "Encyclopedia" along with several of its peers and mentioned early in the review that the advent of online encyclopedias makes the works much easier to correct and update. However, the availability of online encyclopedias diminished the significance of the print editions according to the review because it made gifting them less significant and it reduced sales at libraries. The review also noted that the online approach is becoming so successful that the state of Georgia has produced the online-only "New Georgia Encyclopedia", which started as a 300-article venture and has blossomed to a 1300-article work. However, they noted that when the "Encyclopedia of Chicago" was first released that the local media supported the book; some Chicago disc jockeys read passages from it on air. It enjoyed successful marketing as both a popular gift item and a must-have for local historians.

The encyclopedia is composed of 1117 pages that feature over 1400 entries by more than 600 contributors. Additionally, it includes 442 maps, more than 400 vintage photographs, over 250 sketches of "historically significant business enterprises", a dictionary of Chicago-area businesses, a biographical dictionary and a 21-page timeline that traces the history of Chicago from 1630 to 2000.

The 1400-entry main alphabetical section of the "Encyclopedia" covers all Chicago neighborhoods, suburbs, and ethnic groups as well as the major cultural institutions. Topics covered include technology and science, architecture, religions, immigration, transportation, business history, labor, music, health and medicine. It is considered the most geographical diverse city encyclopedia of its kind because it fully encompasses the suburbs in eight of the region's counties. 386 thumbnail maps of neighborhoods and municipalities are complemented by 400 black-and-white photographs plus hundreds of color photographs and thematic maps. There are separate lengthy interpretive essays woven into the alphabetical section on topics such as the built environment, literary images of Chicago, and the city's sports culture. The Encyclopedia includes a 2000-entry comprehensive biographical dictionary and a detailed listing of approximately 250 of the city's historically significant business enterprises. A color insert features a timeline of Chicago history and photo essays exploring nine pivotal years in this history. The photo essays feature the city’s urban art and artifacts.



</doc>
<doc id="24466292" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24466292" title="I Thought I Lost You">
I Thought I Lost You

"I Thought I Lost You" is a pop rock song performed by both American singer-songwriter and actress Miley Cyrus and actor and singer John Travolta. The song was co-written by Cyrus with producer Jeffrey Steele. It was released to Radio Disney as promotion for the 2008 Disney animated film "Bolt", in which Cyrus and Travolta provide the voices of Penny and Bolt. "I Thought I Lost You" was made after filmmakers requested Cyrus to write a song for the film. The lyrics speak of getting lost and getting found.

"I Thought I Lost You" was nominated for Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Song and Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song, but lost both to Bruce Springsteen's "The Wrestler" from "The Wrestler" (2008). The song's accompanying music video has Cyrus and Travolta performing the song in a recording studio and features clips from "Bolt". "I Thought I Lost You" was promoted by few live performances by Cyrus.

Cyrus became involved with "Bolt" once she was cast as Penny, Bolt's owner. Filmmakers asked Cyrus to write a song for herself and John Travolta, who stars as Bolt. She co-wrote the song with the aid of Jeffrey Steele, who also produced the track, in a short period of time as they had a due date. The film's settings vary in cities throughout the United States, which Cyrus thought she could capture in the song. "Not just make it something that sounds from Hollywood and really produced, but we could add a little country twang to it," she said. Cyrus said the writing process was easy. Before the song's completion, Travolta agreed to sing it, believing "Well, it will be a cute song, whatever it is." After listening to the song, he was surprised at Cyrus' songwriting abilities. "She's really gifted at writing, and she really wanted to write something good for me as the character Bolt, so she went out of her way with her writing partner to come up with something good, and I really think they pulled it off", Travolta told MTV News.

John Lasseter, executive producer of "Bolt", decided to make "I Thought I Lost You" the theme for "Bolt", since it lyrically summarized the film's plot. He said, "[The song] so sums up the theme of this film. You know, a dog and its owner and they both were separated, but they love each other so much — there's such an emotional payoff when these characters get reunited, and I think that's what this song's about." Lasseter thought that solely the song worked, but it worked better for the film. "I Thought I Lost You" is one of two songs on the "Bolt" soundtrack and was released to Radio Disney to promote "Bolt" and its accompanying soundtrack.

"I Thought I Lost You" is a pop rock song and lasts three minutes and thirty-six seconds. Its instrumentation includes electric guitar and piano. The song is set in common time at a moderate rock tempo of 103 beats per minute. The song is sung in the key of E♭ major and Cyrus' vocals span two octaves, from G to A♭. "I Thought I Lost You" follows the chord progression of E♭—A♭sus2. The song's lyrics speak of "getting lost and getting found, with an overarching theme of loyalty."

The song received mixed reception from contemporary critics. William Ruhlmann of AllMusic wrote, "The album begins with a pop/rock song, 'I Thought I Lost You,' which oddly sounds like a love duet between John Travolta, a man in his mid-fifties, and the teenage TV and pop star Miley Cyrus, until it is remembered that Travolta voices the movie's title character, a dog." "I Thought I Lost You" was nominated for the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Song at the 14th Broadcast Film Critics Association Award, but lost to Bruce Springsteen's "The Wrestler" from "The Wrestler" (2008). The song was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song at the 66th Golden Globe Awards, but also lost to "The Wrestler". An uncredited reviewer from the "Los Angeles Times" thought the song could have been nominated for and won the Academy Award for Best Original Song at 81st Academy Awards. However, the reviewer stated that the probability of the event was shattered by "a serious obstacle [solely being used in "Bolt"s ending credits] and lots of Disney competition."

The music video for "I Thought I Lost You" premiered on November 3, 2008 on Disney Channel. The video commences with a clip from "Bolt" in which one of the film's characters, Rhino, shouts "Let it begin!" Then several clips from the film play rapidly until Cyrus and Travolta are shown performing in a recording studio. Throughout the rest of the video, scenes alternate between Cyrus and Travolta performing to clips from "Bolt". It ends with Rhino performing a brief dance move.

Cyrus first performed "I Thought I Lost You" live on November 12, 2008 at an outdoor concert televised by "Good Morning America". She also performed the track at the 2008 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.



</doc>
<doc id="24472828" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24472828" title="Mycena cinerella">
Mycena cinerella

Mycena cinerella, commonly known as the mealy bonnet, is an inedible species of mushroom in the family Mycenaceae. It is found in Europe and the United States, where it grows in groups on fallen leaves and needles under pine and Douglas fir. The small grayish mushrooms have caps that are up to wide atop stipes that are long and thick. Its gills are grayish-white and adnate, with a "tooth" that runs slightly down the stipe. The fungus has both two- and four-spored basidia. As its common name suggests, it smells mealy.

First called "Agaricus cinerellus" by Finnish mycologist Petter Karsten in 1879, he transferred it to the genus "Mycena" that same year. In his 1936 "Flora Agaricina Danica" (Agaric flora of Denmark) Jakob Emanuel Lange referred it to the genus "Omphalia"; "Omphalia cinerea" (P. Karst.) J.E. Lange is now a synonym. "Mycena cineroides" was named and described as a new species distinct from "M. cinerella" by Hintikka in 1963, who thought it to be unique due to its narrowly acute cap that lacked brownish or yellowish tones, decurrent gills, and two-spored basidia. However, intermediate forms of it have been found, and some authorities, like Dutch "Mycena" specialist Maas Geesteranus, believe it should be treated as a synonym of "M. cinerella".

The mushroom is commonly known as the "mealy bonnet". The specific epithet "cinerella" means "somewhat ashy color".

The cap of "M. cinerella" is white and small, with a diameter typically ranging from . Initially hemispherical, obtusely conic, and then convex, it expands during maturity, developing visible grooves on the surface that correspond to the gills underneath the cap. The cap has a broad, flattened umbo. The cap surface is smooth and moist, with a slimy margin that is initially pressed against the stipe; with age the margin becomes notched and sometimes scalloped, turning translucent. The cap color is dark gray to pale gray, somewhat hygrophanous, fading to ashy white or brown when dry. The flesh is thin, gray, cartilaginous and tough, with a strongly farinaceous (mealy, similar to raw potatoes) odor and taste if crushed or chewed. The whitish to grayish gills are moderately broad (2–3 mm) with a spacing that is close to subdistant, and 18–26 reach the stipe, interspersed with two or three tiers of lamellae (short gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stipe). The stipe attachment is adnate or arcuate, but later develops a pronounced decurrent tooth. The decurrent tooth occasionally separates from the stipe and forms a collar around it. The stipe is long, thick, equal in width throughout, hollow, cartilaginous, and brittle. The stipe surface is smooth or polished, with the apex initially faintly pruinose (as if covered with a fine whitish powder). The base of the stipe is sparsely covered with sharp, straight, stiff hairs, and is the same color as the cap or paler. The mushroom is inedible.

The spores are 7–9 by 4–5 μm, ellipsoid, smooth, amyloid (reaction very weak in some collections). The basidia (spore-bearing cells) are four-spored, or occasionally a combination of two- and four-spored. The four-spored forms have clamp connections that are absent in the two-spored forms. The pleurocystidia (cystidia found on the face of the gills) are not differentiated. The cheilocystidia (cystidia found on the edges of the gills) are embedded in the hymenium and inconspicuous, measuring 22–36 by 5–11 μm. They are roughly filiform (like thin filaments), with numerous contorted branches or protuberances, and club-shaped with finger-like prolongations. The flesh of the gills is homogenous, and turns vinaceous-brown when stained in iodine. The flesh of the cap has a well-differentiated pellicle, with a differentiated but not very well-developed hypoderm, and hyphae that are 10–20 μm wide.

"Mycena cinerella" is a saprobic fungus, and derives nutrients by decomposing leaf litter and similar detritus, converting it to humus and mineralizing organic matter in the soil. The fruit bodies grow in groups on needles under pine and Douglas fir, typically in the late summer and autumn. In the United States, it has been collected from Michigan, Washington, Oregon, and California. In Europe, it has also been collected from the Great Britain, Norway, Poland, and Sweden.


</doc>
<doc id="24472838" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24472838" title="Mycena leptocephala">
Mycena leptocephala

Mycena leptocephala, commonly known as the nitrous bonnet, is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family. The mushrooms have conical grayish caps that reach up to in diameter, and thin fragile stems up to long. The gills are gray and distantly spaced. The spores are elliptical, typically measure 7–10 by 4–6 μm, and are white in deposit. When viewed under a light microscope, the gills have abundant spindle-shaped cystidia on the gill edges, but few on the gill faces. The mushroom is found in North America and Asia, where it grows singly or in groups on conifer needles, cones and sticks on the forest floor. It has a distinctive odor of bleach; the edibility is unknown. Similar species include "Mycena alcalina", "M. austera", and "M. brevipes".

The species was first called "Agaricus leptocephalus" by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1800, and was transferred to the genus "Mycena" in 1876 by French mycologist Claude-Casimir Gillet. Synonyms include "Agaricus alcalinus" var. "leptocephalus" (Fries, 1821), "Mycena alcaline" var. "chlorinella" (J.E. Lange, 1914), and "Mycena chlorinella" (Singer, 1936). The latter was reduced to synonym in a 1980 publication by Dutch "Mycena" specialist Maas Geesteranus.

"Mycena leptocephala" is classified in the section "Fragilipedes" of the genus "Mycena", along with other similar-looking mushrooms, such as "M. aetites", "M. austera", "M. parca", and "M. aronsenii". Some of these have a nitrous smell similar to "M. leptocephala".

The specific epithet "leptocephala" is derived from the Greek λεπτος "leptos", "thin" and κεφαλη "kephale", "head", and refers to the delicate cap. The mushroom is commonly known as the "nitrous bonnet".

The cap of "M. leptocephala" is in diameter, and initially a fat conical shape with the margin pressed close to the stem. As the cap expands, it becomes broadly conic to convex, sometimes broadly bell-shaped, and sometimes convex with a flaring margin. The cap surface has a whitish sheen because of its pruinose coating. The coating gradually sloughs off, leaving the surface smooth and moist. The cap shows radial grooves that outline the position of the gills underneath. Its color is initially dusky brownish-gray to blackish (after the pruinose coating has sloughed off), soon fading from dark to light gray and finally ashy-gray. The flesh is thin and fragile, grayish, and has a slightly sour (acidulous) taste, and a weakly alkaline odor that strengthens in intensity if the flesh is crushed. The gills are narrow, equal in width throughout, ascending-adnate (the gills attach at much less than a right angle, appearing to curve upward toward stem) and toothed. They are subdistantly spaced, with 18–27 gills reaching the stem, and one or two tiers of lamellulae (short gills that do not extend fully from the cap edge to the stem) interspersed between them. The color of the gills is pallid or cinereous, with pallid and even edges. The stem is long, 1–2 mm thick, equal in width throughout, hollow, and very fragile. It is usually bluish-black initially (darker than the cap) but gradually turns sordid brownish-gray, and finally fades to pallid or cinereous. The surface is densely white-pruinose overall, but soon polished and translucent when the pruinose coating wears off. The stem base is nearly smooth to rather densely white-strigose. The species has a distinctive bleach-like odor. Its edibility is currently unknown.

The spores are broadly ellipsoid, amyloid (meaning they will adsorb iodine when stained with Melzer's reagent), and measure 7–10 by 4–6 μm. The basidia (the spore-bearing cells) are usually four-spored, although two- and three-spored forms have been found on which the spores measure 11–14 by 6–6.5 μm or 8–10 by 3.5–4.5 μm, respectively. The pleurocystidia (cystidia on the face of a gill) are scattered, rare or absent, 30–44 by 9–13 μm, variable in shape, fusoid-ventricose to club-shaped, with some having a forked apex. The pleurocystidia that are club-shaped occasionally have two or three finger-like prolongations. The cheilocystidia (cystidia on the gill edge) are numerous, and similar in morphology to the pleurocystidia. The flesh of the gill is homogenous, composed of enlarged hyphae that stain vinaceous-brown in iodine. The flesh of the cap has a well-differentiated pellicle, the cells of which bear numerous rodlike prolongations. The hypoderm (a layer of tissue immediately below the pellicle) is well-formed, while the remaining tissue is floccose; all but the pellicle are vinaceous-brown in iodine stain.

The "stump fairy helmet" "Mycena alcalina" is a common species that is similar in appearance and odor to "M. leptocephala". However, it grows on conifer wood and rarely on the ground. Microscopically, it has numerous cystidia on the gill edges. Although "M. leptocephala" usually has a weaker alkaline odor and a more fragile stem, the strength of the odor of "M. alcalina" is also quite variable, so differences in odor cannot be used as the sole distinguishing characteristic. "M. austera", described from southern Norway in 1994, differs from "M. leptocephala" by the lack of a nitrous odor, and differently shaped cheilocystidia and terminal cells of the cortical layer of the stem. Alexander H. Smith considers "M. brevipes" close to "M. leptocephala", but the former mushroom has a short stem up to long, typically grows singly, and lacks an odor.

"Mycena leptocephala" is a saprobic species, meaning it derives nutrients from the breakdown of organic matter. Fruit bodies are found growing scattered to gregarious on fallen sticks and on needle carpets under conifers, and are rather common during early summer and again in the autumn. Fruit bodies may be infected by the bonnet mold "Spinellus fusiger".

In North America, the fungus is found in Canada (British Columbia, Manitoba, Nova Scotia), to Washington and south to California and North Carolina. In South America, the mushroom has been collected in Venezuela. It also grows in the Archipelago of the Recherche, off the southern coast of Western Australia. In Europe, it is known from Britain, Finland, The Netherlands, Norway, and Spain It has also been found in various locations in Asia: the Vindhya Range of India; the Gwangneung Forest Museum in the Korea National Arboretum; and the alpine zone of Changbai Mountain Nature Reserve, Jilin Province, China. The fungus is also known from Arctic and Alpine regions such as Iceland, Greenland, and the Murmansk region.


</doc>
<doc id="24495480" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24495480" title="Tropical Storm Delia (1973)">
Tropical Storm Delia (1973)

Tropical Storm Delia was the first tropical cyclone on record to make landfall in the same city twice. Forming out of a tropical wave on September 1, 1973, Delia gradually strengthened into a tropical storm as it moved north by September 3. After reaching this strength, the storm turned more westward and further intensified, nearly attaining hurricane status the next day. The storm peaked with winds of 70 mph (110 km/h) and a barometric pressure of 986 mbar (hPa; 29.11 inHg). Several hours later, Delia made landfall near Freeport, Texas; however, the storm began to execute a counterclockwise loop, causing it to move back over the Gulf of Mexico. On September 5, the storm made another landfall in Freeport before weakening to a depression. The remnants of Delia eventually dissipated early on September 7 over northern Mexico.

Due to the erratic movement of the storm along the Texas coastline, significant rainfall fell in areas near the center and in parts of Louisiana. This led to widespread flooding, especially of farmland, that left $6 million in damages. Five people were killed during the storm.

Tropical Storm Delia originated from a tropical wave that formed over the central Caribbean Sea in late August 1973. Tracking towards the west-northwest, convective activity increased and the overall structure of the system improved. By August 31, a weak area of low pressure formed over the Gulf of Honduras. This system tracked northward and further organized into a tropical depression just off the southeastern coast of the Yucatán Peninsula on September 1. Gradually intensifying, the depression became a tropical storm on September 3 as it turned towards the west. In accordance with its upgrade, it was given the name Delia. This upgrade followed a reconnaissance mission into the system that found sustained winds of 50 mph (85 km/h). A complex steering pattern formed later that day, resulting in a more hostile environment for the cyclone.

As Delia neared the Texas coastline, it managed to intensify into a strong tropical storm with winds of 70 mph (110 km/h) and reconnaissance reported winds well in excess of hurricane-force in numerous squalls associated with the storm. The lowest pressure was recorded at 986 mbar (hPa; 29.11 inHg). However, Delia was not classified a hurricane as it had not developed an eyewall around the center of circulation. Delia subsequently made its first landfall at Freeport, Texas late on September 4. After executing a counterclockwise loop, the storm made its second landfall in Freeport on September 5. After moving inland, the storm quickly weakened, becoming a depression on September 6 before dissipating early the next day over northern Mexico.

On September 3, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) issued gale warnings and hurricane watches for areas between Lake Charles, Louisiana and the mouth of the Mississippi. Later that day, they were extended westward to Palacios, Texas and eventually, warnings for areas east of Morgan City, Louisiana were canceled. Due to the unexpected loop taken by Delia, gale warnings were extended as far south as Baffin Bay, Texas. By September 6, the NHC discontinued all watches and warnings associated with the storm. Around this time, the National Weather Service issued flood warnings, and warned residents about the possibility of tornadoes forming with the weakening tropical cyclone. In Cameron, Louisiana, an estimated 6,000 residents were evacuated with memories of Hurricane Audrey, a storm that killed 575 in the city, still fresh.

Due to the erratic track of the storm along the Texas coastline, widespread heavy rains fell in areas near the storm and in Louisiana. Tides up to , in addition to rainfall up to , caused significant flooding in the Galveston-Freeport area. Up to $3 million was reported in damages to homes due to the flooding. In southern Louisiana, numerous areas received more than of rain and most of the state recorded at least . This rainfall led to widespread flooding, particularly in agricultural areas. Damages to crops amounted to $3 million. In addition to the flooding rains produced by Delia, eight tornadoes also touched down due to the storm, injuring four people. Five people were killed during Delia, two of which were directly related to the storm. Two of the other deaths resulted from a car crash, triggered by slick roads, with the two occupants of a pickup truck being killed. The fifth death resulted occurred while a man was boarding up his home and suffered a stress-induced heart attack. The outer bands of the storm also produced significant rainfall in Arkansas and Oklahoma, peaking at and respectively.




</doc>
<doc id="24523369" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24523369" title="Polytolypa">
Polytolypa

Polytolypa is a monotypic genus of fungus containing the single species Polytolypa hystricis. First classified in the Onygenaceae family, as of 2008 it is considered to be in the Ajellomycetaceae, although there is still uncertainty as to its phylogenetic relationships with other similar genera. This species is only known from a single specimen derived in the laboratory from a specimen of dung of the North American porcupine, "Erethizon dorsatum", collected in Ontario, Canada. "Polytolypa hystricis" contains bioactive compounds that have antifungal activity.

The genus was first described in 1993 by University of Toronto mycologists J.A. Scott and D.W. Malloch, who grew the fungus in moist chamber cultures of porcupine dung collected in Stoneleigh, Ontario, Canada. The generic name "Polytolypa" is from the Greek word "poly" (πολυ) meaning "many", and "tolype" (τολυπη), meaning "skein of yarn". The specific epithet "hystricis" comes from the Greek "hystrix" (υστριξ), or "porcupine".

The genus has been classified in the Onygenaceae, a fungal family characterized by species capable of digesting human hair "in vitro", and with spores that are punctate (with minute surface punctures) when viewed with scanning electron microscopy. However, as Scott and colleagues demonstrated using traditional laboratory tests to determine keratinolytic activity, "P. hystricus" is not able to digest hair. There is still uncertainty as to its phylogenetic relationships with other similar genera. "Polytolypa" is thought to be evolutionarily most closely related to the genera "Malbranchea" and "Spiromastix". The grouping of "Polytolypa" and "Spiromastix" represent a sister clade to the Ajellomyces clade, based on analysis of partial nuclear LSU sequence data. However, the phylogenetics of "Polytolypa" are still unclear and await further study. The 10th edition of the "Dictionary of the Fungi" (2008) considers the genus to be in the Ajellomycetaceae family, although uncertainty with this classification is indicated in the entry; in contrast, the online mycological database MycoBank classifies the genus in the Onygenaceae.

The ascus-containing reproductive structures, or "ascomata", are minute, spherical bodies, typically 200–400 μm in diameter. They start out white, but gradually become rusty brown in maturity. The ascomata, which may be clustered together in groups or scattered about, grow in a shallow layer of "hairs" (actually fungal mycelia) called a tomentum. The ascomata have "appendages" composed of numerous coiled, sometimes branched helices of hyphae that are coiled 3–15 times.

The ascospores produced by "Polytolypa" are ellipsoidal, yellow to yellow-orange in color, with dimensions of 2.5–5 by 3–4 μm. Viewed with a light microscope their surfaces appear to be smooth, but under scanning electron microscopy, they are revealed to be densely marked with punctures and small, hard, sharp projections. The structures that produce the ascospores are called asci. In "Polytolypa" they are numerous, spherical, and measure 9–10 by 12–13 μm. Each ascus contains eight ascospores, which are released when the ascus dissolves away at maturity. The anamorph (asexual form of the fungus) resembles the genus "Chrysosporium".

"Polytolypa hystricis" is known only from the dung of the North American porcupine, "Erethizon dorsatum". Porcupine dens accumulate thick layers of nutrient-rich dung, hair and urine that are degraded by a succession of fungi. These fungi are disseminated by arthropods (such as insects) or by the porcupine themselves.

Chemical analysis has shown that "Polytolypa hystricis" contains a unique triterpenoid chemical named polytolypin, as well two compounds known previously as metabolites from Scleroderris Canker ("Gremmeniella abietina"). Both polytolypin and one of the previously identified compounds have "moderate" antifungal activity against the species "Ascobolus furfuraceous", while polytopin alone can inhibit the growth of "Candida albicans".



</doc>
<doc id="24524170" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24524170" title="John Waddy (British Army officer)">
John Waddy (British Army officer)

Colonel John Llewellyn Waddy OBE (born 17 June 1920) is a former officer of the British Army who served in World War II, Palestine and the Malayan Emergency before becoming director of the SAS.

Joining the British Army shortly before the Second World War, he initially served with the Somerset Light Infantry in India. He subsequently volunteered for the Parachute Regiment and saw action in the Italian Campaign in late 1943. After returning to the United Kingdom with the 4th Parachute Brigade, part of the 1st Airborne Division, he took part in the Battle of Arnhem, where he was wounded and taken prisoner by German troops.

After the war Waddy remained in the army and saw action in the Mandatory Palestine and during the Malayan Emergency, for which he was mentioned in dispatches. He went on to hold a series of command posts with the Parachute Regiment, both at home and overseas, and was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 1963. He was an early incumbent in the post of Director SAS and did much to expand the Special Air Service's role. He subsequently held a number of Military Advisor positions, most notably in Washington DC, Vietnam and, after resigning from the military, with Westland Helicopters and during filming of the movie "A Bridge Too Far".

John Waddy was born on 17 June 1920 in Taunton, Somerset, the son of Lieutenant Colonel Richard Henry Waddy, DSO, and his wife Llewellyn. He was educated at Wellington College, Berkshire and then as a cadet at Royal Military College, Sandhurst.

On 3 July 1939, Waddy was commissioned into the Somerset Light Infantry as a second lieutenant and sent to India two months later with the 1st Battalion, then commanded by Lieutenant Colonel John Harding. After travelling from Taunton to Scotland he sailed from Britain on the same day that Britain declared war on Germany. He was promoted to acting, then temporary, captain from September 1940, and substantive lieutenant on 3 January 1941. His time in India, however, was mostly spent on exercises with little chance of action. Desperate to leave, Waddy successfully volunteered for a new British Parachute Battalion when the chance came in August 1941, and in October joined the 151st Parachute Battalion as their intelligence officer. Parachuting was rudimentary in India and training jumps were made from Vickers Valentia biplanes. He qualified for his jump wings on the same day that Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, although only two months later he was nearly killed in a training jump and spent three days in a coma.

In October 1942 the battalion was sent to North Africa and re-designated 156th Parachute Battalion, where it became the central unit of the new 4th Parachute Brigade, formed in December. Waddy was briefly made adjutant of the battalion, but quickly moved up to the post of the 4th Brigade's Intelligence Officer. The brigade moved from Egypt to Palestine in February 1943, and to Tunisia in June where it joined the 1st Airborne Division, then commanded by Major General George Hopkinson. Waddy recalled that the introduction of the now famous maroon beret was particularly unpopular with the 156th Battalion, who had previously worn bush hats. The 4th Brigade did not take part in the Allied invasion of Sicily but on 5 September the whole Division sailed to Taranto in Italy (Operation Slapstick), successfully capturing the port with 156th Battalion and brigade HQ in the vanguard.

The division advanced northwards over the coming weeks, slowly pursuing the 1st German Parachute Division. In one action Waddy found an Italian 179mm Howitzer which he used to disperse Germans gathering to counterattack the 156th Battalion's positions, firing through open sights at a building in the centre of their front. Waddy was promoted to acting major in October and took charge of the 156th Battalion's B Company, a month before the 1st Airborne Division was withdrawn and sailed back to the United Kingdom, arriving there in December. On 24 January 1944, he was made a war substantive captain and temporary major.

1st Airborne Division's next deployment was in September 1944 during Operation Market Garden. The Allies planned to use airborne forces to secure key bridges over a number of rivers and canals in the Netherlands, opening a route around the Seigfried Line and into the heart of Germany. 1st Airborne Division was tasked with securing bridges across the Lower Rhine at Arnhem and 4th Parachute Brigade was detailed to occupy the northern approaches of the city in the event of a counterattack by German forces. The brigade was scheduled to arrive on the second day of the operation, 18 September, using drop zones protected by elements of 1st Airlanding Brigade. In the event, ground mist in England meant that the second lift was delayed by four hours, which spared the Dakota transport aircraft from meeting Luftwaffe fighters over the drop zone. Nevertheless, the aircraft encountered considerable anti-aircraft fire as they approached the drop zone. Waddy later recalled that his aircraft was so near to the ground that he could see the upturned faces of the German gun crews. He observed numerous flak bursts and watched the escorting Hawker Typhoon fighters attacking flak batteries as they approached the DZ. His own aircraft was hit in the tail but the pilot continued to the drop zone where, despite bad yawing, Waddy and his men were able to jump. The paratroopers came under small-arms fire directed at the aircraft's doors as they left the aircraft and parachuted under heavy fire onto Ginkel Heath. Waddy's signaller lost his radio as he jumped behind him; the bulky equipment was hit by a round the moment he jumped out of the Dakota.

On the ground an irate captain, who had expected the men four hours earlier, explained to a shocked Waddy the rapidly deteriorating situation on the ground. With 11th Parachute Battalion despatched to Arnhem and 10th Parachute Battalion defending the wounded on the drop zone, only 156th Battalion was free to move. At about 5pm they moved off along the Utrecht-Arnhem railway and met their glider-borne elements at Wolfheze just before being strafed by a German fighter. Approaching Oosterbeek they encountered German Panzer troops and stopped for the night.

In the morning, fresh orders were issued to lead the 4th Brigade to the left flank of 1st Parachute Brigade. B Company were ordered to provide supporting fire from the flanks of A Company's advance, which they successfully did before returning to battalion HQ and following up the advance. Lieutenant Colonel Sir Richard des Voeux ordered Waddy to take B Company through A Company's positions and continue the advance to the high ground, believing that there was not much opposition. In fact A Company had been nearly destroyed, and Waddy passed numerous bodies on his way forward. As the company advanced, they were held up by what Waddy believes was a twin barrelled 20mm flak gun. He led a small group to attack it, but was spotted by a German sniper as they moved forward. A companion was killed instantly and Waddy, without his machine gun, could only fire ineffectively with his pistol. The sniper shot him in the groin and tried to hit him again as he started to crawl away, forcing Waddy to lay doggo for a moment before one of his men, a tall Rhodesian soldier, carried him back to Company HQ. Faced with a heavy concentration of enemy armour, the attack stalled and was then called off; the battalion had taken such heavy casualties that it was reduced to the size of what was essentially a single company. 

At the Regimental Aid Post, Waddy found that the doctors did not rate his chances particularly highly; the 156 Battalion's war diary even recorded that "B Company commander was fatally wounded". He was taken next to a Field Ambulance post and from there to the Tafelburg hotel in Oosterbeek, now being used as a Main Dressing Station. Here he was operated on in the hotel's billiard room where Major Guy Rigby Jones used the billiard table to perform surgery. A day later he was moved to a house opposite as the number of casualties increased. Because the aid stations were in the front lines of the Oosterbeek perimeter, they came under constant fire and he was wounded twice more. A mortar round shell fragment lodged in his left foot, and a later hit caused splinter injuries to his face and shoulder. On another occasion, as the battle seesawed around the aid post, Germans occupied his building. A British sniper shot a German rifleman, prompting a German sergeant to lecture the British about shooting at a Red Cross house. When the house caught fire he was taken outside and driven to a collection point from where German medics took him to Apeldoorn.

Waddy spent the next six weeks in a German hospital in Apeldoorn. Once again the British patients were lectured about firing at the Red Cross after a Spitfire strafed the operating theatre, but overall Waddy was impressed by the kindness of the German staff and guards. He narrowly avoided having his foot amputated when a nurse removed the splinter embedded in it with a pair of forceps, and once he had sufficiently recovered from his wounds he was taken to Stalag VII-A where he remained until the camp was liberated at the end of April 1945.

Waddy remained in the army after the war ended and joined the HQ of 3rd Parachute Brigade before being sent to Palestine in September 1945. A month later he joined 9th Battalion dealing with the Jewish terrorist threat and in July 1947 he was wounded once again, this time by members of the IZL. Because the Parachute Regiment was not allowed to recruit officers for longer than three years, Waddy was posted in March 1948, after almost seven years with the regiment. He spent the next four years in staff posts, initially in Greece, then Taunton where he became GSO 3 for 43rd (Wessex) Division. Later he was sent to 1st Infantry Division in Egypt and then Libya. In July 1952 he was promoted to substantive major, and two months later was posted to Malaya as a company commander with the 1st Battalion, The Somerset Light Infantry. He spent a year in the country during the Malayan Emergency and was Mentioned in Despatches.

Returning from Malaya, Waddy spent time at RAF Staff College and as a training major for the Somerset Light Infantry Territorial Army Battalion. He then volunteered to rejoin the Parachute Regiment and was sent to the Canadian Joint Air Training Centre in Manitoba, Canada on exchange. In 1958 the Parachute Regiment was allowed to keep its own officers and Waddy swiftly applied. He was posted to Jordan and then Cyprus as 2IC of 2nd Battalion, an experience he likened to being back with family. In 1960 he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and posted to Aldershot to command the Depot The Parachute Regiment and Airborne Forces during which time he established the Parachute Regiment Battle Camp at Brecon, which later evolved into the Infantry Battle School. In 1962 he came chief instructor at a small arms school in Hythe. In the 1963 New Year Honours he was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his command of the depot.

In late 1964, Waddy took up a new post as Colonel SAS, which later evolved into Director SAS (now Director Special Forces), resulting in his promotion to full colonel. Waddy was an early incumbent of this post and is credited with doing much to develop new roles for the SAS in the post colonial war period. He also wrote a paper envisaging counter-terrorism and intelligence gathering roles for the service, predictions that have since been realised.

After brief stints in Washington DC and Fort Benning as a liaison officer, Waddy was posted to the British Embassy in Saigon as a defence advisor in 1970. Here he was able to witness the Vietnam War first hand before returning to Britain in 1972 and joining the Joint Warfare Establishment at Old Sarum near Salisbury in Wiltshire.

Waddy resigned his commission in 1974 and became Military Advisor to Westland Helicopters, a post he held until his retirement in 1989. Although he found the work stimulating, Waddy was frustrated by the Army's lack of interest in the helicopter.

When production of the movie "A Bridge Too Far" began in 1975, Waddy was given six months leave by Westland to act as chief Military Advisor, an appointment that John Frost thought was ideal. Waddy was responsible for training "Attenborough's Private Army", a group of fifty men who went through boot camp in order to portray Frost's men at Arnhem Bridge and provide the backbone of the extra cast. Waddy confessed to being deeply concerned by the actors' quality at first, but was able to turn them into men who looked and acted the part.
Although there was little that Waddy or his fellow military consultants (who included Frost, Roy Urquhart, James M. Gavin, Brian Horrocks and J.O.E. Vandeleur) could do to greatly influence the film's script, he was able to ensure that some parts were kept historically accurate. By way of thanking him after receiving some advice, Edward Fox referred to his driver as Waddy in his first scene in the movie, and he had a brief cameo appearance in one of the film's final scenes.

Along with many veterans, Waddy has returned to Arnhem frequently. When visiting in 1954 he was presented with a damaged silver cigarette case bearing his surname. When he had it cleaned at home he discovered it was a present from his father to Colonel Hilaro Barlow, another 1st Airborne officer who was killed during the battle.

From 1982 to 1996 Waddy led talks for students of the Army Staff College on their battlefield tours at Arnhem, a role he has reprised since the Defence Academy restarted the tours in 2008. He wrote a book on the subject in 1999 ("A Tour of the Arnhem Battlefields") and is recognised as an authority on the battle.





</doc>
<doc id="24540774" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24540774" title="LGBT themes in American mainstream comics">
LGBT themes in American mainstream comics

LGBT themes in American mainstream comics is a relatively new concept, as lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) themes and characters were historically omitted intentionally from the content of comic books, due to either formal censorship or the perception that comics were for children and thus LGBT themes were somehow inappropriate. With any mention of homosexuality in mainstream United States comics forbidden by the Comics Code Authority (CCA) until 1989, earlier attempts at exploring these issues in the US took the form of subtle hints or subtext regarding a character's sexual orientation. LGBT themes were tackled earlier in underground comix from the early 1970s onward. Independently published one-off comic books and series, often produced by gay creators and featuring autobiographical storylines, tackled political issues of interest to LGBT readers.

Mainstream comics—the genre of superhero comics published in the United States since the late 1930s—have historically excluded gay characters, and the superhero genre and its two largest publishing houses, Marvel Comics and DC Comics, have been criticised for their lack of inclusivity. Transgender characters have likewise been under-represented, although the common storyline of a superhero having their sex changed by magical or technological means has been regarded as an oblique reference to transgender and transsexual issues. Queer theory analyses have noted that LGBT characters in mainstream comic books are often shown as assimilated into heterosexual society, whereas in alternative comics the diversity and uniqueness of LGBT culture is at the forefront. Mainstream comics have also been labelled as "heteronormative", in comparison to "integrationist" alternative comics. Since the 1990s LGBT themes have become more common in mainstream US comics, including in a number of titles in which a gay character is the star.

For much of the 20th century, creators were strongly discouraged from depicting gay relationships in comic books, which were regarded as a medium for children. Until 1989 the Comics Code Authority (CCA), which imposed "de facto" censorship on comics sold through newsstands in the United States, forbade any suggestion of homosexuality, and LGBT characters were excluded from comics bearing the CCA seal. The CCA itself came into being in response to Fredric Wertham's "Seduction of the Innocent", in which comic book creators were accused of attempting to negatively influence children with images of violence and sexuality, including subliminal homosexuality. Wertham claimed that Wonder Woman's strength and independence made her a lesbian, and stated that "The Batman type of story may stimulate children to homosexual fantasies." Storytellers subsequently had to drop subtle hints while not stating directly a character's orientation. Overt gay and lesbian themes were first found later in underground and alternative titles which did not carry the CCA's seal of approval.

In recent years the number of LGBT characters in mainstream superhero comics has increased greatly. At first gay characters appeared in supporting roles, but their roles have become increasingly prominent. The trend has prompted both praise from the LGBT community and organizations like the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD), and criticism from conservative groups. Critics make regular accusations that comics are attempting to subvert readers into a "gay lifestyle", trying to "lure young American boys into the kinky web of homosexuality and AIDS".

According to writer Devin Grayson, the amount of creative freedom allowed by editors in the portrayal of LGBT characters depends upon how popular and established a character already is. Long-standing characters that would require a retcon to change their sexuality are less likely to be shown as LGBT than newer characters. When such changes to a character's continuity are made, fans are often disgruntled, particularly when sexuality is involved, and Alan Moore suggests that creating a new character is preferable.

Scott Lobdell claims that it is more often the fans, rather than editors, that have stronger negative reaction to LGBT issues. Moore notes however, that "it's probably quite fashionable... to have the odd gay character," and that the inclusion of LGBT people continues to improve in mainstream comics, but that the characters continue to be limited by stereotypes and do not represent a varied cross-section of LGBT people. Greg Rucka says that some scenes of same-sex interactions are rejected by editors due to unease with sexual content in general rather than the LGBT content.

On the other hand, inclusion of LGBT issues attract media attention, in which the hype makes some fans and creators uncomfortable. Podcaster Faust points out for example, that gay marriage in a comic issue is treated almost as an “event”, when that series had already been significant with openly gay characters. Lobdell, while wondering about the attention media gives gay characters, hopes that in the near future, they will not “make the news at all, because they are as common as capes and cowls.”

The "Encyclopedia of Gay Histories and Cultures" (2000) notes that gay subtext can be found in DC Comics publications as early as the Golden Age of Comic Books, with readers inferring homosexuality between superheroes and their same-sex sidekicks and on the women-only Paradise Island. Batman's relationship with Robin has famously come under scrutiny, in spite of the majority of creators associated with the character denying that the character is gay. Psychologist Fredric Wertham, who in "Seduction of the Innocent" asserted that "Batman stories are psychologically homosexual," claimed to find a "subtle atmosphere of homoeroticism which pervades the adventures of the mature 'Batman' and his young friend 'Robin.'" It has also been claimed that Batman is interesting to gay audiences because "he was one of the first fictional characters to be attacked on the grounds of his presumed homosexuality," and "the 1960s TV series remains a touchstone of camp." Frank Miller has described the Joker as a "homophobic nightmare," and views the character as sublimating his sexual urges into crime fighting. Burt Ward has also remarked upon this interpretation in his autobiography, noting that the relationship between the two could be interpreted as a sexual one. When creating the character of Jericho in Teen Titans, Marv Wolfman and George Perez considered making him gay, which would have marked one of the first appearances of a gay character in a major super hero book. However, they ultimately passed on the idea after concluding that it would be too stereotypical to make the sensitive, artistic, effeminate featured Jericho a homosexual.

The first obviously gay character was Extraño, an effeminate Hispanic man whose name means "Strange" in Spanish, who was created by Steve Englehart and Joe Staton and appeared in "Millennium" and "New Guardians" in 1987. "New Guardians" was not successful, but during its short run it also featured a character dying of AIDS. An official aftermath to "Millennium", "The Spectre" (vol. 2) #11, depicted a "mostly male and mostly gay" AIDS rally. Several characters, including the Enchantress (describing them as "filthy disgusting men") and a police helicopter pilot named Ed (screaming about "fags") are influenced into attempting to crush the rally by a seven-headed spirit. Thanks to the actions of the Spectre, Doctor Fate, Deadman, Madame Xanadu, and Ben Turner, the men are saved. Previous to this, in the hugely influential "Watchmen" (1986), one of the central characters, Ozymandias, is referred to as "possibly homosexual" by Rorschach, who critics have interpreted as asexual. The series also strongly implied that minor characters the Hooded Justice and Captain Metropolis were gay, and that Silhouette was kicked off the Minutemen superhero team when she was publicly outed as a lesbian. In "Watchmen and Philosophy", Mark White and William Irwin write that the gay relationships in "Watchmen" remain ambiguous as "lots of heteros are icked out by homos", and also that "Watchmen" is particularly surprising and challenges preconceptions of homosexuality, as "if it's true that Hooded Justice and Captain Metropolis are gay, they sure as heck don't "act" or "look" like they are gay". Alan Moore was described by AfterElton.com writer Lyle Masaki as "very gay friendly", due to his inclusion of complex LGBT characters and realistic treatment of LGBT issues in "Watchmen" and "V for Vendetta".

The early 1990s saw a few more LGBT minor characters portrayed in DC titles. Transsexual themes were explored in a 1992 storyline in "Legion of Super-Heroes", in which Element Lad finds out that Shvaughn Erin, the woman he is in love with, is actually a man who has taken a sex-change drug to be with him; Element Lad subsequently reveals that he prefers Shvaughn as a male. A lesbian relationship was also implied between the Legion of Super-Heroes' Shrinking Violet and Lightning Lass, but all these non-heterosexual characters were retconned during the "Zero Hour" "reboot" to be straight. "Camelot 3000" also explored transsexual themes by having Sir Tristan reincarnated into the body of a woman, to his initial dismay. Notable storylines featuring LGBT themes include the 1991’s "The Flash" (vol. 2) #53, which had received the first GLAAD Award for Best Comic Book in 1992. Here, the reformed villain Pied Piper was revealed as gay. Another is the coming out of Kyle Rayner's assistant and an arc about his "gay bashing" in "Green Lantern", both written by Judd Winick. These stories earned the writer title two GLAAD awards and a Gaylactic Spectrum Awards (and a further nomination). Green Lantern also has a lesbian couple, Lee and Li, as supporting characters.

The 1990s title "Doom Patrol" introduced a number of LGBT characters and explored transsexual themes. Doom Patrol's base of operations in later stories is the sentient transvestite street Danny the Street. Danny is named after British female impersonator Danny La Rue, and "dresses in drag" by hosting typically masculine shops (such as gun shops), but decorating them in bright frilly patterns and pastel curtains." His inclusion is described by Timothy Callahan as part of the "increasingly absurd" tone of the book from the twentieth issue. One member of the team is the transsexual, bisexual Coagula, who can coagulate liquids and dissolve solids, created by transsexual fantasy writer Rachel Pollack. Coagula gains her powers while working as a prostitute: One of her customers is Rebis, a radioactive hermaphrodite and Coagula gains her powers after having sex with them.

DC Comics has a number of imprints, including Wildstorm and Vertigo. Wildstorm was originally a studio producing work for Image Comics, which is noted to have a greater proportion of LGBT characters. Vertigo is an imprint that produces comics for more mature audiences, allowing more sexual themes. George Haggerty notes in "Gay histories and cultures: an encyclopedia" that "substantive mainstream presentation of gay themes in the future seems most likely in DC's adult-orientated Vertigo titles." Vertigo titles that have tackled LGBT themes include the Sandman, Shade, The Changing Man and Enigma. "" (1991) had a transsexual character, and its creator Neil Gaiman said that he included transgender characters in his works in response to the lack of realistic representation of such people in comics. The title character of Shade, the Changing Man was an alien who could change his surface form: This resulted in people sometimes perceiving him as female, and although he remained essentially male, it was implied that he had relationships with both genders. "Enigma" (1992) deconstructed the superhero genre, with the title characters homosexuality playing a large part. John Constantine, the protagonist of "Hellblazer" was first hinted as bisexual in 1992, and confirmed in 2002. In the television series however, Constantine was portrayed straight due to NBC guidelines, which brought on criticism from both critics and fans.

An example of a gay character in a starring role is the violent vigilante superhero Midnighter, who appears in comic books first published by Wildstorm. The Batman-like Midnighter was revealed to be in a relationship with the Superman-like Apollo during their time as members of the superhero team The Authority. The portrayal of the relationship was initially subtle, with writer Warren Ellis not informing the artist of his intentions. However, the DC editorial board still censored a kiss between the two characters in 2000. Described as the "first openly gay couple in comics," Midnighter and Apollo married in a later issue and have an adopted daughter. Midnighter starred in his own solo title from 2006; the "Midnighter" comic was criticised by François Peneaud for ignoring the protagonist's relationship with his husband, and also for the continual use of homophobic insults by villains. Criticism has also been leveled at a storyline in which Apollo is raped, with critics saying that straight superheroes are never subjected to such treatment. Alan Moore pointed to the characters as an example of comics' "strange attitude" towards LGBT themes, describing them as "vicious muscle queens." Starting 2015, Midnighter once again stars in his own solo series, published from DC Comics, making him the first gay male superhero to have his own series in a mainstream publisher.

"Manhunter", created by Mark Andreyko in 2004, caused reaction in the fan community when it was revealed that the boyfriend of the title character's gay co-counsel was long-time Infinity, Inc. member Obsidian. Obsidian had a number of failed heterosexual romances in Infinity, Inc. and while a member of the Justice League, and later struggled to come to terms with his sexuality, but it wasn't until his appearances "Manhunter" that the character was revealed to be gay and to have accepted his homosexuality. Andreyko said that making the character openly gay could be seen as a retcon, but that this seemed a logical step in character's growth.

Homosexual interpretations of Batman have continued into the 21st century. One notable example occurred in 2000, when DC Comics refused permission for the reprinting of four panels (from "Batman" #79, 92, 105, and 139) to illustrate Christopher York's paper "All in the Family: Homophobia and Batman Comics in the 1950s". In summer 2005, painter Mark Chamberlain displayed a number of watercolours depicting both Batman and Robin in suggestive and sexually explicit poses. DC threatened both the artist and the Kathleen Cullen Fine Arts gallery with legal action if they did not cease selling the works and demanded the surrender of all remaining art, as well as any profits derived from them.

In 2006 DC drew widespread media attention by announcing a new, lesbian incarnation of the well-known character Batwoman even while openly lesbian characters such as Gotham City police officer Renee Montoya already existed in DC Comics. It was revealed at the 2009 New York Comic Con that she would be DC Comics' highest profile gay superhero, appearing in a new Justice League comic book written by James Robinson and taking over as the lead character in "Detective Comics" with issue #854. Greg Rucka said that DC's editors had no problem with his writing Montoya or Batwoman as lesbian, but the media controversy over Batwoman's sexuality "nullified any positive effect Batwoman might have had on the industry" and forced the character into minor roles during major crossover storylines. In 2011 Batwoman gained her own title as part of The New 52 DC comics relaunch. This makes her the first LGBT character to headline a monthly series in the DC Universe.

In 2006, Gail Simone brought back the "Secret Six" as a team of villains with new members, in which many are LGBT, including lesbian Scandal Savage, her lover Knockout, pansexual Rag Doll, bisexual Jeannette, and Catman, who is also bisexual. "Secret Six" relaunched in December 2014, with Gail Simone returning as the writer. Scandal Savage, Rag Doll, and Jeannette return as recurring characters. The team consists of new members save Catman, and among them, Porcelain is genderfluid.

In "Earth 2", Green Lantern Alan Scott was revealed as gay. In issue 3, Scott is revealed to have a boyfriend named Sam, to whom he intends to propose while on vacation in China. Before he can do so, however, the train on which the couple is travelling is suddenly wrecked. A mysterious green flame protects Scott and heals him; a disembodied voice informs him that the crash was caused by a force that threatens the whole world, and that Sam did not survive. The grief-stricken Scott is then told that he will be given the power to avenge his love and protect the world.

Alongside "Batwoman", DC also released a series starring Voodoo, a bisexual African American woman, as part of The New 52 relaunch. The same relaunch also introduced Bunker, an openly gay Latino superhero, as part of the core cast of the new "Teen Titans" series. "Demon Knights" brought back "Shining Knight," who previously appeared in Grant Morrison’s "Seven Soldiers of Victory" as a girl crossdressing as a male knight. In the new series however, The Shining Knight says that he is “not just a man or a woman[, but] both.” This makes him the possible first intersex hero.

The number of minor DC characters being identified as LGBT continues to increase, including bisexual superheroes Sarah Rainmaker and Icemaiden, as well as major ones such as Catwoman. and Jericho. In "Catwoman" #39, she was confirmed bisexual, which critics claim iconic, as she is one of the most famous characters in the DC Universe. Furthermore, DC Comics officially stated that Harley Quinn and Poison Ivy, whose relationship many fans have speculated as romantic or sexual, are “girlfriends without the jealousy of monogamy.”

In 2016, "Sensation Comics" featured Wonder Woman officiating a same-sex wedding ("Issue #48") drawn by Australian illustrator Jason Badower. Inspired by the June Supreme Court ruling that established marriage equality in all 50 United States, Badower says DC Comics was "fantastic" about his idea for the issue. In an interview with "The Sydney Morning Herald", he said his editor "Was like 'great, I love it! Let's do it. It was almost anticlimactic." Wonder Woman's advocacy for gay rights was taken a step further in September 2016, when comic book writer Greg Rucka announced that she is canonically bisexual, according to her rebooted "Rebirth" origin. Rucka stated that in his opinion, she "has to be" queer and has "obviously" had same-sex relationships on an island surrounded by beautiful women. This follows the way Wonder Woman was written in the alternate continuity or non-canon "Earth One" by Grant Morrison, and fellow Wonder Woman writer Gail Simone staunchly supported Rucka's statement. Surprised at the amount of backlash from her fanbase, Rucka responded to "haters" that consensual sex with women is just as important to Wonder Woman as the Truth is to Superman.

Marvel Comics' incorporation of LGBT themes has been unfavorably compared with that of DC; its use of gay characters has been described as "less prolific but more deliberate". Marvel reportedly had a "No Gays in the Marvel Universe" policy during Jim Shooter's 1980s tenure, and Marvel's policy from the 1990s had stated that all series emphasizing solo gay characters must carry an "Adults Only" label, in response to conservative protests. Yet in 2006 publisher Joe Quesada claimed that this policy is no longer in force. Although same-sex couples are depicted occasionally kissing, intimate or sexual scenes have not been shown, even in Marvel's "Adult only" imprint. The use of mutants and the discrimination they face in the "X-Men" comics has been seen as a metaphor for the real-world discrimination directed at minority groups including LGBT people.

"Alpha Flight"’s Northstar, a member of the original Alpha Flight superhero team, was the first major gay character created by Marvel Comics. Creator John Byrne said that Northstar was planned to be gay from his inception in 1979, but although hints about Northstar's sexual identity appeared during 1983 in issues 7 and 8 of "Alpha Flight", his apparent lack of interest in women was attributed to his obsessive drive to win as a ski champion. The character was finally revealed to be gay in 1992's "Alpha Flight" issue 106, the only comic book issue to have been inducted into the Gaylactic Hall of Fame. Storylines involving Northstar have included an illness seen by some readers as a metaphor for AIDS, which was cured when it revealed that the character is actually a part "fairy", a race of non-human beings. Northstar also adopts an abandoned baby, which soon dies of AIDS. Criticism has been levelled at the fact that in 30 years Northstar has never been shown kissing another man, although many interactions with other gay characters are shown, as in the "Marvel Swimsuit Special", in which he is shown socializing with the gay Pantheon member Hector.

After the cancellation of "Alpha Flight" Northstar appeared in his own miniseries, which mostly ignored his sexuality, and eventually became a member of the X-Men. During his time in this team he became a mentor to gay teenage mutant Anole, who later became a "Young X-Men" member along with another gay teen, Graymalkin. Notable also in Northstar's tenure in the X-Men was his death in three separate continuities in the same month. Other LGBT members of Marvel's mutant teams were "X-Statix"'s Phat, Vivisector, and Bloke (until their deaths) and the villain Mystique, the latter having been in a relationship with the character Destiny, although this was not explicitly revealed until years after the relationship had ended with Destiny's murder.

Freedom Ring was a character depicted as gay from his debut by his creator Robert Kirkman. Joe Quesada touted him as Marvel Comics' leading gay hero, with stories dedicated to his adventures in "Marvel Team-Up". Despite this, the character was killed one month later. His death and general treatment was met with some negative reactions, including accusations of homophobia, particularly with respect to the phallic imagery of the death, with the character being killed by being impaled with spikes. Kirkman commented on the controversy, stating "Freedom Ring was always planned as an inexperienced hero who would get beaten up constantly and probably die. I wanted to comment on the fact that most superheroes get their powers and are okay at it... and that's not how life works. During working on the book, I was also noticing that most gay characters... are all about being gay. Straight characters are well-rounded characters who like chicks. So I wanted to do a well-rounded character who just happened to like dudes. Then I decided to combine the two ideas. In hindsight, yeah, killing a gay character is no good when there are so few of them... but I really had only the best of intentions in mind." Kirkman later stated, "Frankly, with the SMALL amount of gay characters in comics in general, and how unfortunate the portrayals have been thus far, whether intentional or not—I completely understand the backlash on the death of Freedom Ring, regardless of my intentions. If I had it to do all over again... I wouldn't kill him. I regret it more and more as time goes on. I got rid of what? 20% of the gay characters at Marvel by killing off this ONE character. I just never took that stuff into consideration while I was writing."

In 2002, Marvel revived "Rawhide Kid" in their Marvel MAX imprint, introducing the first openly gay comic book character to star in his own magazine. The first edition of the Rawhide Kid’s gay saga was called "Slap Leather". According to a CNN.com article, “The new series pairs the original artist, John Severin, now 86, with Ron Zimmerman, a television writer. Making the Rawhide Kid gay was Zimmerman’s idea. The character’s sexuality is conveyed indirectly, through euphemisms and puns, and the comic’s style is campy. Conservative groups protested the gay take on the character, which they claimed would corrupt children, and the covers carried an "Adults only" label.

The "Young Avengers" series, which debuted in 2005, featured two gay teenager major characters, Hulkling and Wiccan, from its inception. The characters' sexuality was criticised by some readers and defended by the writers in an extended series of letters on the title's letters page. "The Young Avengers" earned Marvel its first (and to date only) GLAAD Award Best Comic Book Award in 2005. Hulkling was originally planned to be a female character: According to Tom Brevoort, "Originally, Allan pitched Hulkling as a female character using her shape-changing abilities to pose as a man. I suspect this was as close as Allan felt he could get to depicting an openly gay relationship in a Marvel comic. But as we got underway... he started to have second thoughts and approached me about maintaining Hulkling and Wiccan as two involved male characters."

In the latest incarnation of X-Factor, written by Peter David, depowered mutant Rictor and his longtime friend Shatterstar (with whom he'd had an ambiguous relationship) were shown in an on-panel kiss. After the issue was published, Peter David confirmed Rictor and Shatterstar's bisexuality in his blog and expressed his desire to develop the relationship between them further. Shortly after, one of Shatterstar's creators, Rob Liefeld, expressed his disapproval of Peter David's decision. Despite his complaints, however, both Peter David and Marvel editor-in-chief Joe Quesada have defended the development, and the story will most likely go on as planned.

2012’s "Astonishing X-Men" #51 held Northstar and his long-term partner, Kyle Jinadu’s wedding. Though it is not the first same-sex marriage to be featured in superhero comics, as Apollo and Midnighter had married in "The Authority," this is the first in mainstream comics.

Due to flirtations with characters of various genders and sexuality, fans have speculated Deadpool as pan- or omnisexual. Writers Gerry Duggan and Gail Simone, as well as Terry Miller, the director of the "Deadpool" film, accepts the fan theory. However, Fabian Nicieza, one of the creators of the character, stated on Twitter that such speculation on his sexuality is invalid because his “brain cells are in CONSTANT FLUX. He can be gay one minute, hetero the next, etc.” The comment upset many fans, for it suggests that Deadpool’s sexuality is linked to his mental disorder.

"Hercules", in previous works such as "Hercules: Fall of an Avenger" and "X-Treme X-Men" have been portrayed as bisexual. However, Marvel’s editor-in-chief Axel Alonso stated that Hercules in the new series will be heterosexual, which disappointed fans and critics for “straightwashing” an LGBT character.

Other recent major characters that have confirmed to be LGBT include Iceman, who came out as gay, and Loki, who is now genderfluid and bisexual.

The 1990s saw the creation of a number of independent publishing houses with output that competed with the giants of mainstream comics publishing, Marvel and DC. The companies included Malibu Comics, Image Comics and later, Dark Horse Comics. These companies gave greater artistic freedom to their writers and artists and chose not to ascribe to the Comics Code, allowing exploration of more mature themes. As a result, comics from these companies included a greater relative number of LGBT characters and storylines than their more traditional competitors. LGBT superhero characters include Spectral and Turbo Charge (from Malibu comics), and Promethea and Gen's Sarah Rainmaker (both created by Wildstorm for Image Comics before being taken over by DC). Image comic's "A Distant Soil", written by Colleen Doran, depicts an alien culture with exotic gender and sexual mores and gay romances that gained the series a Gaylactic Spectrum Award nomination.

Dark Horse's "Buffy the Vampire Slayer"-related comics feature the lesbian characters of Willow, Tara and Kennedy and the closeted character Andrew from the television series. The "Buffy Season Eight" comics attracted media attention when the title character has a one night stand with another girl who had fallen in love with her. The encounter was repeated, but both the character and the creators denied that this made Buffy gay, with Joss Whedon saying: "We're not going to make her gay, nor are we going to take the next 50 issues explaining that she's not. She's young and experimenting, and did I mention open-minded?".

"Archie" featured their first gay character, Kevin Keller, in 2010. The American Family Association spoke out against the character and issues containing same-sex romance, but "Veronica" #202 had been so popular it sold out, resulting in his own solo series.

As the visibility of LGBT comic book creators and characters has increased, comic book fandom has taken notice. Panels discussing LGBT topics occur regularly at comic book and LGBT conventions such as Comicon and Gaylaxicon, and conventions also feature stands dedicated to LGBT comics. Ted Abenheim, event chair of Prism Comics said in 2008, “We’re in our sixth year of exhibiting at Comic-Con, presenting a larger booth and more panels and events than ever before.” A number of websites dedicated to LGBT comic book fandom and featuring content from staff writers exist, such as Prismcomics.org, Pinkkrytonite.com and Gayleague.com.

The first GLAAD Award for "outstanding comic book" was awarded in 1992 (to DC's The Flash). Since then, a number of GLAAD awards have been awarded to mainstream titles, including for DC's "Green Lantern" and "The Authority" titles, and Marvel's "Young Avengers". According to Paul Lopez, LGBT fans and creators have "debated whether the awards for mainstream comics were more about media hype than the actual content of the comic's stories."

The Gaylactic Spectrum Awards are given to works of science fiction, fantasy or horror published in the United States, and their "other works" category allows nomination of comic book series or individual issues. Comic book winners include issues of DC's "Green Lantern", "The Authority" and "Gotham Central", and nominations have been given to titles from Marvel ("X-Force", "X-Statix"), Dark Horse ("Buffy Season Eight") and Image Comics ("A Distant Soil").





</doc>
<doc id="24559190" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24559190" title="Beck v. Eiland-Hall">
Beck v. Eiland-Hall

Beck v. Eiland-Hall is a case filed in 2009 before the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), a United Nations agency. It was filed by political commentator Glenn Beck against Isaac Eiland-Hall, concerning the website "GlennBeckRapedAndMurderedAYoungGirlIn1990.com". Eiland-Hall created the site as a parody to express the view that Beck's commentary style challenged his guests to prove a negative. The site's name was based on a joke first used by comedian Gilbert Gottfried at the 2008 Comedy Central Roast of Bob Saget, in which Gottfried jokingly implored listeners to disregard the (non-existent) rumor that Saget had raped and murdered a girl in 1990. Online posters began an Internet meme comparing Gottfried's joke with Beck's style of debate, by requesting Beck disprove he had committed the act in question. Eiland-Hall launched his website on September 1, 2009.

Beck filed a complaint to the WIPO under the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP), arguing the domain name of the website was defamatory and asserted trademark infringement in its use of his name. Eiland-Hall filed a response brief to WIPO which cited the U.S. Supreme Court case "Hustler Magazine v. Falwell", asserting the website's domain name was a form of free speech and satirical political humor.

Beck made a supplemental filing in the case arguing the domain name was misleading and might lead individuals to believe it contained factual information. Eiland-Hall filed a and stated Beck had depreciated the value of the First Amendment by attempting to evade its reach in a legal proceeding outside U.S. courts. On October 29, 2009, WIPO ruled against Beck, concluding that Eiland-Hall was making a political statement through parody in a justified usage of the Glenn Beck mark.

Commentators noted Beck's actions led to a Streisand effect; his suit against the website drew increased attention to it. Representatives of Public Citizen, the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Citizen Media Law Project were all of the opinion that Beck's trademark argument in his complaint against the website was ridiculous. The assistant director of the Citizen Media Law Project applauded WIPO's decision, saying, "It's good to see that this WIPO arbitrator had no interest in allowing Beck to circumvent the guarantees of the U.S. Constitution." Beck's representative declined comment to "PC Magazine" about the conclusion of the case. Lawyers for Beck did not respond to a request from National Public Radio for a comment about the WIPO ruling.

Gilbert Gottfried was a featured comedian at the "Comedy Central Roast" of Bob Saget which first aired on August 16, 2008. At Saget's roast, Gottfried jokingly begged listeners to disregard the (nonexistent) rumor that his fellow comedian "raped and killed a girl in 1990". Gottfried repeatedly warned the audience at the roast not to spread the rumor, which did not exist before the comedian's speech. The audience in attendance at the "Comedy Central Roast" were both shocked and amused by the preposterous nature of Gottfried's joke which seemed more ludicrous each time he repeated it.

On August 31, 2009, a post on the Internet discussion community Fark applied Gottfried's joke to Glenn Beck. Online posters compared the Internet meme to Beck's style of arguing, requesting Beck disprove that he had committed the act in question. The meme spread to social-media websites, including Encyclopedia Dramatica, Reddit, Yahoo!, Answers.com, YouTube, Twitter and Digg.com. A variation of the Googlebomb technique was used, in which Google provided "Glenn Beck murder" as a search suggestion in a query for "Glenn Beck".

Isaac Eiland-Hall, a 34-year-old computer science student in Panama City, Florida, saw the discussion on Fark using the Gottfried joke on Beck and created a website, GlennBeckRapedAndMurderedAYoungGirlIn1990.com, intending it as a parody of Beck's style of political commentary. He chose not to identify with the WHOIS service and decided to remain anonymous. Eiland-Hall used the domain name registrar Namecheap for his site. It was launched on September 1, 2009, and received over 120,000 page views during its first 24 hours. The website asserted that it did not believe the charges were true. Eiland-Hall wrote on the site that those furthering the meme were asserting Beck used a similar strategy to promote his opinions and increase his viewership.

The webpage originally displayed a small text disclaimer at the bottom, stating that the site was satirical. Eiland-Hall later placed two prominent disclaimers at the top of the page, which identified it as parody. The disclaimer at the top of the website's main page stated its entire contents was parody, and included a link to a larger disclaimer at the bottom of the page. The site criticized Beck's tactic of challenging those he opposes to prove a negative. Eiland-Hall told "Politics Daily" that after reading the initial thread at Fark which started the meme, he came to the conclusion that for those involved online participation in its propagation was a form of catharsis. He explained in an interview with "Ars Technica" that it was a means of utilizing Beck's strategies to criticize him and a way to focus exasperation around Beck's style of commentary into action. Eiland-Hall's website inspired copycat parodies.

By September 3, 2009, attorneys representing Mercury Radio Arts, Glenn Beck's media company, had requested that the domain registrar of Eiland-Hall's website delete the site. Beck's lawyers characterized the site's location as libelous. They demanded that the domain registrar revoke the WhoisGuard privacy-protection service for the website, and turn over contact information for the then-anonymous Eiland-Hall. The registrar, NameCheap, refused. On September 4, 2009, Beck's lawyers sent another letter to the domain registrar, repeating their requests and noting that they had read the website's contents and were therefore aware from statements posted to the site that its operator had been notified by the registrar.

Their second letter to NameCheap observed that the site was still operational on September 4, 2009, in spite of their prior requests on behalf of Beck. The domain registrar changed the name server of the website without telling Eiland-Hall; after contacting the registrar, he was permitted to return to his original name server. In an interview with "Gawker" on September 9, 2009, Eiland-Hall remarked that Beck's attorneys contacted the registrar of the domain, his hosting provider, as well as the company which housed the servers for his website. He noted that the hosting provider informed him they would not cooperate with the requests from Beck's lawyers unless they received a court order.

In September 2009, lawyers for Beck and Mercury Radio Arts filed a complaint with the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) under the Uniform Domain-Name Dispute-Resolution Policy (UDRP) against the privacy service for Eiland-Hall's website. WIPO is a Switzerland-based agency of the United Nations. The rules of WIPO's Arbitration and Mediation Center were created by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). The privacy service for the website revealed the identity of the site's owner in response to Beck's complaint.

The complaint stated that Eiland-Hall was trying to distort perceptions about the purpose and derivation of the site. Beck argued that the domain name of the website could be confused with his trademark, "Glenn Beck". The complaint described the website's domain name as libelous claiming that it encroached upon Beck's legally registered claim of his name. Beck did not claim libel or defamation in the complaint, focusing on the legal issue of trademark. The complaint asserted that the website itself contained factually inaccurate information, was unauthorized and defamatory, and that it was highly probable it would create uncertainty among Beck's potential customers.

Beck's complaint asserted that the domain name of the website was an example of bad-faith registration. It argued that Eiland-Hall had no legitimate interest in, or right to, the website's domain name. As of September 2009 Beck was in the process of trademarking the use of his name for "goods and services", including the usage of "Glenn Beck" on merchandise.

Eiland-Hall retained First Amendment rights lawyer Marc Randazza to represent him. According to Randazza, Eiland-Hall sought legal representation after he was contacted with legal requests from lawyers representing Beck. On September 28, 2009 Randazza filed a 17-page response brief on behalf of his client, asserting that the website's domain name was a form of protected political speech and satirical political humor. According to Randazza, the website was used for satirical purposes and its owner was not attempting to profit from it. Randazza wrote that an individual would have to be a pathetic idiot to come under the impression that his client's website was directly affiliated with Beck, contending that the website's domain name could not be confused with the "Glenn Beck" trademark except to "a moron in a hurry".

Randazza asserted that Beck had insufficiently demonstrated trademark rights to his name, "Glenn Beck", and claimed that Beck was actually trying to have the website taken down because he did not appreciate the criticism through satire which parodied Beck's own techniques. He argued that Eiland-Hall had legitimate rights to his website's domain name because of its use to criticize Beck using political satire and as part of the Internet meme which had begun on the Fark website.

The brief gave a short history of Internet phenomena, including video parodies of the German film "Downfall", memes based on the film "300", "Hitler Hates Kanye West", "All your base are belong to us", "Mr. Spock Ate My Balls", and the gerbil story involving Richard Gere.

Randazza traced the website's origin, explaining the internet meme's roots in Gilbert Gottfried's joke. He then spelled out the root comedic intent of Eiland-Hall's website, in an explanation he termed the "humor equation":

The Eiland-Hall response brief cited a clip of Beck interviewing United States Congressman Keith Ellison, a Muslim from Minnesota. Beck had stated to U.S. Representative Ellison, "No offense and I know Muslims, I like Muslims, I've been to mosques, I really don't think Islam is a religion of evil. I think it's being hijacked, quite frankly. With that being said, you are a Democrat. You are saying let's cut and run. And I have to tell you, I have been nervous about this interview because what I feel like saying is, sir, prove to me that you are not working with our enemies. And I know you’re not. I’m not accusing you of being an enemy. But that’s the way I feel, and I think a lot of Americans will feel that way." It was argued that this was an example of Beck's interview style in which he challenged his guests to prove a negative. Randazza concluded Beck's rhetorical style was similar to Gottfried's, simply devoid of comedic intent.

Randazza's argument compared the case to the Supreme Court of the United States case "Hustler Magazine v. Falwell". Randazza wrote that Beck was attempting to evade the First Amendment to the United States Constitution by filing the legal process with an agency of the United Nations instead of in a U.S. court. In the legal brief, Randazza pointed out that Beck's action of going to the WIPO in an attempt to get the website taken down was in contradiction to his prior statements saying he preferred United States law over international law.

On September 29, 2009, Randazza requested that Beck voluntarily ask that the First Amendment be applied to the arbitration case, despite its international setting. Randazza made this request because Beck's political commentary favored the United States Constitution over international law. Randazza's September 29, 2009 letter to Beck's attorneys cited statements by Beck in which he indicated he preferred United States law over international law. Beck had said, "Once we sign our rights over to international law, the Constitution is officially dead." Randazza's letter concluded: "I am certain that neither party wishes to see First Amendment rights subordinated to international trademark principles, thus unwittingly proving Mr. Beck's point. Lest this case become an example of international law causing damage to the constitutional rights that both of our clients hold dear, I respectfully request that your client agree to stipulate to the application of American constitutional law to this case."
On October 8, 2009, Randazza was interviewed about the case on the WPRR radio program, "Declaring Independence". He explained why Beck did not file a libel lawsuit in the United States. He pointed out that because Beck was a public figure he had to prove a legal standard referred to as actual malice, and show that Eiland-Hall knew his assertions were inaccurate. He explained that this did not apply to Eiland-Hall's website even if it was knowingly inaccurate, because the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in "Hustler Magazine v. Falwell" that no proof is needed for an absurd statement made in the context of satire.

Beck submitted a supplemental filing in the case on October 13, 2009. In the supplemental filing, his attorneys argued that the joke of the Eiland-Hall website was not obvious; therefore, the website's domain name was misleading. The filing asserted: "While there is absolutely nothing humorous or amusing about the statement made by Respondent in his domain name that 'Glenn Beck Raped and Murdered a Young Girl in 1990,' the average Internet user finding the domain name GlennBeckRapedAndMurderedAYoungGirlin1990.com ("Disputed Domain Name") in a search would have no reason not to believe that they will be directed to a website providing factual information (as opposed to protected criticism or similar protected speech) about Mr. Beck."
On October 20, 2009, Eiland-Hall filed a in response to Beck's supplemental filing. Eiland-Hall asserted in the surreply that Beck was the butt of a viral joke which was protected speech even if it was not perceived as comedic in nature by the subject. He stated Beck had depreciated the value of the First Amendment by attempting to evade its reach in a legal proceeding outside U.S. courts.

On October 29, 2009, the WIPO ruled against Glenn Beck in the case. For Beck to have prevailed in the case, the WIPO court would have had to have ruled in Beck's favor on three issues: that the domain name could be mistaken for the mark "Glenn Beck"; that Eiland-Hall did not have a justifiable stake in the name, and that the domain name was "bad faith". On the first point, WIPO arbitrator Frederick M. Abbott ruled that the domain name could be confused with the "Glenn Beck" mark. On the issue of profit from Beck's mark WIPO ruled that there had not been substantial commercial activity to warrant this particular claim. Abbott was the sole arbitrator on the WIPO panel.

Abbott concluded that Eiland-Hall had legitimate interests in the website's name for purposes of political satire in the form of comedic parody. Abbott did not draw a conclusion on the third point, noting that it was unlikely that Beck would have prevailed on the "bad faith" issue. Abbott wrote that the determination of whether the website is defamatory would not be an issue for WIPO. Instead, the WIPO limited the case's scope to a determination of whether the website registrant had engaged in "abusive domain name registration and use".

On November 6, 2009, Eiland-Hall wrote to Beck, giving him control of the domain free of charge, and providing Beck with its username and password. Eiland-Hall wrote that he had made his point, and the act of filing the complaint exacerbated the situation for the complainant. Eiland-Hall explained his rationale for giving away the domain name, citing his desire to protect the applicability of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution had been satisfied.

"Techdirt" reported on November 6, 2009, that GlennBeckRapedAndMurderedAYoungGirlIn1990.com was a dead site; by November 10 the domain name was registered to Beck's company, Mercury Radio Arts. In a notice posted to one of his other websites, Eiland-Hall wished Beck (then suffering from appendicitis) well, and characterized the conclusion of the case as a success. In a post on his blog, Eiland-Hall's lawyer Marc Randazza described the case as a victory for freedom of speech.

Beck did not respond to Eiland-Hall's letter, and Beck's representative declined comment to "PC Magazine" about the conclusion of the case. Lawyers for Beck did not respond to a request for comment about the WIPO ruling from "National Public Radio".

Electronic Frontier Foundation attorney Corynne McSherry and Paul Levy of Public Citizen commented on the case to "Ars Technica", calling Beck's trademark claim before the WIPO ridiculous. The Citizen Media Law Project agreed with this assessment. Levy noted that domain names, in and of themselves, could be seen as defamatory; however, the statement in the domain name would have to be deemed both false and malicious. Levy and McSherry thought that the filing may have been to ascertain Eiland-Hall's identity, which was anonymous prior to the complaint. McSherry couldn't recall a prior case where an individual asserted a domain name was libelous. Jack Bremer of "The First Post" wrote that the attempt by Beck's lawyers arguing the domain name of the website was itself defamatory had likely never occurred before in the field of information technology law.

Media commentators, including Paul Schmelzer of the "Minnesota Independent", Andy Carvin of National Public Radio, and Andrew Allemann of "Domain Name Wire", considered Randazza's legal brief entertainingly written. Writing for "Bostonist", Rick Sawyer called Randazza's legal brief very funny and considered him among the uproariously amusing wordsmiths in North Shore, Massachusetts. Eriq Gardner of "Adweek" noted that the case had strategic import for the field of politics, referring to Beck's style of commentary as exemplified in the interview with Congressman Keith Ellison. Chris Matyszczyk of "CNET News" commented on the legal issues of the case; he asked whether it should hold to U.S. law as it involved two citizens, and additionally wondered if Beck was asserting trademark over his full name or his individual first and last names as well. Ed Brayton of "ScienceBlogs" called Randazza's request that Beck stipulate to United States law intellectually creative. "Daily Kos" pointed out the inherent hypocrisy in Beck's legal position of seeking redress in an international agency when compared to his prior statements criticizing foreign law in favor of U.S. law.

Commentators analyzed Beck's actions with respect to the "Streisand effect". Jim Emerson of the "Chicago Sun-Times" commented that the website's disclaimer was not enough to dissuade attorneys representing Beck from attempting to have the site removed, which triggered the Streisand effect and backfired against their client. Jeffrey Weiss of "Politics Daily" wrote that by taking legal action, Beck achieved the one impact he did not desire, namely garnering more attention for Eiland-Hall's website. John Cook of "Gawker" noted Beck's attempts to remove the site from the Internet helped assure it would become noteworthy because of his actions.

Mike Masnick wrote about the case on "Techdirt", commenting on the effect of Beck's actions on the meme's spread. He observed in retrospect it would have been advantageous for Beck to have simply done nothing rather than encourage the meme as a byproduct of his attempts to remove it from the Internet. Masnick pointed out that Beck's actions provided legitimacy to the meme's noteworthiness. Steffen Schmidt wrote of Beck's predicament in a "Des Moines Register" article: "Mr. Beck has quite a task ahead of him. Shutting down one web site is like trying to eradicate "Pueraria lobata" the dreaded Kudzu vine that is eating the South." Citizen Media Law Project observed Beck had exacerbated the situation by intimating legal tactics against Eiland-Hall, which served to increase the popularity of the meme and coverage of it among blogs.

At the conclusion of the WIPO case Glynnis MacNicol of "Mediaite" commented that those including Glenn Beck afforded freedom of speech guaranteed by the First Amendment must allow for an Internet environment with the same rights given to everyone. Brayton of "ScienceBlogs" pointed out that Beck and his lawyers never replied to Randazza's request for all parties to stipulate to the U.S. Constitution and the First Amendment in the case. Brayton observed that this was irrelevant as Beck's case was weak even when examined under the standards of the UN agency. Of Eiland-Hall's decision to turn the domain over to Beck after the conclusion of the case he commented that this was a wise strategic move. Monica Hesse of "The Washington Post" remarked upon the conclusion of the case that the division between what is considered libel and satire was murky, and asked whether this determination was more difficult to make on the Internet where speech can be amplified by others.

Wendy Davis of "Online Media Daily" commented on the potential impact of the case, and observed it was a victory for proponents of Internet rights. Davis pointed out a judgment for Beck would have enabled additional WIPO cases from individuals who were the focus of satire on the web, as a way for those people to avoid judgment in U.S. courts which adhere to First Amendment case law. John Cook of "Gawker" called Eiland-Hall's decision to turn the domain name over to Beck an optimal end to the affair which emphasized the ridiculousness of Beck's actions. Citizen Media Law Project assistant director Sam Bayard applauded WIPO's decision, noting, "It's good to see that this WIPO arbitrator had no interest in allowing Beck to circumvent the guarantees of the U.S. Constitution."

"The Washington Post" columnist Dana Milbank wrote in his 2010 book "Tears of a Clown", that Beck had been baited by Eiland-Hall to confirm the importance of the United Nations. Alexander Zaitchik came to a similar conclusion in his 2010 book "Common Nonsense", and pointed out the discrepancy between Beck's criticism of the United Nations as part of a New World Order with Beck's subsequent reliance upon the WIPO where he chose to file the case. The case was cited by Jude A. Thomas in a 2011 article published in the "John Marshall Review of Intellectual Property Law". In a discussion of the conflicts between freedom of speech and trademark, Thomas noted that panels of the UDRP have concluded website operators had fair use over domain names even in cases where the name in question was exactly the same as that trademarked by the individual filing the complaint to the WIPO.




</doc>
<doc id="24580536" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24580536" title="Cobalt">
Cobalt

Cobalt is a chemical element with symbol Co and atomic number 27. Like nickel, cobalt is found in the Earth's crust only in chemically combined form, save for small deposits found in alloys of natural meteoric iron. The free element, produced by reductive smelting, is a hard, lustrous, silver-gray metal.

Cobalt-based blue pigments (cobalt blue) have been used since ancient times for jewelry and paints, and to impart a distinctive blue tint to glass, but the color was later thought by alchemists to be due to the known metal bismuth. Miners had long used the name "kobold ore" (German for "goblin ore") for some of the blue-pigment producing minerals; they were so named because they were poor in known metals, and gave poisonous arsenic-containing fumes when smelted. In 1735, such ores were found to be reducible to a new metal (the first discovered since ancient times), and this was ultimately named for the "kobold".

Today, some cobalt is produced specifically from one of a number of metallic-lustered ores, such as for example cobaltite (CoAsS). The element is however more usually produced as a by-product of copper and nickel mining. The copper belt in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and Zambia yields most of the global cobalt production. The DRC alone accounted for more than 50% of world production in 2016 (123,000 tonnes), according to Natural Resources Canada.

Cobalt is primarily used in the manufacture of magnetic, wear-resistant and high-strength alloys. The compounds cobalt silicate and cobalt(II) aluminate (CoAlO, cobalt blue) give a distinctive deep blue color to glass, ceramics, inks, paints and varnishes. Cobalt occurs naturally as only one stable isotope, cobalt-59. Cobalt-60 is a commercially important radioisotope, used as a radioactive tracer and for the production of high energy gamma rays.

Cobalt is the active center of a group of coenzymes called cobalamins. vitamin B, the best-known example of the type, is an essential vitamin for all animals. Cobalt in inorganic form is also a micronutrient for bacteria, algae, and fungi.

Cobalt is a ferromagnetic metal with a specific gravity of 8.9. The Curie temperature is and the magnetic moment is 1.6–1.7 Bohr magnetons per atom. Cobalt has a relative permeability two-thirds that of iron. Metallic cobalt occurs as two crystallographic structures: hcp and fcc. The ideal transition temperature between the hcp and fcc structures is , but in practice the energy difference between them is so small that random intergrowth of the two is common.

Cobalt is a weakly reducing metal that is protected from oxidation by a passivating oxide film. It is attacked by halogens and sulfur. Heating in oxygen produces CoO which loses oxygen at to give the monoxide CoO. The metal reacts with fluorine (F) at 520 K to give CoF; with chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br) and iodine (I), producing equivalent binary halides. It does not react with hydrogen gas (H) or nitrogen gas (N) even when heated, but it does react with boron, carbon, phosphorus, arsenic and sulfur. At ordinary temperatures, it reacts slowly with mineral acids, and very slowly with moist, but not with dry, air.

Common oxidation states of cobalt include +2 and +3, although compounds with oxidation states ranging from −3 to +5 are also known. A common oxidation state for simple compounds is +2 (cobalt(II)). These salts form the pink-colored metal aquo complex [Co(HO)] in water. Addition of chloride gives the intensely blue . In a borax bead flame test, cobalt shows deep blue in both oxidizing and reducing flames.

Several oxides of cobalt are known. Green cobalt(II) oxide (CoO) has rocksalt structure. It is readily oxidized with water and oxygen to brown cobalt(III) hydroxide (Co(OH)). At temperatures of 600–700 °C, CoO oxidizes to the blue cobalt(II,III) oxide (CoO), which has a spinel structure. Black cobalt(III) oxide (CoO) is also known. Cobalt oxides are antiferromagnetic at low temperature: CoO (Néel temperature 291 K) and CoO (Néel temperature: 40 K), which is analogous to magnetite (FeO), with a mixture of +2 and +3 oxidation states.

The principal chalcogenides of cobalt include the black cobalt(II) sulfides, CoS, which adopts a pyrite-like structure, and cobalt(III) sulfide (CoS).

Four dihalides of cobalt(II) are known: cobalt(II) fluoride (CoF, pink), cobalt(II) chloride (CoCl, blue), cobalt(II) bromide (CoBr, green), cobalt(II) iodide (CoI, blue-black). These halides exist in anhydrous and hydrated forms. Whereas the anhydrous dichloride is blue, the hydrate is red.

The reduction potential for the reaction + e → is +1.92 V, beyond that for chlorine to chloride, +1.36 V. Consequently, cobalt(III) and chloride would result in the cobalt(III) being reduced to cobalt(II). Because the reduction potential for fluorine to fluoride is so high, +2.87 V, cobalt(III) fluoride is one of the few simple stable cobalt(III) compounds. Cobalt(III) fluoride, which is used in some fluorination reactions, reacts vigorously with water.
As for all metals, molecular compounds and polyatomic ions of cobalt are classified as coordination complexes, that is, molecules or ions that contain cobalt linked to several ligands. The principles of electronegativity and hardness–softness of a series of ligands can be used to explain the usual oxidation state of cobalt. For example, Co complexes tend to have ammine ligands. Because phosphorus is softer than nitrogen, phosphine ligands tend to feature the softer Co and Co, an example being tris(triphenylphosphine)cobalt(I) chloride ((P(CH))CoCl). The more electronegative (and harder) oxide and fluoride can stabilize Co and Co derivatives, e.g. caesium hexafluorocobaltate (CsCoF) and potassium percobaltate (KCoO).

Alfred Werner, a Nobel-prize winning pioneer in coordination chemistry, worked with compounds of empirical formula [Co(NH)]. One of the isomers determined was cobalt(III) hexammine chloride. This coordination complex, a typical Werner-type complex, consists of a central cobalt atom coordinated by six ammine orthogonal ligands and three chloride counteranions. Using chelating ethylenediamine ligands in place of ammonia gives tris(ethylenediamine)cobalt(III) ([Co(en)]), which was one of the first coordination complexes to be resolved into optical isomers. The complex exists in the right- and left-handed forms of a "three-bladed propeller". This complex was first isolated by Werner as yellow-gold needle-like crystals.

Cobaltocene is a structural analog to ferrocene, with cobalt in place of iron. Cobaltocene is much more sensitive to oxidation than ferrocene. Cobalt carbonyl (Co(CO)) is a catalyst in carbonylation and hydrosilylation reactions. Vitamin B (see below) is an organometallic compound found in nature and is the only vitamin that contains a metal atom. An example of an alkylcobalt complex in the otherwise uncommon +4 oxidation state of cobalt is the homoleptic complex (Co(1-norb)), a transition metal-alkyl complex that is notable for its stability to β-hydrogen elimination. The cobalt(III) and cobalt(V) complexes [Li(THF)][Co(1-norb)] and [Co(1-norb)][BF] are also known.

Co is the only stable cobalt isotope and the only isotope that exists naturally on Earth. Twenty-two radioisotopes have been characterized; the most stable, Co has a half-life of 5.2714 years, and Co has a half-life of 271.8 days, Co a half-life of 77.27 days, and Co a half-life of 70.86 days. All the other radioactive isotopes of cobalt have half-lives shorter than 18 hours, and in most cases shorter than 1 second. This element also has 4 meta states, all of which have half-lives shorter than 15 minutes.

The isotopes of cobalt range in atomic weight from 50 u (Co) to 73 u (Co). The primary decay mode for isotopes with atomic mass unit values less than that of the most abundant stable isotope, Co, is electron capture and the primary mode of decay in isotopes with atomic mass greater than 59 atomic mass units is beta decay. The primary decay products below Co are element 26 (iron) isotopes; above that the decay products are element 28 (nickel) isotopes.

Cobalt compounds have been used for centuries to impart a rich blue color to glass, glazes, and ceramics. Cobalt has been detected in Egyptian sculpture, Persian jewelry from the third millennium BC, in the ruins of Pompeii, destroyed in 79 AD, and in China, dating from the Tang dynasty (618–907 AD) and the Ming dynasty (1368–1644 AD).

Cobalt has been used to color glass since the Bronze Age. The excavation of the Uluburun shipwreck yielded an ingot of blue glass, cast during the 14th century BC. Blue glass from Egypt was either colored with copper, iron, or cobalt. The oldest cobalt-colored glass is from the eighteenth dynasty of Egypt (1550–1292 BC). The source for the cobalt the Egyptians used is not known.

The word "cobalt" is derived from the German "", from "kobold" meaning "goblin", a superstitious term used for the ore of cobalt by miners. The first attempts to smelt those ores for copper or nickel failed, yielding simply powder (cobalt(II) oxide) instead. Because the primary ores of cobalt always contain arsenic, smelting the ore oxidized the arsenic into the highly toxic and volatile arsenic oxide, adding to the notoriety of the ore.

Swedish chemist Georg Brandt (1694–1768) is credited with discovering cobalt circa 1735, showing it to be a previously unknown element, different from bismuth and other traditional metals. Brandt called it a new "semi-metal". He showed that compounds of cobalt metal were the source of the blue color in glass, which previously had been attributed to the bismuth found with cobalt. Cobalt became the first metal to be discovered since the pre-historical period. All other known metals (iron, copper, silver, gold, zinc, mercury, tin, lead and bismuth) had no recorded discoverers.

During the 19th century, a significant part of the world's production of cobalt blue (a dye made with cobalt compounds and alumina) and smalt (cobalt glass powdered for use for pigment purposes in ceramics and painting) was carried out at the Norwegian Blaafarveværket. The first mines for the production of smalt in the 16th century were located in Norway, Sweden, Saxony and Hungary. With the discovery of cobalt ore in New Caledonia in 1864, the mining of cobalt in Europe declined. With the discovery of ore deposits in Ontario, Canada in 1904 and the discovery of even larger deposits in the Katanga Province in the Congo in 1914, the mining operations shifted again. When the Shaba conflict started in 1978, the copper mines of Katanga Province nearly stopped production. The impact on the world cobalt economy from this conflict was smaller than expected: cobalt is a rare metal, the pigment is highly toxic, and the industry had already established effective ways for recycling cobalt materials. In some cases, industry was able to change to cobalt-free alternatives.

In 1938, John Livingood and Glenn T. Seaborg discovered the radioisotope cobalt-60. This isotope was famously used at Columbia University in the 1950s to establish parity violation in radioactive beta decay.

After World War II, the US wanted to guarantee the supply of cobalt ore for military uses (as the Germans had been doing) and prospected for cobalt within the U.S. border. An adequate supply of the ore was found in Idaho near Blackbird canyon in the side of a mountain. The firm Calera Mining Company started production at the site.

The stable form of cobalt is produced in supernovas through the r-process. It comprises 0.0029% of the Earth's crust. Free cobalt (the native metal) is not found on Earth because of the oxygen in the atmosphere and the chlorine in the ocean. Both are abundant enough in the upper layers of the Earth's crust to prevent native metal cobalt from forming. Except as recently delivered in meteoric iron, pure cobalt in native metal form is unknown on Earth. The element has a medium abundance but natural compounds of cobalt are numerous and small amounts of cobalt compounds are found in most rocks, soils, plants, and animals.

In nature, cobalt is frequently associated with nickel. Both are characteristic components of meteoric iron, though cobalt is much less abundant in iron meteorites than nickel. As with nickel, cobalt in meteoric iron alloys may have been well enough protected from oxygen and moisture to remain as the free (but alloyed) metal, though neither element is seen in that form in the ancient terrestrial crust.

Cobalt in compound form occurs in copper and nickel minerals. It is the major metallic component that combines with sulfur and arsenic in the sulfidic cobaltite (CoAsS), safflorite (CoAs), glaucodot ((Co,Fe)AsS), and skutterudite (CoAs) minerals. The mineral cattierite is similar to pyrite and occurs together with vaesite in the copper deposits of Katanga Province. When it reaches the atmosphere, weathering occurs; the sulfide minerals oxidize and form pink erythrite ("cobalt glance": Co(AsO)·8HO) and spherocobaltite (CoCO).

Cobalt is also a constituent of tobacco smoke. The tobacco plant readily absorbs and accumulates heavy metals like cobalt from the surrounding soil in its leaves. These are subsequently inhaled during tobacco smoking.

The main ores of cobalt are cobaltite, erythrite, glaucodot and skutterudite (see above), but most cobalt is obtained by reducing the cobalt by-products of nickel and copper mining and smelting.

Since cobalt is generally produced as a by-product, the supply of cobalt depends to a great extent on the economic feasibility of copper and nickel mining in a given market. Demand for cobalt was projected to grow 6% in 2017.

Several methods exist to separate cobalt from copper and nickel, depending on the concentration of cobalt and the exact composition of the used ore. One method is froth flotation, in which surfactants bind to different ore components, leading to an enrichment of cobalt ores. Subsequent roasting converts the ores to cobalt sulfate, and the copper and the iron are oxidized to the oxide. Leaching with water extracts the sulfate together with the arsenates. The residues are further leached with sulfuric acid, yielding a solution of copper sulfate. Cobalt can also be leached from the slag of copper smelting.

The products of the above-mentioned processes are transformed into the cobalt oxide (CoO). This oxide is reduced to metal by the aluminothermic reaction or reduction with carbon in a blast furnace.

The United States Geological Survey estimates world reserves of cobalt at 7,100,000 metric tons. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) currently produces 63% of the world’s cobalt. This market share may reach 73% by 2025 if planned expansions by mining producers like Glencore Plc take place as expected. But by 2030, global demand could be 47 times more than it was in 2017, Bloomberg New Energy Finance has estimated.

Changes that Congo made to mining laws in 2002 attracted new investments in Congolese copper and cobalt projects. Glencore's Mutanda mine shipped 24,500 tons of cobalt last year, 40% of Congo DRC’s output and nearly a quarter of global production. Glencore’s Katanga Mining project is resuming as well and should produce 300,000 tons of copper and 20,000 tons of cobalt by 2019, according to Glencore.

In 2005, the top producer of cobalt was the copper deposits in the Democratic Republic of the Congo's Katanga Province. Formerly Shaba province, the area had almost 40% of global reserves, reported the British Geological Survey in 2009. By 2015, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) supplied 60% of world cobalt production, 32,000 tons at $20,000 to $26,000 per ton. Recent growth in production could at least partly be due to how low mining production fell during DRC Congo's very violent civil wars in the early 2000s, or to the changes the country made to its Mining Code in 2002 to encourage foreign and multinational investment and which did bring in a number of investors, including Glencore.
Artisanal mining supplied 10% to 25% of the DRC production. Some 100,000 cobalt miners in Congo DRC use hand tools to dig hundreds of feet, with little planning and fewer safety measures, say workers and government and NGO officials, as well as Washington Post reporters' observations on visits to isolated mines. The lack of safety precautions frequently causes injuries or death. Mining pollutes the vicinity and exposes local wildlife and indigenous communities to toxic metals thought to cause birth defects and breathing difficulties, according to health officials.

Human rights activists have alleged, and investigative journalism reported confirmation, that child labor is used in mining cobalt from African artisanal mines. This revelation prompted cell phone maker Apple Inc., on March 3, 2017, to stop buying ore from suppliers such as Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt who source from artisanal mines in the DRC, and begin using only suppliers that are verified to meet its workplace standards.

The political and ethnic dynamics of the region have in the past caused horrific outbreaks of violence and years of armed conflict and displaced populations. This instability affected the price of cobalt and also created perverse incentives for the combatants in the First and Second Congo Wars to prolong the fighting, since access to diamond mines and other valuable resources helped to finance their military goals—which frequently amounted to genocide—and also enriched the fighters themselves. While DR Congo has in the 2010s not recently been invaded by neighboring military forces, some of the richest mineral deposits adjoin areas where Tutsis and Hutus still frequently clash, unrest continues although on a smaller scale and refugees still flee outbreaks of violence.
Cobalt extracted from small Congolese artisanal mining endeavors in 2007 supplied a single Chinese company, Congo DongFang International Mining. A subsidiary of Zhejiang Huayou Cobalt, one of the world’s largest cobalt producers, Congo DongFang supplied cobalt to some of the world’s largest battery manufacturers, who produced batteries for ubiquitous products like the Apple iPhones. Corporate pieties about an ethical supply chain were thus met with some incredulity. A number of observers have called for tech corporations and other manufacturers to avoid sourcing conflict metals in Central Africa at all rather than risk enabling the financial exploitation, human rights abuses like kidnappings for unfree labor, environmental devastation and the human toll of violence, poverty and toxic conditions.

The Mukondo Mountain project, operated by the Central African Mining and Exploration Company (CAMEC) in Katanga Province, may be the richest cobalt reserve in the world. It produced an estimated one third of the total global coval production in 2008. In July 2009, CAMEC announced a long-term agreement to deliver its entire annual production of cobalt concentrate from Mukondo Mountain to Zhejiang Galico Cobalt & Nickel Materials of China.

In February 2018, global asset management firm AllianceBernstein defined the DRC as economically "the Saudi Arabia of the electric vehicle age," due to its cobalt resources, as essential to the lithium-ion batteries that drive electric vehicles.

On March 9, 2018, President Joseph Kabila updated the 2002 mining code, increasing royalty charges and declaring cobalt and coltan "strategic metals".

In 2017, some exploration companies were planning to survey old silver and cobalt mines in the area of Cobalt, Ontario where significant deposits are believed to lie. The mayor of Cobalt stated that the people of Cobalt welcomed new mining endeavours and pointed out that the local work force is peaceful and English-speaking, and good infrastructure would allow much easier sourcing of spare parts for the equipment or other supplies than were to be found in conflict-zones.

Cobalt has been used in production of high-performance alloys. It can also be used to make rechargeable batteries, and the advent of electric vehicles and their success with consumers probably has a great deal to do with the DRC's soaring production. Other important factors were the 2002 Mining Code, which encouraged investment by foreign and transnational corporations such as Glencore, and the end of the First and Second Congo Wars.

Cobalt-based superalloys have historically consumed most of the cobalt produced. The temperature stability of these alloys makes them suitable for turbine blades for gas turbines and aircraft jet engines, although nickel-based single-crystal alloys surpass them in performance. Cobalt-based alloys are also corrosion- and wear-resistant, making them, like titanium, useful for making orthopedic implants that don't wear down over time. The development of wear-resistant cobalt alloys started in the first decade of the 20th century with the stellite alloys, containing chromium with varying quantities of tungsten and carbon. Alloys with chromium and tungsten carbides are very hard and wear-resistant. Special cobalt-chromium-molybdenum alloys like Vitallium are used for prosthetic parts (hip and knee replacements). Cobalt alloys are also used for dental prosthetics as a useful substitute for nickel, which may be allergenic. Some high-speed steels also contain cobalt for increased heat and wear resistance. The special alloys of aluminium, nickel, cobalt and iron, known as Alnico, and of samarium and cobalt (samarium-cobalt magnet) are used in permanent magnets. It is also alloyed with 95% platinum for jewelry, yielding an alloy suitable for fine casting, which is also slightly magnetic.

Lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO) is widely used in lithium-ion battery cathodes. The material is composed of cobalt oxide layers with the lithium intercalated. During discharge, the lithium is released as lithium ions. Nickel-cadmium (NiCd) and nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries also include cobalt to improve the oxidation of nickel in the battery. 
Transparency Market Research estimated the global lithium-ion battery market at $30 billion in 2015 and predicted an increase to over US$75 billion by 2024.

Although in 2018 most cobalt in batteries was used in a mobile device, a more recent application for cobalt is rechargeable batteries for electric cars. This industry has increased five-fold in its demand for cobalt, which makes it urgent to find new raw materials in more stable areas of the world. Demand is expected to continue or increase as the prevalence of electric vehicles increases. Exploration in 2016–2017 included the area around Cobalt, Ontario, an area where many silver mines ceased operation decades ago.

Since child and slave labor have been repeatedly reported in cobalt mining, primarily in the artisanal mines of DR Congo, tech companies seeking an ethical supply chain have faced shortages of this raw material and the price of cobalt metal reached a nine-year high in October 2017, more than US$30 a pound, versus US$10 in late 2015.

Several cobalt compounds are oxidation catalysts. Cobalt acetate is used to convert xylene to terephthalic acid, the precursor of the bulk polymer polyethylene terephthalate. Typical catalysts are the cobalt carboxylates (known as cobalt soaps). They are also used in paints, varnishes, and inks as "drying agents" through the oxidation of drying oils. The same carboxylates are used to improve the adhesion between steel and rubber in steel-belted radial tires. In addition they are used as accelerators in polyester resin systems.

Cobalt-based catalysts are used in reactions involving carbon monoxide. Cobalt is also a catalyst in the Fischer–Tropsch process for the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide into liquid fuels. Hydroformylation of alkenes often uses cobalt octacarbonyl as a catalyst, although it is often replaced by more efficient iridium- and rhodium-based catalysts, e.g. the Cativa process.

The hydrodesulfurization of petroleum uses a catalyst derived from cobalt and molybdenum. This process helps to clean petroleum of sulfur impurities that interfere with the refining of liquid fuels.

Before the 19th century, cobalt was predominantly used as a pigment. It has been used since the Middle Ages to make smalt, a blue-colored glass. Smalt is produced by melting a mixture of roasted mineral smaltite, quartz and potassium carbonate, which yields a dark blue silicate glass, which is finely ground after the production. Smalt was widely used to color glass and as pigment for paintings. In 1780, Sven Rinman discovered cobalt green, and in 1802 Louis Jacques Thénard discovered cobalt blue. Cobalt pigments such as cobalt blue (cobalt aluminate), cerulean blue (cobalt(II) stannate), various hues of cobalt green (a mixture of cobalt(II) oxide and zinc oxide), and cobalt violet (cobalt phosphate) are used as artist's pigments because of their superior chromatic stability. Aureolin (cobalt yellow) is now largely replaced by more lightfast yellow pigments.

Cobalt-60 (Co-60 or Co) is useful as a gamma-ray source because they can be produced in predictable quantity and high activity by bombarding cobalt with neutrons. It produces gamma rays with energies of 1.17 and 1.33 MeV.

Cobalt is used in external beam radiotherapy, sterilization of medical supplies and medical waste, radiation treatment of foods for sterilization (cold pasteurization), industrial radiography (e.g. weld integrity radiographs), density measurements (e.g. concrete density measurements), and tank fill height switches. The metal has the unfortunate property of producing a fine dust, causing problems with radiation protection. Cobalt from radiotherapy machines has been a serious hazard when not discarded properly, and one of the worst radiation contamination accidents in North America occurred in 1984, when a discarded radiotherapy unit containing cobalt-60 was mistakenly disassembled in a junkyard in Juarez, Mexico.

Cobalt-60 has a radioactive half-life of 5.27 years. Loss of potency requires periodic replacement of the source in radiotherapy and is one reason why cobalt machines have been largely replaced by linear accelerators in modern radiation therapy. Cobalt-57 (Co-57 or Co) is a cobalt radioisotope most often used in medical tests, as a radiolabel for vitamin B uptake, and for the Schilling test. Cobalt-57 is used as a source in Mössbauer spectroscopy and is one of several possible sources in X-ray fluorescence devices.

Nuclear weapon designs could intentionally incorporate Co, some of which would be activated in a nuclear explosion to produce Co. The Co, dispersed as nuclear fallout, is sometimes called a cobalt bomb.


Cobalt is essential to the metabolism of all animals. It is a key constituent of cobalamin, also known as vitamin B, the primary biological reservoir of cobalt as an ultratrace element. Bacteria in the stomachs of ruminant animals convert cobalt salts into vitamin B, a compound which can only be produced by bacteria or archaea. A minimal presence of cobalt in soils therefore markedly improves the health of grazing animals, and an uptake of 0.20 mg/kg a day is recommended because they have no other source of vitamin B.

In the early 20th century, during the development of farming on the North Island Volcanic Plateau of New Zealand, cattle suffered from what was termed "bush sickness". It was discovered that the volcanic soils lacked the cobalt salts essential for the cattle food chain.

The "coast disease" of sheep in the Ninety Mile Desert of the Southeast of South Australia in the 1930s was found to originate in nutritional deficiencies of trace elements cobalt and copper. The cobalt deficiency was overcome by the development of "cobalt bullets", dense pellets of cobalt oxide mixed with clay given orally for lodging in the animal's rumen.

Proteins based on cobalamin use corrin to hold the cobalt. Coenzyme B features a reactive C-Co bond that participates in the reactions. In humans, B has two types of alkyl ligand: methyl and adenosyl. MeB promotes methyl (−CH) group transfers. The adenosyl version of B catalyzes rearrangements in which a hydrogen atom is directly transferred between two adjacent atoms with concomitant exchange of the second substituent, X, which may be a carbon atom with substituents, an oxygen atom of an alcohol, or an amine. Methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase (MUT) converts MMl-CoA to Su-CoA, an important step in the extraction of energy from proteins and fats.

Although far less common than other metalloproteins (e.g. those of zinc and iron), other cobaltoproteins are known besides B. These proteins include methionine aminopeptidase 2, an enzyme that occurs in humans and other mammals that does not use the corrin ring of B, but binds cobalt directly. Another non-corrin cobalt enzyme is nitrile hydratase, an enzyme in bacteria that metabolizes nitriles.

Cobalt is an essential element for life in minute amounts. The LD value for soluble cobalt salts has been estimated to be between 150 and 500 mg/kg. In the US, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has designated a permissible exposure limit (PEL) in the workplace as a time-weighted average (TWA) of 0.1 mg/m. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.05 mg/m, time-weighted average. The IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health) value is 20 mg/m.

However, chronic cobalt ingestion has caused serious health problems at doses far less than the lethal dose. In 1966, the addition of cobalt compounds to stabilize beer foam in Canada led to a peculiar form of toxin-induced cardiomyopathy, which came to be known as "beer drinker's cardiomyopathy".

It causes respiratory problems when inhaled. It also causes skin problems when touched; after nickel and chromium, cobalt is a major cause of contact dermatitis. These risks are faced by cobalt miners.

Cobalt can be effectively absorbed by charred pigs' bones; however, this process is inhibited by copper and zinc, which have greater affinities to bone char.





</doc>
<doc id="24590273" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24590273" title="Reigomys">
Reigomys

Reigomys primigenus is an extinct oryzomyine rodent known from Pleistocene deposits in Tarija Department, southeastern Bolivia. It is known from a number of isolated jaws and molars which show that its molars were almost identical to those of the living "Lundomys". On the other hand, the animal possesses a number of derived traits of the palate which document a closer relationship to living "Holochilus", the genus of South American marsh rats, and for this reason it was placed in the genus "Holochilus" when it was first described in 1996. The subsequent discoveries of "Noronhomys" and "Carletonomys", which may be more closely related to extant "Holochilus" than "H. primigenus" is, have cast its placement in "Holochilus" into doubt, and it was ultimately made the type species of a separate genus, "Reigomys".

Material of "Reigomys primigenus" was collected in 1924 and 1927 by Elmer Riggs of the Field Museum of Natural History, but the animal was not described until 1996, when Scott Steppan formally named it as a new species of the genus "Holochilus" and diagnosed it, contrasting it to related species. The material Riggs collected includes nine mandibles, three maxillae, and five isolated molars. The specific name Steppan gave to the animal, "primigenus", means "primitive" in Latin and refers to the primitive features of the animal when compared to its relatives "Holochilus" and "Lundomys". In order to determine the relationships of his new species, Steppan carried out a cladistic analysis, in which he also included the oryzomyines "Holochilus", "Lundomys", "Pseudoryzomys", and "Cerradomys", as well as the non-oryzomyine "Sigmodon". His results supported a close relation between "R. primigenus" and extant "Holochilus", with "Lundomys" and "Pseudoryzomys" more distantly related.

In 1999, another rodent from the same group was described: "Noronhomys", a recently extinct species from the Brazilian island of Fernando de Noronha. Michael Carleton and Storrs Olson, who described the animal, argued that "Holochilus primigenus" was probably outside the clade of "Noronhomys" and extant "Holochilus" and that "H. primigenus" should probably be excluded from the genus. When Ulyses Pardiñas described another extinct rodent from this group, "Carletonomys" from the Pleistocene of Argentina, he suggested that "H. primigenus" should be placed in its own genus because of its mosaic of "Holochilus"- and "Lundomys"-like features.

The phylogenetic analysis conducted by Machado "et al." (2014) confirmed that living members of the genus "Holochilus" are more closely related to "Noronhomys" and "Carletonomys" than to "H. primigenus". The authors moved "H. primigenus" to its own genus, which they named "Reigomys".

"Reigomys primigenus" was a large rat, though smaller than both "Lundomys" and living "Holochilus", characterized by an S-shaped ("sigmodont") crown on the third lower molar. Features of the molars are nearly indistinguishable from those of "Lundomys" and include cusps located opposite each other, enamel valleys that barely reach the midline of the molars, and short mesolophs and mesolophids (accessory crests). Other notable features include a robust mandible (lower jaw) with a steeply rising coronoid process, short incisive foramina (perforations of the front part of the palate) that barely extend between the first molars, and a short bony palate that hardly extends beyonds the third molars, all of which are shared with extant species of "Holochilus" to the exclusion of "Lundomys". Also unlike in "Lundomys", there is an additional small root present at the labial (outer) side of the first upper molar. In eight specimens that could be measured, the length of the lower toothrow is 6.79 to 7.58 mm, averaging 7.28 mm; the first lower molar is 2.62 to 3.08 mm long, averaging 2.89 mm, and 1.75 to 1.93 mm broad, averaging 1.85 mm in seven measured teeth; the only preserved complete upper toothrow is 6.64 mm long; and the first upper molar is 2.63 to 2.70 mm long and 2.03 mm broad in two specimens.

Remains of "Reigomys primigenus" come from several localities in river sediments of the Tarija Formation in Tarija Department, which have been paleomagnetically dated to about 0.7 to 1.0 million years ago (chrons Clr.ln to early Cln, Ensenadan South American land mammal age). Other sigmodontine rodents found there include "Andinomys", "Calomys", "Kunsia", "Nectomys", "Oxymycterus", "Phyllotis", and another akodontine, probably "Akodon", "Necromys", or a related genus. The deposits were deposited by a river and the paleoenvironment was probably a floodplain or channel. "Reigomys primigenus" is not known from any other localities and is considered to be extinct.



</doc>
<doc id="24601202" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24601202" title="Van Morrison: Too Late to Stop Now">
Van Morrison: Too Late to Stop Now

Van Morrison: Too Late to Stop Now is a biography of musician Van Morrison, written by Steve Turner. It was first published in 1993 in the United States by Penguin Group, and in Great Britain by Bloomsbury Publishing. Turner first met Van Morrison in 1985; he interviewed approximately 40 people that knew the subject in his research for the biography. Van Morrison did not think positively of the biography, and multiple newspapers reported he attempted to purchase all of the book's 25,000 copies. He sent a letter to the author asserting the 40 individuals interviewed for the book were not his friends, and accused Turner of "peddling distortions and inaccuracies about me personally".

The biography takes a pictorial format, and includes many photographs of Van Morrison and scenes relating to his life, including close-up shots and contact prints. Turner discusses Van Morrison's youth in Belfast, Northern Ireland, and how early experiences shaped his perceptions. Flautist John Payne was interviewed for the book, and comments on his work with Van Morrison on the album "Astral Weeks". Turner discusses Van Morrison's reluctance to be interviewed or engage with the public, and includes quotes from the musician about this desire for privacy. The author discusses Van Morrison's efforts to seek out creativity, and his exploration of spirituality. The book concludes with an assessment of Van Morrison's experiences with religion.

The book was selected as "Editor's Choice" in the "Sunday Age". "Publishers Weekly"<nowiki>'s</nowiki> review of the book was critical of its "adulatory" tone, but called it a "necessity for fans", due the inclusion of the discography. A review of the book for "The Boston Globe" commented "The value of the book is that it has at its heart the same subjects that most of Morrison's music has featured ... religion and spirituality." "The Palm Beach Post" noted that the biography provides "insights and updates as well as a solid background on Morrison's early life". "The Sunday Times" wrote that "the really interesting story here is told by the photographs". "The Irish Times" was critical of the book's text but wrote positively of the included photographs.

Prior to his work on the biography, Steve Turner had previously written a book about the music group U2, titled "U2: Rattle & Hum", and Eric Clapton, titled "Conversations With Eric Clapton". Turner first met Van Morrison in 1985, while writing a book on religion's place in rock music. Turner characterised himself as someone who is "drawn to artists bothered by spiritual issues". In his research for the book, the author interviewed approximately 40 people that knew Van Morrison. Turner spoke with Van Morrison, and they discussed the musician's views on philosophy. Some of the photographs included in the book were obtained by Turner from a guitarist with Van Morrison's band Them.

According to "The Sunday People", "though critics said it was an affectionate tribute about a nice man. Van went on to urge fans not to buy it." According to "The Boston Globe", Van Morrison "disdained the book". In an interview with "The Boston Globe", Turner commented on this: "He considers anything that reveals details of family background or anything like that an invasion of his privacy. He doesn't believe in biographies, and I do." When the biography came out in hardcover, Van Morrison sent Turner 36 statements from the book that he called "lies, gross exaggerations and innuendo". Van Morrison told Turner that none of the 40 individuals the author had interviewed for the biography were currently friends of his. The letter from Van Morrison to Turner concluded with: "I am very sorry that you feel you are entitled to earn a living by peddling distortions and inaccuracies about me personally." In his reply letter to Van Morrison, Turner wrote: "You may not think you are 'difficult' or 'introvert' but other people do and have the right to express their opinions." "The Sunday Times" reported that "Allegedly, Van's management even considered buying up all 25,000 copies of the book to pulp them," and this was also reported in "The Independent". "The Evening Times" wrote that Van Morrison "reportedly tried to buy all the copies of a biography by Steve Turner." Representatives for Van Morrison did not confirm whether he attempted to purchase the 25,000 copies of the biography, and confirmed that "representatives of the singer discussed various possibilities". Van Morrison's manager, Chris O'Donnell, said of the musician: "He is not happy about books, period. He is an artist and stands up for himself – he doesn't want his private life raked over."

Steve Turner appeared on a panel of experts in the 2008 documentary "Van Morrison: Under Review 1964–1974". Along with Turner was Johnny Rogan, author of the biographies "Van Morrison: A Portrait of the Artist" (1984) and "" (2005).

The introduction to the book includes an analysis by the author of Van Morrison's skill to use "the stuff of his life". Turner compares Van Morrison with other musicians of the time period, including Robbie Robertson, Bob Dylan, and Neil Young. The book's 10 chapters contain a pictorial overview of the musician's professional work. The book's chapters are structured according to record releases of the musician. Pictures include images from locations where Van Morrison grew up in Belfast, contact prints from a photo shoot for a cover album with his wife at the time Janet Planet, and archived marketing photographs of a younger Van Morrison. The beginning of the book includes 10 close-up shots of the musician. The book also contains a complete discography of Van Morrison's work.
Turner describes Van Morrison's early life as George Ivan Morrison on Hyndford Street in Belfast. "I'm definitely Irish", Van Morrison is quoted as stating in the book. He asserts that Van Morrison was affected by his mother's religious conversion to the Jehovah's Witnesses when he was a child. Turner states that this experience contributed to his position as an outcast: "Who else in Belfast had a father who played Jelly Roll Morton records, and a mother who indulged in doorstep evangelism?" Turner discusses Van Morrison's musical colleagues, his successes, the break-ups of his various bands, and his efforts to seek out creative expression. The author includes commentary and images from Van Morrison's first release with the band Them in 1964, through to his latest album at the time of the book's publication.

Turner interviewed flautist John Payne for the book, who had sat in on sessions with Van Morrison and later collaborated with him. Payne comments on their work together on the album "Astral Weeks", which also included musicians Connie Kay, Warren Smith, Jay Berliner, and Richard Davis: "Ironically, the image you have when you listen to the album now is of these guys who are all together, and they realise they are creating a monumental work of art. The fact is that it was just another session for them." Payne states of his observations of Van Morrison's performance style: "When (Van) was on stage, he would look like a space cadet, but then he'd open his mouth and you would realize that he had channeled everything into the sound of his voice. The rest of it was just a shell that was there for the purpose of producing this noise."

The book notes the artist's reluctance to be interviewed or engage with the public, and quotes him as saying: "It's very hard for me to relate to people asking questions that are not only boring but don't have anything to do with my life ... It's a waste of time on my part because it drains me from doing what I really want to do, which is just to play music." Van Morrison describes his perceived musical role: "I just feel I'm doing the job. My job is to play music and deliver the show ... It's more emotional for the audience ... what they sort of think you are." He states that one of his motivations is "ideally to induce states of meditation and ecstasy, as well as to make people think".

The author notes Van Morrison's dislike of conformity, and quotes him as saying: "I hate organizations." Of his period in his life of experimentation, Van Morrison comments: "I'm not searching for anything in particular. I'm just groping in the dark ... for a bit more light. That's it really." Turner notes how musical styles including rhythm and blues and Motown influenced the musician. Van Morrison's exploration of spirituality is discussed in the book, including his experiences with mysticism, Christianity, and Dianetics. In the last chapter of the book, Turner comments on Van Morrison's experiences in religion, writing: "His development of religion as a normal topic of discourse in popular song may turn out to be his most lasting contribution."

The book was selected as "Editor's Choice" in the "Sunday Age", where Michael Gordon wrote: "This is not the whole story, but it is a well-researched and superbly presented summary of the story so far – a kind of companion to the John Lennon book, 'Imagine' – including the temper tantrums. Fans may, however, disagree with the closing assessment that Morrison may be running out of themes and ideas to express." "Publishers Weekly" was critical of the book's tone, commenting: "Turner is more adulatory than probing." The review noted: "A complete discography makes this book a necessity for fans of the Irish Rover." Writing for "The Boston Globe", Thomas C. Palmer Jr. called the book "a coffee-table biography that fills an extensive void, both for those hungry for gossip and for those who have wondered at the source of the creativity in this prolific producer of often stunningly original – if difficult to categorize – music". Palmer commented on the book's value: "The value of the book is that it has at its heart the same subjects that most of Morrison's music has featured, subtly or otherwise (but never as blatantly as Dylan in his "Saved" period): religion and spirituality." Robert Sandall reviewed the book for "The Sunday Times", and wrote: "Steve Turner has performed his task as a biographer diligently enough in Too Late To Stop Now, but the really interesting story here is told by the photographs." Sandall commented: "Thirty years of constant rowing with anybody who has ever tried to get close to him, and a fitful and irritable hankering after religion (any religion) have left him looking bloated, sad and, as Turner has the courage and decency to point out, not as great a musician now as his current reputation would suggest. It's all there in the pictures."

Bernard Perusse of "The Gazette" described the book as "more superficial but more positive" than the 2006 biography "" by Johnny Rogan. In a review of the book for "The Palm Beach Post", Lisa McDonough wrote "Steve Turner's "Van Morrison: Too Late To Stop Now" is not the final answer on Morrison – only Morrison could give that – but he does provide insights and updates as well as a solid background on Morrison's early life." Writing for "The Irish Times", John Boland was critical of the book's text but wrote positively of its images: "Steve Turner's "Van Morrison: Too Late to Stop Now", has a trite, fanzine style text and isn't very informative about the great man, but it has some splendid pictures and in its coffee table format is well worth the asking price". A review in the "Herald Sun" was critical: ""Too Late To Stop Now" is more suited to the coffee table than a library shelf. It is browsing material, fleshed with snapshots, album covers, PR shots, posters and prints. The words are mere stitches, there to hold the pictures in place." The "Herald Sun" noted that the author left out critical quotes from individuals that knew Van Morrison, and questioned Turner's objectivity.





</doc>
<doc id="24632772" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24632772" title="Mycena nargan">
Mycena nargan

Mycena nargan, commonly known as the Nargan's bonnet, is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family, and the sole member of the section "Nargan" in the genus "Mycena". Reported as a new species in 1995, it is known predominantly from Southern Australia. The saprobic fungus produces mushrooms that grow on well-decayed wood, often on the underside of wood lying in litter. The dark chestnut-coloured caps are covered with white, easily removed scales, and reach diameters of up to wide. The pale, slender stems are up to long and have white scales at the base. On the underside of the cap, the cream-coloured gills are widely spaced and bluntly attached to the stem. The edibility of the mushroom is unknown.

The species was first discovered in 1992 in Kuitpo Forest, South Australia, and reported as new to science in a 1995 "Australian Systematic Botany" publication. The species name refers to the nargan or nargun, a mythical aboriginal being – originally the mycologists Tom May and Bruce Fuhrer had called it "nargan", as its white speckles glistened in the dark like the eyes of the nargan, and Cheryl Grgurinovic incorporated this into its specific epithet. It is commonly known as "Nargan's bonnet", but has also been referred to as the "spotted pixie cap".

With respect to infrageneric classification (i.e., taxonomic ranking below the level of genus) in "Mycena", several characteristics suggest the mushroom fits best in Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus' section "Fragilipedes": the ellipsoidal, amyloid spores; dextrinoid spore-bearing tissue; smooth cheilocystidia; gills with the edge the same colour as the face; and the non-slimy, distinctly coloured cap. According to the 1986 infrageneric classification proposed by Rolf Singer, the mushroom would be classified in subgenus "Mycena", subsection "Ciliatae", stirps "Alcalina" (roughly equivalent to section "Fragilipedes" of Maas Geesteranus) because of the amyloid spores, smooth, elongated cheilocystidia, dull-coloured pigment, and stem without either latex or a slimy sheath. Grgurinovic erected the new section "Nargan" to accommodate "M. nargan", because its scales, lack of coarse fibrils at the base of the stem, and lack of pruinose coating meant it was not a good fit for section "Fragilipedes".

The caps of young mushrooms are initially egg-shaped to conical, expanding to become bell-shaped and up to 2 cm (0.8 in) in diameter. Initially, the margin of the cap is rolled inwards; it typically assumes a lighter color than the centre of the cap surface. Dark brown in color, the mushroom is distinguished by the presence of white speckles or scales on the cap and stem; these scales may disappear when they become sloughed off or washed away by rain, which can make the species hard to recognise. The thick gills have an adnate attachment to the stem (broadly attached to the stem slightly above the bottom of the gill, with most of the gill fused to the stem), and are white to light grey in colour, paler toward the edge. There are about 24–28 gills extending completely from the cap margin to the stem, and one or two tiers of lamellulae (shorter gills does do not extend fully from the margin to the stem). The thin stem is up to 4 cm (1.6 in) high and 0.3 cm (0.12 in) wide, and does not have a ring. Young specimens will typically have whitish scales at the base; later, these will slough off and a felt-like whitish mycelium may be apparent. The mushroom have no distinctive odour. The spore print is white or cream. The edibility of the mushroom has not been reported.

The spores of "M. nargan" are roughly ellipsoid, smooth, hyaline, and measure 7.4–10.4 by 4.8–7.1 μm. They have a small, oblique apiculus, and lack oil droplets. In terms of staining reactions, they are acyanophilous (not absorbing methyl blue dye), and amyloid (turning blue-black in Melzer's reagent). The basidia (spore-bearing cells in the hymenium) are club-shaped, have clamp connections at their bases, and measure 29.6–36.4 by 8.2–10.7 μm. They are four-spored, and the spores are attached to the basidia by long slender sterigmata that are up to 7.2 μm long. The gill edge is sterile (without basidia), and has adundant cystidia. These thin-walled cheilocystidia range in shape from swollen in the middle with a beak-like point, to spindle-shaped (fusiform) to club-shaped. They are smooth, hyaline, and inamyloid, with dimensions of 20.8–38.4 by 4.8–10.4 μm. They have a clamp connection at base. Pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face) are not present in this species. The gill tissue is made of smooth, thin-walled cylindrical to egg-shaped cells, up to 30.4 μm in diameter. The cells are dextrinoid (producing a black to blue-black positive reaction with Melzer's reagent), and reddish brown. The surface of the cap (the pileipellis) is made of a layer of bent-over filamentous hyphae measuring 1.8–4.8 μm. These loosely arranged hyphae are slightly gelatinised, smooth, thin-walled, hyaline, inamyloid, and have clamp connections. The tissue layer directly under the pileipellis (the hypodermium) has cells containing brown pigment. The cap tissue consists of smooth, thin-walled, cylindrical to broadly cylindrical or ovoid cells, up to 37.0 μm in diameter, with clamp connections. These cells are dextrinoid and reddish orange-brown in colour. The surface of the stem is made of filamentous hyphae, 2.2–4.0 μm in diameter, either smooth or with sparse to moderately dense short, rod-like to cylindrical projections. The cells are thin-walled to very slightly thick-walled, hyaline, inamyloid, and have clamp connections. Caulocystidia (cystidia on the cap surface) are not present. The stem tissue consists of short, cylindrical cells, up to 28.0 μm in diameter that are smooth, thin-walled, and with or without brown pigment in the cytoplasm. The cells contain clamp connections and are reddish orange-brown.

"Mycena nargan" has a very distinct appearance, and is unlikely to be mistaken for other Mycenas. However, one noted unintentional misidentification occurred when the "M. nargan" on the cover photograph of Bruce A. Fuhrer's 2005 book "A Field Guide to Australian Fungi" was labelled as "Mycena nivalis", a species with a white cap.

A common mushroom, "Mycena nargan" is found growing singly or in clusters on the underside of rotting wood in wet and shaded areas, and is especially partial to "Eucalyptus" and "Pinus pinaster". Fruit bodies usually appear from April to June. The species has been recorded from Tasmania, Victoria and southeastern South Australia. The Australian Fungimap initiative has reported isolated collections in Western Australia, South Australia, and New South Wales, although the majority of sightings have been in Tasmania and Victoria. The fungus is saprobic, meaning it derives nutrients from dead or dying organic matter. A field study conducted in Tasmania showed that it is much more likely to be found in mature eucalypt forest (defined as having grown at least 70 years before the last wildfire) than young, regenerating forest that had experienced clearfelling, burning, and sowing two to three years previously.


</doc>
<doc id="24648861" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24648861" title="The Land of Green Plums">
The Land of Green Plums

The Land of Green Plums () is a novel by Herta Müller, published in 1994 by Rowohlt Verlag. Perhaps Müller's best-known work, the story portrays four young people living in a totalitarian police state in Communist Romania, ending with their emigration to Germany. The narrator is an unidentified young woman belonging to the ethnic German minority. Müller said the novel was written "in memory of my Romanian friends who were killed under the Ceauşescu regime".

Like many of Müller's books, "The Land of Green Plums" illustrates the position of dissidents from the German minority in Romania, who suffered a double oppression under the regime of Nicolae Ceauşescu. The rural German-speaking community tries to preserve its culture by enforcing traditional rules; once the main characters escape this environment through university study in the city, they suffer, as political dissidents, the oppression exercised by the totalitarian regime. Those who flee the country for Germany become cultural outcasts: they are not considered German there but rather Eastern Europeans. Critics read the novel as testifying to abuse and the ensuing trauma. Normal human relationships are rendered impossible by the lack of freedom of expression; the threat of violence, imprisonment, and execution; and the possibility that any personal friend may be a traitor. Written in a paratactic style, full of flashbacks and time shifts, the language of the book reflects trauma and political oppression.

After its publication in German and its translation into Dutch, the novel received moderate attention. It gained an international audience when the English translation by Michael Hofmann was published in 1996. In 1998 this translation won the International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award, the largest prize given for a single work of fiction published in English. Following the announcement that Müller was awarded the 2009 Nobel Prize in Literature, "The Land of Green Plums" entered the bestseller list on Amazon.com.

The first character introduced to the reader is a girl named Lola, who shares a college dormitory room with five other girls, including the narrator. Lola records her experiences in a diary, relating her efforts to escape from the totalitarian world of school and society. She rides the buses at night and has brutish, anonymous sex with men returning home from factory work. She also has an affair with the gym teacher, and soon joins the Communist Party. This first part of the book ends when Lola is found dead, hanging in the closet; she has left her diary in the narrator's suitcase.

Having supposedly committed suicide and thus betrayed her country and her party, Lola is publicly denounced in a school ceremony. Soon after, the narrator shares Lola's diary with three male friends, Edgar, Georg, and Kurt; Lola's life becomes an escape for them as they attend college and engage in mildly subversive activities—"harbouring unsuitable German books, humming scraps of banned songs, writing to one another in crude code, taking photographs of the blacked-out buses which carry prisoners between the prison and the construction sites." The four are from German-speaking communities; all receive mail from their mothers complaining about their various illnesses and how their children's subversiveness is causing them trouble; all have fathers who had been members of the Nazi SS in Romania during World War II. They hide the diary and other documents, including photographs and books, in the well of a deserted summerhouse in town. Very quickly it becomes clear that an officer of the Securitate, Captain Pjele, is interested in the four; he begins to subject them to regular interrogations. Their possessions are searched, their mail opened, and they are threatened by the captain and his dog.

After graduation the four go their separate ways, but they remain in contact through letters and regular visits, although their letters are read by the Securitate. They take menial jobs: Kurt works in a slaughterhouse as a supervisor, for instance; and the narrator translates German manuals in a factory. A fifth member, Tereza, befriends the narrator even as it becomes clear that she is acting partly on Pjele's orders.

The lives of all five become more miserable, and each conforms to the regime's demands even as they lose their jobs for apparently political reasons. They discuss fleeing the country, and Georg is the first to do so. Weeks after he arrives in Germany, he is found dead from a fall from the window of a Frankfurt hotel. The narrator and Edgar likewise acquire passports and go to Germany, but continue to receive death threats after emigrating. Kurt remains in Romania, no longer working; he is later found hanged. The novel ends with the same passage as it began: "When we don't speak, said Edgar, we become unbearable, and when we do, we make fools of ourselves".

The narrator, Edgar, Georg, and Kurt hail from similar backgrounds. All are German Romanian and students at the same university. They all suffer persecution, and oppose the regime. The characters—especially Edgar, Georg, and Kurt—are quite deliberately not developed in great detail, as noted by critics. "Characterization is not the point here. Müller is primarily a poet", and this poetic interest likewise is said to explain the lack of chapter organization and of transitional phrases. Only two of the six main characters who suffer oppression survive at the end of the book: Lola dies by hanging, Georg commits suicide after fleeing to Germany, Kurt is found hanged, and Tereza, the narrator's friend who betrays her to the Securitate, dies of cancer.

The novel is partly autobiographical. Like her narrator, Müller comes from the German-speaking minority in Romania, the Banat Swabians, with a father who had been former SS man during World War II. Trained as a teacher, she lost her position after refusing to cooperate with the Securitate. She emigrated to Germany in 1987. In a 1998 interview she mentioned that real persons can be recognized in some of her characters, including one in "The Land of Green Plums": "That [recognition of characters] was already the case in my previous book ["The Land of the Green Plums"]. Because my best girlfriend died young, and because she had betrayed me, and because I had to despise her and could not stop loving her."

In an earlier interview with the Danish newspaper "Politiken", Mülller went into greater detail about her friend, portrayed as Tereza in this novel:
The novel approaches allegory in many of its details, such as the green plums of the title. Mothers warn their children not to eat green, unripe plums, claiming that they are poisonous. Yet the novel regularly depicts police officers gorging themselves on the fruit: "The officers' lack of constraint in engulfing the fruit parallels the remorseless persecution of the human race" under Nicolae Ceauşescu. The green plums also suggest childhood, or regression into childhood: "The narrator watches the Romanian police guards in the streets of the city as they greedily pocket green plums ... 'They reverted to childhood, stealing plums from village trees.' Ms. Muller's vision of a police state manned by plum thieves reads like a kind of fairy tale on the mingled evils of gluttony, stupidity and brutality."

Critics have recognized Müller's writing as political, "as a form of manifest resistance against totalitarian claims to power," and have studied her "complex and ambiguous imagery." According to Larry Wolff, reviewing the book for "The New York Times", the poetic quality of the language is essentially connected to its author's objective: "the author seeks to create a sort of poetry out of the spiritual and material ugliness of life in Communist Romania." Critics have generally shown appreciation for the novel's language, as did Nicholas Lezard, writing in "The Guardian": 
The prose, while simple at the level of the sentence (and we can safely assume that Hofmann's translation is very faithful to the original), is shifty, blurred, to the point where at times we are left unsure as to what exactly is going on – a deliberate flight from causation, quite understandable in a country where everyone (even, we learn, the horses) has been driven mad by fear.

Though the novel's language, and Müller's language in general, is praised for its precision--Peter Englund, secretary of the Swedish Academy, noted her "extreme precision with words"—many things are left unsaid. As a reviewer for "The Australian" noted, the narrator is never named, the words "totalitarian" and "liberty" never appear in the book, and even Ceausescu, usually referred to as the "dictator," is named only twice, first when one of the characters (a Jewish WWII survivor) notes how the greeting "ciao" is also the first syllable of the dictator's name, and again when a comparison is made between Ceausescu, Hitler, and Stalin.

Psychological trauma caused by fear permeates the novel: "Fear, isolation, and abandonment characterize the lives of the first-person narrator and her three friends...Müller describes how fear acquires a life of its own; it becomes independent of the subject's will." One critic argues that ""Herztier" was written in response to the trauma of life under the Ceauşescu dictatorship, when the citizens of Romania lived in constant fear of the secret police or Securitate." As Müller said in an interview, this fear in the novel is autobiographical as well.

According to Beverley Driver Eddy, "The Land of Green Plums" presents trauma as well as its testimony; the narrator gives her own testimony, and relates it to the testimony of her friends' suffering. The first of these is Lola, the friend who supposedly kills herself; her testimony is preserved in her diary, in which she wrote of her animalistic sexual exploits with nameless men and her struggle to cope with the guilt of having joined the Communist Party in an effort to better herself. For the narrator, preserving Lola's notebook (and sharing it with her three friends) becomes of paramount importance, especially since the memory of Lola was erased days after her death by the Party establishment. Additional complexity comes from Lola's testimony being interwoven in the narrator's own—"a testimony within a testimony." In an interview published in 1998, Müller said that "she is concerned with showing that the childhood experiences have been internalised by the narrator, and that the traumas of the frightened, non-conformist child are replicated to the larger traumas of the adult dissident." In the image of the weeds cut down by the narrator's father, an image presented early in the novel, the parallel between the father and the dictator is evidenced: "both 'make cemeteries' without fear of retribution." One symptom of the trauma this causes in its victims is disconnection, the strain of friendship resulting from lack of trust, disrupting normal human relationships for the remainder of the victim's life. Müller's novel portrays this disconnection and the ongoing trauma for survivors, even after the fall of the dictatorship.

Other critics have focused on different effects of trauma in the novel and in Müller's work in general. Lyn Marven argues that the Müller's poetics and style, characterized by paratactic as well as syntactic and narrative gaps, illustrates one of the effects of trauma: 
"Trauma disrupts the structures of memory...Trauma cannot be integrated into narrative memory and exists only as a gap or blank spot; it therefore cannot be articulated, and returns in the form of surprisingly literal flashbacks, hallucinations, or dreams."Marven notes another effect: a "distorted body image" that often gives rise to a "radical metonymy," a fragmentation, surfacing most notably in a scene where Pjele, during an interrogation, lists the narrator's clothes and possessions, to which the narrator responds by listing her own body parts: "1 pr. eyes, 1 pr. ears, 1 nose, 1 pr. lips, 1 neck." Marven notes that Müller's collages, which the critic says are "central to Müller's œuvre," show the same fragmentation, and says that her "increasingly readable" prose, coupled with recent collages moving toward narrative, might suggest that there is "a possibility of overcoming trauma."(Grazziella Predoui also noted that Müller's prose is developing from parataxis toward more complicated syntax.)

The situation of the Banat-Swabians, the German-speaking minority in Romania, is a recurring theme in Müller's writing. Historically, Germans were recruited by the Austria-Hungary to repopulate southern areas following the expulsion of the Turks of the Ottoman Empire. They were given special privileges, allowed to keep their language and Roman Catholicism, even in areas in which the Orthodox Church was paramount. Their communities spoke German into the 20th century. They were among ethnic Germans, or "Volksdeutsche," whom Adolph Hitler proposed to unite in a greater Germany. Millions of ethnic Germans were expelled from eastern Europe after the war; thousands were forced into labor camps. Even years later, they were often discriminated against in Romania under the communist government.

By the late 20th century, their status is one of the central themes of "The Land of Green Plums"; this idea is explored in detail in Valentina Glajar's 1997 article "Banat-Swabian, Romanian, and German: Conflicting Identities in Herta Müller's "Herztier"." The Banat-Swabian community, of which the narrator is a member, was described by Müller as extremely ethnocentric. Following persecution after the war, while remaining survivors had no desire to emigrate to Germany, they exerted an almost totalitarian control, especially on their children to keep them within their community. Müller had already addressed this topic in her first work, "Niederungen", translated as "Nadirs" in English, in which the German community holds on to its language and habits in an attempt to deny the Romanian dictatorship that rules them. One critic characterized this communal attempt in "Niederungen" as a "mechanistically followed tradition".

According to Glajar, this is the world of the narrator's mother, who writes of her sicknesses in her letters in the hope of keeping her daughter emotionally connected to her home village. The narrator's father was a member of the SS (as were Müller's father and uncle), and is a troubling example of Germanness. The novel proposes a tension inside Romania between the culturally totalitarian atmosphere of the Banat-Swabian community and the politically totalitarian world of Timişoara, where the main characters attend college—between German and Romanian. But the main characters who move to Germany quickly discover that although they were German in Romania, they are Romanian in Germany. They face new social, cultural and linguistic difficulties. Georg commits suicide a few weeks after his arrival in Frankfurt.

The book attracted academic interest, and scholars discussed it in at least three distinct categories: language and style, often in relation to the politics of totalitarianism; trauma studies, given the psychological pressure on the novel's characters, who grow up under a totalitarian regime; and ethnographic and literary studies of the German minority in Romania. On the latter topic, Valentina Glajar, now at Texas State University, published an article in 1997. Müller's "Herztier" is one of the four titles discussed in Glajar's 2004 monograph "The German Legacy," on German-language literature from Eastern Europe.

In the German press, the novel's publication generated modest but positive attention. Rolf Michaelis reviewed the novel at length in "Die Zeit" in October 1994, analyzing the function of fear and praising the book as a "poetic epic", comparing transitions and structure to those found in Homer. "Herta Müller", he wrote, "does not simply use the German language; she makes it her own, in an incomparable way. She invents her own language." A favorable review of the Dutch translation appeared in the national daily newspaper "Trouw" in 1996.

The English translation was likewise favorably reviewed: a review in "The San Diego Union-Tribune" said "this heartbreaking tale is bitter and dark, yet beautiful". Larry Wolff, in his review for "The New York Times", described the book as "a novel of graphically observed detail in which the author seeks to create a sort of poetry out of the spiritual and material ugliness of life in Communist Romania".

"Radio Free Europe" reported that the novel is a favorite of Mohammad-Ali Abtahi, the Iranian pro-democracy activist, who read it (in the Persian translation by Gholamhossein Mirza-Saleh) shortly after being released from prison in 2009.

The IMPAC award drew attention to the novel, and by the end of the year, it had been published in paperback in the US by Hydra Books/Northwestern University Press.

In 2009, Herta Müller won the Nobel Prize in Literature. During the presentation ceremony, Anders Olsson, member of the Swedish Academy, referred to "The Land of Green Plums" as "a masterful account of the flight of a group of youths from the terror regime". Immediately following the announcement, sales of this and Müller's other novels (five had been translated into English by then) skyrocketed: "On Thursday morning, when the award was announced, "The Land of Green Plums", by all accounts Müller's best book, was No. 56,359 on Amazon.com; by the close of business that day, it was No. 7".

"The Land of Green Plums" is the second novel published by Müller since leaving Romania, after "Der Fuchs war damals schon der Jäger" (1992). It appeared in German in 1994, followed by the English translation in 1996. The hardback was published in the United States by Metropolitan Books in November 1996. A Dutch translation was published in 1996. Although French-language Swiss media had shown interest in the author, the novel had not been translated into French by 1998 
After the IMPAC award, paperback editions of Hoffman's translation were published in the United Kingdom by Granta later that year and again in September 1999 (with new cover art.) It was published in the United States by Northwestern University Press in November 1998. In November 2010, after Müller had won the Nobel Prize for Literature, a paperback was released in the United Kingdom and the United States by Picador.


</doc>
<doc id="24653066" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24653066" title="Practice Date">
Practice Date

"Practice Date" is the fourth episode of the second season of "Parks and Recreation", and the tenth overall episode of the series. It originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 8, 2009. In the episode, Ann takes Leslie to dinner to help prepare for her first date, while the rest of the parks department tries to learn secrets about each other as part of a game.

The episode was written by Harris Wittels and directed by Alex Hardcastle. It featured stand-up comedian Louis C.K. in his third guest appearance as Dave Sanderson, a Pawnee police officer who develops a romantic interest in Leslie. The episode also featured a fictional sex scandal mirroring the real-life 2009 scandal of South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford.

"Practice Date" was the first episode to establish the personality of Jerry as the co-worker everyone else in the office picks on, and marked the first of several appearances by Jay Jackson as news reporter Perd Hapley. According to Nielsen Media Research, the episode was seen by 4.97 million household viewers, an improvement over the previous week's episode, "Beauty Pageant". "Practice Date" received generally positive reviews, with several commentators praising it for fleshing out the characters of Ron and Tom.

The episode opens with Leslie (Amy Poehler) and the rest of the Parks department watching media coverage of Pawnee Councilman Bill Dexhart (Kevin Symons), a married man, admitting to having four-way sex in a Brazilian cave while pretending to be "building houses for the underprivileged". He tries to justify it by saying that it was his birthday on the day of the foursome, and that he "...really wanted to do it." Tom (Aziz Ansari) insists nobody could find any scandalous information about him, prompting the parks department employees to start a game to see who can get the most dirt on each other. Meanwhile, Leslie tells Ann (Rashida Jones) she is nervous about her first date with Pawnee police officer Dave Sanderson (Louis C.K.). Ann offers to take Leslie on a practice date to help Leslie prepare for the real date. During the practice date, Ann realizes that Leslie has a serious problem: Leslie brought note cards with "topics of conversation" and engages in fake-sounding "practice laughing."

Ann decides to use exposure therapy on Leslie to help her deal with the worst-case date scenario. She acts very mean to Leslie, who is initially horrified, but she eventually stands up to Ann. When Ann tells her she is now ready for anything, Leslie feels cheered up and very confident. They go to a bar later to celebrate, where Leslie gets very drunk. After leaving Ann, she visits Dave's house to tell him that she was nervous about their upcoming date, but now realizes he is lucky to have her because of how "awesome" she is. A seemingly annoyed Dave brings Leslie home. The next day, Leslie feels horrible for ruining her chances with Dave. He arrives at her office later and she starts to apologize, but he says she can make it up to them on their second date, thereby reassuring her the first date is already over. Leslie once again feels cheered up.

Meanwhile, during the office game, Mark (Paul Schneider) announces Jerry's (Jim O'Heir) adoptive mother was arrested for marijuana possession. A distraught Jerry said he did not know he was adopted, making Mark feel terribly guilty. Later, Ron (Nick Offerman) declares himself the winner when he tells Tom he knows Tom's marriage to Wendy (Jama Williamson) is a green card marriage to prevent her from being deported to Canada. A desperate Tom turns to Mark for help in finding dirt on Ron, and Mark suggests Tom visit an out-of-town bar and speak to Ron's old friend Duke Silver. Tom visits the bar and learns Duke Silver is actually the alter ego of Ron himself, who secretly plays saxophone in a jazz club. Tom confronts Ron, who immediately calls a truce to the game to prevent his secret from getting out (in the Pilot episode, Mark "cashes in" a favor Ron owes him, probably that). After watching more footage of Dexhart, Mark decides he wants Ann to learn all his own dark secrets from him. He visits her late at night and tells him about an affair he had with a married woman at age 16, among other secrets. Although initially confused, Ann is ultimately flattered by the gesture. April (Aubrey Plaza), disappointed nobody found dirt on her, announces she drove a lawnmower through a Nordstrom department store.

"Practice Date" was written by Harris Wittels and directed by Alex Hardcastle. The episode featured stand-up comedian Louis C.K. in his third guest performance as Dave Sanderson, a Pawnee police officer romantically involved with Leslie. Kevin Symons also appeared as Pawnee Councilman Bill Dexhart. The sex scandal involving Dexhart mirrored the real-life 2009 scandal of South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford, who publicly admitted to a long-time extramarital affair with an Argentinian woman.

"Parks and Recreation" co-creator Michael Schur conceived the idea for Ron Swanson's jazz musician alter ego before they learned Nick Offerman actually played the saxophone in real life, and had for his entire life. Offerman praised the decision: "When he came to me and said, 'You're going to have an alter ego who plays jazz saxophone,' I go, 'How do you see inside me?'" After the episode broadcast, NBC created an official "Duke Silver" website, which included a biography, discography, reviews, gallery, tour schedule and booking information for the fictional band.

"Practice Date" marked a turning point for the character Jerry. Prior to the episode, Jerry had appeared in every episode, but his personality had not yet been developed. Schur said the "Parks and Recreation" staff liked Jim O'Heir, so they cast him in the show and "figured we'd work it out later". After the scene when Mark inadvertently reveals Jerry was adopted, the writers built upon that joke and established Jerry as the co-worker the rest of the department picks on. Schur said after "Practice Date", "We realized that's who he is: He's the guy who wants to put his head down and get his pension, but is asking for it all the time. In the next three scripts, it was like throwing chum into the water. Every script after that had 15 slams on Jerry. "Practice Date" marked the first of several appearances by Jay Jackson as Pawnee news reporter Perd Hapley. The character was only originally intended for one appearance, but Schur said the staff enjoyed his performance so much that they made him a recurring character.

Within a week of the episode's original broadcast, three deleted scenes from "Practice Date" were made available on the official "Parks and Recreation" website. The first clip features approximately two minutes of extended scenes, including Leslie talking about her anxiety about the date, Ann offering her advice, a drunk Leslie complaining about the heat in Dave's apartment, which he secretly tells the camera is "freezing cold right now". The second 75-second clip features more of Pawnee City Councilman Bill Dexhart's press conference about the sex scandal. Dexhart refuses to promise he will not continue his transgressions, which he insists is a sign he is no longer lying to Pawnee residents. Reporters also discuss Dexhart's credit card bills, which include purchases Dong-O-Rama Sex Toy Company, Smut Doctors and a product called "vibrating raisins". In the third 75-second clip, Ron discusses in detail his "scientifically perfect ten-point scale of human beauty", the criteria for which he admits is "extremely misogynistic". It also included more footage of Ron's Duke Silver persona, along with interviews by older women who fantasize about him.

Leslie worries she will bring up the genocide in the Sudanese country Darfur too much, or not enough, during her first date with Dave. While describing his scale of the attractiveness of women, Ron says tennis star Steffi Graf is a "perfect ten". Ron believes Tom is wearing the robes of the Taliban, a Sunni Islamist political movement, in a photo he finds for the contest. The photo is actually of Tom wearing a Halloween costume of a Jedi from the "Star Wars" universe. Tom learns one African American co-worker donated money to David Duke, a white nationalist involved in the Ku Klux Klan, because "he promised to lower taxes".

In its original American broadcast on October 8, 2009, "Practice Date" was seen by 4.97 million household viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research. The episode received a 2.2 rating/6 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49. It was an improvement over the previous two episodes, which drew 4.22 million household viewers and 4.63 million household viewers, respectively.

The episode received generally positive reviews, with several commentators praising it for fleshing out more information about the supporting cast, such at Ron's jazz singer persona and the back story behind Tom's marriage and chronic flirting. In an article reflecting on the show's second season, "Slate" magazine writer Jonah Weiner dubbed "Practice Date" the episode in which "Parks and Recreation" "truly hit its stride". In particular, he called the background-check game "a funny, economical way to bring them more vividly to life", and said the green card marriage subplot "at once punctured (Tom's) slimy façade and deepened our sympathies for him". "Entertainment Weekly" writer Henning Fog called "Practice Date" "the most satisfying comedy of the week", even compared to the wedding of Jim and Pam on "The Office" and a "Seinfeld" reunion on "Curb Your Enthusiasm". Fog said the episode "managed to be sweet and sharp and absolutely hilarious" at once, and praised Poehler's improvising and Ron's jazz singer persona, but he said Mark's appearance at Ann's house to confess his life's sins was the episode's "weak spot".

Alan Sepinwall of "The Star-Ledger" said the episode was "completely satisfying - funny when it needed to be, sweet when it wanted to be". Sepinwall said Jones was particularly funny during the fake date, as well as the "constant one-upsmanship" between Ron and Tom. Matt Fowler of IGN said the episode had a "winning formula". He particularly praised Jones during the practice date, as well as Jerry's role during the contest, which Fowler said was a good way to allow the supporting cast to work together. Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club said it seemed like the episode "took everything they were warming up to over the last few weeks, and hit them hard". Heisler particularly praised Poehler's performance, as well as the interactions between Ron and Tom. In contrast, however, A.V. Club writer Leonard Pierce said "Practice Date" "was the first time all year I felt like "P&R" wasn't firing on all cylinders".

"Practice Date", along with the other 23 second season episodes of "Parks and Recreation", was released on a four-disc DVD set in the United States on November 30, 2010. The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode.



</doc>
<doc id="24661033" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24661033" title="Mycena overholtsii">
Mycena overholtsii

Mycena overholtsii, commonly known as the snowbank fairy helmet or fuzzy foot, is a species of fungus in the family Mycenaceae. The mushrooms produced by the fungus are relatively large for the genus "Mycena", with convex grayish caps up to in diameter and stems up to long. The gills on the underside of the cap are whitish to pale gray, and initially closely spaced before becoming well-spaced at maturity after the cap enlarges. The mushrooms are characterized by the dense covering of white "hairs" on the base of the stem. "M. overholtsii" is an example of a snowbank fungus, growing on well-decayed conifer logs near snowbanks, during or just after snowmelt. Formerly known only from high-elevation areas of western North America, particularly the Rocky Mountain and Cascade regions, it was reported for the first time in Japan in 2010. The edibility of the mushroom is unknown. "M. overholtsii" can be distinguished from other comparable species by differences in location, or spore size.

The species was first described by mycologists Alexander H. Smith and Wilhelm Solheim in 1953, on the basis of specimens collected in the Medicine Bow Mountains of Albany County, Wyoming. The specific epithet honors the early 20th-century American mycologist Lee Oras Overholts. It is commonly known as the "snowbank fairy helmet", or "fuzzy foot", although it shares the latter name with "Tapinella atrotomentosa" and "Xeromphalina campanella". "M. overholtsii" has been given the Japanese name "yukitsutsumikunugitake".

"Mycena overholtsii" produces some of the largest mushrooms of the genus "Mycena". They have caps that are in diameter, and convex in shape, developing an umbo (a central protrusion resembling a nipple) in maturity. The cap surface is smooth, moist, and marked with radial striations. The caps are somewhat hygrophanous, and depending on age and state of hydration, range in color from brown or grayish-brown, to dark or bluish-gray. The mushroom flesh is thin and watery, with a light gray color.

The gills have an adnate, adnexed, or shallowly decurrent attachment to the stem, and are initially closely spaced before becoming well-spaced at maturity. They have a whitish to pale gray color, and will stain gray when they are bruised. There are three or four tiers of lamellulae (short gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stem) interspersed between the gills. The stem is long by thick, and tapers upward so that the stem apex is slightly thinner than the base. It can be straight or curved, has cartilage-like flesh, and is hollow in maturity. When growing on soft, well-decayed wood, the stem often penetrates deeply into the substrate. The stem is pinkish-brown in color, and the lower half is tomentose – densely covered with white, woolly hairs. The mushroom has a yeast-like odor and a mild taste; its edibility is unknown, but it is not considered poisonous.

Viewed in deposit, as with a spore print, the spores appear white. Microscopically, the spores are roughly elliptical, sometimes appearing bean-shaped, with dimensions of 5.5–7.0 by 3.0–3.5 µm. They are thin-walled and smooth, and bear an indistinct hilar appendage. The spores are amyloid, meaning they will absorb iodine and turn black to blue-black when stained with Melzer's reagent. The basidia (spore-bearing cells) are four-spored. The cheilocystidia (cystidia on the gill edge), which are scattered and interspersed with basidia, are roughly cylindric to fusoid (spindle-shaped), smooth, hyaline (translucent), and measure 45–65 by 2–5.5 µm. Pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face) are uncommon, and similar in appearance to the cheilocystidia. The cap cuticle is an ixocutis (a fungal tissue type in which the hyphae are gelatinous and lie flat) with mostly smooth hyphae that are 1.5–3.5 µm in diameter. The cap flesh is dextrinoid, meaning it will turn reddish-brown in Melzer's reagent. Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of "M. overholtsii".

Other similar mycenas that grow in clusters on wood include "M. maculata" and "M. galericulata". The fruit bodies of "M. maculata" often develop red stains as they mature, but this characteristic is inconsistent and cannot be reliably used for identification. Its spores are larger than that of "M. overholtsii", measuring 7–10 by 4–6 µm. "M. galericulata" is very similar in appearance to "M. maculata", but does not undergo reddish staining; its spores are 8–12 by 5.5–9 µm. Another similar species is "M. semivestipes", which can be distinguished by its bleach-like odor, an eastern North American distribution, fruiting season during summer and autumn, and small spores measuring 4–5 by 2.5–3 µm.

This species is sometimes found singly, but more often in clusters on well-rotted conifer logs and stumps (often Douglas-fir) near melting snowbanks, or sometimes in moist snow chambers formed by receding snow. Cool nighttime temperatures reduce the snowmelt rate, and help ensure that spores released by the mushroom will be dispersed into the soil. The mushroom is common in western North America, particularly the Pacific Northwest, the Rocky Mountains and the Cascade mountains. It has been reported in four US states: South Dakota, California, Washington and Wyoming, but is not known in Oregon. It is also found in western Canada. The mushroom is restricted to areas with minimum elevations of . In 2010, it was reported growing in the boreal coniferous forests of Hokkaido, Japan, in plantations of Sakhalin fir ("Abies sachalinensis"), as well as in natural forests dominated by both Sakhalin fir and Jezo spruce ("Picea jezoensis"). In North America, the mushroom usually appears between March and July; Japanese collections were made in May. The fruiting period can be prolonged, especially in areas with heavy snowfall, or at high elevations where the snowmelt is delayed.


</doc>
<doc id="24662653" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24662653" title="Worcester Castle">
Worcester Castle

Worcester Castle was a Norman fortification built between 1068 and 1069 in Worcester, England by Urse d'Abetot on behalf of William the Conqueror. The castle had a motte-and-bailey design and was located on the south side of the old Anglo-Saxon city, cutting into the grounds of Worcester Cathedral. Royal castles were owned by the king and maintained on his behalf by an appointed constable. At Worcester that role was passed down through the local Beauchamp family on a hereditary basis, giving them permanent control of the castle and considerable power within the city. The castle played an important part in the wars of the 12th and early 13th century, including the Anarchy and the First Barons' War.

In 1217, Henry III's government decided to break the power of the Beauchamps and reduce the ongoing military threat posed by the castle by returning much of the castle's bailey to the cathedral. Without an intact bailey the castle was no longer valuable militarily, although it played a small part in the Second Barons' War in the 1260s. A gaol had been built in the castle by the early 13th century and the castle continued to be used as Worcestershire's county gaol until the 19th century, when a new prison was built on the north side of Worcester and the old site completely redeveloped. Today nothing remains of Worcester Castle with the exception of Edgar's Tower, a cathedral gatehouse built on the former entrance to the castle.

Worcester Castle was built after the Norman conquest of England in the Anglo-Saxon city of Worcester. The castle was constructed between 1068 and 1069 on the orders of William the Conqueror as part of a wave of royal castle building in major Roman or Anglo-Saxon towns across England. Constructed in timber, the castle had a motte-and-bailey design, with a bailey to the north and south of the motte. The top of the motte was later recorded as being around 18 feet (5.5 m) in diameter. The castle was defensively well situated on the eastern bank of the River Severn in the south-west corner of the borough, taking advantage of the old "burh" walls and ditches. Urse d'Abetot was appointed as the sheriff of Worcester and the constable of the new castle.

Worcester was an urban castle, built within an existing settlement. Many such castles required the clearance of local properties, but unusually at Worcester Castle the ditch of the outer bailey cut through part of Worcester Cathedral's cemetery. It is unclear whether the cemetery was still in use at that time, but the desecration resulted in Ealdred, the Archbishop of York, with extensive interests in Worcester, complaining about the seizure of the land and formally cursing Urse.

Worcester remained a royal castle, but within a few years the post of sheriff and that of constable became hereditary in the Beauchamp family, the successors to Urse d'Abetot. Urse's son, Roger, inherited them, followed by Walter de Beauchamp, who married Urse's daughter, and William de Beauchamp. The castle was effectively run by the Beauchamps, largely independent of the king. Despite controlling Worcester, the Beauchamps preferred to use Elmley Castle, 12 miles (20 k) away, as their main residence. In 1113 Worcester was attacked by Welsh raiders, who broke into the outer bailey of the castle and set fire to the buildings there; the timber castle was destroyed and had to be rebuilt, again in wood.

In the late 1130s a period of civil war – the Anarchy – broke out in England, in which the rival factions of King Stephen and the Empress Matilda contested the kingdom; Worcestershire proved to be a key battleground in the war. The first attack on Worcester itself occurred in late 1139, when an Angevin army from Gloucestershire assaulted the city; after an attempt to take the castle on the south side of the city, the Gloucester forces entered from the north, looting and burning the city. As a result, Walter de Beauchamp chose to side with Matilda. Worcester became a base for Stephen's forces for a period, with Stephen replacing Walter as the constable with Waleron de Beaumont, before the city and castle were reclaimed for the Empress by Robert of Gloucester. In response, Stephen first stormed and burnt the city in 1148, and then attacked it again in 1150, shortly before the end of the conflict. Two neighbouring siege castles were built by Stephen as part of these operations, designed to contain Worcester Castle itself, one at Henwick Hill the other at Red Hill. After the conflict, Walter was finally reaffirmed as the constable of Worcester Castle by Henry II, the Empress's son.

By the end of the 13th century, William de Beauchamp – the grandson of Walter de Beauchamp – controlled the castle on behalf of the king. In the 12th century there was a trend in England for stone castles to replace their earth and timber counterparts, and in 1204 King John ordered the sheriff of Worcester to rebuild the gatehouse "which is now of timber, with good and fine stone". John's work cost £25, and was one of a number of repairs and improvements during the period: £12 was spent maintaining the castle in 1183, for example, while in 1192 £5 4s was spent on the internal buildings and in 1203 work on the stables came to £6 3s.
Civil war broke out again in England in 1215 between forces loyal to King John and rebel barons, supported in due course by Prince Louis of France. John annexed the castle in 1214 and William sided with the rebels in 1216. King John responded by sending forces to attack the castle and successfully retook it. Despite John's death, the war continued until forces loyal to John's young son, Henry III, finally achieved victory over the rebels in 1217.

Meanwhile, the 11th century dispute over the cathedral graveyard had continued unabated and in 1217 Henry III's government decided to announce that the disputed land would be granted to the cathedral. A panel met to agree exactly how the land should be divided, concluding that the division should run straight across the bailey; the far side was returned to the cathedral, making the remainder of the castle unusable from a military perspective. Henry thus ingratiated himself with the church and broke the power of the Beauchamps in the city by crippling their local fortress.

The castle nevertheless continued in use for a time, partially because the Worcestershire County gaol was situated in the outer bailey; the earliest record of this gaol is from 1221, when a porter was recorded as being employed as a gaoler. The gaol appears to have been built of wood during the medieval period. Escapees remained a problem; some were recorded during the 1220s, and during Second Barons' War, Worcester was captured and all the prisoners released. Later in the same war, Henry III was imprisoned there for a period by Simon de Montfort.
The castle was also used as one of the locations for the Worcestershire county court and election of local officials.

The sheriffs of Worcestershire continued to control the castle as constables, and the property passed along hereditary lines from the Beauchamps to the Earls of Warwick until Richard Neville, also known as the "Kingmaker", died during the Wars of the Roses in 1471. The victorious Edward IV divided up the various estates that Neville had owned and gave the castle to his son, severing the link between Worcester and the earldom of Warwick. The final constables were appointed during the 1540s, after which the practice of appointing constables ceased altogether. The castle's walls were quarried for stone, the motte was used to keep animals on and only the sheriff's county gaol remained intact. The antiquarian John Leland recorded in the 1540s that the castle was "now clean down", and that the motte was still of an impressive size but heavily overgrown. A gatehouse known as Edgar's Tower was built by the cathedral on the site of the earlier castle gatehouse, to control access to the former bailey.

In 1628 the castle site was granted by the Crown to Giles Clutterbuck; the local gentry complained, leading to a legal case in which the county successfully reclaimed the site. In 1642 England descended into a period of civil war between the Royalist supporters of Charles I and the supporters of Parliament. Worcester's city walls were refortified and a sconce, or small fort, was built on top of the motte of Worcester Castle.

The castle continued to be used as the county gaol after the war and in 1653 a new gaol, built from stone and brick, was constructed in the castle grounds. In the 1770s the prison reformer John Howard inspected the gaol and was very critical of the facility. In particular he complained about the castle's underground dungeon, accessed down a flight of 26 steps; the room was circular, 18 feet (5.5 m) across, and guarded by an iron grill. Worcester conducted extensive work after the report at a cost of £3,431 (£364,000 at 2009 prices), and by 1788 the prison had 18 new cells for men and two for women, in addition to the dungeon and the sick-rooms. Nevertheless, it was housing 74 inmates at the time of Howard's inspection, with two prisoners routinely sharing each cell, sleeping together on the floor. Like other prisons of the time, Worcester Castle was run as a private enterprise, in this case by a local butcher, who was paid £150 a year (£15,400) to run the facility. The prison was known to suffer from outbreaks of gaol fever, which claimed the life of a local doctor who visited the facility.

A new county gaol was built in 1814, at a cost of £20,000 (£1.1m) with a more modern system of radiating wings; this was constructed on the north side of Worcester where the local street was named "Castle Street" as a result. The Dean and Chapter of Worcester Cathedral acquired the old gaol in 1823. The outer bailey of the castle became known as the College Green; the College Green was accessed through Edgar's Tower. The motte was slowly demolished between 1823 and 1846.




</doc>
<doc id="24690355" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24690355" title="History of the Galveston Bay Area">
History of the Galveston Bay Area

For a period of over 7000 years, humans have inhabited the Galveston Bay Area in what is now the United States. Through their history the communities in the region have been influenced by the once competing sister cities of Houston and Galveston, but still have their own distinct history. Though never truly a single, unified community, the histories of the Bay Area communities have had many common threads.

Prior to European settlement the area around Galveston Bay was settled by the Karankawa and Atakapan tribes, who lived throughout the Gulf coast region. Spanish and French explorers traveled the area for many years gradually establishing trade with the local natives. In the early 19th century the pirate Jean Lafitte created a small, short-lived empire around the bay ruled from his base on Galveston Island before his being ousted by the United States Navy.

Following Mexico's independence from Spain, the new nation established long-term settlements, including Anahuac and San Jacinto, around the bay. Early rebellions by the settlers against Mexican rule occurred in the region and it was later the site of the victory of the Texas army over the Mexican army during the Texas Revolution. Following Texas' independence from Mexico and its annexation by the United States, economic growth was centered initially on agriculture and cattle ranching. Commerce grew between Galveston, Harrisburg and Houston in the later 19th century, and created additional economic opportunities as railroads were built through the Bay Area to connect these and other commercial centers.

In the early 20th century, the region gave birth to some of the state's earliest oil fields and refineries as the Texas Oil Boom took hold. Refining and manufacturing grew rapidly in the area, particularly around Baytown, Pasadena, and Texas City. The opening of the Port of Texas City, and later Barbours Cut and Bayport, gradually established the region as an important shipping center. As wealth increased in southeast Texas, resorts and other tourist draws developed in the Bay Area. During the 1960s the area became home of the Johnson Space Center, headquarters for the nation's manned space program, which helped diversify the regional economy and began the development of an aerospace industry, and later other high-tech industries.

The present geography of the Gulf Coast was formed during an ice age approximately 30,000 years ago when dramatic lowering of the sea level occurred. As the ice later melted, it formed a flow through the Trinity and San Jacinto rivers and carved wide valleys in the soft sediments, resulting in the creation of the modern system of bays and lakes approximately 4,500 years ago.

Humans first entered the region as early as 10,000 years ago following migrations into the Americas from Asia during the ice age. Research has indicated that the first settlements around Galveston Bay may have been constructed around 5500 BCE. The first ceramics appeared around 100 CE, and arrow points around 650 CE. When Europeans first entered the region there were still significant numbers of Native Americans living there. Along the southern coast around the Colorado River and Matagorda Bay and up toward Galveston Bay lived the Capoque tribe, a branch of the Karankawa people. The northeast was inhabited by the Akokisa, or Han, tribe as part of the Atakapan people's homelands. The Karankawa were migratory hunter-gatherers. Their diet included deer, bison, peccary, and bears, in addition to fish, oysters, nuts, and berries as they were available. They used portable huts for shelter. Dugout canoes were used to travel the many internal waterways and the coast, an advantage that initially gave them tactical superiority over the Europeans. The Akokisa in the area were similarly hunter-gatherers, and utilized canoes for transport. They became well-known among the Europeans for their hide-tanning abilities, especially for bear hide. During the 18th century the Akokisa population in the area was estimated at about 3,500.

Though earlier surveys of the coastline had been made, the first known Europeans to land in the vicinity were under the command of Spanish explorer Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca when he and his crew were shipwrecked in 1528, though it is unclear precisely where they landed. Though subsequent explorers described cannibalism among the local tribes, Cabeza de Vaca made no mention of the practice. He and the other survivors left the area as soon as they were able traveling to safety into Mexico.

The Rivas-Iriarte expedition, one of several Spanish maritime expeditions charting the Gulf Coast, performed a detailed scientific exploration of the Galveston Bay in 1687, probably the first such exploration. A 1785 expedition by José Antonio de Evia charting the Gulf Coast gave the bay and the island the name "Galveztown", or "Galvezton", for the Spanish Viceroy Bernardo de Gálvez.

During the early 18th Century, French traders first began trade with the Akokisa and the nearby Bidai tribes for furs. In 1754 several traders including Joseph Blancpain established a trading post on the Trinity River a just north of the bay, near modern Wallisville. Spanish authorities quickly seized the post and transformed it into the San Augustín de Ahumada fort. They named the site El Orcoquisac and established a Catholic mission. The Spanish were not successful in maintaining trade with the natives and the post was abandoned within a few years. Encroachment by Spanish as well as U.S. settlers continued such that by the end of the century native populations had declined dramatically due to disease and territorial pressures from the Europeans.

In 1816 Galveston Island was claimed by the pirate Louis-Michel Aury as a base of operations to support Mexico's rebellion against Spain. Aury was succeeded as leader by Jean Lafitte, the famed Louisiana pirate and American hero of the War of 1812. Lafitte, at the time serving as a privateer for the Spanish Empire, transformed Galveston Island and the bay into a pirate kingdom he called Campeche. He established bases for smuggling and ship repair on the Trinity River near the bay and at Eagle Point (modern San Leon). His gang also created a hide-out on the shores of Clear Lake. As late as 1965, treasure from this era was discovered at Kemah. In response to the piracy, the United States Navy ousted Lafitte from the island in 1821 and the colony was abandoned. Some settlers in the region remained such as Anson Taylor who had supplied produce and game from the Clear Lake area for Campeche.

In the early 19th century following the Louisiana Purchase, Texas, particularly southeastern Texas, had become an increasing point of contention between Spain and the United States. Various failed attempts, such as the Long Expedition, were made by groups from the U.S. to take control of parts of Texas, resulting in some temporary settlements near the bay including Perry's Point near modern Anahuac. Spanish authorities began efforts to colonize Texas to help protect its claim to the territory. Hoping to spur settlement, the Spanish government granted land to pioneers from the United States, including Moses Austin.

Soon afterward, though, Mexico declared its independence from Spain and moved to establish its own control over Texas. Because of fears of the indigenous tribes, officials found it difficult to find settlers in Mexico willing to move into the territory's coastal areas, and therefore continued to allow settlers from the United States into the area with the promise of allegiance to Mexico. Austin's son, Stephen F. Austin, established a colony which extended from east central Texas to Galveston Bay and the Gulf Coast. Some of Austin's original "Old 300" settlers, including John Dickson, William Scott, and John Iiams, established homesteads and commercial enterprises around the bay. The Port of Galveston and a permanent settlement were established on the island in 1825 to spur trade. Communities including Lynchburg, San Jacinto, and Campbell's Bayou (founded by one of Lafitte's former officers) were gradually established around the bay. In addition to the Anglo-American and Mexican settlers in the area, a Cajun settlement was established along Armand Bayou. The Mexican Colonization Law of 1824, however, forbade the creation of settlements near the coast with the intention of protecting the native tribes in the area. The law was not enforced and settlers continued to encroach upon tribal lands. Native tribes remained in the area years afterward but were gradually driven out as European settlers moved into the region. The Akokisa were driven inland where they merged with the Bidai. The Karankwa were driven southward where they eventually established their current homelands in northeastern Mexico.

The Galveston Bay and Texas Land Company was formed in New York in 1830 to promote additional settlement around Galveston Bay and other parts of southeast Texas. The company gradually brought in many colonists from the United States and Europe, although conflict with Mexican officials over colonization laws initially made these efforts difficult. In 1830, Mexican authorities created a customs and garrison post near the bay commanded by Juan Davis Bradburn. The post, which later became the modern city of Anahuac, was the first major outpost on the mainland shores and temporarily replaced Galveston as a port of entry. New Washington (modern Morgan's Point) and Austinia (within modern Texas City) were also founded by settlers from the company. Conflicts between Bradburn and the settlers in the region over land rights, slavery laws, and customs duties led to the Anahuac Disturbances, a prelude to the larger Texas rebellion. As a result, Mexican authorities were driven out of eastern Texas and the settlers began to discuss independence.

Following a coup in the Mexican government, Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna became president and revoked many freedoms previously enjoyed by the Texans further deteriorating the government's relations with the region's settlers. Texas declared its independence and revolted in 1835. Following a number of battles with the Mexican army, the Texas army, under the leadership of General Sam Houston, finally defeated Santa Anna in the Battle of San Jacinto, near modern Pasadena.

The new Republic of Texas grew rapidly. The shores of the bay were initially home to farms and ranches. Longhorn cattle, which had roamed wild throughout Texas, became free resources for producing hides and beef shipped throughout North America. The famed Allen Ranch was established near Harrisburg in what is now southeast Houston and Pasadena, in addition to the Bay Lake Ranch and other ranches established around the bay. The range land of these ranches came to encompass most of the terrain around the bay south of the San Jacinto River. Cedar Bayou (part of modern Baytown), Shoal Point (part of modern Texas City), and other small communities began to develop during this period. Eagle Point (part of modern San Leon) became an important shipping and trading post for slaves.

Inland from the bay, the towns of Harrisburg and Houston were both founded on the Buffalo Bayou by entrepreneurs from New York and competed as commercial centers, but neither was as significant as Galveston. Throughout the 19th century these three cities developed increasing influence on the Bay Area communities, particularly as railroads were built through the region.

Multiple hurricanes struck the region during this time and after. Though none during the 19th century were catastrophic, they nevertheless caused substantial damage and caused some loss of life.

Texas succeeded in its bid to join the United States in 1845, one of the key causes of the subsequent Mexican–American War. Texas' annexation brought more people to Texas. Ranching interests expanded around the bay, along with the growth of the farming and lumber enterprises in the region. The construction of the Galveston, Houston and Henderson (GH&H) Railroad, begun in 1857, further spurred more growth in the region.

During the American Civil War, in which Texas seceded from the United States, the area served a limited role in the conflict though no major battles were fought on the mainland shoreline. New fortifications, like Fort Chambers near Anahuac, were constructed to ward off a mainland invasion by Union forces and to protect supply routes to and from Galveston. The GH&H Railroad was used in the recapture of Galveston by Confederate forces in 1863. Makeshift hospitals, such as the Nolan home in Dickinson, were established in the bayside communities.

In the aftermath of the war the Texan economy declined for a period. Nevertheless, ranching interests became major economic drivers spawning many other economic enterprises like hide processing plants and shipping companies. Some former slaves were able to take advantage of ranching's economic influence as some successful African American communities were established, including the "Settlement" in what is now League City. The success of the various enterprises in the area and the growth of Galveston as one of the prime commercial centers in the South and Southwest helped promote the construction of the Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway, and the La Porte, Houston and Northern Railroad over the course of the 19th century. These railroads built lines near the southwest shore of the bay and led to the creation of La Porte, Clear Creek (modern League City), Webster, Edward's Point/North Galveston (modern San Leon), and others (eventually including Texas City). Toward the end of the century, as ranching's profitability declined, many communities turned increasingly to agriculture. The farming community of Pasadena was established during this time. By the end of the 19th century, the land south of Buffalo Bayou came to be known as the "Texas Fruit Belt" for the oranges, pears, grapes, and other fruits and vegetables grown in the area. The Sylvan Beach park was created at La Porte as a beachfront summer getaway from Houston. With amenities including bathhouses, boating piers, and a Victorial hotel with a dance pavilion, Sylvan Beach quickly became the most popular tourist destination in the Houston area.

In 1900 a massive hurricane devastated the city of Galveston and heavily damaged communities around the bay. According to some estimates the death toll on the coast outside of Galveston may have been over one thousand. Bridges between Galveston and the mainland were destroyed. Communities along the shoreline declined for some time as economic growth moved inland and Houston became the dominant economic center in Southeast Texas. The region received a population boost from some Galveston refugees who relocated to the mainland following the catastrophe.

The sparsely populated communities around the bay transformed during the 20th century. Following the devastating 1900 hurricane, donations by the newly created Red Cross, including millions of strawberry plants to Gulf Coast farmers, helped revive area communities. This and the subsequent establishment of a major strawberry farm in the area by Texaco founder Joseph S. Cullinan made Pasadena an important fruit producer for many years afterward. The newly established community of Texas City opened its port and railroad junctions shipping cotton and grain. In fact, because the port had opened just before the 1900 hurricane, it was able to handle Galveston's diverted shipping traffic until the island's damaged port was repaired. Following another hurricane in 1915, the Texas City Dike was built to protect the Texas City ship channel from sediment movement in future storms, thus helping to build confidence in the safety of the port. One of the most immediate effects of the dike, however, was to increase the salt levels in West Bay, between Galveston and the southwest coastline.

Major tracts of the Allen Ranch were liquidated opening up new development around Pasadena and other bayside communities. Commercial fishing for oysters and shrimp grew as a significant area industry. The lumber industry also continued to grow. A sugar refinery opened in Texas city, a paper mill in Pasadena, and other factories in the early 20th century.

Following the petroleum discovery at Spindletop (roughly from Galveston Bay) in 1901 Texas entered an era of economic development known as the Texas Oil Boom. Petroleum exploration at Galveston Bay began shortly afterward with the discovery of the Goose Creek Oil Field in 1903. The first well at Goose Creek was built in 1907 with significant production beginning in 1908 (in 1924 it was the state's third largest field). In 1915 the first offshore oil drilling site in the state was opened at Goose Creek. Gradually other oil fields were discovered around the bay as well, including the Anahuac oil field in 1935. The first refinery by the bay was built in 1908 at Texas City, followed by refineries in Baytown and Pasadena. The main refinery in Baytown, built by Humble Oil (now ExxonMobil), became the largest in the state.

The wealth brought on by the boom transformed the region. The population increased rapidly due to significant immigration from within the United States, from Mexico, and overseas. Mexicans, fleeing the Mexican Revolution in 1910, added significantly to the population of what is now Baytown; Sicilian immigrants added greatly to the community of Dickinson; and Japanese rice farmers settled in Webster, Pasadena, and League City (in fact the rice industry on the U.S. Gulf Coast was born in Webster; see Seito Saibara). Major manufacturing centers developed throughout the Bay Area with Houston acting as the corporate and financial center for the boom. Wealthy Houstonians created waterfront retreats in Morgan's Point and a boardwalk amusement park at Sylvan Beach, La Porte (together known at the time as the Texas "Gold Coast"), as well as summer homes at Seabrook and other communities. The onset of Prohibition made Galveston Bay an important entry point for smuggling illegal liquor, which supplied most of Texas and much of the Midwest. Boats arrived at locations ranging from Galveston to Seabrook. The Maceo crime syndicate, which operated in Galveston at that time, created casino districts in Kemah and Dickinson and other areas of Galveston County. Houstonians often humorously referred to the county line as the "Maceo-Dickinson line" (a pun referring to the Mason-Dixon line). Much of the area around Clear Lake was developed as recreational properties for the wealthy, including a large ranch estate owned by Houston businessman James West. Though the Great Depression closed many businesses in the area petroleum-related growth helped offset the effects.

During the World Wars, factories around the bay were pressed into service mass-producing a variety of products including aviation fuel, synthetic rubber, and ships. The first tin smelter outside of Europe was opened in Texas City becoming one of the world's main suppliers. The population in the Bay Area grew faster than even Houston as processing plants and factories were built and expanded. Ellington Air Force Base was built to the southeast of Houston (adjacent to modern Clear Lake City) and became a major air field and flight training center during the wars.

Industrialization and urbanization during the earlier 20th century led to the pollution of the bay. By the 1970s the bay was described by some sources as "the most polluted body of water in the U.S." The ship channel and Clear Lake were rated by some sources as having even worse water quality. Drilling for oil and underground water, as well as large wakes from increasing shipping in the bay, led to land subsidence and erosion along the shoreline, especially in the Baytown-Pasadena area. Today approximately of the historic San Jacinto battleground are submerged, most of Sylvan Beach is gone, and the once prominent Brownwood neighborhood of Baytown has had to be abandoned.

In 1947, an explosion on a ship at the Port of Texas City caused fires and destruction throughout the city's industrial complex and other ships creating one of nation's worst industrial accidents. The tragedy caused more than five hundred deaths, more than four thousand injuries, and more than $50 million in damage ($ million in today's dollars). Though the city's growth and prosperity were interrupted, the city and the business leaders were able to rebuild.

The war effort had brought about significant diversification in the area's industrial base. This diversity facilitated the area's transition to a peacetime economy though the petroleum industry again became a major focus. In 1952 the Gulf Freeway, then part of U.S. Route 75, was completed providing a fast automobile link between Houston and Galveston. The new freeway, considered an engineering marvel at the time, greatly encouraged new development in the western region of the bay.

Hurricane Carla, Texas' largest storm on record, struck the coast in 1961 causing substantial flooding and damage in Texas City and other communities. Loss of life was minimal thanks to evacuation efforts. Expansion of the flood control dike and construction on the Texas City seawall occurred a result. The project was completed in 1985.

NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) was established in the area in 1963. That and the explosive growth of neighboring Houston in the mid-20th century, especially the 1970s and 1980s, caused the remainder of the communities on the southwestern shore to urbanize. The Clear Lake City community was created by the Friendswood Development Company, a venture of Humble Oil and Dell E. Webb Corporation, to support residential growth near the new NASA facility. The communities around Clear Lake rapidly reoriented toward aerospace related industries, and the region's economy diversified further. Urban development spread solidly between Houston and the Bay Area communities. Houston formally annexed most of Clear Lake City in 1977 with Pasadena annexing most of the rest. Most of the other communities around the bay, however, had already incorporated, or incorporated soon afterward, and thus were independent of the metropolis.

The economic boom of the 1970s and early 1980s that took place in Texas (because of the escalation in oil prices) benefited the Bay Area communities significantly. Industrial operations were expanded including the opening of the U.S. Steel plant in Baytown in 1970, and the Barbours Cut shipping terminal at Morgan's Point in 1977. The Port of Texas City became the third leading port in Texas by tonnage and ninth in the nation. The Barbours Cut terminal, operated by the Port of Houston, became the seventh leading port in the nation. Not all of this development was without controversy, however. In building Barbours Cut, the Port of Houston used its power of eminent domain to evict residents from nearly one third of the homes in Morgan's Point. Still, when the Texas economy declined in the later 1980s, the economic diversity of the area and substantial annual federal investments related to JSC helped the region fare better than most of Greater Houston.

Conservation efforts in the mid to late 20th century by area industries and municipalities helped to dramatically improve water quality in the bay. The Nature Conservancy and Houston's Outdoor Nature Club (ONC) helped encourage nature preservation efforts including creating the Anahuac National Wildlife Refuge, the Armand Bayou Nature Center, and the Texas City Prairie Preserve. Tourism in the area grew, especially around Clear Lake, led in large part by the Space Center. Some former resort communities of the early 20th century like Kemah and Seabrook re-emerged. The lake itself today holds one of the largest concentrations of marinas in the world.

During the later 20th century and afterward, many of the communities and businesses in the area began cooperative efforts, including the Clear Lake Area Chamber of Commerce, the Bay Area Houston Economic Partnership, and the Bay Area Houston Transportation Partnership, to create a distinct economic and civic identity for the region and to plan regional development. Though most of the communities in the region have been incorporated into municipalities, a few unincorporated communities remain under the extra-territorial jurisdiction of neighboring towns. These include San Leon, Bacliff, and Smith Point. The communities of San Leon and Bacliff, despite their seaside location, their proximity to the relatively prosperous Clear Lake Area, and the development of summer resort communities there in the early 20th century, have suffered economic decline since the mid-20th century and are among the least affluent parts of the Bay Area today.

In 2008 Hurricane Ike struck the coast causing substantial damage both environmentally and economically. the ecology of the region is still in recovery with damage caused by both natural pollution (sea salt) and man-made pollution (chemicals washed into the freshwater and the bay) still showing dramatic effects on both the marine and land-dwelling wildlife. Commercial fishing and oyster farming are expected to take decades to fully recover. Most major industry was able to return to normal operations but some tourist areas have taken longer to recover.

Discussions of a proposal to build an "Ike Dike" that would protect the Bay Area, particularly the nationally critical Houston Ship Channel, were begun in 2009. the project is still in the conceptual stage.





</doc>
<doc id="24721236" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24721236" title="Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo">
Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo

"Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo" is the twenty-fifth episode of the second season of the animated television series "Phineas and Ferb," and the 72nd overall episode of the series. It originally aired on Disney XD in the United States on September 21, 2009. In the episode, Phineas and his stepbrother Ferb travel into the future and have their time machine stolen by their older sister Candace, now an adult, who travels back in time to get her brothers in trouble during one of their outlandish schemes. In doing so, however, she sets off a chain reaction leading to a dystopian future ruled by the evil Dr. Doofenshmirtz.

"Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo," written by Scott Peterson and directed by Zac Moncrief, was rated TV-G in the United States. The episode was conceived as a means of expanding the time machine plot that was introduced previously in the episode "It's About Time." Dan Povenmire and Jeff "Swampy" Marsh, co-creators of "Phineas and Ferb," centralized plot elements to satirize time travel films, such as "The Time Machine" (1960) and the "Back to the Future" trilogy (1985-1990). Multiple scenes in the episode were meant to be rather confusing and difficult to understand in order to interest viewers so they would watch the episode multiple times, trying to learn something new each time.

The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics. In its original broadcast, it ranked fourth in the key demographics Boys 6–14, Kids 6–11 and Boys 6–11, totaling 599,000 viewers, an 88 percent increase from that of the previous year's ratings in the timeslot. When it premiered on Disney Channel, it was the thirteenth-highest-ranked cable program for the entire week. It guest starred actors Jennifer Stone, Moises Arias, Noah Munck, and Jennifer Grey, along with the band Bowling for Soup, who appeared as themselves playing an extended version of the series' theme song, "Today is Gonna Be a Great Day," which was also included on the official "Phineas and Ferb" soundtrack which was released on September 22, 2009.

Phineas and his stepbrother Ferb learn from their friend Baljeet that a tool they need for their latest project has yet to be invented. They and their friend Isabella borrow the time machine on display at the local museum to travel twenty years into the future. Once they arrive, Isabella stays behind with the time machine while the boys enter their sister Candace's backyard, where her sons Fred and Xavier are sitting under a tree doing nothing. The boys convince their future nephews to be active and in return are given the tool they need. As they leave, Candace spots them and it brings back upsetting memories of never being able to bust the boys. She takes her mother Linda to the museum where the boys leave, right before Linda can see them.

Professor Onassis, who invented the time machine in the 1800s, arrives in the original version of the machine soon after and future Candace steals it. She travels back to the day the boys built the rollercoaster in their backyard and succeeds in getting her mother to see them, finally fulfilling her dream of busting them. However, in doing so, she accidentally leads Perry, their pet platypus who is secretly a suave secret agent, to be injured while stopping an evil magnet mechanism. As a result, Perry's nemesis, Dr. Doofenshmirtz, comes out unharmed from the effects of the now-destroyed machine. Over time, everything is altered and the Tri-State Area becomes childproof for fear of a repeat of Phineas and Ferb's dangerous activities. Doofenshmirtz eventually gains the upper hand, effectively becoming the ruler. He claims to be a nice Emperor, though, since he can remember everyone's name (though this is considerably easier than it seems, since one of his rules is that everyone has to be named Joe and requires everyone to wear lab coats at all times). Also, because of Doofenshmirtz succeeding, the Agency is now forced into a oath to obey him, resulting a demoralized Perry to fail more on his missions against Doofenshmirtz and is forbidden to use the time machine that Candace previously used as suggested by Major Monogram. After arriving in the dystopian future Doofenshmirtz rules, Candace finds the time machine in a junk yard and returns to the day of the rollercoaster to stop herself from interfering like before, stopping the dystopia from occurring.

The time machine gets destroyed so the two Candaces go to the backyard to convince the boys to fix the current time machine in the museum and take them back, creating a paradox and as a result, the Candace from the bleak future(wearing a white lab coat as seen in the picture above) ceases to exist. The boys then fix the machine. Isabella says to Ferb that a rollercoaster ride and time travel was a bonus. The present Candace tags along with her future self, Phineas, Ferb, and Isabella as they travel to the future (while Candace "finally" busting them in the process, but the future Linda is not angry at the boys, saying she doesn't have jurisdiction to bust the boys anymore). As Candace and the boys talk to the future Linda, Isabella sparks an idea and travels back in time. After returning to the present time, Candace leaves in victory, now happy that she had finally (technically) busted her brothers. During the credits, it reveals Isabella obtained the tool and gave it to the boys before they even time traveled in the first place. This causes them to change their minds about going into the future, thus, canceling out all the events that happened earlier in the episode and also causing all the characters involved in the future to cease existence (also erasing the "busting" present Candace caused, thus possibly causing a time loop). In "Summer Belongs To You", Phineas mentions time traveling twice and Isabella comments that Phineas has traveled through time "twice", but because of the events in the credits of Quantum Boogaloo, no-one - including Isabella should actually know about the time-traveling.

During this episode, it is implied that Isabella marries either Phineas or Ferb, though none of the characters remember this. It is also implied that Phineas wins at least one Nobel Prize as the future Linda says the future Phineas is "in Switzerland for the Awards Ceremony." Ferb is likely President of the United States as he is stated to be "at Camp David", a resort specially made for Presidents since Eisenhower, although his British birth, and not being 35 years old yet, would ordinarily prevent this. A more likely scenario would be that Ferb is married to Vanessa, and is at Camp David with his wife President Vanessa Doofensmirtz as she would fit both the birth and age requirement.

"Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo" was written by Scott Peterson and directed by Zac Moncrief. "Phineas and Ferb" had previously produced an episode in season one's "It's About Time" which featured a time machine. Co-creator Dan Povenmire stated that he enjoyed the outcome of said episode. The writers purposely left the time machine available for the boys' use at the end of the episode so that they could reuse it in a later episode. Eventually, they conceived a plot where "Phineas and Ferb go into the future and actually see Candace as an adult (which) drags up all kinds of memories of not being able to bust them."

The scenes in which Candace travels back to the Phineas and Ferb building a roller coaster are taken from the pilot episode, "Rollercoaster." Including the scenes was "great fun" for Povenmire and fellow co-creator Jeff "Swampy" Marsh, who decided early on that using it would have "future Candace go back to the rollercoaster . Then whatever she did would affect the future, in this case give Doofenshmirtz the upper hand and effectively change history." The inclusion was inspired by the "" episode "Trials and Tribble-ations," in which the "Deep Space 9" crew travel back in time to the "" episode "The Trouble with Tribbles." The novel approach was viewed by Marsh as "a great way to interweave a story."

The crew spent a long amount of time plotting out the episode in a room, using sticky notes, in order to make sure it played out sensibly and was clearly understandable to viewers. The production staff based a lot of the usage of time travel in "Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo" on those from the "Back to the Future" trilogy (1985-1990) and H. G. Wells' "The Time Machine" (1960). The goal of the crew was to make sure everything stayed strong to a certain logical standpoint, which led to several surreal conversations, including several paradoxes involving time travel. The crew members sought to venture into elements that seemed complicated, as their children viewers were deemed intelligent enough to understand such elements. The hopes of the production staff was to make the episode one that they could watch multiple times and notice something new with each viewing.

Since Doofenshmirtz and Perry's actions tend to affect those of the boys, the choice to have future Candace's interference in the past greatly affect those of Doofenshmirtz and Perry's was considered the logical choice. Povenmire explained, "They affect each other in ways that we never fully understand, but if you throw off that little balance of power of their [respective] activities, all hell could break loose." The song Doofenshmirtz sings, entitled "It's Been a Charmed Life," was well-praised by the production crew, who felt that it was considerably well-handled. The song centralized the irony surrounding Doofenshmirtz having everything go well for him, a theme completely different from that which is generally touched upon in the series.

The scene where Candace mentions that her best friend Stacy Hirano had become the president of Uruguay was originally written as a throwaway joke for the episode. During an e-mail exchange between the crew, some crew members were curious about the line and Povenmire came up with an entire back story, in which Stacy meets the prince of the country, moves there and, after changing several laws, becomes eligible for the presidency. The staff enjoyed the idea and wrote it down as a possible plot for a future episode.

"Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo" featured multiple guest appearances. Actress Jennifer Stone guest starred as Amanda, Candace's future daughter. Stone researched actress Ashley Tisdale's performance as Candace on YouTube to better grasp the attention needed on the voice role. Stone recorded her lines a long time before the final animation came in and was feeling impatient about how the end results would come out. Moises Arias, who is, according to Stone, "like [her] little brother," voiced Candace's future son, Fred. Actress Jennifer Grey also appeared as a librarian. Grey's character in "Ferris Bueller's Day Off" was the inspiration for Candace and the actress had previously portrayed Doofenshmirtz's professor in "Oil on Candace."

"Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo" originally broadcast on September 21, 2009, on Disney XD. Like all episodes of "Phineas and Ferb," it carried a TV-G parental guidance rating. The song "Today is Gonna Be a Great Day" is available on the official "Phineas and Ferb" soundtrack, which was released on September 22, 2009, a day after the episode's broadcast.

"Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo" serves as a parody of time travel films, particularly the "Back to the Future" film series and H. G. Wells' "The Time Machine." Candace stealing the time machine to change something in the past, thus creating a dystopian future, mirrors the scene in "Back to the Future Part II" (1989), in which Biff Tannen steals the Delorean time machine and causes a dark and chaotic future in the process. In the future, the American pop-punk band Bowling for Soup appears and performs an extended version of the series' theme song. The band members were designed to look twenty years older and having gained weight.

"Phineas and Ferb's Quantum Boogaloo" ranked fourth in its timeslot, in the demographics Boys 6–14, Kids 6–11 and Boys 6–11. It averaged 599,000 total viewers, an 88 percent increase over the previous year's record for the timeslot. In Kids 6–14, it outranked previous year's records by 152 percent. In Boys 6–14, it claimed over a 121 percent increase, in Boys 6–11, it garnered an over 116 percent increase, and in Boys 9-14, an over 138 percent registered increase. When the episode aired on Disney Channel for the first time, it was watched by 2.7 million American households and 3.9 million individual viewers, placing it at number 13 in cable network ratings for the entire week.

The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics. Matt Blum of "Wired" called it "probably the geekiest episode of the show so far". Blum praised the joke about Stacy becoming the president of Uruguay and called Doofenshmirtz's song "It's Been a Charmed Life" "heavy irony." Paige Wiser of the "Chicago Sun-Times" considered the episode one of September 21's television highlights, writing that she "could not be more excited." "News OK" listed the episode on its "Top 55 TV Programs for Sept. 20-26, 2009", and all three guest stars appeared on its list of "Top 30 Guest Stars on TV Shows airing Sept. 20-26, 2009". Povenmire considered the episode one of his favorites of the series.




</doc>
<doc id="24769784" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24769784" title="Ila (Hinduism)">
Ila (Hinduism)

Ila () or Ilā () is an androgyne deity in Hindu mythology, known for their sex changes. As a man, he is known as Sudyumna and as a woman, is called Ilā. Ilā is considered the chief progenitor of the Lunar dynasty of Indian kings – also known as the Ailas ("descendants of Ilā").

While many versions of the tale exist, Ila is usually described as a daughter or son of Vaivasvata Manu and thus the sibling of Ikshvaku, the founder of the Solar Dynasty. In versions in which Ila is born female, she changes into a male form by divine grace soon after her birth. After mistakenly entering a sacred grove as an adult, Ila is either cursed to change his/her gender every month or cursed to become a woman. As a woman, Ilā married Budha, the god of the planet Mercury and the son of the lunar deity Chandra (Soma), and bore him a son called Pururavas, the father of the Lunar dynasty. After the birth of Pururavas, Ilā is transformed into a man again and fathered three sons.

In the Vedas, Ilā is praised as Idā (), goddess of speech, and described as mother of Pururavas.

The tale of Ila's transformations is told in the Puranas as well as the Indian epic poems, the "Ramayana" and the "Mahabharata".

According to the "Linga Purana" and the "Mahabharata", Ilā was born as the eldest daughter of Vaivasvata Manu, the progenitor of mankind, and his wife Shraddha. However, the parents desired a son and so prayed and performed austerities to propitiate the deities Mitra and Varuna, who changed Ilā's gender. The boy was named Sudyumma. The "Bhagavata Purana", the "Devi-Bhagavata Purana", the "Kurma Purana", the "Harivamsa", the "Markandeya Purana" and the "Padma Purana" (referred to as ""Bhagavata Purana" et al. texts" further) narrate a variant: Ila's parents could not have any children for a long time and approached the sage Agastya for a solution. The sage performed a yajna (fire sacrifice) dedicated to Mitra and Varuna to attain a son for the couple. Due to either an error in the ritual, or a failure to offer the appropriate sacrifice, Mitra and Varuna instead sent a daughter to the couple. In one version, the couple supplicated the deities, who transformed Ilā's gender. In another version, this transformation happens after the erroneous hymns are rectified and the son is called Ila. According to a variant, Shraddha wished for a daughter; Vashistha heeded her wish while performing the sacrifice and thus, a daughter was born. However, Manu desired a son so Vashistha appealed to Vishnu to change the gender of his daughter. Ilā was renamed Sudhyumna. The accounts describe Ila as either the eldest or the youngest child of Manu. As the child of Manu, Ila had nine brothers, the most notable was Ikshvaku, the founder of the Solar dynasty. As the son of Manu, Ila is the grandson of Surya. According to another account found in the "Vayu Purana" and the "Brahmanda Purana", Ilā was born female and remained female.

In the "Ramayana", Ila is born as a son of Kardama, the Prajapati born of the god Brahma's shadow. Ila's tale is told in the "Uttara Kanda" chapter of the Ramayana, while describing the greatness of the Ashvamedha – the horse sacrifice.

In the "Ramayana", the "Linga Purana" and the "Mahabharata", Ila grows to become the king of Bahlika. While hunting in a forest, Ila accidentally trespassed Sharavana ("Forest of Reeds"), the sacred grove of the goddess Parvati, the consort of the god Shiva. Upon entering Sharavana, all male beings except for Shiva, including trees and animals, are transformed into females. In the "Ramayana", even Shiva had assumed the form of a female to please the goddess. One legend tells that a female "yakshini" disguised herself as a deer and purposefully led Ila to the grove in order to save her husband from the king. The "Linga Purana" and the "Mahabharata" emphasize the sex change of Ila to be a deliberate act of Shiva to start the Lunar dynasty. The "Bhagavata Purana" et al. texts tell that Ila's entire entourage as well as his horse also changed their genders.
According to the "Ramayana", when Ila approached Shiva for help, Shiva laughed with scorn but the compassionate Parvati reduced the curse and allowed Ila to switch genders every month. However, as a male he would not remember his life as a female and vice versa. While Ilā roamed the forest in her new form with her female attendants, Budha, the god of the planet Mercury and the son of the moon-god Chandra, noticed her. Although he had been practising asceticism, Ilā's beauty caused him to fall in love with her at first sight. Budha turned Ilā's attendants into "Kimpurushas" (hermaphrodite, lit. "is it a man?") and ordered them to run away, promising that they would find mates as Ilā had.

Ilā married Budha and spent an entire month with him and consummated the marriage. However, Ilā woke one morning as Sudyumna and remembered nothing about the past month. Budha told Ila that his retinue had been killed in a rain of stones and convinced Ila to stay with him for a year. During each month she spent as a woman, Ilā had good time with Budha. During each month as a man, Ila turned to pious ways and performed austerities under the guidance of Budha. In the ninth month, Ilā gave birth to Pururavas, who grew to become the first king of the Lunar dynasty. Then, as per the advice of Budha and Ila's father Kardama, Ila pleased Shiva with a horse sacrifice and Shiva restored Ila's masculinity permanently.

Another legend from the "Vishnu Purana" credits Vishnu of restoring Ilā's manhood as Sudyumma. The "Bhagavata Purana" et al. texts tell that after Pururavas's birth, the nine brothers of Ila – by horse sacrifice – or the sage Vasistha – the family priest of Ila – pleased Shiva to compel him to give the boon of alternate month manhood to Ila, turning him into a "Kimpurusha". The "Linga Purana" and the "Mahabharata" record the birth of Pururavas, but do not narrate the end of Ila's alternating gender condition. In fact, the "Mahabharata" describes Ilā to be the mother as well as the father of Pururavas. According to another account found in the "Vayu Purana" and the "Brahmanda Purana", Ilā was born female, married Budha, then was transformed into a male called Sudyumna. Sudyumna was then cursed by Parvati and transformed once again into a female, but became a man once again through Shiva's boon.

In almost all versions of the tale, Ila wants to live as a man, but in the "Skanda Purana", Ila desires to be a woman. The king Ela (Ila) entered Parvati's grove at Sahya mountain and became the woman Ilā. Ilā wished to remain a woman and serve Parvati (Gauri) and Ganga, the goddess of the Ganges river. However, the goddesses dissuaded him. Ilā bathed in a sacred pool and returned as Ela, bearded and deep-voiced.

The descendants of Ilā through Pururavas are known as Ailas after Ilā or as the Lunar Dynasty (Chandravamsa) due to their descent from Budha, the son of the moon-god Chandra. Most versions of tale call Ilā the father as well as the mother of the Ailas. The "Linga Purana" and the "Mahabharata", in which Sudyumma's curse does not end, state that as a male, Sudyumma also bore three sons named Utkala, Gaya and Vinatashva (also known as Haritashva and Vinata). The three sons ruled the kingdom for their father as Sudyumma was unable to do so himself due his alternating gender. The sons and their principalities are called the "Saudyumna"s. Utkala, Gaya, and Vinatashva ruled Utkala country, Gaya, and eastern regions including northern Kurus respectively. With the assistance of the family priest Vasistha, Sudyumma regained control of the entire kingdom. He was succeeded by Pururavas.

In the "Matsya Purana", Ila was disinherited after becoming a female or "kimpurusha". Ila's father passed his inheritance directly to Pururavas, ignoring the three sons Ila-Sudyumma bore as a male. Pururavas ruled from Pratishtanapura (present-day Allahabad), where Ila stayed with him. The "Ramayana" says that having returned to manhood, Ila ruled Pratishtana while his son Shashabindu ruled over Bahlika. The "Devi-Bhagavata Purana" tells that as a man Sudyumma governed the kingdom and as a woman remained indoors. His subjects were disturbed by his sex changes and did not respect him as they once had. When Pururavas attained adulthood, Sudyumma left his kingdom to Pururavas and went to the forest for penance. The sage Narada told Sudyumma a nine-syllable mantra, "Navakshara", which would please the Supreme Goddess. Pleased with his austerities, the Goddess emerged before Sudyumma, who was in his female form Ilā. Sudyumma praised the Goddess, who merged the king's soul with herself and thus, Ilā gained salvation.

The "Bhagavata Purana", the "Devi-Bhagavata Purana" and the "Linga Purana" declare that Ila ascended to heaven with both male and female anatomy. Ila is considered the chief progenitor of the Lunar Dynasty through Pururavas and of the Solar Dynasty through his brother Iksavaku and sons Utkala, Gaya, and Vinatashva. The marriage of Ilā, a descendant of the Sun, and Budha, the son of the Moon, is the first union of the solar and lunar races recorded in the scriptures.

In Vedic literature, Ilā is also known as Idā. Idā in the "Rigveda", signifies food and refreshment, personified as the goddess of speech. Ilā-Idā is also associated with Sarasvati, the goddess of knowledge. Ilā-Idā is mentioned a number of times in the "Rigveda", mostly in the hymns known as "Āprīsūkta"s. She is often mentioned along with Sarasvati and Bharati (or Mahi) and Pururavas is described as her son. Idā is the instructor of Manu, in performing ritual sacrifices. According to Sayana – a commentator on the Vedas – she presides over the Earth.

In the "Shatapatha Brahmana", Manu performed a fire-sacrifice in order to have children. Idā emerged from the sacrifice. She was claimed by Mitra-Varuna, but she lived with Manu and together they initiated the race of Manu. In this text, Idā is the goddess of the sacrificial meal. She is described as the "Mānavi" (daughter of Manu) and "Ghṛtapadī" (with the ghee-dripping foot) and she is represented by a cow, also known as Idā during a sacrifice. Pururavas is mentioned as the son of Ilā in the text.




</doc>
<doc id="24811736" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24811736" title="EastEnders: E20">
EastEnders: E20

EastEnders: E20 (sometimes just E20) is a British Internet soap opera, which began airing on 8 January 2010. A spin-off from the established BBC soap "EastEnders", it is set in "EastEnders" regular setting of Albert Square, a Victorian square in the fictional borough of Walford, in the East End of London. Each series follows a group of teenage characters: Zsa Zsa Carter (Emer Kenny), Leon Small (Sam Attwater), Fatboy (Ricky Norwood) and Mercy Olubunmi (Bunmi Mojekwu) in series 1; Asher Levi (Heshima Thompson) and his brother Sol (Tosin Cole), Naz Mehmet (Emaa Hussen), and Stevie Dickinson (Amanda Fairbank-Hynes) in series 2; and Ava Bourne (Sophie Colquhoun), Donnie Lester (Samuell Benta) and Faith Olubunmi (Modupe Adeyeye) in series 3. The show's title comes from Walford's fictional London postcode district, E20. The four characters from series 1 also appear in "EastEnders", as well as Faith from series 3.

"EastEnders: E20" originally aired as part of the main show's 25th anniversary celebrations. It was devised in a bid to develop and nurture new talent, including writers, actors, composers and remixers, and target a younger audience, as well as to attempt to drive more people onto the Internet. The series was the idea of executive producers Diederick Santer, who wanted a show where regular "EastEnders" characters would be in the background, and John Yorke, who wanted to improve the portrayal of teenagers in "EastEnders" and to get younger people writing for it.

The show's writers, all newcomers aged between 17 and 22, were selected through a writing competition, and created the series at a BBC summer school. The theme tune was also selected through a competition, promoted on BBC Radio 1. The show primarily operates as a standalone series but also cross-references storylines of the main soap, and features cameo appearances from several of the regular characters from "EastEnders". The episodes are between three and 16 minutes each in length and are available via "EastEnders" official website. Omnibus editions were also available on BBC iPlayer, BBC Red Button and, from April 2010, BBC Three.

"EastEnders: E20" was conceived by executive producer Diederick Santer as part of "EastEnders" 25th anniversary celebrations. Described as the "naughty little brother or sister to the main show", it was devised in a bid to target younger viewers and to develop and nurture new talent. Executive producer John Yorke, who oversaw the show, and is also controller of BBC drama production and new talent, said "Fundamentally the whole idea of the show is it's a training ground for new talent, be that acting, writing, composing, remixing, everything. The fact is because it's online, we can take risks." Nevertheless, the makers said they knew they had to get it right because "the eyes of the World Wide Web would be watching."

Santer conceived the idea of a "parallel universe show" with new characters, where the regular characters are in the background. Yorke sought to improve the portrayal of teenagers in "EastEnders" and to get younger people writing for it. The ideas came together and "EastEnders: E20" was created in what Yorke described as "one of the quickest periods from idea to screen I've ever known." Regarding the decision to create an online drama, Yorke said, "People don't watch television at fixed times anymore, they use iPlayer [to] get it at their convenience and so it made sense to make a programme that [viewers] can specifically get at their convenience." The show's producer, Deborah Sathe, added, "Technology is changing and it's changing really quickly and I think it's really appropriate that the BBC is leading the way in offering online content." The first series was commissioned by multi-platform commissioning executive Rosie Allimonos.

Another incentive for the show was to get more people to use the Internet. Sathe stated that it was an opportunity for younger people to bring the older members of their families onto the internet, and Yorke hoped that it would bring people onto the internet who had not used it before. Simon Nelson, BBC Vision controller of multiplatform and portfolio, said that this was an opportunity for the BBC to develop its expertise in drama production by exploiting the creative potential of the Internet to create a new online drama where few have succeeded. "EastEnders: E20" primarily operates as a standalone series but also cross-references storylines of the main soap. According to Santer, the series also explores the stories of the soap's anonymous bystanders. He said, "There are always other people [in "EastEnders"] milling round the market and houses that we never go into. There are four or five parallels you could do. It will be nice to see well-known characters through strangers' eyes. Ian Beale may show up and he is just a strange, irritating man. Or they might ask: 'Who is that moody girl in the market?' And it will be Stacey Slater."

The second series was announced on 8 April 2010, brought back by Santer's successor, Bryan Kirkwood and commissioned by Sarah Clay. Nelson explained "We had no hesitation in commissioning another series, something which will delight the 17,000 fans who've been calling for more episodes on the "E20" Facebook page." Script producer Peter Mattessi promised that the second series would take the characters to darker, scarier and more unattractive parts of their personalities, writer Muge Ahmet said it would be sexier, and Sathe stated there would be big secrets, while writer Alex Oates said that the show and the writers had grown up a lot since the first series. The "Daily Star" newspaper reported that the second series would be more controversial than the first, including scenes of drug dealing and violence.

With the return of the series, Sathe explained that some of the show's writers had already worked with the "EastEnders" team on storylines for the characters they had created, and hoped this would continue as the "E20" brand develops, and that the show would become a "junior version" of the BBC Writers Academy. Series 2 sees the introduction of street dance to the series to give it an "authentic East End flavour of youth". The episodes were made all the same length following complaints about the length of episodes in the first series and the decision to show the series on BBC Three. Social networking site Twitter was also used to introduce teasers, with four of the characters having their own profiles.

A third series was announced on 27 September 2010, commissioned by BBC Learning, as part of a new BBC strategy to provide learning opportunities for all audiences. Saul Nassé, Controller of Learning, said, "I want to use BBC programmes that are known and loved by audiences that can serve as springboards for learning. [...] We'll be enlisting the help of the BBC's best talent to maximise the reach of our output," and Sathe commented, "We are thrilled with the success of the first two series and have already started to storyline the third. Be prepared for a few familiar faces, a couple of new ones and a lot of fireworks." It was confirmed that Learning would fund the third series and work with young people to develop storylines "that bring to life subjects in the Personal, Social, Health Education (PSHE) curriculum such as bullying or peer pressure." A regional schools tour was organised to tie in with the launch of the series, with pupils writing short scenes based on scenarios tying in with the PSHE curriculum, which were performed, filmed and edited. Sarah Miller, BBC Learning commissioner and executive producer of series 3, explained: "The schools tour was a terrific opportunity to deliver powerful face-to-face workshops, giving students and teachers the opportunity to develop key media production skills and to get behind the scenes of a top BBC drama."

The show was produced by television newcomer Deborah Sathe. The production process for series 1 took about six months, from commissioning to the final cut. Yorke stated that, "Television takes a notoriously long time to make and one of the joys of doing this online is that it's been incredibly quick, about a quarter of the time it would take a normal show to get off the ground. It's smaller, it's easier to do and also there's a collective will for it to succeed."

The first series was written by a team of 13 writers from London aged between 17 and 22 who responded to a writing competition and attended a summer school in August 2009 as part of the BBC's new talent initiative, where they created the entire series. The summer school took place over four weeks, with the first two weeks in Theatre Royal Stratford East and the last two at the BBC centre at Elstree Studios. The writers did not know they would be writing a spin-off to "EastEnders" until they arrived. The writers, including Florence Vincent, Alex Oates, Kashman Harris and Emer Kenny, also wrote the ten episodes of series 2. They are from various parts of London, which Sathe said was "brilliant" as they represent different parts of life in London, and they have grown up with the Internet as a native medium. Santer stated that the writers created a new Walford, calling it a "fresh perspective on a British classic." The writers were given a day to travel around East London to listen to people talking to get ideas. Sathe commented: "We created some brilliant scenes from the eavesdropping stuff." After the summer school, the writers were commissioned to write the 12 episodes of series 1. Some of the scripts were allowed by be changed by the actors if they thought lines were not authentic, such as the use of London street slang. Sathe considered the use of slang to be a highlight of the series, calling it her proudest moment. Storylining and character creation for series 2 started in January 2010. The third series used mostly different writers to the first two. Each potential writer had to send in a monologue for a character they would like to see on television and the production team chose their favourites. The writers were then asked to write a scene between their character and one of the established "EastEnders" characters. Following this, the writers were interviewed and the most promising fifteen were selected. Kenny returned as a writer for series 3 and was joined by several of the young "EastEnders" cast members: Arinze Kene (Connor Stanley), Himesh Patel (Tamwar Masood) and Charlie G Hawkins (Darren Miller).

"EastEnders: E20" was filmed on the same set as "EastEnders", using three handheld cameras to give it a more "edgy" feel compared to "EastEnders", which is filmed with cameras on tripods. Director Michael Keillor stated that although using handheld cameras is normally easier, the fact it was shot with a multiple-camera setup made it more challenging and created problems for the lighting and props teams as nobody knew exactly where the camera would be. Keillor said it was a "particularly tough day" when filming a party scene in a flat, as normally walls of the set would be removed but all the walls were left in to make it look more realistic, meaning the crew overheated. Series 1 was filmed over ten days with approximately 120 minutes of television being shot. Each of the first series' 12 episodes are between three and 16 minutes in length. The second series features 10 episodes averaging 14 minutes each, which was a response to complaints from viewers about the length of some of the episodes in series 1. Series 3 began production in May 2011, and took about four weeks to film.

Unlike "EastEnders", "E20" uses incidental music, which Scott Matthewman of "The Stage" said makes it feel like an episode of "Hollyoaks", a Channel 4 soap opera targeted at a teen audience. A remix of the "EastEnders" theme tune was created for the series, with members of the public submitting remixes in a competition held on the BBC website. The competition opened on 11 November 2009 and was officially launched on 13 November by Annie Mac on her BBC Radio 1 show. More than 250 entries were submitted. They were reduced to four and judged by Sathe, Santer, Keillor, original theme tune composer Simon May, and BBC Radio 1Xtra's DJ Ace. The winner, 21-year-old Carl Darling, was announced on 4 December 2009. He said "I was very excited to hear that my track was chosen by such an eclectic judging panel. And to spend time in the BBC studios and walking around the Square was phenomenal. I have grown up hearing Simon May's original theme tune and watching Albert Square and the iconic Queen Vic, so I feel very privileged to be a part of "EastEnders: E20" history!" Darling explained that he wanted to keep all the "essential features" of the original theme, but to make a grimy drum and bass version.

Additionally producers worked with BBC Introducing to give unsigned bands and musicians the chance to have their music used on the series 2 soundtrack, and grime music producer Aiden "S.K.I.T.Z Beatz" Hogarth was appointed music director and composer, having been unable to take the role for series 1. He said "For "E20" I will be providing all the best and what's current from the underground and mainstream music scene and instead of having the music playing out of stereos and stalls, we've taken the step to compose and source music as a soundtrack. Something seasoned "EastEnders" fans may not be familiar with. I honestly think that the viewers are ready for a refreshing and brand new take on how music direction for this show and others like it should be done."

Casting of the new characters for series 1 was announced on 25 November 2009. Open auditions were held at Theatre Royal Stratford East, followed by recalls until the possible actors were reduced to eight and then four. Yorke described it as a "painful process" and they had difficulty finding someone to play Zsa Zsa Carter. Emer Kenny was cast in the role whilst writing the second episode. Yorke said "She was so good that we suddenly went, 'It's her! Kenny said, "I'm really thrilled to have been given the opportunity to both write for and act in a show connected with such an iconic drama as "EastEnders". Kids these days use their laptops more than their televisions, so it's really exciting to be a part of a project that's taking drama online and connecting with these viewers." To prepare for the role, Kenny had to disguise her "posh" accent, saying that when the director asked her what she would do about her voice, she travelled around the East End to listen to the way people spoke.

On his casting in the role of Fatboy, television newcomer Ricky Norwood said, "It's an honour to now be a part of [the] show. I am born and bred in the East End [so] it feels like a homecoming." Norwood adapted his own use of slang into the character to "try and bring it and from a true place." Bunmi Mojekwu, who plays Mercy Olubunmi, commented "I feel so blessed to be part of "EastEnders: E20". My first day on set was just crazy. I was on Albert Square – a dream come true – I'm enjoying every second." Sam Attwater, who previously appeared in five episodes of "Hollyoaks", was cast as boxer Leon Small. On his casting, he commented, "It's a great privilege to be working with such great actors and on such an established show. It's an amazing opportunity and I'm really enjoying tackling a character like Leon who has so much going on," He prepared for the role by attending a gym, as the character has a lot of topless scenes. He said: "As soon as I heard that I was straight down the gym. Lots of crunches. Everyone said don't worry about it, but every time I did one of those scenes I had to watch it back and see how it looked because there will be 10 million people watching it. I want to be on the best form."

The cast for series 2 were announced on 29 July 2010. Heshima Thompson and Tosin Cole were cast as brothers Asher and Sol Levi. Cole, who has previously starred in a modern adaptation of Shakespeare's "Julius Caesar", said, "It's a privilege to work on something so big but so different. Everyone is fantastic to work with. I'm really excited." Thompson, who has appeared in "The Bill" and "Spooks", stated "It's a great project to be a part of and I get to dance so this is going to be fun." Emaa Hussen was cast as Naz Mehmet, her first professional acting role, on which she commented: "it's a really exciting place to start my career. I'm from East London and a big fan of "EastEnders", which is one of the reasons I wanted to do the show." Finally, Amanda Fairbank-Hynes, who appeared in "An Education", said of her casting as Stevie Dickinson, "It all happened so quickly but I'm really excited to be working on "EastEnders". It's an amazing group of people and they are great to work with." Additionally, "Hollyoaks" actress Roxanne McKee, and dance acts Flawless and Avant Garde also make appearances. Flawless were asked to appear in the show by Sathe, who has previously worked with Marlon Wallen from the troupe.

Each of the first series' episodes were made available on varying days of the week at 8.30pm via "EastEnders" official website, starting on 8 January 2010 and ending on 25 January 2010. The series was also available in three omnibus shows on BBC iPlayer and via BBC Red Button after the "EastEnders" omnibus aired on BBC One. The first omnibus, comprising episodes 1–4, was available for one week from 17 January. The second omnibus was available for one week from 24 January, containing episodes 5–8. Episodes 9–12 were available as an omnibus from 31 January 2010. Additionally, the series was re-edited into three 30-minute editions and shown weekly on BBC Three from 23 April 2010.

The second series began on 7 September 2010, with two episodes being made available weekly on Tuesdays and Thursdays, excluding episode 2, which was available on a Wednesday. The series comprises 10 episodes in total of around 14 minutes each, and was also screened in five omnibus editions on BBC Three on Monday nights. Series 3 comprises 15 episodes of around 10 minutes each. Extra footage, such as video blogs and behind-the-scenes clips, is also available online. All episodes from all three series remain available to view on the BBC website.

Each series features new teenage characters who move to Walford, as well as cameos from existing characters from the main show. The characters are described as sixth form students trying to escape from "family problems and crises of their own making". Series 1 follows Zsa Zsa, Fatboy, Mercy and Leon, who move into 89b George Street in Walford. Leon, Fatboy and Zsa Zsa also appeared briefly in "EastEnders" in January 2010 before "EastEnders: E20" started, and returned as regular characters when "EastEnders: E20" ended. It was later announced that due to positive reaction to the character, Mercy would also join "EastEnders" later in 2010. Series 2 follows brothers Sol and Asher, plus Naz and Stevie. Sathe said there was a "good chance" that they would also appear in "EastEnders" at some point. Zsa Zsa, Mercy and Leon also have cameo appearances in series 2, and Fatboy has a recurring role. Series 3 follows newcomers Ava, Donnie and Faith, Mercy's sister. Donnie's younger sister, Riley, also appears along with Richard, a care worker. Naz and Sol also make a cameo appearance. Fatboy continues his recurring role, along with Mercy and Faith's grandmother Grace Olubunmi, and regular "EastEnders" character Zainab Masood.

Between 8 and 21 January 2010, "EastEnders: E20" material available via the "EastEnders" website and BBC iPlayer, including episodes, behind the scenes videos and extra content, received 1.7 million views. By 19 February 2010, the episodes had 2.8 million views with additional content pushing the total to 3.3 million. Santer was reported to be "knocked out" by the figures, saying: "For our little side project, something that started life as an experiment, to go so big is very exciting. I'm delighted in particular that the 13 young London writers who wrote the series have reached such an audience with their first professional work." "EastEnders: E20" official Facebook fan page grew in membership from 100 to 5000 in a matter of hours after the spin-off started, and as of 19 February 2010, had over 16,000 fans. Yorke said that due to the popularity of the first series, they hoped to make further spin-offs. The first BBC Three omnibus edition on 23 April 2010 received 302,000 viewers and a 1.4% audience share according to overnight figures. by 13 October 2011, series 3 had gained viewing figures across both BBC Online and BBC Three of 1.2 million viewers, and a 50% increase in its online audience since it launched on 20 September 2011. Sathe commented: "I am thrilled to see E20 has sustained its position as a front-runner in online drama." Grace Dent of "The Guardian" described the series as "rather brilliant", while Patrick Smith of "The Daily Telegraph" called it "vibrant" and Tony Stewart of the "Daily Mirror" called Zsa Zsa an "impressive" character. However, website Watch With Mothers gave a negative review of the show, saying "there’s no need for it." After the first episode of series 2 was available, Scott Matthewman from "The Stage" said "while it's good to have more black and minority ethnic characters in the Square, by concentrating on a very narrow age range of characters it'll make it all the harder for any new blood to effectively mesh into the full show."

In 2010, "EastEnders: E20" was shortlisted for a Banff World Television Festival award in the Original Online Programs category. In April 2011, the show was nominated for a Webby Award in the Drama category. Sathe commented on this: "I am so proud of what we have achieved with EastEnders: E20, and to be nominated for a Webby proves how far the series has come." The show went on to win the award, on which Yorke stated, "To win such a prestigious award is a huge honour for all the team—and proof that the "EastEnders" brand is as brave and innovatory as it was when it first started, a quarter of a century ago." In December 2011, Sathe won the Creative Innovation Award at the Women in TV & Film Awards for her work on "E20".

In 2012, Benta received a Screen Nation Awards nomination in the Emerging Talent category for his role as Donnie, while Adeyeye received a special mention for her role as Faith. The same year, the series was nominated in the Best Soap category at the Virgin Media TV Awards.




</doc>
<doc id="24814721" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24814721" title="Sister City (Parks and Recreation)">
Sister City (Parks and Recreation)

"Sister City" is the fifth episode of the second season of "Parks and Recreation", and the eleventh overall episode of the series. It originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 15, 2009. In the episode, Leslie welcomes a delegation from Venezuela, who act disrespectfully toward Pawnee and the United States.

The episode was written by Alan Yang and directed by series co-creator Michael Schur. It featured "Saturday Night Live" performer Fred Armisen in a guest appearance as Raul, the head of the Venezuelan delegation. According to Nielsen Media Research, the episode was seen by 4.69 million household viewers, a drop from the previous week. The episode received generally positive reviews.

Leslie (Amy Poehler) and the Pawnee parks department prepare for a visit by park department officials from Boraqua, Pawnee's Sister City in Venezuela. Leslie warns her co-workers the Venezuelan government officials will likely be poor, simple people. Later, the Venezuelan delegation arrives, headed by their parks department vice director Raul Alejandro Bastilla Pedro de Veloso de Morana, the Vice-director Ejecutivo del Diputado del Departamento de Parques, L.G.V. (Fred Armisen), Antonio, Jhonny and Elvis. There are cultural clashes right away, like when they mistake Tom (Aziz Ansari) for a servant and order him to get their bags. They also mistakenly believe they can choose any woman to have sex with; they all favor Donna (Retta). Raul and Leslie exchange gifts during a meet-and-greet party, where Raul and the Venezuelans act condescendingly toward the Pawnee residents, making offensive remarks about the town and mocking the gifts Leslie gives them. They continue to give orders to Tom, who follows along because they give him large cash tips.

The Venezuelan intern Jhonny (JC Gonzalez) falls in love with April Ludgate (Aubrey Plaza), who convinces him she is feared and very powerful. Jhonny is crazy and fell in love for April and sent her his car to pick her up but she used his car to go to movies with her friends. Meanwhile, Leslie tells the Venezuelans that she is seeking to raise $35,000 to fill in a pit to make a park. Raul and his colleagues start to laugh, telling her they have so much money from oil, they can build whatever they want. Leslie, who is growing increasingly annoyed with the Venezuelans, decides to take them to Pawnee's nicest park with hopes of impressing them. Instead, they are disgusted, and Raul mistakes the park for the aforementioned pit. Leslie later takes them to a public meeting to show them democracy in action, but all of the citizens shout angry and annoyed questions at Leslie. An unimpressed Raul wonders where are the armed guards to take the protestors to jail. When Raul tells Leslie they live like kings in Venezuela and answer to nobody, she explodes in anger, insulting their uniforms and Hugo Chavez. The Venezuelans storm out.

Leslie calls a meeting and apologizes to Raul, who in turn apologizes as well and offers Leslie a check for $35,000 to fill in the pit. Leslie fears it may be "dirty money", but accepts. During a photo opportunity later, Raul sets up a video camera and asks Leslie say "Viva Venezuela" and "Viva Chavez" to it. Against her wishes, Leslie reluctantly does so. When Raul starts speaking Spanish to the camera, Leslie asks April to translate, and learns Raul is discussing his "Committee to Humiliate and Shame America". A furious Leslie tears up the $35,000 check and shouts "Viva America", prompting Raul to declare Pawnee is no longer their sister city and storm out. Leslie insists she will raise the money to build the park without them and Tom, inspired by her example, secretly puts all the tip money he made from the Venezuelans into the park donation jar. The episode ends with Leslie and Tom later receiving an online video from April, who tells them she and Donna are vacationing with Jhonny (JC Gonzalez) in his Venezuelan palace, which is watched over by armed guards.


"Sister City" was written by Alan Yang and directed by series co-creator Michael Schur. The episode featured comedian Fred Armisen in a guest appearance as Raul, the vice director of a Venezuelan parks department. Armisen was a cast member of NBC's sketch comedy show "Saturday Night Live", where he previously worked with performer Poehler and writer Schur. Armisen has played Venezuelan characters before, and previously imitated President of Venezuela Hugo Chavez on "Saturday Night Live". Armisen said he got into character by thinking about his uncle, who is from Venezuela. But he said it was not a difficult performance because "most of the joke is the uniform", which included a tan military-style jacket with medals, a red beret and a sash with the colors of the Venezuela flag. The uniform also included a fictional seal designed by Schur, which included an image of Chavez, machine guns, an oil tower, a lion and a parrot.

Schur said of the episode's plot, "They're very confused because in Venezuela the government is so powerful; their parks department travels with military escorts and motorcades and stuff. They have all the money in the world because of their oil and they (don't understand) why Pawnee's parks department is so rinky-dink." A fan of "Parks and Recreation" since its inception, Armisen said he laughed as soon as he read the script, and found it even funnier during the table read with the cast. After working with Armisen, Rashida Jones described him as "one of the funniest people on the planet".

Within a week of the episode's original broadcast, three deleted scenes from "Sister City" were made available on the official "Parks and Recreation" website. In the first 100-second clip, Ron talks about his hatred for socialism, and Raul says he fears Ron because of his mustache, which he said makes him "cower in fear" (repeatedly saying the word 'mustache'). In the second minute-long clip, Raul discusses the medals he received for his parks-related accomplishments, including "doing away with people making speeches in the parks", "organizing the garbage so it's not all over the place" and "looking at the leaves". In the third 100-second clip, Raul and the Venezuelans question why Leslie does not have a giant oil painting of herself in her office. After his final argument with Leslie, Tom refuses to follow Raul's orders to open the door for him, and Raul has trouble opening it because "it's been a while since I've done this".

"Sister City" largely portrayed Chavez and his socialist ideology in a negative light. The script portrays the Venezuelans as belittling and contemptuous toward Americans. They repeatedly claim Pawnee and the United States are inferior compared to the power and splendor they are accustomed to in Venezuela. Their negative attitude toward Americans is particularly demonstrated by the name of their delegation, the Committee to Humiliate and Shame America, as well as the line from one of the delegates, "This is not personal. We just think you are weak and your city is disgusting."

While discussing how many television channels he gets in Venezuela, Raul said he already knows who wins "Project Runway", a fashion design reality television show on the Bravo network. In trying to maintain composure in the face of insults from the Venezuelans, Leslie said she was following the example of U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, of whom she said, "Nobody takes a punch like her. She's the strongest, smartest punching bag in the world." Raul says his city is also a sister city to Kaesong, North Korea, which he said is "far nicer" than Pawnee.

In its original American broadcast on October 15, 2009, "Sister City" was seen by 4.69 million household viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research. It was a drop from the previous week's episode, "Practice Date". "Sister City" received a 2.0 rating/6 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49. The episode received generally positive reviews. "Entertainment Weekly" writer Henning Fog said "Sister City" continued a trend of excellence in the second season that has established "Parks and Recreation" as NBC's best comedy. Fog said the episode also further expanded its characters, by showing Leslie is not a complete pushover and Tom is a kind person.

Salon.com writer Heather Havrilesky called the episode an "instant classic", and particularly praised the guest performance of Fred Armisen. She said the episode "benefits from the show's writers' increasing habit of giving everything from political scandals to lame local events the Onion treatment". Alan Sepinwall of "The Star-Ledger" said it was "another strong one", and said the Leslie character is growing less clueless and more three-dimensional. Robert Philpot of the "Fort Worth Star-Telegram" said he believed the show still too closely resembled "The Office", but that "Sister City" "showed that "Parks and Recreation" can equal "The Office" for comic discomfort". Fowler of IGN said the anti-American sentiment demonstrated by the Venezuelan delegation "was a funny twist that didn't completely wear itself out, although it came close". Fowler particularly praised Armisen, who he said risked overshadowing the regular cast, and the sardonic comedy of Plaza. Not all reviews were positive. The A.V. Club writer Leonard Pierce, who said he felt the second season had been excellent so far, described "Sister City" as "easily the weakest episode of the season, maybe the series". Pierce called the political overtones "ham-handed", the humor was too over-the-top, and the episode suffered from the absence of most of the supporting cast.

"Sister City", along with the other 23 second season episodes of "Parks and Recreation", was released on a four-disc DVD set in the United States on November 30, 2010. The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode. It also included a commentary track for "Sister City" featuring Amy Poehler, Fred Armisen, Alan Yang and Michael Schur.



</doc>
<doc id="24816402" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24816402" title="1941 Texas hurricane">
1941 Texas hurricane

The 1941 Texas hurricane, the second storm of the 1941 Atlantic hurricane season, was a large and intense tropical cyclone that struck coastal Texas as a major hurricane in September 1941, causing relatively severe damage. The storm is estimated to have formed in the eastern Gulf of Mexico on September 16. After attaining hurricane strength, it completed a clockwise loop and turned northwestward. The hurricane continued to strengthen until it made landfall near East Matagorda Bay, Texas, with winds of , but rapidly weakened as it headed inland. Damage from the storm amounted to about $6.5 million, and crops throughout the region were largely destroyed. The city of Houston suffered extensive damage as the storm passed to the east. The hurricane disrupted activities related to the Louisiana Maneuvers. Later, the system became extratropical and passed over Lake Huron, killing three people in Toronto. Overall, seven people lost their lives due to the cyclone.

In the middle of September, disturbed atmospheric conditions from a trough or tropical wave existed over the western Caribbean Sea and gradually coalesced near western Cuba on September 15–16. Even so, surrounding surface weather observations did not suggest that an area of low pressure had generated, but gradual organization continued until a tropical depression formed on September 17 in the central Gulf of Mexico about north of the Yucatán Peninsula. Operationally, the United States Weather Bureau failed to detect a tropical cyclone in the Gulf of Mexico until a day later. After formation, the system initially moved northwestward, a heading that continued early on September 18. At that time, the system became a tropical storm more than to the south-southeast of New Orleans, Louisiana.

Over the next three days, the intensifying storm executed a gradual clockwise loop, moving to the south-southeast before turning back to the west. After intensifying into a hurricane on September 21, the storm began assuming a more northwestward course, toward the Texas Gulf Coast. It continued to strengthen into a major hurricane, peaking at late on September 23. Just afterward, the storm went ashore east of Bay City, Texas, at peak intensity with an estimated central pressure of . However, few weather instruments were sited close to the point of landfall, so the lowest recorded pressure on land was only in Houston. After landfall, the cyclone curved to the northeast and passed just west of Houston early on September 24. It accelerated as it continued to move inland and transitioned into an extratropical storm on September 25. The post-tropical system dissipated early on September 27 over northeastern Quebec, near the Torngat Mountains National Park.

In advance of the storm, advisories and warnings were widely distributed by press, radio, telegraph and telephone. About 25,000 residents evacuated their homes; some small towns along the coast were described as "deserted". People in low-lying areas of coastal Louisiana sought shelter as storm surge from the hurricane affected the northern Gulf Coast. Residents in Texas prepared their homes and businesses for the hurricane, and boat owners pulled their craft out of the water. In Port Arthur, structures were boarded up and hundreds of refugees sought shelter in local hotels. American Red Cross workers were dispatched to the state. In Houston, a temporary hospital was erected. Police and firefighters in the city were put on alert. Vessels near the storm were advised to proceed with caution.

Overall damage from the storm totaled approximately $7 million, of which about $4 million can be attributed to the destruction of crops, notably rice and cotton. The hurricane affected the southern Louisiana region one week before the Louisiana Maneuvers, a series of military exercises held during August and September 1941. The exercise was designed to test US troop training, logistics, doctrine, and commanders and is considered a prelude to World War II. The rainfall triggered flooding and swelled rivers, and army vehicles became stuck in the mud as a result. Hundreds of military aircraft were forced to move inland for shelter.

Winds along the coast of Texas reached at numerous points near the hurricane's center. A report from Galveston explained, "There was little characteristic sky appearance prior to the advent of the storm, the sky being mostly clear until lower clouds appeared suddenly between 6 and 7 a. m. C. S. T., on the 22d with altocumulus and alto-stratus overcast showing through breaks occasionally during the day. By late afternoon of the 22d the sky became completely overcast with low clouds of bad weather which predominated throughout the remainder of the storm." Tides at the city, already slightly above-normal due to a previous storm, rose to a crest of on September 23, flooding large portions of Galveston Island. A local airport was flooded with of tidewater.

As the hurricane moved inland, the city of Houston was hit especially hard. Three people in the area died and several others were injured. Winds blew at up to , catching many off-guard after a previous forecast that deemed the region was safe. Some sections of the city were left without power. The winds destroyed poorly built structures and damaged others, and some streets were flooded. An athletic stadium was demolished by the storm, and glass windows were shattered in downtown stores. A preliminary estimate placed the damage in Houston at $500,000. In the aftermath of the storm, fifteen truckloads of shattered glass were removed.

After spreading across the United States, the remnants moved through Ontario and Quebec, producing hurricane-force wind gusts and 40 ft (12 m) waves along Lake Ontario. Throughout the lake, 55 vessels sunk due to the storm, resulting in tens of thousands of dollars in damage. High winds caused power outages and structural damage, as well as destroyed wheat fields across Ontario. In Toronto, the storm killed three people and injured others.




</doc>
<doc id="24869986" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24869986" title="Kaboom (Parks and Recreation)">
Kaboom (Parks and Recreation)

"Kaboom" is the sixth episode of the second season of "Parks and Recreation", and the twelfth overall episode of the series. It originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 22, 2009. In the episode, Leslie tries to have the pit filled in and injures Andy in the process, opening Pawnee up to a possible lawsuit.

The episode was written by Aisha Muharrar and directed by Charles McDougall, and featured guest performances by comedians Paul Scheer and H. Jon Benjamin. "Kaboom" saw the filling in of the Pawnee pit, a focal plot device in "Parks and Recreation" since the first episode. As part of a multi-network television campaign to spotlight volunteerism, the episode prominently featured the real-life organization KaBOOM!, a charity that builds playgrounds in locations all over the United States.

According to Nielsen Media Research, the episode was seen by 4.98 million household viewers, an improvement over the previous week. "Kaboom" received generally positive reviews, with several commentators praising the series for resolving the long-standing pit subplot.

It is the only episode of the entire series in which Aubrey Plaza does not appear as April Ludgate.

The episode opens with Leslie (Amy Poehler) receiving a speakerphone call about abnormal transactions on her credit card. The purchases turn out to all be legitimate, but Leslie cancels the card anyway out of embarrassment when Tom (Aziz Ansari) hears about her unusual purchases, including a "bucket of cake", a man pillow in the shape of Daniel Craig, and tuition to Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Later, the parks department and Ann (Rashida Jones) visit neighboring Indiana town Eagleton to help build a playground in a single day, as part of an event by the charity KaBOOM! There, Leslie and Ann find Ann's ex-boyfriend Andy (Chris Pratt), who claims to be volunteering, but in reality, is coming for the free food. He tells Leslie and Ann that he now has a home with the drummer of his band. Leslie is inspired by the energy of the group and its leader Keef (Paul Scheer), which prompts her to take proactive measures in filling in the pit in Pawnee and turning it into a park. While discussing the matter with her parks department, Mark (Paul Schneider) takes her aside and suggests she simply fill it in without permission. Leslie decides to take his advice and rents an excavator to fill in the pit.

Leslie meets Ann at the pit with the rented excavator, which starts filling it in with dirt. However, they failed to realize Andy was under some tarps in the pit, and he is injured when mounds of dirt fall on him. He is taken to the hospital, where Ann is assigned as his nurse. An angry Ron (Nick Offerman) tells Leslie the town is now open to a large potential lawsuit from Andy, and he sends her to visit him along with their city attorney Scott (H. Jon Benjamin). Meanwhile, Andy is excited to be near Ann and insists it will lead to them getting back together, but Ann tells him she is very happy dating Mark, who unlike Andy has a job, apartment and future. A disheartened Andy decides he has to get money to impress Ann. When Leslie visits, he regretfully tells her he and his attorney Wendell Adams (Chris Tallman) are going to sue Pawnee.

Leslie is convinced she can reason with Andy if they can talk without their lawyers, but Andy will not return her calls. Finally, Ann calls Andy and asks him to come to her house. Later that day, he arrives completely naked, having assumed Ann wanted to take him back. A disgusted Ann leaves the house, leaving Leslie and Andy to talk. Andy admits he is suing the town in an attempt to win Ann back, and she thinks of a different way he can impress her. The next day at city hall, Andy tells Leslie and Scott he will drop the lawsuit if they agree to fill in the pit right away. Scott agrees, unaware it was a trick between Andy and Leslie. The next day the pit is filled in and turned into a lot, and an impressed Ann waves at Andy while the construction work is going on. The episode ends with Keef riding a motorboat, revealing his role in KaBOOM! was an elaborate prank to get the playground built, and announcing he is going to build a hospital in a poor part of China.

"Kaboom" was written by Aisha Muharrar and directed by Charles McDougall. The Pawnee pit, which has been a focal plot device in "Parks and Recreation" since the first episode, is filled in during this episode. "Kaboom" features actor and comedian Paul Scheer in a guest appearance as the KaBOOM! organizer. Scheer has previously worked with Aziz Ansari on the MTV sketch comedy show, "Human Giant". "Kaboom" also featured H. Jon Benjamin, a voice actor from "Archer", "Dr. Katz", and "Home Movies", as Pawnee's lawyer. Chris Pratt actually appeared naked during filming of a scene in which he arrived at Ann's house without clothes on. Michael Schur, co-creator of "Parks and Recreation", said the scene was written because Pratt "loves taking his clothes off".

The script prominently features KaBOOM!, a real-life charitable organization that builds playgrounds in locations all over the United States. "Parks and Recreation" included the charity in the episode as part of a charity campaign called "I Participate", sponsored by the Entertainment Industry Foundation. The campaign involves more than 60 shows on NBC ABC, CBS, Fox and several other networks, all of which spotlighted real-life charities in an effort to encourage volunteerism. Greg Daniels, the series executive producer and co-creator, was responsible for choosing the KaBOOM! charity. In an editorial featured on "The Huffington Post" after the "Kaboom" aired, KaBOOM! chief executive officer Darell Hammond called the episode "Ka-PERFECT!" and said, "The writers certainly captured the spirit that fuels each of our (playground) builds – something that inspires volunteers to continue their great work and strive even harder to give back to their communities."

Within a week of the episode's original broadcast, two deleted scenes from "Kaboom" were made available on the official "Parks and Recreation" website. The first two-minute clip included extended scenes of the KABOOM! park construction, including Tom text messaging instead of working, Leslie and Ann competing with children, and Paul Scheer doing the Worm dance move. Leslie also seeks advice from her mother (played by Pamela Reed) after putting Pawnee in danger of a lawsuit. In the second, 15-second clip, Ann complains to Mark about Andy appearing naked at her apartment, which Mark only finds amusing.

Andy says he volunteers at several organizations in order to get their free food at their events. He specifically identifies the Red Cross, which he says has "amazing cookies", and Meals on Wheels, which he described as a "bonanza".

In its original American broadcast on October 22, 2009, "Kaboom" was seen by 4.98 million household viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research. It was a slight increase from the previous week's episode, "Sister City". "Kaboom" received a 2.1 rating/6 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49. The episode received generally positive reviews. Steve Heisler of "The A.V. Club" said "Kaboom" was the best episode of the second season, and called "Parks and Recreation" "one of the funniest shows on TV right now". Heisler praised the show for not shying away from outrageousness, and called Andy's naked entrance "by far the highlight of the series". "Entertainment Weekly" writer Henning Fog said "Kaboom" continued a trend of superior "Parks" episodes in season two, and praised the episode for filling in the pit, claiming it "both tied up a plot thread that had overstayed its welcome and put to rest any lingering ghosts from the first six episodes". Matt Fowler of "IGN" said the episode was funny and served as good character development for Leslie and Andy. But Fowler also said "some scenes fell flat", and questioned why Ann would continue to harbor feelings for the immature Andy.



</doc>
<doc id="24923000" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24923000" title="3 Words (song)">
3 Words (song)

"3 Words" is a song recorded by English singer Cheryl Cole for her 2009 debut studio album of the same name. It was released in the UK and Ireland on 20 December 2009 by Fascination Records and later in 2010 by Universal Music, sometimes serving as the lead single for "3 Words". The uptempo dance-pop song was written by Cole and George Pajon. It was also written and produced by will.i.am who has guest vocals on the song. "3 Words" was cited by Cole as her favourite song from the album for being different from what people expected.

"3 Words" was praised by contemporary critics, who said it was "a sophisticated love song" and the "standout track" from the album. Its unconventional production abandons the use of "verse-chorus-verse" structure, instead opting for a throbbing buildup to a climax. The accompanying video, directed by Saam, features the singer in various fashion ensembles often contrasting colour with will.i.am, and paying homage to Madonna. It also makes use of split screen cinematography and camera effects for the transition of scenes.

The song was promoted on "Cheryl Cole's Night In". The single was less commercially successful compared to its predecessor "Fight for This Love" but despite not peaking at number one, it went on to become Cole's second consecutive UK top-five and Irish-top ten hit. It was also a top five hit in Australia and has since been certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association and silver by the British Phonographic Industry.

"3 Words" is an uptempo dance-pop song which features guest vocals from will.i.am who produced the song as well as, writing the lyrics with Cole and George Pajon. Serving as the opening and title song of Cole's debut album, the song is written in the key of C♯ minor with a time signature in common time and a tempo of 129 beats per minute. Noticeably missing is the standard use of a "verse-chorus-verse song structure". The song's backing track consists of a sparse yet complex chord progression of C♯ m, G♯ m, C♯ and A major/C♯. The production features loops of acoustic guitar with a piano melody to form an "atmospheric love song" in the vocal range of G♯ to B.

Critics stated that the "sophisticated love song" is difficult to class by genre because it was "unconventional", something which Cole agreed when she said, "[its] totally different from anything I've done [with Girls Aloud] or liked before". Some industry critics also noted that "3 Words" was "unlike many things currently [at that time] on radio or being released". Cole said that the song was inspired by her newly acquired love for dance music on the charts, especially David Guetta & Kelly Rowland's "When Love Takes Over".

Cole described it as her favourite song on the album and music critics generally agreed. Tom Ewing of "The Guardian" called the song Cheryl's "showcase [...] built on dark loops of treated acoustic guitar and building into a claustrophobic dance track. It's as brave and novel a song as anything Cole's group have released." Daniel Wilcox even went as far as to say the song was "far more interesting and innovative than anything her girl group has done in their entire careers." "3 Words" has been described as "mesmerizing in its listlessness" as well as being "unlike anything Cheryl or Will.I.Am have released" and "to what's currently being played on the radio." It was labeled a standout track by many reviewers, with Killian Fox of "The Observer" referring to the song as "a slick, sophisticated love song that hints at what this album could have been." David Balls of Digital Spy wrote, "Snubbing traditional verse-chorus-verse song structure, and beginning with spare acoustic guitar strums, '3 Words' builds slowly towards a throbbing and infectious, if slightly brief, arms-in-the-air climax [...] it's hard to deny that Chez pulls off this less-than-obvious offering with aplomb."

Louise McCudden of Inthenews.co.uk, however, argued that although "her voice sounds pleasant [...] the song itself is too long and becomes tedious fairly fast." Vicki Lutas had a mostly negative review for the song saying "at the end of the day it does sound like something you could have made up when you were at school", though she did praise the backing track for being "dark, eerie and cold in a chilling way; in an infectious way". However she pointed out that "the vocal arrangement and the actual vocals themselves do nothing more for the song", and respected that "it's a brave song choice, but it's hap-hazard vocal line seems to scream... C-R-I-N-G-E.".

In the United Kingdom, "3 Words" made its official debut on the UK Singles Chart at number twenty-six, following strong digital sales from the release of the album, two weeks prior. Then a day before its digital release and two days before its CD release the single climbed to number fourteen. Later during the first week of 2010 it would go on to peak at number four, giving Cole her third consecutive top-five UK hit if her feature on will.i.am's "Heartbreaker" is included. On 14 May 2010 the single was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for shipping 200,000 copies.

The single also achieved top ten success in the Republic of Ireland, where it reached number seven becoming her third consecutive top-ten single. Coincidentally, it is the second song featuring Cole's vocals to peak at number seven in Ireland, the first being will.i.am's "Heartbreaker". Internationally the single peaked top five in Hungary, and Australia. In the latter it performed better than any song Cole released with Girls Aloud beating the previous best entry "Jump" by eighteen places. "3 Words" is the only song from Cole's debut album to peak within the top fifty of the Australian Singles Chart and was subsequently certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for shipping 70,000 units. Additionally it peaked at top-ten in Italy.

The song debuted at 14 on the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand. It later rose to number 12, staying in the charts for 12 weeks.

Cole filmed two music videos for "3 Words". The first music video was a viral version directed by Vincent Haycock, in the week beginning 19 October 2009 "on the only rainy night in Los Angeles in six months." The second version was the official "split screener", directed by Saam, that premiered on 27 November 2009. The video was described as being distinctly different from that of previous single "Fight for This Love", drawing comparisons to Madonna and Lady Gaga. The overall goal of the video was described as "tell[ing] the story of a couple who socialise separately and are both approached by members of the opposite sex. Despite the other person showing a romantic interest in them". The singers go on to declare each other is 'the love of my life' and 'through the ups and the downs... never let go'." The "edgy and arty" video features "a split screen, unconventional camera angles and modern dance."

The video begins with Cole sitting alongside will.i.am, wearing a "Lady Gaga-inspired platinum blonde wig" and a lace veil. In the early scenes she "swaps her bronzed tan for alabaster skin, smokey eyes and pale lipstick". In the next scene she can be "seen looking wistfully into the distance in a slinky floor-length black dress with brown hair extensions cascading over her shoulders", whilst in a third scene she is depicted as an "Egyptian goddess". Each scene incorporates "dance shots interspersed with sequences in which the focus falls on the two stars alone, seemingly searching each other, as it were ... experimenting more with her looks and even taking a chance with Lady Gaga-esque outfits for her dancers, including veils that cover their faces and black leotards." It's shot with a split screen, meaning Cheryl and will.i.am do not come into physical contact.

The video received mixed to positive reviews from critics who praised Cole's sense of fashion but cited that the video was unoriginal. Elena Gorgan of Softpedia said "even with all this, she hardly manages to create a strong impression ... the video fails to break any visual ground, albeit standing on its own as a stylish video." "The Daily Mail" agreed saying "[The story] which will no doubt be interpreted by fans as an insight into Cheryl's marriage to footballer Ashley Cole. Cheryl has ditched her street dance gear for a gown fit for a diva along with suitably styled big hair ... But as she teams up with Black Eyed Peas rapper will.i.am is sporting a more feminine look. The net result is, sorry to say it, very regal but a bit on the dull side." Lisa McGarry of 'Unreality TV' said the platinum wig was "strange" She also said "if it doesn’t look great, at least it looks shocking." Meanwhile, David Balls of 'Digital Spy' said "[in] this glitzy split-screen affair, Cheryl looks effortlessly classy and glam as she transforms into an Egyptian goddess and - with more success than a certain Mrs. B (Mel B) back in 2001 [with "Feels so Good"] - shows how to wear a blonde wig without looking like you're on a dirty weekend in the Toon. Perfectly complimenting the song itself, this super-glossy clip also suggests that Cole has a firm eye on global stardom over the next year." "Fame" magazine called the video "a little edgier than anything Girls Aloud have done".

The song received its worldwide radio premiere on 13 October 2009 on BBC Radio 1's "The Chris Moyles Show". Cole performed "3 Words" for the first time with will.i.am during her one-off special for ITV, "Cheryl Cole's Night In". A reporter of "The Daily Mail" said Cole "performed in "a glamorous flowing Kate Bush-esque black gown". In January 2010 Cole flew to Germany to perform "3 Words" at German Award Ceremony, DLD Starnight at the Haus der Kunst in Munich. She also performed the song as part of a four-song set at 'BBC Radio 1 "Big Weekend" as well as performing at the 'De Grisogono jewellery dinner party' at the Eden Rock Hotel in Cap d'Antibes during the Cannes Film Festival.




"3 Words" was recorded at Record Plant Studios, Los Angeles (CA).



</doc>
<doc id="24925808" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24925808" title="Trustee Act 2000">
Trustee Act 2000

The Trustee Act 2000 (c 29) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that regulates the duties of trustees in English trust law. Reform in these areas had been advised as early as 1982, and finally came about through the Trustee Bill 2000, based on the Law Commission's 1999 report "Trustees' Powers and Duties", which was introduced to the House of Lords in January 2000. The bill received the Royal Assent on 23 November 2000 and came into force on 1 February 2001 through the Trustee Act 2000 (Commencement) Order 2001, a Statutory Instrument, with the Act having effect over England and Wales.

The Act covers five areas of trust law: the duty of care imposed upon trustees, trustees' power of investment, the power to appoint nominees and agents, the power to acquire land, and the power to receive remuneration for work done as a trustee. It sets a new duty of care, both objective and standard, massively extends the trustees' power of investment and limits the trustees' liability for the actions of agents, also providing for their remuneration for work done in the course of the trust.

Lawyers and academics had been pushing for reform of this area of law since at least 1982, when the Law Commission published a report advising reform of the rules over trustees delegating their powers to other people. Other trusts reform came about through the Trusts of Land and Appointment of Trustees Act 1996, but this did not cover most of trusts law. Although there were some other small changes (such as a 1996 Statutory Instrument that extended the rights of trustees under the Trustee Investments Act 1961) little else was done. Further papers were published on similar areas in 1997 and 1999, and finally the Trustee Bill 2000 was introduced to the House of Lords in January 2000, implementing the proposals laid out in the Law Commission's 1999 report "Trustees' Powers and Duties". The Act was given the Royal Assent on 23 November 2000, and most of it came into effect on 1 February 2001 through the Trustee Act 2000 (Commencement) Order 2001.

The Act is divided into six parts, forty-three sections and four schedules, and focuses upon five specific areas of law. These are the duty of care imposed upon trustees, trustees' power of investment, the power to appoint nominees and agents, the power to acquire land, and the power to receive remuneration for work done as a trustee.

Part I of the Act sets out a general duty of care, which trustees have towards beneficiaries. Section 1 defines this duty, which is that a trustee,

This test has both an objective and subjective element. There is an objective baseline of care that every trustee, depending on the size and responsibility of their office, to exercise "such care and skill as is reasonable in the circumstances". This codifies the common law and reflects company and insolvency law. It indicates that a professional trustee would be held to a higher standard than a family trustee. The subjective element requires a court to exercise greater scrutiny if a trustee had any special skills, which takes the trustee's ability above the objective baseline. So if a trustee had a special accountancy qualification that trustee would be expected to exercise a greater than normal degree of care over the trust's accounts.

According to Schedule 1, the duty of care may be excluded by the trust instrument, but if it is not, it must be exercised when,

Commentators have agreed that this is largely a reiteration of the previous common law rule on the duty of care. In "Speight v Gaunt", Lord Blackburn said that "as a general rule a trustee sufficiently discharges his duty if he takes in managing trust affairs all those precautions which an ordinary prudent man of business would take in managing similar affairs of his own", similar to an objective test. It has been pointed out that the new duty of care creates problems, because it sets a fixed, objective point. It is not known where this point is, however - a professional trustee obviously cannot be held to the standards of a lay trustee, but it has been seen as equally unfair that a lay trustee would be held to the standards of a professional one. This duty, unlike the previous common law duty, at no point requires the trustee to act. The duty of care has been seen to be advantageous to charities compared to the old one, because it allows those charities forced to employ lay trustees to use professional agents to exercise some duties.

Investment powers and limits on those powers are set out in Part II of the Act. Section 3(1) states that "subject to the provisions of this part, a trustee may make any kind of investment that he could make if he was absolutely entitled to the assets of the trust". This is far looser than the previous provisions, which were contained in the Trustee Investments Act 1961. The 1961 Act was repeatedly criticised for its "very conservative investment policy for trustees". The powers of investment trustees were given were restrictive and narrow, and at the same time the trustees were expected to go through expensive and complicated procedures to exercise them. This new power of investment is treated as a default provision - it is overridden if the trust instrument itself restricts the ways trust money can be invested. If the trust instrument was created prior to 3 August 1961, however, its provisions regarding investments are treated as void. The new provisions apply retrospectively, i.e. to trusts created before the passage of the Act. They do not, however, apply to trusts governed by the Charities Act 1993, Authorised Unit Trusts or occupational pension schemes.

Section 4 of the Act requires trustees to look at the "standard investment criteria" when investing. These criteria are defined in Section 4(3) as the need to check the suitability of investments for the trust, and the importance of diversification. Section 4(2) requires that, having exercised their power of investment, trustees must regularly refer back to the standard investment criteria to check that they are being fulfilled. This does little more than restate what is given in the Trustee Investments Act 1961, however, and this provision has been criticised for not defining "suitable". In "Cowan v Scargill" [1985] Ch 270 Megarry VC suggested that trustees have an overriding duty to invest solely in the financial interests of beneficiaries, unless the trust instrument laid down otherwise. So even though the National Union of Mineworkers' leader, Arthur Scargill, wanted the mineworkers' pensions to be reinvested in the British Coal industry and keep jobs, the court held that because this would make less money than other investments it would be a breach of trust. Subsequent case law has qualified this controversial principle, such as "Harries v The Church Commissioners for England" [1992] 1 WLR 1241, and it is a point of ongoing debate. It is assumed by academics that, if a trust suffered a loss as a result of a trustee investing in unsuitable areas, the trustee would be liable for breach of trust.

Under Section 5, trustees are required to obtain "proper advice" before investing, unless the circumstances mean that it is inappropriate or unnecessary to do so. "Proper advice" is defined in Section 5(4) as "advice of a person who is reasonably believed by the trustee to be qualified to give it by his ability in and practical experience of financial and other matters relating to the proposed investment". This is an objective test, and as with much of Section 4, is almost identical to the test laid out in the 1961 Act. The advice must be sought before the exercise of any investment power, and is also required if the trustee wishes to change where and how the trust is invested.

Rules on the acquisition of land are covered in Part III of the Act. Until the passage of the Act, trustees had no right to purchase land with trust money, with two exceptions; first, if the trust instrument authorised or required the trustee to purchase land and second, Section 6(4) of the Trusts of Land and Appointment of Trustees Act 1996, which allowed trustees to buy land either as an investment or for habitation by the beneficiaries.

Under Section 8 of the Act, trustees can purchase land "as an investment, for occupation by the beneficiaries or for any other reason". Once this land has been purchased they are free to do with it what they could if they were the absolute owner; they can sell it, lease it or mortgage it. This is a default provision, and can be made irrelevant if the trust instrument contains other rules and requirements. This land may only be bought in Britain; if trustees wish to purchase land outside Britain, they must either invest in companies which own land or alter the trust instrument to allow it.

Part IV of the act covers the delegation of powers to agents, and the trustees liability for their acts. This is an area that has long been criticised by practitioners and academics, particularly the provisions of the Trustee Act 1925. The Act allowed the trustees to appoint an agent in good faith, and gave them no liability for the agent's acts. In "Re Vickery" it was confirmed that a trustee may escape liability for an agent's acts if he acted in good faith, which was simply a test of honesty rather than reasonableness.

Sections 11–20 of the 2000 Act cover the appointment of agents. Section 11(1) allows for trustees "[to] authorise any person to exercise any or all of their delegable functions as their agent", with Section 11(2) defining "delegable functions" as any function other than the powers to distribute or dispose of trust assets, allocating fees or other payments, appointing a trustee or further delegating duties. Section 15 requires that, where an administrative function is delegated, special conditions must be satisfied. Section 15(1) makes it mandatory to write and sign a policy agreement, which lays out guidance on how a function should be undertaken.

Sections 21–23 cover the review of agents and the liability of trustees for agents actions. Section 21 identifies that review and liability occurs when the trustees appoints agents, nominees and custodians under the Act or under similar provisions in the trust instrument. Section 22 provides a duty on trustees who delegate their powers, with the duty consisting of three elements. Firstly, trustees are required to make sure that agent is suitable for the job he is employed to do. Secondly, they are required to consider whether or not to intervene in the appointment if circumstances demand it. Thirdly, trustees are required to intervene after appointment if the circumstances demand it. Section 23 establishes trustees' liability for the actions of agents; a trustee is liable for negligence if he violates the general duty of care set out in Section 1, but not otherwise.

Part V of the Act, sections 28 to 33, deals with trustees' remuneration. Section 28 states the default position is that trustees are entitled to remuneration if it says so in the trust instrument or if a trustee acts in a "professional capacity". A trust can differ from this default, but the Act confirms the recent developments in the common law from the old default position that trustees were entitled to nothing unless it was explicitly stated that they were. Section 29 goes on to say that non-charitable professional trustees are entitled to "reasonable remuneration" which will be a sum that the court thinks is commensurate to the work done, along the principles of "quantum meruit". This is automatic if the trustee is a corporation, but will require consent of all other trustees if the trustees are natural persons. Section 30 stipulates that rules on charitable trustee remuneration are to be found in a statutory instrument drawn up by the Secretary of State. Trustees will be reimbursed from the trust fund itself, as will be authorised agents, nominees and custodians who are properly appointed by the trustees all so long as the expenses and payable remuneration are incurred while conducting the affairs of the trust.

The Act repealed:



</doc>
<doc id="24953467" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24953467" title="Reaction (The Spectacular Spider-Man)">
Reaction (The Spectacular Spider-Man)

"Reaction" is the eighth episode of the American animated television series "The Spectacular Spider-Man", which is based on the comic book character Spider-Man, created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko. The episode originally broadcast in the United States on the Kids WB! block for The CW on May 3, 2008, where it was rated TV-Y7-FV.

The episode details Dr. Otto Octavius as an accidental laboratory incident caused by the Green Goblin where the radiation merges special mechanical tentacles to his skin and seemingly damaged his brain (although it was later suggested that what was interpreted as brain damage was in fact his mind rewiring itself to accommodate four extra limbs), and turns him from a timid and weak scientist into the villain Dr. Octopus. "Reaction" was directed by Jennifer Coyle and was the first episode of the series to be written by Randy Jandt. While writing the teleplay, Jandt was challenged with staying true to the original material of Spider-Man, particularly towards that of Dr. Octopus. 

"Reaction" received generally positive reviews, with television critics singling out Dr. Octopus' portrayal. Octopus's character design was applauded by both the designers and Coyle; the latter noted that his design allowed her to direct them freely in different manners, and that the arms in particular were particularly well-done. Peter MacNicol voiced the character and used a voice inspired by that of late actor Laird Cregar. It is available on both the third volume DVD set for the series, as well as the complete season box set.

Dr. Otto Octavius tries to complain to his boss Norman Osborn about the dangers of several recent experiments they have been performing to create super villains in his laboratory, but is quickly berated by Osborn for his "whining." Octavius backs down and goes to work inside an experimentation chamber while Osborn departs. Unbeknown to him, the villain Green Goblin sneaks into the lab, activating the chamber's generators while locking Octavius inside. While unsuccessfully trying to escape from the chamber, the radiation emitted fuses the mechanical tentacles he is wearing into his skin.

Osborn and others arrive on the scene to turn off the generator, while Spider-Man jumps in to help get Octavius out of the wreckage. When the doctor wakes up, he attacks Osborn with his tentacles and pins him to a wall. When Spider-Man tries to intervene, Octavius brushes him aside as well with one of his tentacles, declaring himself "Dr. Octopus." He steals a power battery to recharge his tentacles and storms out of the building, using his tentacles as extra limbs. The next day, Peter, Gwen, Harry and some of Harry's new popular friends go to Coney Island, where Harry impresses everyone with his newfound strength. Liz Allan begins to attach herself to Peter and the two have a fun time. However, Peter spots Dr. Octopus and abandons the group to pursue him as Spider-Man.

Spider-Man follows Dr. Octopus to TriCorp, where he attempts to steal a power pack from a vault. Spider-Man swoops in and gets to the power source before him. He then runs out, with Dr. Octopus pursuing him, hoping to cause the doctor to run out of energy. They reach Coney Island through their ensuing brawl and Octopus, aware of Spider-Man's desire to save innocent lives, kidnaps Liz. With only an hour of energy left, he climbs to the top of a roller coaster, forcing Spider-Man to choose between the power pack and Liz. Spider-Man throws the pack in the air before rescuing Liz; he gets close to Dr. Octopus as the latter scrambles for the power pack and is able to take it away from him, successfully defeating the doctor.

When Peter returns to the group, he discovers that Liz is breaking up with her boyfriend Flash Thompson after the latter gets jealous that she spent the day so close to Peter. Sally blames Peter for it and runs to comfort Liz. Gwen approaches Peter, and the two agree they need to have a talk with Harry about his belligerent attitude towards them and constant strange behavior.

"Reaction" was written by Randy Jandt and directed by Jennifer Coyle. It originally aired on the Kids WB! block for The CW on May 3, 2008, at 10:00 a.m. Eastern/Pacific time, with a parental guidance rating of TV-Y7-FV. The episode's title, "Reaction," expands the series theme "The Education of Peter Parker" chosen by developer Greg Weisman. Episodes in the third season one arc all shared a naming scheme based on chemistry.

The episode was the first of the series to be penned by Jandt, who said that the opportunity to work on the series was "both thrilling and a bit daunting, primarily because of the elevated expectations of such a high-profile, established franchise." To meet these expectations, he followed a simplistic strategy—"be mindful of the history, listen to the direction and guidance of Greg Weisman, and then write an episode with a good, entertaining story that is packed with as much action and humor as 22 minutes will allow." Writing for Dr. Octopus in particular was difficult for the first-time writer as he had "such a range of character."

"Reaction" marked the first appearance of Dr. Otto Octavius as Dr. Octopus. Coyle noted her enthusiasm for the character, particularly towards his design; she has given noteworthy praise towards his arms, as they "are amazing, and the timing has been really good for this show, so much so that I think you feel the impact of those arms." Coyle also believes that people can connect with the character on different levels. Similarly, Sean Galloway—a character designer on the series—said that he is "probably one of [his] favorites" to have designed.

Peter MacNicol was cast to play Dr. Octopus. MacNicol had starred in primetime television series, including "Chicago Hope," "Numb3rs," and "Boston Legal," while also being a veteran to the voice acting profession on animated series such as "The Wild Thornberrys" and "Buzz Lightyear of Star Command." MacNicol chose to base Dr. Octopus' voice on that of Laird Cregar, a 1940s actor who, throughout his short-lived career, was challenged with obesity, until he lost too much weight and died at age 30. MacNicol, though, notes that he is "no mimic and it was Cregar's quality rather than his voice which gave me my model."

"Reaction" became available on the DVD "The Spectacular Spider-Man, Volume 3," on March 17, 2009, alongside the episodes "Catalysts" and "The Uncertainty Principle." The volume featured episodes that detailed Green Goblin as a prominent or supporting character. "Reaction" also became available on the full season DVD box set entitled "The Spectacular Spider-Man: The Complete First Season DVD," which featured every other episode of season one for the series.

"Reaction" received a generally positive response from critics. Eric Goldman of IGN, giving the episode an 8.2. rating ("Impressive"), wrote favorably, noting that the depiction Dr. Octopus "was very clever – on one hand, he was a pitiful, cowering pushover. But when Norman was berating him we got a brief look at the anger within, as he imagined attacking Norman with his robotic tentacles." Goldman applauded both Dr. Octopus' line, "I've been good" and when Spider-Man crashes into several stuffed animals, only to be pulled out by Dr. Octopus in a manner similar to a carnival game; he concluded that, "This show continues to leave several prime time live-action shows to shame when it comes to building serialized stories and has been one of the most pleasant surprises of the TV season."

Luke Bonanno of Ultimate Disney listed "Reaction" as one of his top five favorite episodes of the first season, while commenting that "the uniform excellence of the lot [makes] this a challenging task." Writing for DVD Talk, reviewer Justin Felix opined that the episode was "particularly action-packed." Rob M. Worley of Mania described Dr. Octopus' introduction as "explosive," while praising MacNicol for balancing such a heavy workload between both the episode and other series.



</doc>
<doc id="24968386" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24968386" title="Battle of Vijithapura">
Battle of Vijithapura

The Battle of Vijithapura was a decisive and major battle in the campaign carried out by Sri Lankan king Dutthagamani against the invading South Indian king Ellalan. The battle is documented in detail in the ancient chronicles of the country. However, they only provide the viewpoint of Dutthagamani and his army, and details are scarce on Elara's side.

After launching a campaign to regain the country from Elara, Dutthagamani captured a number of his strongholds before coming to the fortified city of Vijithapura. A four-month siege ensued, followed by a large assault where Dutthagamani's champions and royal elephant played a major part. The chronicles focus a lot on these ten champions, and vividly describe some unusual "tests" that Dutthagamani carried out to find out their skills.

The battle ended in victory for Dutthagamani's forces and considerably weakened Elara's army, ultimately leading to his defeat and death. The exact location of Vijithapura is unknown, though historians have made some speculations on this. The battle is still regarded by Sri Lankans as a legendary event in the country's history, and has even been compared with victories of the Sri Lanka Army during the country's civil war.

Dutthagamani's campaign against Elara is given in detail in the ancient chronicles of Sri Lanka; "Mahavamsa", "Dipavamsa", "Rajavaliya" and "Thupavamsa". All of them describe the battle in detail, and apply a high importance to it. Dutthagamani is a hero in these chronicles, and his campaign is depicted as a "holy war" aimed at restoring Buddhism in the country. Therefore, these accounts are favourably biased to him, and the description of the Battle of Vijithapura, along with the rest of the campaign, is a mix of fact and legend. However, historians agree that the basic facts from these chronicles are accurate. The one sided accounts given in the chronicles mean that there is very little information to be obtained on Elara and his armies. According to Orientalist Wilhelm Geiger, who translated the "Mahavamsa", the problem is "not what is said but what is left unsaid".

At the time of the battle, Ellalan was the king of Anuradhapura. He was a Chola prince from South India, who had defeated the Sinhalese ruler Asela in an invasion. Although an invader, Elara is described as a just ruler who had even patronized Buddhism. Most of the country came under this Tamil king's rule, while his rival Kavan Tissa, a Sinhala king from Ruhunu in the south of the country, organized a resistance against him. Kavan Tissa's son, Dutthagamani, ascended to the throne after the death of his father.

Soon after he became the king in Ruhuna, Dutthagamani launched a campaign against Elara with the intention of "restoring and glorifying Buddhism" in the country. After setting out from Magama and crossing the Mahaweli river, Dutthagamani captured a number of forts and cities that were under Elara, and killed several of his generals. The ancient chronicles refer to all of the chieftains or generals defeated by Dutthagamani as "Demalas" (Tamils). However, it is unlikely that all of them were indeed Tamils, and it is possible that one of them—whose name is given as Dighabaya—may even have been a stepbrother of Dutthagamani himself who had later joined Elara.

After these victories, Dutthagamani's army marched on to the "great fortress of Vijithapura". Dutthagamani followed a road between Sigiriya and Minneriya to take his army there; a road that had been used by Pandukabhaya, a previous ruler, in his military campaigns as well.

The city of Vijithapura, which the "Mahavamsa" refers to as Vijitha Nagara, had been founded nearly three hundred years ago by the brother in law of king Panduvasudeva. By the time of the battle, it had become a well-fortified stronghold of Elara. It is said to have been surrounded by three moats and a wall with a height of 18 cubits. The wall had four wrought iron gates on the north, south, east and west. The "Rajavaliya" describes Vijithapura as a fortress second only to Anuradhapura.

The control of Vijithapura was essential to both sides. The loss of the stronghold would be a largely demoralizing factor for Elara's forces and would significantly reduce their capability to resist Duthhagamani's advance. For Dutthagamani's forces, the capture of the city would mean that they could easily move on to Anuradhapura.

Surviving troops of Elara's forces from previous battles retreated to Vijithapura, further strengthening its defenses. Dutthagamani's army also arrived and pitched camp close to the fortress. The open stretch of land where they camped later came to be known as Khandavara Pitthi or Kandavurupitiya. They carried out regular assaults against the fortress while the defenders also made occasional sorties, but none of them were able to sway the battle in favour of either side. After laying siege on the city for four months, plans were laid to launch an assault using the entire army. Dutthagamani's army was led by his ten champions or generals, known as the "Ten Giant Warriors", who were to play a significant part in the battle to come.

The ancient chronicles mention two tests that Dutthagamani planned to find out these warriors' skill before the battle. For the first test, Dutthagamani asked the warriors to drink a large cauldron of toddy, intending to test their strength. When all others refused, Suranimala stepped forward and drank the entire cauldron without any effort. The second test was to test Nandimithra, the commander of the army. Dutthagamani had his royal elephant, Kandula, infuriated and set on Nandimithra. However, the warrior stood his ground and taking the elephant by its tusks, pushed it to the ground. Thus clearing all doubts as to the abilities and skill of his warriors, Dutthagamani sounded the war drums and raising his flags, started the assault to take Vijithapura.

Dutthagamani's army attacked all four gates of the city simultaneously. He led the main assault on the southern gate with Nandimithra, Suranimala and the elephant Kandula, while the attacks on the northern and western gates were led by Bharana, Khanjadeva, Phussadeva and Labhiyavasabha. The eastern gate was attacked by Mahasona, Gothaimbara, Theraputthabhaya and Velusumana. The defenders of the eastern gates were routed by Velusumana after a cavalry attack, and Elara's forces withdrew into the city.

Elara's archers, shooting from the walls, inflicted heavy casualties on the attackers, while soldiers on top of the walls prevented any attempt to breach the wall by pouring down molten metal on them. The elephant Kandula, attempting to break the southern gate, was injured in such an attack. After tending to his injuries and protecting him using thick animal hides, Dutthagamani encouraged Kandula and drove him against the wall. The wall was breached and Dutthagamani's army entered the city. The ten champions, unwilling to enter through an opening made by another, destroyed the wall themselves in different places and broke into the city. Led by them, Dutthagamani's army destroyed the defenders and took control of the fortress city of Vijithapura. The survivors retreated to Anuradhapura.

The capture of Vijithapura paved the way for Dutthagamani's army to advance on to Anuradhapura, and they proceeded immediately afterwards, capturing two more of Elara's strongholds on the way. In the battle for Anuradhapura, Dutthagamani killed Elara in single combat and became the king of Anuradhapura, bringing the entire country under his rule.

The battle of Vijithapura is a legendary battle in Sri Lankan history and a significant milestone in Dutthagamani's campaign to restore Buddhism in the country. It is often referred to as "Vijithapura maha satana" (the great battle of Vijithapura). After the ending of the Sri Lankan Civil War in 2009, General Sarath Fonseka, the then commander of the Sri Lanka Army, compared several battles they fought to that of Vijithapura.

The exact location of the Vijithapura fortress is uncertain. A village with the same name near the ancient Kalawewa reservoir may have been the place where the battle took place. There is an ancient temple here as well as a granite stone that locals believe to have been used by Dutthagamani's soldiers to sharpen their swords However, other historians and archaeologists believe that the location is close to Kaduruwela near Polonnaruwa, where the ruins of an ancient fortress have been found.



</doc>
<doc id="24976483" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24976483" title="Russian battleship Chesma (1886)">
Russian battleship Chesma (1886)

Chesma (Russian: "Чесма", sometimes transliterated as Tchesma) was the second ship of the s built for the Imperial Russian Navy in the 1880s. When the ship was completed she proved to be very overweight which meant that much of her waterline armor belt was submerged. Russian companies could not produce the most advanced armour and machinery desired by the Naval General Staff, so they were imported from the United Kingdom and Belgium. "Chesma" spent her career as part of the Black Sea Fleet.

When the crew of the battleship mutinied in June 1905, the ship's crew was considered unreliable and she did not participate in the pursuit of the "Potemkin". "Chesma" did, however, escort "Potemkin" as towed her back to Sevastopol from Constanța, Romania, where "Potemkin" had sought asylum. "Chesma" was turned over to the Sevastopol port authorities before being stricken on 14 August 1907. Before she was fully dismantled the Naval Ministry decided to use her hull for full-scale armour trials. She was re-designated as "Stricken Vessel Nr. 4" on 22 April 1912 before being used as a gunnery target. Afterwards the ship served as a torpedo target for the destroyers of the Black Sea Fleet. During these attacks "Chesma" settled to the bottom of the Bay of Tendra and was eventually scrapped during the mid-1920s.

"Chesma" was long at the waterline and long overall. She had a beam of and a draft of more than than designed. She displaced at load, over more than her designed displacement of .

"Chesma" had two 3-cylinder vertical compound steam engines imported from the Belgian Cockerill company. Fourteen cylindrical boilers, also imported from Cockerill, provided steam to the engines. The engines had a total designed output of , but they produced on trials and gave a top speed of almost . At full load she carried of coal that provided her a range of at a speed of and at .

She differed from her sister ships mainly in her main armament. She had six Model 1886 35-caliber guns mounted in twin barbette mounts, two forward, side by side, and one aft. Each of the forward mounts could traverse 30° across the bow and 35° abaft the beam, or a total of 155°. The rear mount could traverse 202°. They had a range of elevation from −2° to +15°. "Chesma"s guns were mounted on unbalanced turntables and they caused her to list when the guns were trained to one side. Traversing all the guns as far as they could go to one side produced a list of 7.6° and made it very difficult for the turntable machinery to rotate the guns back to the fore-and-aft position. This problem had been anticipated and water tanks had been added to counteract the list, but they proved to be virtually useless because they took up to two hours to fill. The problem was partially cured in 1892 when the equipment was rearranged on the turntable to improve their balance, but more thorough solutions to the problem were either deemed too expensive or inadequate. Their rate of fire was reportedly one round every fifteen to seventeen minutes, including training time. Sixty rounds per gun were carried. The main guns were mounted very low, (only ) above the main deck, and caused extensive damage to the deck when fired over the bow or stern. They fired a 'light' shell that weighed or a 'heavy' shell that weighed . The 'light' shell had a muzzle velocity of while the 'heavy' shell could only be propelled at a velocity of . The 'light' shell had a maximum range of when fired at an elevation of 15°.

The seven 35-caliber guns were mounted on broadside pivot mounts in hull embrasures, except for one gun mounted in the stern in the hull. The eight five-barreled revolving Hotchkiss guns were mounted in small embrasures in the hull to defend the ship against torpedo boats. Four five-barreled revolving Hotchkiss guns were mounted in the fighting top. She carried seven above-water torpedo tubes, one tube forward on each side, able to bear on forward targets, two other tubes were mounted on each broadside forward and aft of the central citadel; the seventh tube was in the stern.

"Chesma" was named after the Russian victory at the Battle of Chesma in 1770. She was built by the Russian Steam Navigation Company (RoPIT) at Sevastopol. She was laid down in late June 1883, launched on 18 May 1886, and completed on 29 May 1889. She served with the Black Sea Fleet until 1907. She was inactive in 1895, probably for mechanical problems. "Chesma" conducted trials in 1902 with towing spherical observation balloons and she was re-boilered the following year. Plans were made for a radical reconstruction to be done while her boilers were being replaced. The rebuilding involved cutting her down by one deck and replacing her armament with two twin-gun turrets equipped with 12-inch 40-caliber guns and ten 6-inch 45-caliber guns between the turrets in an armoured citadel that used Krupp armor. This proved to be too expensive and it was cancelled, but not before the armor and turrets had been ordered. Her turrets were used to equip the pre-dreadnought , then under construction.

When the crew of the battleship mutinied in June 1905, "Chesma"s crew was considered unreliable, and she did not participate in the pursuit of "Potemkin". She escorted "Potemkin" as towed her back to Sevastopol from Constanța, Romania, where "Potemkin" had sought asylum.

The ship was turned over to the Sevastopol port authorities before being stricken on 14 August 1907. Before she was fully dismantled the Naval Ministry decided to use her hull for full-scale armour trials. She was re-designated as "Stricken Vessel Nr. 4" on 22 April 1912. "Chesma" was fitted with a replica of the armour system used in the s to test its effectiveness. She was towed into position and given a 7° list to simulate the descent angle of shells fired at long range. Ironically her own guns were used against her as "Ioann Zlatoust" anchored away and fired 12-inch, and 6-inch shells with reduced charges to simulate shells fired from approximately away. These revealed significant weaknesses in the support structure for the armour plates and in the deck protection, but the "Gangut"-class ships were too far along in construction to incorporate fixes. Afterwards she served as a torpedo target for the destroyers of the Black Sea Fleet. During these attacks she settled to the bottom of the Bay of Tendra and was eventually scrapped during the mid-1920s.



</doc>
<doc id="25075425" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25075425" title="The Camel (Parks and Recreation)">
The Camel (Parks and Recreation)

"The Camel" is the ninth episode of the second season of "Parks and Recreation", and the fifteenth overall episode of the series. It originally aired on NBC in the United States on November 12, 2009. In the episode, Leslie and the parks department bicker as they work on a proposal for a new town hall mural, while Ron and Andy share an awkward moment at Andy's new shoe-shine job.

The episode was written by Rachel Axler and was directed by Millicent Shelton. The title refers to the figure of speech that a camel is a "horse made by a committee", and refers to the final mural proposed by the parks department. "The Camel" included references to several Indiana celebrities, including Greg Kinnear, John Mellencamp, Larry Bird, Michael Jackson and David Letterman, all of whom have a place in the mural representing Leonardo da Vinci's "The Last Supper". 

Stand-up comedian Kirk Fox made a guest appearance as Joe, from the Pawnee sewage department. According to Nielsen Media Research, "The Camel" was seen by 4.67 million viewers, a drop from the previous week. The episode received generally positive reviews, with particular praise for the Ron and Andy subplot, and the jokes involving Jerry's "murinal".

The Pawnee council decides it will replace the town hall's "Spirit of Pawnee" mural, which has been repeatedly vandalized because of its racist overtones. When each Pawnee department is asked to propose a new mural, Leslie (Amy Poehler) becomes determined for the parks department to win, especially after she is taunted by "Sewage" Joe (Kirk Fox) in the sewer department. Everyone in the parks department is told to come up with a possible mural. Tom (Aziz Ansari) pays a local artist (Doug Anthony Jones) to make a painting for him, and he is initially unsatisfied with the result, a colorful abstract painting. When presenting it to the staff, however, he suddenly experiences his first emotional reaction to a work of art. Ann (Rashida Jones), who acknowledges a lack of creative talent, presents a rendering of a park that is widely panned by the others. April (Aubrey Plaza) presents a dark and bizarre piece made of garbage she found in a dumpster. Donna (Retta) presents a version of "The Last Supper" with famous people from Indiana. Jerry (Jim O'Heir) presents a beautiful pointillist photomosaic of city hall, but everyone laughs at him when he accidentally calls his mural a "murinal". Leslie proposes a picture of a historic Pawnee bakery fire, which she thinks will win because it is dark and depressing.

When the parks department casts votes for the best mural, they each vote for their own artwork. As a compromise, Leslie creates a mural using pieces of everybody's artwork, but the result is an ugly and confusing mess. Leslie enlists the help of Mark (Paul Schneider), who draws a bland but skillful sketch of an old man feeding pigeons in the park. Mark himself admits the sketch is dull, but claims it will win because it has mass appeal. Nobody in the parks department likes it except Ron (Nick Offerman), but Leslie insists on entering it so they will win, much to everybody's disappointment. While waiting to present the sketch, Leslie sees how much fun other departments had in making their mural, and she decides to enter the parks department's original mural after all. The town council committee are confused by the proposal, but the parks department have fun presenting it and break into laughter. In the end, the town decides not to spend any money on a new mural and simply renames the old one "The Diversity Express". The parks department is nevertheless proud of their work, which they hang in their conference room; Ron also hangs Mark's sketch in his office.

In a B plot, Andy (Chris Pratt) is doing well in his new job as the Pawnee shoeshiner, and Ron pays for a shine. Ron is impressed when Andy actually eases the pain from his bunion, and he later purposely scuffs his shoe so he can get a second shine. Andy is initially flattered, but starts to grow uncomfortable when Ron returns for a third shoeshine. This time, Ron makes an involuntary noise that sounds like a sexual moan, seriously embarrassing both men. After a day of avoiding each other, Ron and Andy discuss the noise and decide it would be best to simply pretend it never happened.

"The Camel" was written by Rachel Axler and directed by Millicent Shelton. It derives its title from the figure of speech that a camel is "a horse made by a committee". When the parks department puts together a mural proposal using elements of six different pieces of art, which Mark refers to in the episode as a camel. The episode features a guest appearance by stand-up comedian Kirk Fox as Joe, Leslie's nemesis from the Pawnee sewer department. Within a week of the episode's original broadcast, a deleted scene from "The Camel" were made available on the official "Parks and Recreation" website. In the 90-second clip, Ann tries to get out of helping with the mural, April looks through a dumpster for inspiration and Ron defends "cookie cutter art" by saying, "There's nothing wrong with a cookie cutter. You know what you get with a cookie cutter? Perfectly shaped cookies!"

Leslie indicates she had a dream involving American actress Gina Gershon. For her mural, Donna proposes a recreation of Leonardo da Vinci's painting "The Last Supper" with Indiana natives in place of the apostles. Actor Greg Kinnear was chosen to replace Jesus, with the Apostles replaced by John Mellencamp, Larry Bird, Michael Jackson, David Letterman and a NASCAR race car, among others. Jerry presents for his mural a work of pointillism, a style of painting in which small distinct dots of color create the impression of a wider image. When proposing her somber mural, Leslie claims tragedy often succeeds in awards, and specifically cites the Academy Awards which honor the film industry. As an example, Leslie uses "The English Patient", the 1996 Best Picture winner during the 69th Academy Awards. Upon first receiving his painting, Tom says, "It looks like a lizard puking up Skittles", a reference to the multi-colored candies. Leslie, upon the idea of putting the best parts of each design into a new mural, says it is like having Michelangelo, Andy Warhol, Jackson Pollock and Jim Davis do one painting. When Mark tries to get out of helping with the mural, he uses the excuse, "I was gonna go to Arby's and watch "Frontline"", a reference to a fast food restaurant chain and a Public Broadcasting Service public affairs program. Ron names his bunion Paul, after the mythological lumberjack Paul Bunyan.

In its original American broadcast on November 12, 2009, "The Camel" was seen by 4.67 million viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research. It drew a 2.1 rating/6 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49, about a five percent drop from the previous week's episode, "Ron and Tammy". The episode received generally positive reviews. Matt Fowler of IGN said "The Camel" was a particularly funny episode, and that the parks department's collaboration on the mural allowed "each character being able to instill their own level of brand-specific insanity into the mix". Fowler also praised the sewer department jokes, the "murinal" scene involving Jerry and the fact that no department ended up winning the mural contest, which Fowler called a commentary on "the futility of local government in their attempts to accomplish anything". "The Star-Ledger" television columnist Alan Sepinwall declared "The Camel" one of the episodes he would suggest to newcomers seeking to become familiar with "Parks and Recreation". Sepinwall said the Ron and Andy subplot "made me laugh as hard as I have in a very long time", and said the episode had a good mix of funny, sweet and ridiculous moments, and said the ensemble cast was starting to work extremely well together.
"The A.V. Club" writer Leonard Pierce said the episode included great lines, strong personality-driven comedy and good character moments, specially Tom's emotional reaction to his painting. Pierce said the Andy and Ron subplot was "so well played that it threatens to usurp the mural storyline". Sandra Gonzalez particularly praised the "murinal" jokes about Jerry's mural, as well as Ron's claim that he ran a sheet metal factory when he was nine, and that "Child labor laws are ruining this country." "Time" magazine television critic James Poniewozik said make jokes connected in "The Camel", including the Andy shoeshine plot and the "unexpectedly glamorous" sewage department. But he particularly praised the character development in the main plot, in which "each in their own way sticks to the purity of their uniquely screwy ideas". Brad Sanders of the "Indiana Daily Student" praised the entire cast, particularly Offerman and Pratt, who he said provide the show's two best characters. Sanders said the fact that the episode included a "hilarious subplot" involving both of them "was more evidence that the writers have been listening to the fans".

"GQ" writer Dan Fierman said "Parks and Recreation" appeared to be "approaching early "Simpsons"-levels in its absurdity and comic pacing". He suggested this could be due to the use of Mike Scully, a veteran comic writer with the animated series, as a consulting producer on "Parks and Recreation". In an article reflecting on the "Parks and Recreation" second season, which became critically acclaimed following poor season one reviews, "Slate" magazine writer Jonah Weiner said the plot of "The Camel" "can be read as something of a Season 2 mission statement". Weiner compared Leslie's decision to submit the quirky collage rather than the safer bet as reflective of the "Parks and Recreation" writing staff's apparent decision "to ride their zaniest whims rather than tamp them down for something more readily recognizable as a hit sitcom".

"The Camel", along with the other 23 second season episodes of "Parks and Recreation", was released on a four-disc DVD set in the United States on November 30, 2010. The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode.



</doc>
<doc id="25085707" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25085707" title="Early life of Ricky Ponting">
Early life of Ricky Ponting

Ricky Ponting is a former Australian international cricketer who was born on 19 December 1974. He made his One Day International (ODI) debut for the Australian cricket team against the South Africa cricket team in New Zealand at the age of 20 on 15 February 1995. The eldest of three children, Ponting emulated the feats of his father, playing cricket in summer and Australian rules football in winter, before breaking his arm while playing the latter sport for a junior North Launceston Football Club team as a 14-year-old. He was educated in the Tasmanian state school system, studying at Mowbray Heights Primary and Brooks High School.

Ponting received a bat sponsorship with Kookaburra Sport at 14, before being acclaimed the best 17-year-old batsman that Australian Cricket Academy coach Rod Marsh had ever seen. At 17 years and 337 days, Ponting made his first-class cricket debut for Tasmania, breaking David Boon's record as the youngest player to represent the state. Later in the season, he became the youngest Tasmanian to score a first-class century at 18 years and 40 days, eclipsing Boon's record of 19 years and 356 days. Further into the 1992–93 season, Ponting scored two centuries in a match against Western Australia—the youngest player in Sheffield Shield history to do so. He played non-international games against national teams for Australia A in the 1994–95 World Series Cup, before making his Australian debut.

Born in Launceston, Tasmania, on 19 December 1974, Ricky Thomas Ponting is the eldest of Graeme and Lorraine Ponting's three children. His brother Drew is two years younger, while sister Renee was born when Ponting was six. Their uncle Greg Campbell played cricket for Australia in 1989 and 1990. Graeme was "a good club cricketer" and played Australian rules, while Lorraine was a state vigoro champion. "Fiercely contested" in the 1950s and 1960s, vigoro is a mix between cricket and baseball, primarily played in the Australian states of Tasmania, New South Wales and Queensland. Ponting's parents first lived in Prospect south of the city centre, before moving into the working-class area of Newnham, north of central Launceston. The suburb is near York Park, Tasmania's largest capacity stadium. Residents of the area were generally known as "swampies" because the land was previously swamp on the banks of the Tamar River.

Introduced to cricket by father Graeme and uncle Greg, Ponting was able to play for the Mowbray Under–13s team at the age of 11 in 1985–86. In January 1986, he took part in the five-day annual Northern Tasmania junior cricket competition. On the Monday, he struggled to trouble the scorers, however, he bounced back with a century on Tuesday. Wednesday saw him make 117 not out and he continued his form into Thursday and Friday, scoring centuries on both days. Afterwards, bat manufacturer Kookaburra gave Ponting a sponsorship contract when he was still only 14 years old. Ponting took this form into the Under-16s week-long competition less than a month later, scoring an even century on the final day. Ted Richardson, the former head of the Northern Tasmanian Schools Cricket Association said: "Ricky is certainly the equal of David Boon at this level. At his age he's the best I've seen in the north. His technique, application, and temperament are all excellent and he has the modesty he will need to progress further." 

Australian Rules football was also a big part of Ponting's sporting life; during winter he played junior football for North Launceston and until he was 14, it could have become a possible sporting option, before he broke the humerus in his right arm playing for North Launceston Under–17s. Ponting's arm was so badly damaged that it had to be pinned. Told to endure a 14-week lay-off, he never played competitive football again. He later wrote: "At one stage I was concerned that the arm injury might also stop me from playing cricket but they [the doctors] did a pretty good job on pinning the bones—and it hasn't bothered me since."

In 1986, Ponting said: "I'd love to play for Australia [...] I look up to David Boon because he's from here [Launceston]." During Tasmanian Sheffield Shield matches at the Northern Tasmanian Cricket Association Ground (NTCA Ground), Ponting served as a scoreboard assistant, thereby surrounding himself with first-class and international cricketers. After leaving school at the end of year 10 as a 16-year-old in 1990, he began work as a groundsman at Scotch Oakburn College, a private school in Launceston. In 1991, the Northern Tasmanian Cricket Association sponsored Ponting so that he could attend a fortnight's training at the Australian Institute of Sport's Cricket Academy in Adelaide. The two weeks turned into a full two-year scholarship as he was acclaimed to be the best 17-year-old batsman Academy coach Rod Marsh had ever seen. 

Playing five games for Tasmania in the 1992 Under–19 tournament in Perth, Ponting scored 350 runs, earning him selection in the 13-man national Under–19 development squad for the upcoming tour of South Africa—the first Australian cricket team to make an official tour to the country since Bill Lawry's team in 1970; South Africa were banned from international sport soon after because of their government's policy of apartheid, and were not readmitted until the 1990s. Under the captaincy of Adam Gilchrist, the Australians played four one-day and four three-day games, winning five and drawing three. Ponting scored 430 runs at an average of 45.67. Later recalling the excitement of the experience, Ponting wrote:

After scoring 114 not out in a club match against Riverside, Ponting became the youngest player to appear for Tasmania in a Sheffield Shield match, breaking Boon's record by 14 days. In November 1992, at the age of 17 years and 337 days, he batted at number four in the order against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval. Despite scoring 56 in a 127-run partnership with Boon, he could not prevent defeat, scoring just four in Tasmania's second innings. In his first match in Tasmania—this time against New South Wales—Ponting contributed 32 and 18 in a draw, before scoring 25 against Western Australia in a narrow loss. His first match in Sydney also marked the debut of future Australian opening bowler Glenn McGrath. At the end of the first day's play, Tasmania were 6/200, and Ponting was the only player to resist, reaching 98 not out. He eventually reached three figures the next morning, having endured three rain breaks and 54 minutes in the nineties. The century made him the youngest Tasmanian to score a first-class century, at 18 years and 40 days, eclipsing Boon's record of 19 years and 356 days. The next day he spoke about the achievement: "I knew I had to be patient and wait for it to come [...] I wasn't that nervous last night, but I was a bit nervous this morning." Dismissed for 125 out of a total of 298, Ponting scored 17 boundaries in his five-and-a-half-hour stay at the crease. Coach Greg Shipperd was impressed in what he saw: "It was an excellent innings, one of classical stroke play. The way he freely put together a good, solid innings, showed that his potential is being realised. It was an indication, for him, of what it's like to go the extra step." These performances lead Ponting to his List A debut on 13 December against Victoria in Devonport. He struggled, however, scoring 22 from 45 balls in Tasmania's defeat. His form, nonetheless, remained strong in first-class cricket, scoring another half-century, Ponting scored back-to-back centuries against Western Australia in Perth, the nation's fastest wicket, thus becoming the youngest batsmen in Shield history to score two centuries in a match. After setting a goal of scoring 500 first-class runs in the season, Ponting finished with 781 runs at 48.81. But his form in List A games were not as strong, aggregating 99 at 33 in four matches. Still, Ponting hit an unbeaten 59 from 52 balls against a touring England A side in Hobart. After the season's end, still aged 18, Ponting played seven four-day games for the Australian Academy, scoring 484 runs at 96.70.

Speculation ignited that Ponting was an outsider to be selected for the Australian squad on their 1993 tour to England. Of the speculation, Ponting said "At the start of the season I was wondering whether or not I'd play Shield cricket this year and all of a sudden there's talk in the papers that I'm a chance go on an Australian tour of England. I think it's way out of reach — there are blokes like [South Australian] Jamie Siddons who have scored 20 or 30 first-class centuries who are ahead of me. Nevertheless, Shipperd thought Ponting could handle the experience: "A lot of attention affects different people in different ways, but Ricky is such a well-rounded young fella that it hasn't changed him. I've told him to enjoy the all the attention and if he just keeps on being himself I'm sure he'll cope well with all the success that I imagine he will achieve." The selectors eventually chose Western Australian batsman Damien Martyn for the tour, with Ponting selected in the Academy squad captained by Justin Langer, which toured India and Sri Lanka for seven games in August and September in 1993. Australian success was limited, with only a few wins. No batsman scored a century, but Ponting reached 99 not out in a one-day game in Colombo. He finished the tour second highest in the run-scorers behind Langer.
Before the start of the 1993–94 Sheffield Shield season, Ponting spoke of his goals for the summer. "I've got myself the goal of making 1,000 runs in the season. Hopefully, I can stay in the middle long enough or do that. You can't worry about other people's expectation. I don't care at all what is written in the press. I like to read it but it doesn't go too far into my head." In Tasmania's final round-robin match of the season, they needed to defeat South Australia outright to qualify for the final. Set 366 runs to win in 102 overs, Ponting joined Dene Hills at the crease with the score at 2/35. Ponting scored 161 in a 290-run partnership that ended with Tasmania needing just 41 runs for victory. Despite Tasmania losing four quick wickets after his dismissal, they won with four wickets in hand. Disappointingly for Ponting, he could not repeat the performance in the final against New South Wales. He scored just one and 28, as Tasmania were defeated by an innings and 61 runs. The season saw Ponting score 965 runs at 48.25, close to his 1,000 run goal. 

A month after the final, he was again selected for the Academy squad for three limited overs matches against a touring Indian team. Queenslander Stuart Law captained the Australian side that included former Australian keeper Rod Marsh. In Australia's victory in the first match in Canberra, Ponting top-scored with 71, before making 52 in a victory in Sydney. The last match was also successful for the home team, with Ponting not required to bat.

Ponting started his 1994–95 campaign with a century against eventual Shield champions Queensland in Brisbane, in a performance that impressed Queensland captain Allan Border, who had just retired from international cricket after leading the national team for a decade. Border said of Ponting: "He's just an outstanding prospect. The thing I like about him is he's very aggressive, he plays all the shots, he's equally at home on the front foot as the back foot. He cuts and pulls well, and he drives well. You don't often see that, the ability to get on [the] front foot and back foot and play equally well."
Speculation once again arose that Ponting could be selected for the upcoming tour to the West Indies. When Tasmania played Western Australia at Bellerive Oval on 4 November 1994, Ponting was 117 not out at stumps. That century was his fifth successive triple-figure score against Western Australia; Sir Donald Bradman is the only other batsman to score five consecutive centuries against another state in Shield history. He continued to 211, sharing a 319-run stand with captain Rod Tucker in the process. Ten days after the double century, Ponting was named in the Australian XI to play England at Bellerive Oval in a match that was used as practice for fringe Australian players before the upcoming series in the West Indies. Future Australian representatives Matthew Hayden, Langer, Greg Blewett and Martyn were also selected. In a drawn match, Ponting compiled a half-century, but Martyn scored a century. 

A fourth team was introduced to the World Series Cup in 1994–95—Australia A—for the only time. The Australian selectors re-shuffled both teams so that some players stepped up from the A team to the main Australian team, and vice versa, during the competition, depending on their performance. The Australian captain Mark Taylor was not a fan of the innovation: "... out there, on the field there was an ultra-competitive attitude by blokes of both teams, spurred on by the crows who were barracking for against Australia and supporting the underdog Australia A, who were pepped up and firing. Of course it gave the Australia A guys a chance to break into the Australian team, but to me the focus of the summer was on beating the Poms [England] in the Tests and winning the World Series, not beating our own Australian mates." Despite the negative feedback, the concept gave Ponting a chance on the international stage, and he scored 161 runs at 26.83 with one half-century.<ref name="World Series Cup in Aust. Dec 1994/Jan 1995 - Batting Averages"> </ref> Two weeks after the World Series, Ponting was selected in the squad for the upcoming one-day tri-series involving South Africa, India and hosts New Zealand. Trent Bouts, a cricket writer for "The Australian" said: "His selection at age 20 would normally represent a bold gamble on youth but so precocious are his talents it amounts to a routine progression." Ponting made his ODI debut against South Africa at the Basin Reserve in Wellington on 15 February 1995.



</doc>
<doc id="25130271" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25130271" title="George Mackinolty">
George Mackinolty

Air Vice Marshal George John William Mackinolty, OBE (24 March 1895 – 24 February 1951) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). Commencing his service in the Australian Flying Corps (AFC) as a mechanic during World War I, he rose to become the RAAF's chief logistics officer for more than twenty years. Mackinolty was born in Victoria and joined the AFC in 1914. He first saw active duty the following year in the Middle East with No. 30 Squadron Royal Flying Corps (formerly the Mesopotamian Half Flight). In 1916 he was mentioned in despatches and posted to No. 2 Squadron AFC. By the end of the war he had been commissioned a second lieutenant.

Joining the newly formed RAAF in August 1921, Mackinolty established himself as the service's senior logistician between the wars, first as Director of Transport and Equipment from 1929 to 1935, and thereafter as Director of Equipment. He was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 1937. Soon after the outbreak of World War II, he became Director of Supply and was promoted to group captain. In June 1942 he was raised to acting air commodore and appointed the Air Member for Supply and Equipment (AMSE). Promoted to air vice marshal in 1948, Mackinolty continued to serve as AMSE until his sudden death from cancer in February 1951, aged fifty-five.

Born on 24 March 1895 at Leongatha, Victoria, Mackinolty was the son of labourer James Mickleburg Mackinolty and his wife Mary. He went to public schools, obtaining his merit certificate before undertaking formal engineering and business courses in Melbourne. Commencing his working life as a coach and motor-body builder, he enlisted in the Australian Military Forces on 17 August 1914, soon after the outbreak of World War I. His experience in the motor industry led to assignment as an air mechanic with the Aviation Instructional Staff at Central Flying School (CFS), Point Cook. He was soon promoted from private to corporal and later, having gained a reputation for his skill with timber, raised to sergeant and given command of the school's woodworking team.
On 1 August 1915, Mackinolty transferred to the Australian Imperial Force, to lead a team of thirteen other mechanics as reinforcements for an Australian Flying Corps contingent serving in the Mesopotamian campaign. He departed Melbourne nine days later aboard RMS "Persia", and arrived at Basra on 1 September. Mackinolty's team immediately joined No. 30 Squadron Royal Flying Corps (originally the Mesopotamian Half Flight AFC), which moved into the city of Kut after its capture by British Empire troops in the Battle of Es Sinn. The unit took part in the Battle of Ctesiphon in November, and organised supply drops to the British and Indian garrison in Kut during the siege that lasted from December 1915 until the following April.

Mackinolty was promoted in the field to flight sergeant in June 1916, and mentioned in despatches on 19 October. When the Australian members of No. 30 Squadron were dispersed, he was posted to Kantara, Egypt, where he joined the newly established No. 2 Squadron AFC (also numbered No. 68 Squadron RFC by the British). Commanded by Major Oswald Watt, the unit relocated to England in January 1917. Following his service with No. 2 Squadron, Mackinolty was assigned to No. 5 (Training) Squadron AFC, which formed at Shawbury, Shropshire, in June 1917. Praised for his organisational and leadership abilities, he was commissioned as an equipment officer in March 1918, with the rank of second lieutenant. The following month he was given command of an aircraft repair unit in Minchinhampton, Gloucestershire, home of two squadrons of the AFC's 1st Training Wing.

Mackinolty remained in England following the end of hostilities, serving as "officer in charge of Australian packing" at RAF Hendon, near London, from December 1919 to September 1920. In this role he was responsible for crating and shipping to Point Cook the 128 aircraft and associated spares, weaponry, vehicles, hangars and other equipment that made up Britain's post-war Imperial Gift of Royal Air Force surplus to Australia, which eventually filled 19,000 cases. Mackinolty also completed formal training in aeronautical engineering before returning to Melbourne in October 1920. Discharged from the AIF in January 1921, he worked in the automotive industry and took a correspondence course on internal combustion engines.
On 8 August 1921, Mackinolty was commissioned as a flying officer in the newly formed Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). A member of the Stores and Accounting Branch, he commenced service with No. 1 Aircraft Depot at Point Cook in December. He was assigned to the staff of RAAF Headquarters, Melbourne, in 1924. On 20 November that year, he married Eileen Moore at Christ Church, South Yarra; the couple had a son and a daughter. In 1925, Mackinolty was posted as Equipment Officer to No. 3 Squadron at the recently established RAAF Station Richmond, New South Wales. Promoted flight lieutenant, he was appointed Director of Transport and Equipment at RAAF Headquarters in 1929, effectively making him the Air Force's senior supply officer, a role he would occupy for the next twenty-two years. His continuous tenure in essentially the one post was comparable to the RAAF's other chief logistician, Squadron Leader (later Air Vice Marshal) Ellis Wackett, who served as its senior engineer for twenty-four years, from 1935 to 1959.

Mackinolty's position was redesignated Director of Equipment in April 1935. At around this time, he collaborated with Squadron Leader George Jones, then Director of Training, on an investigation into the state of aircraft production in Australia to highlight shortfalls in local defence in the face of possible future conflict with Japan. Though the report was reviewed enthusiastically by the Air Member for Personnel, Wing Commander Bill Anderson, it apparently went no further in the chain of command and thus was effectively ignored. Raised to squadron leader, Mackinolty was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the Coronation Honours on 11 May 1937, in recognition of his achievements in stores and accounting. In February the following year he was promoted to wing commander. The punctilious Chief of the Air Staff, Air Vice Marshal Richard Williams, sometimes complained that Mackinolty did not pay enough attention to his personal appearance, but never failed to acknowledge his "professional excellence".

In April 1940 Mackinolty became Director of Supply, reporting to the Director-General of Supply and Production on the Air Board, the RAAF's controlling body. Responsible for all stores and equipment, Mackinolty also represented his service at the Federal Contract Board, Department of Supply, and Oil Board. He was promoted to temporary group captain in June that year. With the formation in 1942 of Allied Air Forces Headquarters, which assumed the operational functions of the Chief of the Air Staff, the Air Board was reorganised. The offices of Air Member for Organisation and Equipment, once held by Air Marshal Richard Williams, and Director-General of Supply and Production, a civilian position, were dissolved and replaced by those of the Air Member for Supply and Equipment (AMSE) and Air Member for Engineering and Maintenance (AMEM) to focus on the two key logistical functions of supply and engineering, respectively. Promoted to acting air commodore, Mackinolty became the inaugural AMSE in June. Air Commodore Ellis Wackett became AMEM at the same time. Norman Ashworth, in "How Not to Run an Air Force!", observed that splitting the logistical functions of the Air Board in this manner appeared to be a "uniquely Australian" experiment, and it was not inconceivable that the organisation had been "tailored" to suit these "two very capable officers". Serving as AMSE for the remainder of the war, Mackinolty was credited with successfully managing the supply requirements of personnel and aircraft for an organisation that by 1945 had grown by a factor of fifty from its pre-war size, to become the world's fourth largest air force.
Following the end of hostilities, Mackinolty was personally responsible for disposing of surplus equipment up to an original value of £500, and jointly responsible (with the Business and Finance Members of the Air Board) for disposing of equipment valued between £500 and £10,000. His duties as AMSE extended to setting the peacetime meal rations for RAAF personnel. In May 1946, he joined the Australian Battlefields Memorial Committee, convened to advise the Federal government regarding commemoration of the armed forces for their wartime achievements. Later that year, Mackinolty visited British Commonwealth Occupation Force (BCOF) headquarters in Japan, and subsequently arranged for the RAAF to assume responsibility for the supply of spare parts to its air component, British Commonwealth Air Group (BCAIR). He was raised to acting air vice-marshal in January 1947 (substantive in October 1948). By this time, Mackinolty and the Chief of the Air Staff, No. 4 Squadron AFC veteran Air Vice-Marshal George Jones, were the only remaining RAAF officers who had served in both world wars. Other senior commanders and veterans of the Australian Flying Corps had been summarily retired in 1946, a "purge" that was ostensibly designed to make way for the advancement of younger and equally proficient officers.

During 1947, the RAAF prepared for the introduction of an apprentice engineering scheme. Against a harsh post-war economic climate, Mackinolty personally intervened to improve the planned accommodation for trainees, arguing that the youths could not be expected to live in the austere conditions to which other members of the Air Force were used. He further noted in his submission to the Minister for Air, Arthur Drakeford, that "the parents of apprentices will, from time to time, be permitted to visit their sons and it would be in the interest of both the Apprentice Scheme and the Service generally if all reasonable efforts were made to create a favourable impression in the minds of the parents". Shortly after the first intake of engineer apprentices in January 1948, Mackinolty formally proposed that a similar scheme be set up for apprenticeships in the supply and clerical trades. Although initially rejected by the Minister, after some refinements the plan came to fruition three years later as the Junior Equipment and Administrative Training Scheme.

In January 1951, Mackinolty was struck down suddenly with cancer and admitted to hospital at RAAF Station Laverton, Victoria. He died there on 24 February, survived by his wife and children. At the time of his death, he had served for a decade as honorary treasurer of the Returned Sailors', Soldiers' and Airmens' Imperial League of Australia, and was the last member of the original staff of the AFC in 1914 still serving. He was succeeded as AMSE by Air Vice-Marshal Joe Hewitt. Described by Air Force historian Alan Stephens as "the most significant logistics officer in the history of the RAAF", Mackinolty was accorded an Air Force funeral with full honours at Bathurst Memorial Chapel, Elsternwick, and cremated at Springvale Crematorium.



</doc>
<doc id="25143302" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25143302" title="Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland, BWV 61">
Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland, BWV 61

Johann Sebastian Bach composed the church cantata (Now come, Savior of the heathens), 61, in Weimar for the first Sunday in Advent, the Sunday which begins the liturgical year, and first performed it on 1714.

The cantata text was provided by Erdmann Neumeister, who quoted the Book of Revelation and framed his work by two hymn stanzas, the beginning of Martin Luther's "", the main hymn for Advent with a melody based on Medieval chant, and the end from Philipp Nicolai's "". The librettist quoted developed his thoughts like a sermon. Bach structured the cantata in six movements, beginning with a chorale fantasia, followed by a series of alternating recitatives and arias, and concluded by a four-part chorale. He scored it for three vocal soloists (soprano, tenor and bass), strings and continuo. Bach led the first performance on 2 December 1714. As , director of music of the main churches of Leipzig, he performed the cantata again on 28 November 1723.

On 2 March 1714 Bach was appointed concertmaster of the Weimar court capelle of the co-reigning dukes Wilhelm Ernst and Ernst August of Saxe-Weimar. As concertmaster, he assumed the principal responsibility for composing new works, specifically cantatas for the ' (palace church), on a monthly schedule.

The exact chronological order of Bach's Weimar cantatas remains uncertain. Only four bear autograph dates. BWV 61 is dated 1714 and bears the liturgical designation "", the First Sunday of Advent. The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the Epistle to the Romans, "now is our salvation nearer" (), and from the Gospel of Matthew, the Entry into Jerusalem ().
The cantata text was provided by Erdmann Neumeister, published in "Geistliche Poesien" in Frankfurt in 1714. He began and ended his work with a hymn stanza. "" is the main hymn for Advent, which Martin Luther had derived from the Latin . Its melody is based on Medieval chant and supplies a "dark, imposing character". For the conclusion, Neumeister chose the second part, the , of the seventh and final stanza of Philipp Nicolai's "". The librettist quoted the Book of Revelation in the fourth movement: "" – "Behold, I stand at the door and knock. Anyone that hears My voice and opens the door, to him I will enter and keep the evening meal with him and he with me." (). The poet combined the ideas of Jesus' entry into Jerusalem and his promise to return with an invitation to enter the heart of the individual Christian. He developed his thoughts like a sermon, as the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr notes: mentioning that the arrival of Jesus brings blessing every day (movement 2), a prayer that Jesus may come to his congregation (movement 2), and in response to his statement of being at the door (movement 4) the opening of the heart of the individual Christian who knows about his sinfulness (movement 5). Bach had set one text by Neumeister before, possibly by 1713, in his cantata "Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fällt", BWV 18.

Because of Bach's liturgical designation, the performance can be precisely dated to 2 December 1714. As , director of music of the main churches of Leipzig, Bach performed the cantata again on 28 November 1723, beginning the first liturgical year in the new position. Bach paid attention to the exceptional occasion at beginning of the liturgical year, also when he composed later the chorale cantata "Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland", BWV 62 (1724), and "Schwingt freudig euch empor", BWV 36 (1731), which are all inspired by Luther's hymn. Bach also began his by a setting of the same tune. In Leipzig, the first Sunday in Advent was the last chance to hear cantata music before Christmas, because "tempus clausum" was observed during Advent.

Bach structured the cantata in six movements, beginning with chorale fantasia, followed by a series of alternating recitatives and arias and concluded by a chorale. He scored it for three vocal soloists (soprano (S), tenor (T) and bass (B)), and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of violins (Vl), two violas (Va), and basso continuo (Bc), including cello (Vc) and bassoon (Fg). The autograph score is titled: "Dominica 1. Adventus Xsti. / Nun komm der Heyden Heyland. / â . / due Violini / due Viole / Violoncello / è & / Fagotto. / Sopr: Alto. Tenore è Baßo / Col' / Organo. / da / Joh Sebast Bach / anno. / 1714". The duration is given as 18 minutes. According to the Bach scholar Christoph Wolff, the use of two viola parts is French style. Dürr notes that perhaps the strings were doubled by oboes, at least in the Leipzig performance, in a practise that was "not always marked in the score".

In the following table of the movements, the scoring, keys and time signatures are taken from Dürr, using the symbol for common time (4/4). The continuo, playing throughout, is not shown.

The first Sunday of Advent begins the liturgical year. Bach marked it by creating the opening chorus, "" (Now come, Saviour of the Gentiles), as a chorale fantasia in the style of a French overture, which follows the sequence slow – fast (fugue) – slow. In a French opera performance, the King of France would have entered during the overture; Bach greets a different king. Two of the four lines of the chorale melody are combined in the first slow section, line three is treated in the fast section, and line four in the final slow section. The melody of line 1 is first presented in the continuo, then sung by all four voices one after another, accompanied by a solemn dotted rhythm in the orchestra. Line 2 is sung by all voices together, accompanied by the orchestra. Line 3 is a fast , with the instruments playing , marked "gai". Line 4 is set as line 2. Wolff notes that Bach possibly followed the model of an opera by Agostino Steffani, "Henrico Leone", which uses a chorus in a French overture.

The recitative for tenor, "" (The Saviour has come), begins but continues as an , with tenor and continuo imitating one another. This more lyrical style of recitative derives from early Italian operas and cantatas, where it was known as "" – half aria.

The tenor aria, "" (Come, Jesus, come to Your Church), is accompanied by the violins and violas in unison. It is written in the rhythm of a gigue, and the combination of voice, unison strings and continuo gives it the texture of a trio sonata. Dürr comments that the use of the unison string ritornello, played even during the vocal passages, provides a "rather pointedly strict and unified character". The musicologist Richard Taruskin comments: "This hybridization of operatic and instrumental styles is ... standard operating procedure in Bach's cantatas."

The quote from Revelation, "" (See, I stand before the door and knock), is given as a recitative to the bass as the (voice of Christ). The knocking on the door is expressed by chords in the strings. Dürr notes: "The most expressive text-engendered declamation is here ingeniously melted down into a structure only ten bars long but of compelling musical logic." John Eliot Gardiner, who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage in 2000, compares it to an Emmaus scene in Bach's later cantata "Bleib bei uns, denn es will Abend werden", BWV 6, the "post-Resurrection appearance to the disciples" in "Halt im Gedächtnis Jesum Christ", BWV 67, even to "the entry of the Commendatore in Mozart’s opera "Don Giovanni". Bach would later frequently use the bass as the voice of Christ, in his "St Matthew Passion" even with a similar string accompaniment.

The response to the invitation is the individual prayer of the soprano, "" (Open, my whole heart). It is accompanied only by the continuo, with an adagio middle section.

In the closing chorale, "" (Amen, amen! Come, you fair crown of joy), Bach sets the "Abgesang" only of the final stanza of Nicolai's hymn. The musicologist Julian Mincham offers the thought: "Conceivably the most convincing explanation lies, as it so often does, within the text– ... do not delay, I await You longingly. The hymn tune itself, through its very abbreviation implies a sense of urgency and the feeling of being unable to defer any longer." In Bach's setting, the violin adds a jubilant fifth part to the four vocal parts. The violin has to "climb three octaves to convey the extent of the soul's longing for the joys of a future life and the prospect of Jesus returning at the end of time".

The listing is taken from the selection on the Bach Cantatas Website. Vocal groups with one voice per part (OVPP) and instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are marked by green background.




</doc>
<doc id="25154219" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25154219" title="Chartjackers">
Chartjackers

Chartjackers is a British documentary series, produced by Hat Trick Productions and commissioned by BBC Switch. It documents the lives of four teenage video bloggers over the course of ten weeks, as they attempt to write, record and release a pop song for charity, with the goal to "sell an estimated 25,000 singles to achieve their dream of a number one single". It premiered in the UK on 12 September 2009 on BBC Two, and ran for a single series of eleven weekly episodes. When first broadcast, the programme ran in real time: its first ten episodes documented the events of the previous seven days, while the final episode was an extended compilation that summarised all ten weeks.

The "Chartjackers" single was written entirely through crowdsourcing, with the song's title, lyrics, melody, singers, band, production, cover art and music video all being solicited from the global online community. The crowdsourcing took the format of the four bloggers—Alex Day, Johnny Haggart, Jimmy Hill and Charlie McDonnell—posting videos to a dedicated YouTube channel named "ChartJackersProject", where they invited viewers to suggest various ideas for the final song. After receiving advice from industry experts such as Charlie Simpson and David and Carrie Grant, the completed "Chartjackers" single, entitled "I've Got Nothing", was released through the iTunes Store at the end of the ten-week period on 9 November. The track received mainly negative reviews from music critics and sold approximately 8,400 copies in the UK, earning it a peak position of number 36 on the UK Singles Chart.

"Chartjackers" garnered a viewing figures peak of almost half a million with its final episode and was critically panned by reviewers. Some commentators felt that the programme's concept was ridiculous and doomed from the start, others felt that the series showed a contempt for music and the general public, and other critics questioned whether the point of the project was to raise money for charity or for the four bloggers to promote themselves. The show was nominated for a 2010 Broadcast Digital Award in the Best Multi-Platform Project category, but lost out to "The Operation...Surgery Live".

"Chartjackers" was devised in 2009 by Jonathan Davenport and Andy Mettam of the British production company Hat Trick Productions. It was commissioned by Geoffrey Goodwin and Jo Twist of the television brand BBC Switch, and was featured as part of a season of multi-platform content intended to appeal to teenagers. The show was billed as a "YouTube X Factor", with its main focus being its direct link to the 2009 annual appeal for the British charity "Children in Need" – profits from sales of the completed single were donated to the charity. "Chartjackers" was executively produced by Davenport, Hat Trick's digital department head, who had previously worked on similar cross-platform projects that incorporated both television and online media, such as the video podcast of "Have I Got News For You" and the YouTube-based series "Bryony Makes a Zombie Movie". Digital agency Fish in a bottle were commissioned to provide creative content for the online platforms, such as the YouTube channel and Twitter account.

As a cross-platform project that incorporated YouTube, it was important that the video bloggers cast for the leading team already had a large fanbase – the four bloggers chosen had a combined YouTube subscriber total of over 200,000. They were selected for their familiarity to young British YouTube viewers and to "act as Pied Pipers to the teen audience". Miranda Chartrand and Adam Nichols, the vocalists who sang on the completed "Chartjackers" single, were cast halfway through the programme's series as part of an audition process and were featured in the remainder of the episodes.

Although much of "Chartjackers" was filmed in and around London—such as a gathering at music venue 93 Feet East during episode nine and the music video for "I've Got Nothing" during episode seven—various locations were featured throughout the series. Vocalist auditions in episode five took place at the Wellfield Working Men's Club in Rochdale, and the single itself was recorded at the University of Wales in Newport. During episode nine, some of the team visited the Three Ways School in Bath, Somerset.

"Chartjackers" documented the lives of Day, Haggart, Hill and McDonnell as they attempted to write, record and release a charity single through crowdsourcing. The series was shown in real time, with each of the first ten episodes detailing the events of the previous seven days. On 5 September 2009, one week before the programme's first episode aired, the group announced on the YouTube channel "ChartJackersProject" their intention to release a number one single within their ten-week time frame. A different task would be undertaken each week, so that, by the end of the project, the song would be completed.
The first episode of "Chartjackers" documented the events of the first week of the project and explained what its ultimate goal was. To generate potential lyrics, viewers were asked each to post one line as a comment to a video on "ChartJackersProject". Viewers posted more than 4,000 comments, from which were selected the winning lines. These lyrics were posted to the Internet the following episode, with the chorus having been composed by YouTube user "blakeisno1" and the repeated phrase "I've Got Nothing" chosen for the song's title. "ChartJackersProject" viewers were then asked to create a melody for the lyrics and submit it in a video response, so that one could be selected for the single.

Out of a total of 51 melodies that had been sent in, the winning entry by Jonny Dark was chosen from them during episode three. It was also revealed that a band would be put together to perform the "Chartjackers" single and that any potential members should apply by submitting video auditions. Episode four documented some of the hundreds of auditions that had been sent in – the group reviewed these auditions and selected from them their ten favourites to go through as finalists. These ten finalists performed for the four boys during episode five, where Chartrand, a 19-year-old au pair from Stroud, Gloucestershire, and Nichols, an 18-year-old musician from Essex, were selected to sing on the official release. During episode six, "I've Got Nothing" was recorded in Newport by record producer Marc Dowding, and the group received advice from video director Corin Hardy on how to film the official music video.

Taking Hardy's advice, the music video for "I've Got Nothing" was filmed during the seventh episode of "Chartjackers". To begin promoting its release, the team also petitioned 95.8 Capital FM and BBC Radio 1 to try to get the radio coverage for the single, but it was not playlisted and received no airplay. The boys feared that the song would not chart at all, so, during episode eight, they urged viewers to spam the Twitter feeds of radio DJs who could play the single on their shows. In the next episode, a gathering took place at 93 Feet East in London on 4 November, where the single was performed live for the first time by Chartrand and Nichols. During the tenth episode, "I've Got Nothing" was released online. The midweek charts placed the single at Number 39, but its sales increased after comedian Stephen Fry—who provides an outro for McDonnell's YouTube videos—was convinced to promote it on his Twitter profile. Episode eleven, the final compilation episode, revealed on "The Radio 1 Chart Show" that "I've Got Nothing" had reached number 36 on the UK Singles Chart, which disappointed the boys.

Over the course of the series, several figures from both the music and entertainment industry made an appearance on "Chartjackers", usually to offer advice or encouragement to the four boys. The first celebrity to feature on the show was former pop star Chesney Hawkes, who remarked that he felt that the team had "every experience between [them] to actually pull [their aim of reaching number one] off". During the fourth episode, vocal coaches David and Carrie Grant offered advice to the group on what criteria to use when judging the submitted video auditions, and indie rock band The Young Knives sent in a video message, wishing the team success. The following episode, Charlie Simpson of Fightstar explained to the boys the differences between releasing music through major and independent labels. During episode six, the team met with Peter Oakley, who spoke about his own chart success as part of The Zimmers, and Hardy, who advised ways in which the music video could be filmed. The next episode, the group received advice from celebrity stylist Hannah Sandling, who suggested how Chartrand and Nichols should be styled for the video, and entertainment journalist Rav Singh, who discussed how to get airplay for "I've Got Nothing" through publicity stunts.

Critical reaction to "Chartjackers" was overwhelmingly negative. Although radio stations, newspapers and magazines were all canvassed, the show was largely ignored by the mainstream media and received generally negative reviews. It was misrepresented in an article on "The Times" website, which mistook the four boys for a new boy band. Fraser McAlpine of BBC Radio 1's Chart Blog said that the project showed a basic "contempt for music" and "the public at large". James Masterton of Yahoo! Music called "Chartjackers" "something of a failure" and its charting "lacklustre". He did not mention it at all in his weekly chart podcast. Neither Reggie Yates nor Scott Mills, two of the DJs whose Twitter feeds were spammed during episode eight, were impressed by the way that the "Chartjackers" team had tried to get their attention.

Similarly negative reviews came from Eammon Forde of "Music Week", who said the decision to release the single without management was "ridiculous" and that the campaign was "doomed", and Pocket-lint, who described the show as a "car crash". In the week of the single's release, Irish television personality Stephen Byrne questioned on his Twitter profile whether the main motivation for the project really was "charity" – British comedian David Bass agreed with him. The project was quickly overshadowed by a similar, more successful campaign to get "Killing in the Name" by American metal band Rage Against the Machine to top the UK Singles Chart for Christmas 2009.

"Chartjackers" received one nomination at the 2010 Broadcast Digital Awards, a British awards event commemorating success and creativity in digital television. The show was submitted in the Best Multi-Platform Project category, but was beaten by "The Operation: Surgery Live". It was not nominated for any further awards.
"Chartjackers" was distributed both on television and online. It ran for a single series of eleven episodes: the first ten episodes lasted for five minutes each, with the final compilation episode running for half an hour and gaining a viewership peak of half a million. "Chartjackers" premiered on BBC Two on 12 September 2009 at 12:50 p.m., as part of the channel's two-hour-long BBC Switch segment – it was uploaded to the YouTube channel "BBCSwitch" the same day. This practice of broadcasting an episode on BBC Two and uploading it to the "BBCSwitch" channel the same day continued throughout the series. Episodes were also streamed online through BBC iPlayer to UK residents for seven days after their initial broadcast. The show was not broadcast outside of the UK and, , is not available on DVD.

The completed "Chartjackers" single was released worldwide exclusively through the iTunes Store at midnight on 9 November 2009. Each copy was sold for £0.79 in the UK and $0.99 in the US. Just under 8,400 copies were downloaded in the UK, giving "I've Got Nothing" a chart placing of number 36 in the UK Singles Chart. The song sold approximately 20,000 copies worldwide, but did not make the singles chart in any other country.

Like the series from which it originated, "I've Got Nothing" was poorly received by critics. Some called the effort "very bad" and others predicted that it was "unlikely to make much of a top 40 impact". The music video for "I've Got Nothing" featured footage of Chartrand and Nichols singing the song in a London park, along with an actor dressed as Children in Need mascot Pudsey Bear. This footage, along with clips of viewers miming to the song, was then used to construct the final music video for the single, which McDonnell edited.

"I've Got Nothing" was performed live twice. The first occasion was at the 93 Feet East gathering on 4 November 2009, during the promotion of the single's release. The gathering featured performances from other YouTube users and was headlined by Hawkes. The second occurrence was four days later at Switch Live 2009, an awards show organised by BBC Switch at the HMV Hammersmith Apollo, where a performance of "I've Got Nothing" opened the event.



</doc>
<doc id="25161536" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25161536" title="Howard Knox Ramey">
Howard Knox Ramey

Howard Knox Ramey (28 June 1896 – 26 March 1943) was a United States Army Air Forces general during World War II. Ramey learned to fly in 1918 during World War I and served as an instructor at the Air Corps Advanced Flying School and as a staff officer with the 1st Bombardment Wing between the wars. He was commander of the IV Bomber Command from 12 August 1942 to 8 November 1942, and was promoted to brigadier general on 17 September 1942. In November 1942, he became deputy commander of the Seventh Air Force in Hawaii. In January 1943 he became the commander of the V Bomber Command in Australia and Papua, which he led during the Battle of the Bismarck Sea. In March 1943 he disappeared on a reconnaissance flight over the Torres Strait. Neither his aircraft nor his body has ever been found.

Howard Knox Ramey was born in Waynesboro, Mississippi on 28 June 1896. He attended Mississippi Agricultural and Mechanical College from 1915 to 1917. In December 1917 he enlisted as a private first class in the Aviation Section, U.S. Signal Corps, in which he was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 20 April 1918.

In July 1920, Ramey received a permanent commission as a first lieutenant in the United States Army Air Service. He attended the Air Service Photography School in 1921, and became commander of the 6th Photo Section at Camp Nichols in the Philippines from January to October 1925. He then served as intelligence officer there until he returned to the United States in February 1927. He commanded the 22nd Photo Section at Kelly Field, San Antonio, Texas from 1927 to 1928, and was an instructor at the Air Corps Advanced Flying School there from 1928 to 1931. 

After more than ten years as a first lieutenant, Ramey was finally promoted to captain on 1 March 1932. On 26 March 1934, Ramey was one of 35 American World War I military pilots who founded the Order of the Daedalians, a fraternal order of military pilots.

He attended the Air Corps Tactical School at Maxwell Field, Alabama, graduating in 1934, and then the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, graduating in 1936. Shortly afterwards, he was promoted to major on 16 June 1936. Ramey served as operations officer and assistant chief of staff for intelligence of the 1st Bombardment Wing at March Field, California from 1936 to 1941. He was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 30 December 1940.

Ramey was deputy chief of staff for operations (G-3) of the Fourth Air Force from January to August 1942, with the rank of colonel from 5 January 1942. He was commander of the IV Bomber Command from 12 August 1942 to 8 November 1942, and was promoted to brigadier general on 17 September 1942. In November 1942, he became deputy commander of the Seventh Air Force. 

Following the death of the commander of the V Bomber Command, Brigadier General Kenneth Walker, in an air raid over Rabaul in January 1943, the commander of the Fifth Air Force, Lieutenant General George Kenney asked Lieutenant General Henry H. Arnold, the chief of Army Air Forces to send Ramey to Australia as a replacement. The two men had known each other for years and Ramey had recently been on Kenney's staff when Kenney was commander of the Fourth Air Force. "I had a lot of confidence in him," Kenney later wrote, "and believed he would do a real job for me. Arnold replied the next day that I could have him." Ramey assumed command of V Bomber Command in January 1943. After the arguments over bombing tactics with Walker, Kenney was pleased that Ramey liked the skip bombing tactics the Fifth Air Force was developing. These tactics were put in practice with devastating effect at the Battle of the Bismarck Sea in March 1943.

On 26 March 1943, Ramey took off from Port Moresby in the B-17 Flying Fortress #41-24384, "Pluto", to carry out a scheduled seven-hour reconnaissance flight to Merauke and Horn Island. A message from the radio operator twenty minutes after take-off was the last that was ever heard from the aircraft. An extensive air search was conducted but no sign was found of the aircraft or the twelve men on board. Ramey was declared dead on 19 November 1945. He left behind a wife and two daughters. Ramey Air Force Base in Puerto Rico was named in his honour. 

In February 2007, diver Ben Cropp reported that he had found the wreckage of the plane. However, the plane turned out to have been a misidentified C-47. The location of the wreck of "Pluto" remains unknown.



</doc>
<doc id="25167039" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25167039" title="J. T. White">
J. T. White

John T. "J.T." White (July 10, 1920 – November 21, 2005) was a college football assistant coach, and a second-team 1947 College Football All-American center who played for national championship teams at both the University of Michigan and Ohio State University. White also played basketball for the Ohio State Buckeyes men's basketball team. Although White was drafted to play professional football, he chose to pursue a career as an assistant football coach for both the Michigan Wolverines and Penn State Nittany Lions football teams. He served as an assistant coach for a national champion at Michigan and three undefeated and untied seasons at Penn State. White served in the United States Army during World War II causing a break in his collegiate education.

White was born in Wadley, Georgia and raised in River Rouge, Michigan. White earned his bachelor's degree in education from Michigan in 1948. He earned his master's degree in education at Michigan. White married the former Verna McQueen, and they had one son, Brian. Verna and White were married for 53 years before she died at 75 in October 1997 of emphysema.

At River Rouge High School he played baseball, basketball and football before attending Ohio State. In 1942, he lettered in both basketball and football at Ohio State as a sophomore. He was a player for national champions on both the 1942 Ohio State Buckeyes football team and the 1947 Michigan Wolverines football team. He is one of only three players (along with Justin Boren and Howard Yerges) to have played for the football teams of both Michigan and Ohio State; this low number can be attributed to the strong rivalry between the two schools.

White matriculated at The Ohio State University, where he earned a varsity letter playing for Paul Brown's 1942 team. White played at Ohio State for two years. He served in the United States Army from 1943 to 1945 during World War II and lettered two years for Fritz Crisler's Michigan teams. His younger brother, Paul was captain at Michigan when White transferred. J. T. was the starting center for the 1946 and 1947 teams. The Football Writers Association of America named him as their second-team All-American center for the 1947 college football season. White played in the 1948 College All-Star Game, and he was drafted by two pro teams: the Detroit Lions with the first pick of the 21st round (186th overall) in the 1947 NFL Draft and the Brooklyn Dodgers of the All-America Football Conference.

He chose to join Bennie Oosterbaan's Michigan coaching staff for six years (1948–53), including the national champion 1948 Michigan Wolverines football team. Then, for 26 seasons, from 1954 through 1979, J.T. was a defensive line coach at Penn State, first under Rip Engle and then under Joe Paterno, who took over in 1966. When White moved to Penn State to work for Engle, the staff included Paterno, Earle Bruce, Sever Toretti, Jim O'Hora and Jim Patrick. His tenure on the staff included three undefeated and untied seasons (1968, 1969 and 1973). Subsequently, from 1980–1982, he served as assistant to the Penn State Athletic Director.



</doc>
<doc id="25167742" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25167742" title="Gilbert Thomas Carter">
Gilbert Thomas Carter

Sir Gilbert Thomas Carter (Sir Thomas Gilbert-Carter) (14 January 1848 – 18 January 1927) was an administrative officer in the Royal Navy and a colonial official for the British Empire.

Starting as a Collector of Customs for the Gold Coast, he then became a Treasurer of the Gold Coast and the Gambia. Moving on to colonial administration, he started as the Administrator for the Gambia, where he dealt with the aggression of the native king of Gambia.

His next post was as Governor for the Lagos Colony where he negotiated treaties with the local chiefs which protected Christian missionaries and ending human sacrifies. He later served as the Governor for The Bahamas and Barbados and finally as the Governor for Trinidad and Tobago.

Carter was born in Topsham, Devon in 1848. He was the only son of Commander Thomas Gilbert Carter (R.N.). He was educated at the Royal Hospital School in Greenwich. Carter joined the Royal Navy in 1864, serving as an Assistant Clerk on , being transferred in 1866 to . On 5 July 1866, Carter was promoted to Clerk, while still serving on HMS "Malacca". Between 1867 and 1869, he served on a variety of ships as a clerk, until 1 December 1869 (while serving on ), when he was promoted to Assistant Paymaster (being added to the Navy List).

Following a posting to for the first nine months of 1870, Carter's final posting was to the Colonial steamer "Sherbro" from August 1870. During his time on "Sherbro", he was involved with the Third Anglo–Ashanto War on the Gold Coast. When Elmina was sold to the British by the Dutch Government, he was a commissioner, responsible for valuing the stores and ordnance left behind by the Dutch. He married Susan Laura Hocker, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Hocker, in 1874 (later having 3 sons and 2 daughters — his second son Humphrey 1884–1969 was the first Director of the Cambridge University Botanic Garden). Lady Carter died in 1895. He retired from the Navy on 21 July 1875.

Carter became the private secretary to Sir George Berkeley, Governor of the Leeward Islands, in 1875. In August 1879, he was appointed Collector of Customs and Treasurer of the Gold Coast, an appointment he kept until 1882. From 1882 until December 1888, Carter administered the Settlement on the Gambia as a Treasurer and Postmaster. From 1886, he was acting Administrator of the Colony of the Gambia, and on 1 December 1888 he was appointed Administrator on that colony's separation from Sierra Leone. While working in the Gambia, he was appointed Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG) on 1 January 1890.

In 1891, the native King of Gambia had been organising abusive acts towards the British colonists. Carter (from his official residence in Bathurst) sent an envoy with a message that if the abuses continued, "he might expect a visit of a disciplinary nature from the marine forces of the Queen of England." The King sent the envoy back mutilated, with a message: "This is the King's answer." In response, Carter sent three British gunboats to avenge the outrage upon the envoy.

Carter was appointed Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Colony of Lagos on 3 February 1891. Carter ordered an attack on the Ijebu "in the interest of civilization" in 1892. Afterwards, he continued to justify this attack as a war to end slavery and promote civilization.

Carter travelled to various parts of Yorubaland, accompanied by soldiers, in an attempt to demonstrate the might of the British. Carter was not well received at Oyo, and the Egba chiefs advised him not to interfere with slavery, while the Ibadan chiefs said they were afraid that their slaves would "assert their freedom by running to the Resident" – and they refused to sign a treaty with Carter that would impose a Resident on the city.

However, in January 1893 the Egba chiefs signed a Treaty of Independence with the British Government. It was agreed that freedom of trade between the Egba Nation and Lagos was to be guaranteed by the British Government, in return for which no road would be closed without the approval of the Governor. They further agreed that complete protection and "every assistance and encouragement" would be afforded to all Christian ministers. The Crown agreed that "no annexation on any portion of Egba Nation shall be made by her Majesty's Government without the consent of the lawful authorities of the nation, no aggressive action shall be taken against the said nation and its independence shall be fully recognized." The Egba chiefs further promised to abolish human sacrifices.

He was promoted Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG) on 3 June 1893, "in recognition of his services in conducting a mission to the Yoruba country which resulted in the negotiation of important treaties and brought to an end a long-standing war."

Carter was given Ife works of art in 1896 by the recently crowned King of Ife, Adelekan, in the hopes that a decision in his favour would be made about the resettlement of Modakeke residents outside the city. These works (including three known as the "Ife marbles"), were sent by Carter to Europe.

While serving in Lagos, Lady Carter, his first wife, died on 13 January 1895, shortly after arriving in Lagos.

The Carter Bridge, first built in 1901 and linking Lagos Island with Iddo Island, was named after him.

Carter was transferred to Bahamas as Governor and Commander-in-Chief in 1898, and after a temporary transfer to Trinidad, in July 1904 he was transferred to the Barbados as Governor and Commander-in-Chief.

Carter met an American artist (see Stamp) from Boston, Gertrude Codman Parker (6 February 1875 – 12 November 1953, Boston), in the spring of 1903 when she was travelling in the Bahamas with her parents, Francis Vose Parker and his wife. She became his second wife on 25 August 1903, when they were married in the Church of the Advent in Boston and had a son, John Codman Carter.

Carter continued working in senior colonial positions — being appointed the Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the Island of Barbados and its Dependencies in 1904, and as Administrator of the Government of the Colony of Trinidad and Tobago, and its Dependencies in the absence of the Governor from 1907 until 1910, whereupon he retired.

In 1919, he changed his surname to "Gilbert-Carter". In the early 1920s, he moved back to Barbados, and lived at Ilaro Court, which had been designed and built by Lady Gilbert Carter. He died there on 18 January 1927. When his will was probated on 22 March of that year, the total value of his effects was £6859 9s 11d.



</doc>
<doc id="25171429" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25171429" title="Inflow (meteorology)">
Inflow (meteorology)

Inflow is the flow of a fluid into a large collection of that fluid. Within meteorology, inflow normally refers to the influx of warmth and moisture from air within the Earth's atmosphere into storm systems. Extratropical cyclones are fed by inflow focused along their cold front and warm fronts. Tropical cyclones require a large inflow of warmth and moisture from warm oceans in order to develop significantly, mainly within the lowest of the atmosphere. Once the flow of warm and moist air is cut off from thunderstorms and their associated tornadoes, normally by the thunderstorm's own rain-cooled outflow boundary, the storms begin to dissipate. Rear inflow jets behind squall lines act to erode the broad rain shield behind the squall line, and accelerate its forward motion.

The inflow into a thunderstorm, or complex of thunderstorms, is the circulation of warm and humid air ahead of a trigger convergence zone such as a cold front. This airmass is uplifted by the trigger and form convective clouds. Later, cool air carried to the ground by thunderstorm downdraft, cuts off the inflow of the thunderstorm, destroying its updraft and causing its dissipation.

Tornadoes, which form within stronger thunderstorms, grow until they reach their mature stage. This is when the rear flank downdraft of the thunderstorm, fed by rain-cooled air, begins to wrap around the tornado, cutting off the inflow of warm air which previously fed the tornado.

Inflow can originate from mid-levels of the atmosphere too. When thunderstorms are able to organize into squall lines, a feature known as a rear inflow jet develops to the south of the mid-level circulation associated with its northern bookend vortex. This leads to an erosion of rain within the broad rain shield behind the squall line, and may lead to acceleration of the squall line itself.

While an initial warm core system, such as an organized thunderstorm complex, is necessary for the formation of a tropical cyclone, a large flux of energy is needed to lower atmospheric pressure more than a few millibars (0.10 inch of mercury). Inflow of warmth and moisture from the underlying ocean surface is critical for tropical cyclone strengthening. A significant amount of the inflow in the cyclone is in the lowest of the atmosphere.

Polar front theory is attributed to Jacob Bjerknes, and was derived from a coastal network of observation sites in Norway during World War I. This theory proposed that the main inflow into a cyclone was concentrated along two lines of convergence, one ahead (or east) of the low and another trailing equatorward (south in the Northern Hemisphere and north in the Southern Hemisphere) and behind (or west) of the low. The convergence line ahead of the low became known as either the steering line or the warm front. The trailing convergence zone was referred to as the squall line or cold front. Areas of clouds and rainfall appeared to be focused along these convergence zones. A conveyor belt, also referred to as the warm conveyor belt, is a term describing the flow of a stream of warm moist air originating within the warm sector (or generally equatorward) of an extratropical cyclone in advance of the cold front which slopes up above and poleward (north in the Northern Hemisphere and south in the Southern Hemisphere) of the surface warm front. The concept of the conveyor belt originated in 1969.

The left edge of the conveyor belt is sharp due to higher density air moving in from the west forcing a sharp slope to the cold front. An area of stratiform precipitation develops poleward of the warm front along the conveyor belt. Active precipitation poleward of the warm front implies potential for greater development of the cyclone. A portion of this conveyor belt turns to the right (left in the Southern Hemisphere), aligning with the upper level westerly flow. However, the western portion of this belt wraps around the northwest (southwest in the Southern Hemisphere) side of the cyclone, which can contain moderate to heavy precipitation. If the air mass is cold enough, the precipitation falls in the form of heavy snow. Theory from the 1980s talked about the presence of a cold conveyor belt originating north of the warm front and flowing along a clockwise path (in the northern hemisphere) into the main belt of the westerlies aloft, but there has been conflicting evidence as to whether or not this phenomenon actually exists.



</doc>
<doc id="25200772" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25200772" title="Silver Reef, Utah">
Silver Reef, Utah

Silver Reef is a ghost town in Washington County, Utah, United States, about northeast of St. George and west of Leeds. Silver Reef was established after John Kemple, a prospector from Nevada, discovered a vein of silver in a sandstone formation in 1866. At first, geologists were uncertain about Kemple's find because silver is not usually found in sandstone. In 1875, two bankers from Salt Lake City sent William Barbee to the site to stake mining claims. He staked 21 claims, and an influx of miners came to work Barbee's claims and to stake their own. To accommodate the miners, Barbee established a town called Bonanza City. Property values there were high, so several miners settled on a ridge to the north of it and named their settlement "Rockpile". The town was renamed Silver Reef after silver mines in nearby Pioche closed and businessmen arrived.

By 1879, about 2,000 people were living in Silver Reef. The town had a mile-long Main Street with many businesses, among them a Wells Fargo office, the Rice Building, and the Cosmopolitan Restaurant. Although adjacent to many settlements with a majority of Mormon residents, the town never had a meeting house for Latter-day Saints, only a Catholic church. In 1879, a fire destroyed several businesses, but the residents rebuilt them. Mines were gradually closed, most of them by 1884, as the worldwide price of silver dropped. By 1901, most of the buildings in town had either been demolished or moved to Leeds.

In 1916, mining operations in Silver Reef resumed under the direction of Alex Colbath, who organized the area's mines into the Silver Reef Consolidated Mining Company. These mines were purchased by American Smelting and Refining Company in 1928, but the company did minimal work as a result of the Great Depression. The Western Gold & Uranium Corporation purchased Silver Reef's mines in 1948, and in 1951, they began mining uranium in the area. These operations did not last long either, and the Western Gold & Uranium Corporation sold their mines to the 5M Corporation in 1979. Today, the Wells Fargo office, the Cosmopolitan Restaurant, the Rice Building, and numerous foundations and walls remain in the town site, and a few dozen homes have been constructed in the area.

The sandstone formations from which Silver Reef gets its name were formed when tectonic stresses forced long, longitudinally aligned sections of Navajo Sandstone to buckle and stand on their sides, giving them the appearance of ocean reefs. Over long periods of time silver ore, sediments, and vegetation were carried in water runoff from the Chinle Formation to the White, Buckeye, and East reefs. The ore settled as deposits and the vegetation became petrified. The Silver Reef Mining District's geologic resources consist mainly of silver deposits, with smaller deposits of copper, gold, lead, and uranium oxide. Iron oxide deposits in the soil rocks cause a red coloration, and dinosaur tracks from the early Jurassic period have been found in the area.

Silver Reef is close to the western border of the Colorado Plateau and about northeast of St. George and west of Leeds. Dixie National Forest, Leeds Creek, the White Reef, and the Pine Valley Mountain Wilderness lie directly west of Silver Reef. The Pine Valley Mountain Wilderness has sage steppe, mountain brush, pinyon pine, coniferous trees, and ponderosa pine. Interstate 15 and Toquerville are and east of Silver Reef, respectively. Pintura is north of Silver Reef, and Quail Creek State Park, the ghost town of Harrisburg, the Buckeye Reef, and Red Cliffs Recreation Area are south of Silver Reef. The elevation of Red Cliffs Recreation Area is between and .

Silver Reef is located in one of the driest and hottest parts of the state of Utah; summer temperatures often rise above . Temperatures of or above can occur during the winter, but nighttime winter temperatures occasionally drop below . Silver Reef receives about of precipitation annually. It is not unusual to see an inch or more of snow in the winter. July has the warmest average temperature, , and December is coldest, with an average temperature of . The highest recorded temperature was , in July 2001, and the lowest recorded temperature was , in January 1963.

Silver Reef was first settled in 1875; by the 1880 Census, 1,046 people were living there, and a local census taken in 1884 gave a population of 1,500. By 1890, after most of the mines had closed, the population had dropped to 177, and by 1900, only lessees of the mines were living there. In 1916, Alex Colbath organized the Silver Reef Consolidated Mining Company. Several miners moved in to work for Colbath, who lived in the town with his wife, Mayme, until the 1950s. After the Colbaths' departure, Silver Reef was completely abandoned. Subdivision of the land, planned in the 1960s, was finalized by 1980. During the Census of 1990, 50 people lived in Silver Reef, and today Silver Reef is considered a part of Leeds.

The Silver Reef area was first inhabited by Anasazi Native Americans between about 200 AD and 1300 AD. The Anasazi were nomads who followed the migration of the animals they hunted, typically deer, mountain sheep, elk, and jackrabbits. They were also farmers and gardeners, growing corn, wheat, rye, and barley. Many were potters, and pottery can be found in abandoned villages. The Anasazi usually constructed temporary dwellings out of sticks and leaves, often using bark for the roofs. Occasionally they built more permanent dwellings out of rocks, usually along the side of a mountain, often large enough to accommodate several families. Storage pits were often placed behind the rock dwellings. Settlements were typically small, as food was scarce. A group of Virgin Anasazi lived in what is now the Red Cliffs Anasazi Site in Red Cliffs Recreation Area.

Silver was discovered in the area in the 1860s. One commonly accepted story is that a prospector named John Kemple came to the area in 1866 from Montana. While staying at the home of Orson B. Adams in the settlement of Harrisburg, Kemple decided to do some prospecting, and soon located a vein of silver a few hundred yards southwest of the home. He did not find enough ore to interest him, so he left for Nevada. Five years later, Kemple returned to the Silver Reef area, staked a few mining claims, and organized them under the Union Mining District. The Union Mining District was abandoned, but in 1874, Kemple returned with a group of miners, reorganized the claims under the Harrisburg Mining District, and began developing a mine. Kemple later became discouraged with his claims and sold them.

According to a less accepted story, a man known as "Metalliferous" Murphy, an assayer from Pioche, Nevada, was brought a piece of a grindstone made of sandstone from the Silver Reef area by miners in Pioche. After performing tests on the sample, Murphy stated that it contained over $200 of silver per ton. After some investigation, Murphy discovered that the samples had come from the area that was to become Silver Reef. There is no record of Murphy ever staking a claim, but he did allegedly attract the attention of miners.

Geologists and other miners refused at first to believe the news that silver had been found in sandstone. When brought an actual sample from the area, the Smithsonian Institution called it an "interesting fake". In 1875, news of the silver discovery reached the Walker brothers, well-known bankers from Salt Lake City. They hired William T. Barbee, who had previously staked mining claims in Ophir, to stake claims on their behalf. He staked 21 claims and published an article on the claims in "The Salt Lake Tribune". In the article, Barbee mentioned that the area had "an abundance of rich silver mines". This set off a silver rush, and by late 1875, Barbee had established a town called Bonanza City. Several businessmen then came into the area, inflating property values. Many miners and businessmen looking for inexpensive land set up a tent city north of Bonanza City and called it "Rockpile". When the mines in nearby Pioche were closed in November 1875, many of the miners and business owners who had worked there came into the area of "Rockpile" in what is known as the "Pioche Silver Stampede", and the name of the settlement was changed to Silver Reef. As construction of the St. George LDS Temple ended in mid-1877, labor opportunities for the workers became available in Silver Reef. Pine Valley Mills and Mount Trumbull in the Arizona Strip supplied most of the lumber used to construct the buildings. During its first year, Silver Reef did not have a smelter; as a result, the silver ore mined in Silver Reef was taken to Pioche and Salt Lake City for smelting.

Immediately following the initial silver rush, a town site was platted and the town was built. The first permanent business building established in Silver Reef was a store at the intersection of the roads from the Buckeye, White, and East reefs. By 1878, the town's business district consisted of a hotel, boarding houses, nine stores, six saloons, five restaurants, a bank, two dance halls, a newspaper called "The Silver Echo" (which later became the "Silver Reef Miner"), and eight dry goods stores. Two cemeteries, one Catholic and one Protestant, were located south of Silver Reef's business district. Most of the businesses in Silver Reef were situated along a mile-long Main Street. The mining district consisted of 37 mines and five stamp mills: the Christy, Stormont, Leeds, Buckeye and Barbee & Walker mills. Although it was surrounded by settlements with large Mormon populations, the town never had a Mormon meeting house. A Catholic church was the only church located within the town. After the First Transcontinental Railroad was completed in 1869, many of the Chinese workers who had been hired to build it were out of work. Some returned to China, but others remained in Utah. A group of 250 of these workers set up a Chinatown in a level area just south of Silver Reef. Silver Reef's Chinatown had a Chinese mayor and several businesses. By 1879, Silver Reef's population had reached 2,000, and the town also had a horse race track, a brewery, and a brass band. Shooting matches among members of the Silver Reef Rifle Club and sometimes residents of nearby towns took place on the horse race track.

Although most of the residents of Silver Reef were not Mormon, they had good relations with residents of the nearby Mormon settlements. A lot of the cotton and other agricultural items produced in the area were transported by wagon to Silver Reef. Many of the town's buildings were constructed by Mormon labor workers. Reverend Lawrence Scanlan was invited to say Mass in the St. George Tabernacle of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints before the Catholic in Silver Reef was constructed. To assist Scanlan, the Mormon choir learned Latin chants. When politics were involved, however, these good relations were forgotten. Most Mormons were members of the People's Party, and most people in Silver Reef were members of the Liberal Party. As Silver Reef grew, the townspeople wanted to change the county seat of Washington County from St. George to Silver Reef. This alarmed the members of the People's Party, the main figures in the territorial legislature. The legislature moved the county line eastward in 1882; this maintained the People's Party majority in Washington County by transferring such Mormon farming communities as Grafton, Rockville, and Springdale from Kane County to Washington County.

Although it had good relations with other towns, Silver Reef had the usual labor disputes between mining camp wage laborers and mine owners. After a major dispute with the Stormont Mining Company, the Silver Reef Miners Union was formed to support wages. Gambling, prostitution, and shootouts were also commonplace. One shootout involved Town Marshal Johnny Diamond and mine guard Jack Truby. Tensions between Diamond and Truby temporarily shut down the Kinner mine. Truby was hired by Colonel Enos Wall, foreman and owner of the Kinner, to guard the mine until told otherwise. Diamond went to the Kinner mine to serve the closure warrant, but Truby refused to allow Diamond into the mine, and forced Diamond to leave the property immediately.

The gunfight started during court proceedings in the back room of a saloon. Diamond and Truby argued about Truby wearing his hat inside, and continued the argument outside. When Diamond asked for Truby's gun, Truby shot at Diamond, Diamond returned fire, and both men died. An inquest on both men, held in the saloon, found that the bodies each contained bullet wounds from the .41 caliber revolvers that were used, and powder burns caused by the proximity of the shootout. Truby also had .45 caliber bullet wounds in his back, indicating that somebody else had shot him during the shootout.

Another shootout occurred between Henry Clark and Sykes Griffen on December 1, 1878, at Cassidy's Silver Reef Saloon. Although it is not known exactly what happened, it is believed that Griffen, a faro dealer at the saloon, and Clark, a regular patron, had previously argued over gambling matters. The shooting began when Griffen argued with Clark about a bet they had made. After arguing for several minutes, Griffen pulled a pistol on Clark and shot him. Several witnesses said that Clark pulled a pistol on Griffen and shot him, while other witnesses said that after Clark was shot, other patrons in the saloon, including Clark's father, beat and shot Griffen.

Another instance of murder occurred on October 3, 1880, when Thomas Forrest stabbed Michael Carbis. Carbis, the foreman of the California mine, had fired Forrest the day before on account of his violent nature. The murder occurred near the Buckeye boarding house. Forrest initially had a pistol, but he put it away and drew a knife instead when he got within a few feet of Carbis. Carbis died soon after the stab wound was inflicted. Silver Reef's residents were angered by the murder and soon lynch threats were delivered. Forrest, who had been arrested soon after the murder had been committed, was transferred to the jail in St. George for his own safety. Prior to the moving of Forrest, a lynch mob gathered and followed the sheriff's escort to the St. George jail. Once there, they overpowered the sheriff, took Forrest out of his cell, and tried to hang him on a telegraph pole. When the pole broke, they took him to a cottonwood tree and hung him there. The residents of St. George were shocked at the sight of Forrest's hanging, and one man was reputed to have said, "I have observed that tree growing there for the last 25 years. This is the first time I have ever seen it bearing fruit."

On May 30, 1879, fire was discovered under a restaurant. Hundreds of Silver Reef's residents threw buckets of water from nearby Leeds Creek on the fire and put wet blankets on the adjacent business buildings, but the fire spread to the Harrison House Hotel, one of the town's most prominent buildings. The fire destroyed several other businesses along Main Street before it was finally extinguished. "The Salt Lake Tribune" reported that Silver Reef had been "Chicagoed", and that a state of panic was felt even after the fire had been extinguished.

Silver Reef's residents rebuilt the businesses that had been destroyed, but the town soon began to decline. In 1881, the Stormont Mining Company and the Barbee & Walker Mining Company had to decrease wages from $4 per day to $3.50 per day in all of their mines except the Savage mine (a Stormont property). In response to the decrease in wages, the Silver Reef Miners Union was formed. In February 1881, union members began talking about striking the mines, and as word of this potential strike spread, the Stormont Mining Company discharged those of its miners who were part of the Miners Union. In response, the discharged union members escorted the company's superintendent, Washington Allen, out of Silver Reef. Allen immediately went to the Second District Court in Beaver and filed a lawsuit against the union members. Before they went to court, the union members held a meeting and decided to shut down the Savage mine. Led by Matthew O'Loughlin, the president of the Silver Reef Miners Union, they walked through Silver Reef in rows of two, and, upon arriving at the Savage mine, O'Loughlin and nine other men went into the hoisting works and ordered the engineer on duty to shut down the pumps that kept water from the water table out of the mine. After the pumps were shut down, the group of ten went into the Savage mine and ordered everyone out.

A few days later, the sheriff of St. George, accompanied by a posse of 30 men, arrested 25 members of the Miners Union, including Matthew O'Loughlin. As Silver Reef's jail was too small to hold all 25 prisoners, most of them were jailed in the Rice Building. The Rice Building could not hold all of the prisoners, so a line was drawn around the building, and anyone who crossed the line was threatened with shooting. The Miners Union members were transferred to Beaver, where they were tried for riot, conspiracy, and false imprisonment. Thirteen of the members were sentenced to imprisonment; three were bailed out, while ten were sent to the Utah Territorial Penitentiary. Matthew O'Loughlin was sentenced to twenty days in prison and was charged a $75 fine.

A few years after the strike, the world's silver market dropped, causing the foreclosure of many of the mines. To compensate for the drop in prices, the mines' stockholders reduced the wages of the miners. Instead of striking again, the miners accepted this. In addition, the miners inadvertently dug below the water table, and the mine shafts began filling with water faster than it could be pumped out. By 1884, most of the mines were idle or closed; the last was officially closed in 1891, although lessees of the mines continued to operate them past that year. Many merchants went bankrupt and left town. The Silver Reef mines produced about $8 million worth of silver ore. Between 1891 and 1901, another $250,000 worth was mined. Several people attempted to restart mining operations in 1898, 1909, 1916, and 1950, but none of these attempts were successful. After Silver Reef's mines were closed, many of the buildings were purchased for their lumber and building stone. One buyer dismantled the building he bought and discovered $10,000 in gold coins. News of the find spread quickly, and most of the buildings in Silver Reef were demolished in hopes of discovering more gold, but none was found.

The Silver Reef Consolidated Mining Company was organized in 1916 by Alex Colbath, who owned most of the area's mines. In 1928, American Smelting and Refining Company purchased its mines, and in 1929 they sank a three-compartment shaft on the White Reef. This new mine was connected with the flooded Savage mine, and the water was pumped out. Minimal work was done after that, however, as there was not enough ore to keep the operation profitable during the Great Depression. Ownership of the mines was then passed back to Alex Colbath, but in 1948 the Western Gold and Uranium Corporation purchased the claims from Colbath, and in 1951 they mined the sandstone for uranium oxide deposits. The first shipment of uranium oxide came from the Ann's Pride mine, and in total, of uranium oxide was shipped out of the region. The claims were bought in 1979 by the 5M Corporation, but the company did not operate in Silver Reef for long.

Following the closure of the district's mines, the Wells Fargo office was used as a residence by Alex and Mayme Colbath until the 1950s. It was placed on the National Register of Historic Places on March 11, 1971, and currently serves as an art gallery and a museum. The Rice Building burned down, and was rebuilt in 1991. The Cosmopolitan Restaurant was reconstructed to appear as it did in the 19th century, and it served European cuisine until it was closed in 2010. There are many remnants of houses and other buildings, and there are also markers indicating where some buildings once stood, such as the Elk Horn Saloon. Some of the area has been preserved for its history.

Behind the Wells Fargo office is a powder house which, as of 2011, contains models of the town, the town's major mills, and its Catholic church. The Catholic and Protestant cemeteries were restored by the Leeds Lion's Club in 1998 and can be visited. Several other original buildings remain, including the Clancy Market, McCormick Store, the two-story Harrison House Hotel, and some of the mining buildings. Main Street, once a mile long, is now only a few hundred yards long and is surrounded by private homes.

Besides exploring the ghost town, visitors can explore the red rock country surrounding Silver Reef. Backpacking, camping, fishing, mountain biking, birdwatching, and hunting are among the activities available. Visitors to Red Cliffs Recreation Area, located south of Silver Reef, can picnic in a designated area with cottonwood trees. A half-mile hiking trail leads to the Red Cliffs Anasazi Site, the remains of an Anasazi habitation. The Red Reef Trail leads to the Cottonwood Wilderness Study Area. Dinosaur footprints that date back to the early Jurassic period can be found in the area, and the Orson Adams House in nearby Harrisburg allows visitors to study the pioneer history of Washington County.

Silver Reef has appeared in American films since the late 1960s. The area was scouted by corporate executives from Twentieth-Century Fox for use in the 1969 film "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" and served as a backdrop in the 1979 film "The Electric Horseman". Silver Reef was featured in the 1998 documentary "Treasure House: The Utah Mining Story".






</doc>
<doc id="25221275" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25221275" title="Blown for Good">
Blown for Good

Blown for Good: Behind the Iron Curtain of Scientology is a memoir written by Marc Headley, a former Scientologist and Sea Org member, about his life and experiences in the Church of Scientology. It was self-published in the United States on November 5, 2009.

Marc Headley was raised in Los Angeles, California. Headley's mother was a Scientologist, and she raised him within the church from an early age. He began work as an employee for the church at age 16. Headley soon after joined the Sea Org and worked at the international headquarters of Scientology in Hemet, California, for 15 years. Headley escaped from the international headquarters of the organization in 2006. He was escorted to the safety of a car rental shop by the police during his escape from the organization.

In "Headley v. Church of Scientology International", the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals wrote, "The record overwhelmingly shows that the Headleys joined and voluntarily worked for the [Sea Organization] because they believed that it was the right thing to do, because they enjoyed it, and because they thought that by working they were honoring the commitment that they each made and to which they adhered." The court also noted that the Headleys had private quarters outside the base, and had access to vehicles and multiple opportunities to leave.

After leaving the organization, Headley wrote about his experiences in Scientology. His writings were published in the media including news magazines, publications on the internet and other websites. In 2008, Headley was invited to speak in Hamburg, Germany, at a conference discussing abuses within Scientology, alongside actor and former Scientologist Jason Beghe. In 2009, Headley lived in Los Angeles, California, with his wife and two children, where he opened a furniture business. Headley continues to speak out about his experiences in Scientology.

The book's title is a reference to the Scientology terms "blow" or "blown," which describe one who leaves Scientology without prior authorization from the organization.
Headley recounts episodes from his years as a member of the Church of Scientology, most of that time as part of the order called the Sea Organization, or Sea Org. He details his experiences while working hundred-hour weeks at Scientology's secluded international headquarters known as Gold Base (or "Int Base") at Gilman Hot Springs, California, about eighty miles southeast of Los Angeles.

The book includes a forward written by former high-ranking Scientology official Mark Rathbun.

Headley worked out of the film-production studio facilities of Scientology from 1989 through 2005. He held multiple positions while employed by Scientology at Gold Base, mainly focused on the production of video and audio materials to disseminate the message of Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard. He helped originate scripts of videos to introduce new members to Scientology methodology. He also supervised large scale Scientology public events presided over by Scientology's leader David Miscavige. Headley reproduced thousands of copies of audio recordings of speeches by Hubbard.

The author describes a 2004 event where Tom Cruise was awarded the organization's Medal of Valor from David Miscavige, the video of which was leaked to the Internet in January 2008. Initially, the video intended for the event featured Cruise and other celebrities including Will Smith appearing on camera and praising the actor. Miscavige disapproved and instructed Scientology staff to create a video where Cruise would speak about himself and his views on being a Scientologist. "Dave Miscavige later said that his Tom Cruise video was one of the most important videos that had ever been produced," writes Headley.

Headley states he gained approval to sell old Scientology materials on eBay to recoup money for the organization – he was later accused of embezzlement for doing this. In 2005, when he knew he would be faced with being sent to the organization's prison-like program the Rehabilitation Project Force, Headley decided to leave. Headley worried that leaving Scientology would mean becoming separated from his wife Claire, to whom he had been married for 13 years, and other family members in accordance with the Scientology practice of disconnection. Headley alleges that he left Gold Base on his motorcycle but was followed by Scientology security guards, which resulted in Headley falling off his bike by the side of the road. Riverside County, California Sheriff's arrived, and they helped Headley safely get further away from the Scientology compound. From there he traveled to his father in Kansas City. He was later reunited with his wife who had also been an employee at Gold Base. Prior to his wife's departure from Gold Base, she was monitored closely day and night by the organization.

The author credits multiple sources for introducing doubts about his conditions while living at Gold Base. He writes that he listened to "The John and Ken Show" on KFI, and that their discussion of Scientology allowed him to think more critically during his time at the compound. He says that viewing Conan O'Brien make fun of Scientology celebrities changed his views on individuals that the organization had only spoken of internally with reverence.

When Headley and a Danish film crew went to the Gold Base, Headley was confronted by several members of Gold staff, including base spokesperson Catherine Fraser, who said Headley's account of his escape was untrue."Marc lived in another place, not even on the property, another place altogether," Fraser said in one of the [video clips of the incident]. "And that day when I explained that to the sheriff -- the sheriff looked at me and said, 'Oh, you mean he could have left at any time?' I said, 'Yes, he could have left at any time and he did.'"

After reviewing the evidence, the 9th Circuit agreed with the Scientologists that the Headleys lived outside the base, they had many opportunities to leave the Gold staff, and they had no problem leaving on their first try.

In an interview on "The John and Ken Show" on KFI, Headley was asked if he experienced retaliation from Scientology for speaking critically about the organization. He said that he had been issued a declaration that he was to be considered a "Suppressive Person" by members of the organization, and explained, "That's basically the thing that goes out to anyone and everyone who is in Scientology, saying, 'This person is a Suppressive Person, and you can no longer speak to him ever again.' If you are in Scientology, and you speak to somebody who is a Suppressive Person, you yourself can be declared a Suppressive Person." Headley said when he left Scientology the organization gave him a "freeloader statement", a bill for US$62,000, for courses he had received in Scientology. "It's actually illegal, because they are basically charging me for on-the-job training – in California you can't charge somebody for on-the-job training. It's of no real value, but you don't know that, when you're in Scientology. You think, 'Are they going to garnish my wages, are they going to sue me?' You don't know," said Headley.

The book was self-published November 5, 2009, and was made available through the author's website at www.blownforgood.com and on Amazon.com. "Blown for Good" was selected as a finalist in the 2009 "Book of the Year Awards", by "ForeWord Magazine". The Editor in chief of "The Village Voice", Tony Ortega, described the book as a "remarkable account". Ortega noted, "Headley's story provides a damning account of life working for Scientology ..." He concluded the review by commenting, "Perhaps the best service that Headley provides with "Blown for Good" is giving non-Scientologists the sense of what it's really like to work, day in and day out, in such a strange organization, from the lowliest laborer mucking out excrement in a Gold Base pond (Headley says shit was coming out of his ears and pores for days) to what kind of luxuries the celebrities and high-ranking members enjoy."

On the KFI talk radio program "The John and Ken Show", commentators John Kobylt and Ken Chiampou talked about "Blown for Good" and discussed Scientology. Paul Beaumont, Toni O'Loughlin, and Paul Harris of "The Observer" commented that Headley's book, "details – as others have – allegations of systematic abuse and bizarre episodes" of experiences in Scientology. They noted, "Headley's book follows a year in which Scientology has been plagued by unwelcome revelations from high-profile defectors and fresh media investigation into its practices." "Catholic Online" associate editor and former Archbishop of the Charismatic Episcopal Church, Randy Sly, characterized "Blown for Good" as "a bold insider memoir". Sly reported on criticism of Scientology in the Australian Senate by Senator Nick Xenophon, and commented, "Headley provides vivid accountings of activities within Scientology that confirm the Australian Senator’s concerns." Sly noted, "A number of comments left on the Amazon.com website were from those who indicated they were ex-Scientologists and confirmed the author’s accounts." Ian Punnett of "Coast to Coast AM" commented that the song "We Gotta Get out of This Place", "certainly would be a theme of several of the chapters of "Blown for Good"".

Hamilton Nolan of "Gawker" described the book's design as "featuring a dramatic, action-scene-type cover", and called the work "a new tell-all book". "Star" described "Blown for Good" as an "explosive new book". Pete Samson of "The Sun" called the book "a revealing account of goings-on within the church". The Flemish daily newspaper published in Belgium, "De Standaard", noted the book discusses "remarkable experiences" the author underwent as a Scientology staff member. In a 2010 article in "New Humanist", Paul Sims noted, "Since its release at the end of last year, "Blown for Good" has made the kind of impact its author hoped. Having built up an online buzz courtesy of Anonymous, and sold thousands of copies in the US, Headley says he has been receiving letters and emails from Scientologists, many of whom have said the revelations in his book have confirmed their suspicions about the inner workings of the Church."




</doc>
<doc id="25257248" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25257248" title="Dance in the Dark">
Dance in the Dark

"Dance in the Dark" is a song by American recording artist Lady Gaga, from her third EP, "The Fame Monster". Inspired by Gaga's "Fear of Self Monster", the song deals with the intimate experience between two people alone in a bedroom. According to Gaga, the record is about a girl who likes to have sex with the lights off because she is embarrassed about her body. She explained that she came across such women while working on the MAC AIDS Fund, and that the song is not about freedom, but rather the assurance that Gaga understood their feelings. The song was initially planned to be released after "Telephone", but due to a dispute between Gaga and her record company, "Alejandro" was released instead. It was later released as a digital download and radio-only single in Australia, Belgium, and France.

"Dance in the Dark" contains retro and new wave music influences, and begins with a stuttering introduction. It includes a spoken interlude, where Gaga says the names of famous people whose lives ended tragically. The song has received critical acclaim from music critics. It charted on the UK Singles Chart and "Billboard" Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart, while reaching the top-thirty in Australia and the top-ten in Slovakia, Hungary and Czech Republic.

Gaga performed "Dance in the Dark" as the opening song of The Monster Ball Tour. In the first leg of the tour, she appeared behind a scrim-lit screen to perform the song, while in the revamped shows, Gaga performs it on a set reminiscent of a New York City night scene. The song was also performed at the 2010 BRIT Awards, where Gaga dedicated it to her close friend, Alexander McQueen, who had committed suicide a few days earlier. It was nominated for Best Dance Recording at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards, but lost to Rihanna's "Only Girl (In the World)".

According to MTV, "Dance in the Dark" was initially planned to be released after "Telephone", but due to a dispute between Gaga and her record company, "Alejandro" was released instead. The song was released to Belgian iTunes on November 9, 2009 and as a single was sent to Australia radio on July 26, 2010. Gaga told "Los Angeles Times" that the inspiration behind "Dance in the Dark" as being the intimate experience taking place between two people alone in a bedroom, the fear of Sex Monster. According to her, the record is about a girl who likes to have sex with the lights off, because she is embarrassed about her body. "She doesn't want her man to see her naked. She will be free, and she will let her inner animal out, but only when the lights are out," Gaga explained. She added that like the song, she has to struggle with issues of body image and self-doubt in her own life. While working on the MAC AIDS Fund, she realized that women of her age do not speak their mind, in fear that their boyfriends would not love them if they did so.

All of these new things entering my life are changing the way I view my purpose, but 'Dance in the Dark' in particular is about me wanting to live—but also, the song isn't called 'Dance in the Light'. I'm not a gospel singer trying to cross people over. What I'm saying is, 'I get it. I feel you, I feel the same way, and it's OK.' I hope and pray that I can inspire some sort of change in people subliminally through the show. They're singing 'Dance in the Dark,' but they're dancing and they're free, they're letting it out. But the songs are not about freedom, they're about [the fact that] I get it. I feel the way you feel.

"Dance in the Dark" is a Europop track which infuses influences of retro and new wave music in its composition. Michael Hubbard from musicOMH wrote that the song begins with a stuttering introduction and orgasmic groans, followed by Gaga singing the song. According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony/ATV Music Publishing, "Dance in The Dark" was written in the time signature of common time, with a tempo of 121 beats per minute. It is composed in the key of D minor with Gaga's vocal range spanning from B to D. It follows a basic sequence of Am–Dm/A–F/A–G as its chord progression. A spoken interlude is also present.

The lyrics of the song refer to vampires and werewolves: "Run run her kiss is a vampire grin/The moon lights her way while she's howlin' at him". Gaga explained that the lines were means of expressing how people rely on external motivations to cope with internal anxiety. "She doesn't feel free without the moon," Gaga said. "These lyrics are a way for me to talk about how I believe women and some men feel innately insecure about themselves all the time. It's not sometimes, it's not in adolescence, it's always." The spoken interlude refers to famous people who met with a tragic end of their lives, namely Marilyn Monroe, Judy Garland, Sylvia Plath, JonBenét Ramsey, Liberace, Jesus, Stanley Kubrick, and Princess Diana.

The song has received critical acclaim from music critics, with many citing it as a highlight of the album. Paul Lester from BBC felt that the song was "generic machine RnB". Evan Sawdey from PopMatters commented that "Dance in the Dark", along with "Monster" are a "delightfully dirty retro workout ... to make for one surprisingly effective pop cocktail." Scott Plagenhoef from Pitchfork Media felt that Gaga had morphed into Madonna on the song. Nick Levine from "Digital Spy" commented that "'Dance in the Dark' is the sort of song that, well, makes you want to dance with your top off in a grotty German bondage basement." Edna Gunderson from "USA Today" called the song "campy".

Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine commented that "'Bad Romance' and 'Dance in the Dark' are stacked with towering new-wave synths and seemingly endless hooks; if melodies could be time-stamped, these would have "'80s" branded on their asses. [...] The song isn't a cautionary tale , but a call to arms to misfits everywhere." She went on to declare the song as one of the highlights of "The Fame Monster" but added that "After a stuttering intro of orgasmic groans it becomes a little bit Gaga-by-numbers, which is a shame given the standard of the early tracks". Ben Patashnik from "NME" felt that "Dance in the Dark", along with another song "Monster", was "slightly disposable". Michael Hubbard from MusicOMH complimented the song for its "monumental chorus and some Madonna-esque spoken-word moments, including this shout out to a lost Royal: 'You will never fall apart Diana, you're still in our hearts / Never let you fall apart / Together we'll dance in the dark.'"

In Hungary, the song debuted on the Mahasz Single Top 10 lista chart at number nine on November 30, 2009 but fell off the chart the next week. In the United Kingdom, "Dance in the Dark" debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 89 on December 12, 2009, but was present on the chart for one week. In Canada, the song charted on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 88 on the issue dated November 11, 2009. "Dance in the Dark" debuted at number 93 on the Australian Singles Chart, after it was released to Australian radio, moving to number 43 and then to a peak of number 24 in the following weeks. In France, the song entered the French Digital Singles Chart at forty and has thus far reached a peak of thirty. On the "Billboard" issue dated August 21, 2010, "Dance in the Dark" debuted on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 22, and on the Hot Dance/Electronic Digital Songs at number nine, on the issue dated October 9, 2010. As of September 2010, "Dance in the Dark" has sold 120,000 digital downloads in the United States, according to Nielsen Soundscan.

Gaga performed "Dance in the Dark" as the opening song of The Monster Ball Tour. The show began with Gaga appearing behind a giant, green laser lit video screen featuring scrim lights, in a futuristic silver jewelled jumpsuit with bulbs on it. She had matching eye makeup and wore a mask, beginning to sing "Dance in the Dark", "while dancers dressed in white balaclavas and white jumpsuits moved around her." The scrim resembled an electric math grid which was lifted during the performance. Jane Stevenson from "Toronto Sun" felt that it was not until Gaga had moved on to the next song after "Dance in the Dark", that the Monster Ball "was alive". In the revamped 2010-11 shows of The Monster Ball tour, the song was once again added as the opening song of the setlist, as a part of the segment titled "City". Gaga performed it in a set, reminiscent of New York City night scene, with flickering neon signs displaying the words "Ugly", "Sexy" and "Liquor", fire escape stairwells and a broken yellow taxi.

Gaga performed "Dance in the Dark" at the BRIT Awards on February 16, 2010, at Earls Court Exhibition Centre. The performance was inspired by the recent death of her friend, fashion designer Alexander McQueen. Initially she had planned a different version of the performance, but changed the concept at the last minute, since she wanted to pay tribute to McQueen. Hence she chose acoustic versions of her songs "Telephone" and "Dance in the Dark". She started the performance by sitting in front of a piano and announcing "This is for Alexander McQueen." The whole performance was low-key compared to her previous ones. The stage was decked out in white, and perched on a pedestal was a statue of Gaga wearing a piano skirt and the lobster-claw heels she wore in her "Bad Romance" music video. After finishing an acoustic performance of "Telephone", she got up from her piano as the disco groove of "Dance in the Dark" was heard throughout the room. She wore a lace bodysuit and a large bouffant wig, took to a giant keytar and performed a techno rendition of the track. After the show, she posted a message on her Twitter account: "Tonight's performance is inspired by our friend. Mask by Phillip Treacy, Sculpture by Nick Knight, Music by Lady Gaga. We miss you."

"Dance in the Dark" is performed on the singer's 2018–2019 Las Vegas residency show, Lady Gaga Enigma. The song is preceded by an interlude, which introduces the singer's alien counterpart, named Enigma. Gaga then appears on stage and performs the song in a fluorescent green jacket.


Credits adapted from "The Fame Monster" album liner notes.



</doc>
<doc id="25275565" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25275565" title="Million Dollar Challenge (TV program)">
Million Dollar Challenge (TV program)

Million Dollar Challenge (also referred to as the PokerStars Million Dollar Challenge and PokerStars.net Million Dollar Challenge) is the most watched poker show in television history. It is sponsored by PokerStars. The show, which airs on the Fox Broadcasting Company, debuted on October 11, 2009. The show is hosted by Chris Rose and features Daniel Negreanu. The first season included five episodes following the FOX network Sunday National Football League coverage. The finale aired on December 27, 2009. The eight-episode season 2 premiered on September 19, 2010 and is scheduled to conclude on December 12.

Million Dollar Challenge is a poker game show where amateur poker players attempt to defeat celebrities, professional poker players and, eventually, Daniel Negreanu in order to win the show's grand prize, $1 million. In the first round, the amateur (with Negreanu at their side, acting as their coach and lending advice) must defeat a celebrity such as Jayde Nicole, Jerome Bettis, Joanna Krupa, John Salley or Tito Ortiz. If the contestant is able to defeat the celebrity the contestant wins a trip to the Bahamas and advances to the second round. In the second round, the amateur (with Negreanu now helping them from a sound proof booth, giving them advice through a listening device in the amateur's ear) must defeat a professional poker player such as Vanessa Rousso, Barry Greenstein, Joe Cada or Chris Moneymaker. If the contestant is able to defeat the professional the contestant wins $25,000 in addition to the trip to the Bahamas. At this point, the amateur has a decision to make. Keep the money and walk away $25,000 richer, or risk the money (the trip is still theirs to keep) and play Daniel Negreanu heads-up for $100,000, knowing that if they lose they walk away with nothing but the trip to the Bahamas. In the season finale, the champions from each episode compete against each other in a sit-n-go tournament, the winner of which plays Negreanu for $1 million.

The first three episodes of the season were the three most-watched Poker television shows in U.S. history. The show aired on Sundays after the FOX National Football League coverage. In the first episode that aired on October 11, contestant Father Andrew Trapp defeated John Salley, Rousso and Negreanu, winning $100,000 and a trip to the Bahamas in the process, all of which he promised to donate to his church in Garden City, South Carolina. Trapp also won the chance to play in a mini-tournament (Episode 5), the winner of which would play Negreanu for $1,000,000. On October 18, after contestant Tracy Nguyen defeated Bettis and won a trip to the Bahamas, but lost to Barry Greenstein, the next contestant Sergeant Denny Luna defeated Nicole, Moneymaker to win $25,000 and a trip to the Bahamas. Luna then chose to walk away (and not risk the $25,000 he had already won) rather than face Negreanu in the $100,000 match. On the November 22 episode after contestant Oluwasegun Odumuyiwa lost to Bettis, Brian Barboza defeated Nicole, Rousso and Negreanu, winning $100,000 and a trip to the Bahamas. Barboza also won the chance to play in a mini-tournament, the winner of which would play Negreanu for $1,000,000. In December Joanna Krupa and Joe Cada were announced as newly added as celebrity and professional opponents. Ortiz and Krupa appeared on the fourth episode, which aired on December 13. Cada appeared, but he did not play a hand. Dwayne Buth, playing on behalf of the Cal State Fullerton wrestling team, lost to Ortiz. Mike Kosowski, a first responder during the September 11 attacks lost to Krupa. The final airing of the competition among the previous winners was expected on December 27. However, when the contestants on the fourth episode all lost, a single table tournament was held to determine the fourth contestant. Kosowski won and then bested Luna, Barboza and Trapp, in that order, in the Challenge of Champions for a $100,000 prize and a chance to play Negreanu for $1million. In three hands of heads up play, he bested Negreanu.

Season two premiered on September 19 during the second weekend of the 2010 NFL season. The program will continue to air on the FOX network as a companion to the NFL programming on the seven weekends that FOX does not have doubleheaders (September 19 and 26, October 10 and 24, November 7 and 21 and December 12). The show will air before or after the football game depending upon the region of the country.

Professional poker player Doyle Brunson has been critical of both "Million Dollar Challenge" and its contemporary rival "Face the Ace" as terrible shows unlikely to draw viewers. Negreanu responded, via blog, to this type of criticism that the show is not intended for the serious poker player, but rather is aimed at more casual audience. There was some controversy about a poker playing priest on national television that sparked theological debate.



</doc>
<doc id="25312165" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25312165" title="Defective Premises Act 1972">
Defective Premises Act 1972

The Defective Premises Act 1972 (c. 35) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that covers landlords' and builders' liability for poorly constructed and poorly maintained buildings, along with any injuries that may result. During the 19th century, the common law principle that a landlord could not be liable for letting a poorly maintained house was established, while a long-running principle was that, in practice, builders could not be sued for constructing defective buildings. The courts began to turn against the first principle during the 20th century, imposing several restrictions on the landlord's immunity, but the landlord was still largely free from being sued.

The Defective Premises Bill was introduced to the House of Commons as a private member's bill by Ivor Richard on 1 December 1971, and given the Royal Assent on 29 June 1972, coming into force as the Defective Premises Act 1972 on 1 January 1974. The Act establishes a duty of care builders and their sub-contractors owe to the occupiers of property they construct or modify, and also establishes a duty of care landlords hold towards their tenants and any third parties who might be injured by their failure to maintain or repair property. The Act received a mixed reaction from critics; while some complimented it on its simple nature compared to the previously complex common rule laws, others felt that it was too limited for what was desired to be achieved, and that the wording used was at times both too vague and too specific.

Prior to the passing of the Act, builders who constructed defective buildings could not, practically, be sued under tort. At the same time, a landlord who let a dilapidated or defective house could not be sued for injuries suffered by non-tenants, something based first on the "Privity of Tort" principle that was overturned in "Donoghue v Stevenson" [1932] AC 562 (that if A had a contract with B and in the process injured C, C was prevented from suing A because of the contract with B) and the decision in "Robbins v Jones" [1863] 15 CB (ns) 221, where Chief Justice Earl said that "a landlord who lets a house in a dangerous state is not liable for accidents happening during the term; for, fraud apart, there is no law against letting a tumbledown house". This immunity was further extended in later cases.

The courts began to turn against this position in the 20th century; the case of "Cunard v Antifyre" [1933] 1 KB 551 established that a landlord could be liable if the source of an injury emanated from property of which he was in possession, even if the injury happened on land he no longer owned or occupied. In "Dutton v Bognor Regis Urban District Council" [1972] 1 QB 373, the courts arguably abolished the immunity of the landlord completely. By 1974, this immunity excluded situations where the danger came from premises that the landlord occupied and where the landlord actively created a danger, and only included the landlord, not associated people.

The Defective Premises Bill was introduced to the House of Commons as a private member's bill by Ivor Richard on 1 December 1971, and was not debated at all in the Commons, something the academic lawyer Peter North called "remarkable". There was some debate in the House of Lords, with questions and amendments covering Section 1, but the bill was not substantially amended, something North puts down to the quality of the draft prepared by the Law Commission. The Act was given the Royal Assent on 29 June 1972, and came into force on 1 January 1974.

Section 1 of the Act lays out the duty of care and who it applies to. The duty applies to "A person taking on work for or in connection with the provision of a dwelling (whether the dwelling is provided by the erection or by the conversion or enlargement of a building)", something including not only builders but also electricians, plumbers and other subcontractors. The duty also extends to those who have statutory powers to arrange for the provision of dwellings, and those who do so in the course of business. This duty is owed to two classes of people; the person ordering the house, and also every person who later takes an equitable and legal interest in the house.

The duty itself is laid out in Section 1(1), and is a duty on the people covered by the act "to see that the work which he takes on is done in a workmanlike or, as the case may be, professional manner, with proper materials and so that as regards that work the dwelling will be fit for habitation when completed". This is a three-part test, all parts of which must be fulfilled; if, for example, a house is badly designed but well-built, the architect will be held responsible even though the house is habitable. Those owing a duty can be released from their obligations if they are acting according to the claimant's instructions, under Section 1(2). If they act completely in accordance with the instructions, the duty of care is fulfilled even though the house may not be properly constructed. However, if the claimant instructs the builder to construct a poorly designed and unstable building, the builder has a duty to warn the claimant. Section 2 of the Act excludes "approved scheme" constructions, such as those run by the National House Building Council.

Prior to the passage of the Act, the owner of premises who created a danger there disposed of his duty of care when he disposed of the property by selling or leasing it, something North described as both "bizarre" and "capricious in operation, unjust in the result and indefensible in principle". Section 3(1) of the Act, therefore, establishes that where work is done on premises, whatever duty of care may arise as a result of the work to people affected by defects in the work is not disposed of if the property is sold or let. Section 3(2) qualifies this principle by providing exceptions, which are when the property is the subject of a tenancy and when the property has been disposed of (or is in the process of being disposed of) before 1 January 1974, when the Act came into force.

Prior to the passage of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957, the general principle was that landlords were not liable for injuries suffered by third parties on their property. The 1957 Act qualified this, providing in Section 4 (repealed by the Defective Premises Act) that where a landlord was obligated by his tenant to repair property and he breached this obligation, third parties injured as a result of the breach would be able to claim providing that the tenant could. This provision was limited; it provided no remedy to the tenant himself, and only applied to lawful visitors, not trespassers. In addition, it only came into effect if the landlord was obliged to repair the property; if he simply had the option to do so, there was no remedy for an injured third party. Similarly, if a tenant failed to inform the landlord of something needing repair, any resulting injury could not be sued upon.

Section 4 of the Act includes new provisions to cover this sort of situation. Section 4(1) establishes a general duty to repair and maintain the property, owed by the landlord to anyone who could reasonably be expected to be harmed by a breach; this includes tenants, their friends and family and also trespassers. This duty applies when a landlord ought to have known of a defect, not just when he has been informed of a defect. Additionally, a landlord who merely has the right to repair property rather than an obligation to do so may still be found liable, if one of the groups described in Section 4 was harmed by their failure to repair.

The Act includes a number of miscellaneous points, mainly in Sections 5 and 6. The Act and its provisions are taken to extend to The Crown, which can be held tortiously liable to the extent laid out in the Crown Proceedings Act 1947. It repeals Section 4 of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957, replacing it with Section 4 of this Act, and unlike the 1957 Act does not allow any provisions or duties to be excluded or restricted.

The Act met a mixed review from academics. North praised it, saying that "The Act admirably disposes of confusion, controversy, illogicality and point-less distinctions", while admitting that the vagueness of much of it left it up to the courts to flesh out the statute. Others were more critical; academic Vera Bermingham pointed out that the exclusion of liability for "approved scheme" buildings under Section 2 at the time included almost all new houses built within the United Kingdom, although these schemes have been much reduced since the 1980s. At the same time, actions brought under the Act are the subject of a six-year limitation period starting on the date the dwelling is completed, regardless of when the defect is discovered, which is a "significant [drawback] in the utility of the [Act]". Academic John Spencer criticised both Section 1 and Section 3, the former for being too vaguely worded and the latter for being too specific. Spencer argues that, because of limitations imposed by the bill's sponsors, the original meaning of the draft bill was changed, and the Act itself goes no further than the existing common law.

The Defective Premises (Northern Ireland) Order 1975 brought identical provisions into force in Northern Ireland on 1 January 1976, with the section covering injuries to third parties excluded.



</doc>
<doc id="25324259" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25324259" title="Agustín Ross Cultural Centre">
Agustín Ross Cultural Centre

Agustín Ross Cultural Centre (Spanish, " Centro Cultural Agustín Ross"), previously known as Casino Ross ("Ross Casino"), is the cultural center of the city of Pichilemu in Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins Region, Chile. It was constructed between 1906 and 1909 at the request of politician Agustín Ross Edwards. The structure of the cultural center is very similar to that of the Grand Trianon in Versailles, France.

It is best known for housing one of the first casinos of Chile; a casino operated in the building between 1917 and 1931. After 1931 all casinos, except the newly opened Casino de Viña del Mar, were declared illegal. The building has also been used as a post office, a store selling imported goods, a hotel, a discotheque, and a bar. There were two attempts by the local government to purchase the building; the first time in 1982 failed while the second in 1995 succeeded. The former casino was declared a National Monument of Chile along with the Agustín Ross Park in February 1988.

Over time, the building deteriorated, and a project was approved in January 2007 for it to be renovated for use as a cultural center. The restored building opened in January 2009 and houses the local library. In January 2010, the cultural center was inaugurated by President Michelle Bachelet and Mayor Roberto Córdova.

Agustín Ross Edwards was a wealthy Chilean writer, member of parliament, government minister and politician. He reportedly had the dream of "creating a port which could be an alternative to the Valparaíso port," but this would turn later into "creating a touristic place, an elite resort, collecting the most important characteristics of European places, which would make it unique."

For this purpose, Ross Edwards bought Fundo Pichilemu, a farm, from Juan Esteban Torrealba Maturana in 1885. There was a little hotel in Fundo Pichilemu called La Posada, which he converted into a first-class hotel called the Gran Hotel Pichilemu (now the Agustín Ross Hotel). Following the development of the Gran Hotel Pichilemu, Ross Edwards saw the need of creating "a seaside resort with all the comforts and luxuries capable of seducing the Chilean aristocracy;" for this purpose, he conceived the idea of creating a park, and a post-office building. Afterwards, Agustín Ross installed amenities such as a laundry, stables, and stairways, among others, according to local historian José Arraño Acevedo, turning Pichilemu into a summer resort town for affluent people from Santiago and Mendoza, Argentina.

According to Washington Saldías González, editor of "Pichilemu News", the construction of the building lasted from 1906 to 1909, while Jorge Godoy Rojas, architect of the University of Chile, states that it was built between 1904 and 1906. Ross wanted it to look similar to the Grand Trianon of the Tuileries Palace in Paris, France; he imported building materials and furniture from France and England. After its opening, the building included a post office with telegraph service and a store for imported goods, exclusive to clients of the Gran Hotel Pichilemu.

The National Monuments Council asserts that the first casino in Chile was opened in the building in 1906; however, historians Antonio Saldías and José Arraño Acevedo have pointed out that it was inaugurated as a "de facto" casino in the summer of 1917, after Agustín Ross rented the building to Argentinean businessman Alfredo Master. Saldías also noted that there were casinos in Chile before Agustín Ross's arrival in Pichilemu, in towns such as Constitución. The casino operated until 1931, when the Casino de Viña del Mar, the first official casino of Chile, opened; all others were declared illegal. Ross died in 1925 at age of 82 in Viña del Mar, just months before "one of his greatest" dreams was accomplished: the railway from Palmilla and the local railway station.

After the casino closed, the building was mostly left unused until the 1940s, when the González Pérez family purchased it from Agustín Ross de Ferrari, a descendant of Ross Edwards. The family converted the building into a hotel, and in the late 1940s, the underground floor was remodeled and made a clandestine casino. Twenty years later, in the late 1960s, Gustavo González Pérez, then a pilot in the Chilean Air Force, along with another member of the Air Force, created an American-style discotheque called "La Caverna" ("The Cavern") in the basement. Years later, González Pérez transferred the business to other members of his family, who renamed the discotheque "Los Tijuana" ("The Tijuanas"). Finally, the González Pérez family decided to close the discotheque in the late 1970s. Shortly afterwards, Rancagua businesswoman Carmelita Tello installed a "boîte" called "Carmelita" in the main room. Later, Pichileminian Roberto Álvarez decided to run a discotheque called "Master" in the same place, while at the same time, there was a "grill bar" called "Wa-Na" in another room; both businesses operated until the 1990s. The condition of the building gradually deteriorated, and its use became restricted.

During the administration of Mayor Julio Waidele Wolff (1981–1983), an attempt was made to buy the building with municipal funds; however, Waidele was not allowed to complete the purchase because the price of eight million pesos (approximately US$16,000) was "too high for the municipal budget, and would leave many things without financing." The building would finally be purchased in 1995 by Mayor Orlando Cornejo Bustamante with the support of the Pichilemu City Council, then composed of Aldo Polanco Contreras, Jorge Vargas González, Mario Bichón Cáceres, Mariano Polanco Galarce, and Raúl Tobar Pavez, for 30 million pesos (approximately US$60,000).

In 1987, after the re-inauguration of another work of Agustín Ross, the Ross Park, a request was made to the National Monuments Council that both the park and the former casino be declared "Monumentos Históricos" (National Monuments); they were so designated on 25 February 1988.

After the former casino was purchased by the government of Pichilemu, the building was used to hold meetings, exhibitions of paintings, sculptures, theater, and for launching books. In 1997, the Club Aéreo de Pichilemu (Aero Club of Pichilemu) requested the building to host the fiftieth annual reunion of the Air Federation of Chile. Permission was granted, but the Club Aéreo had to purchase toilet fixtures, as the ones in the building were seriously damaged. This prompted the government of Mayor Jorge Vargas González (1996–2007) to begin restoring the deteriorated former casino, but it was not until 2004 that the Regional Government of Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins Region approved financing for a restoration design study. The study by the Department of Architecture of the Ministry of Public Works began in 2005 and lasted until mid–2006. Afterwards, on 15 December, Intendant of Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins Region Héctor Leiva Polanco unveiled to the community of Pichilemu the design and announced that he would present a financing proposal during the next year to the Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Regional (National Fund of Regional Development). The project was approved on 23 January 2007; the budget, according to architect Jorge Godoy Rojas, was 513,125,000 pesos (US$1,026,250). On 12 June 2007, the budget was increased to accommodate additional restoration work, by 100 million pesos to 663,702,000 pesos (US$1,327,404).

On 14 February 2007, the Regional Secretary (Seremi) of the Ministry of Public Works, Beatriz Valenzuela, wrote in an article in the online newspaper "El Rancahuaso", "The current state of the historic monument is bad, because of the deterioration of the roof, which over the years has had permanently leaked water and humidity. This can be easily seen in the damaged wood of its inside enclosure and the great frame of the mansard roof, which is of oak wood." Some months later, on 23 August, Valenzuela announced that the restoration of the building would begin that same day, after it was authorized by the Regional Government; the building would become a cultural center, housing the local public library and art galleries. The restoration work was the responsibility of development firm Atelier Consultores.

During the restoration of the casino, a number of historical items were found. Those included newspapers, specifically a copy of "Las Últimas Noticias" from February 1941, during the time the building served as a hotel; a US telephone battery from 1909; and a tile from the casino's ceiling with signatures and drawings by casino workers in 1915.

The completely restored building opened on 23 January 2009, one hundred years after its original construction. An exhibition of photographs by Ana María Encina Lemarchand was the first to be staged in the restored building. In June 2009, a non-political organization called the Corporación Cultural de Pichilemu (Pichilemu Cultural Corporation) was formed to manage the cultural center, in coordination with the local government. The center's inauguration was supposed to take place in March of that year, with President Michelle Bachelet Jeria in attendance; however, it was postponed until 27 January 2010. Bachelet toured the rooms of the cultural center with Mayor Roberto Córdova, and later said that the center "[is] to merge itself with the origins of modern Pichilemu, restoring the facilities to do what is so necessary: to make room for the creativity, talent, imagination, dreams of so many young and many people."

After the earthquakes of 27 February, and 11 March 2010, the cultural center was "slightly" damaged. The balustrades of both the northwest and southeast towers of the building fell down after the earthquakes; in the northwest tower, a pole broke; and there were some cracks and minor damage to the walls. Repairs took place in February 2011, with an investment of fourteen million pesos (US$28,000) by the government of Pichilemu.

The Centro Cultural Agustín Ross houses the local public library, and has four exhibition rooms, an auditorium, a music room, and several other rooms in which workshops take place for yoga, acrobatics, theatre, and other disciplines for people of all ages. The restoration of the cultural centre prompted the creation of an independent organization called the Corporación Cultural de Pichilemu (Pichilemu Cultural Corporation).

The Biblioteca Pública de Pichilemu (Public Library of Pichilemu) is the public library of the city of Pichilemu, and its director as of 2011 is María Angélica Yáñez Cortés. The library was created on 16 May 1989, under the leadership of Mayor René Maturana Maldonado.

The library was previously located in a dedicated building on Santa María Avenue from 1989 until 16 January 2009, before relocating to the Centro Cultural Agustín Ross. In September 2010, the library received a donation of 150 music and culture-related books with the help of Alejandra Domedel, the cultural center's communications and cultural management officer.

Jorge Godoy Rojas, architect of the University of Chile, suggested in an January 2007 article he wrote for the online newspaper "El Cachapoal" that a semi-autonomous legal entity be set up for the management of the cultural center. Such a legal entity had also been suggested to the authorities previously by local cultural organizations for several years, but they had been largely ignored. On 20 November 2008, fourteen local organizations, including the Tourism Chamber of Pichilemu, the Agrupación Ciudadana por un Pichilemu Limpio (Citizens Group for a Clean Pichilemu), and Canal 3 Pichilemu, sent a letter to the Pichilemu City Council requesting the creation of the Corporación Cultural de Pichilemu (Pichilemu Cultural Corporation) for the third time.

In May 2009, municipal employee Jorge Torres Avaca reported that the Cultural Corporation had been approved by the City Council, and its constitution was to be drawn up on 2 June; it was approved on 11 June. Of the seven directors of the corporation, two are elected, two are appointed by the Pichilemu City Council, and another two by the regional or provincial government, and the mayor presides as the seventh member. Longtime Pichilemu resident sculptor Macarena Irarrázabal Correa and Professor Carlos Leyton Labarca, native of the nearby village of Ciruelos and creator of the Museo del Niño Rural (Museum of the Rural Child), were elected.

There is a popular myth surrounding the former casino which tells of "underground caves" between the Gruta de la Virgen (also known as the Gruta de Nuestra Señora de Lourdes; Grotto of Our Lady of Lourdes) and the building, crossing Agustín Ross Park. During the restoration of the building, in December 2007, it was reported that "two great walls constructed with flagstone, very wide and very close together" were found, but nothing was confirmed afterwards.

Before the former casino building was completed, in 1908, Agustín Ross Edwards and Evaristo Merino reported to historiographer José Toribio Medina the existence of indigenous remains in the cave now called the Gruta de la Virgen. Medina asked Argentinean ethnographer Félix Faustino Outes to inspect the remains, and subsequently Medina wrote the book "Los Restos Indígenas de Pichilemu" ("The Indigenous Remains of Pichilemu"), using the report Faustino Outes gave him.

American writer Trudy Larkin Forster wrote the book "Los Gatos del Casino: la Historia de Don Agustín Ross Edwards y la Brigada de los Gatos Negros" ("The Cats of the Casino: the History of Sir Agustín Ross Edwards and the Brigade of the Black Cats") in 1999. The book is set in Pichilemu and the Agustín Ross Casino, and it was premiered in the Children's Book Fair of Santiago in June 1999, and then in the Agustín Ross Art Room (in current Centro Cultural Agustín Ross) on 18 September of that year.




</doc>
<doc id="25354112" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25354112" title="Stephen J. Chamberlin">
Stephen J. Chamberlin

Stephen Jones Chamberlin (23 December 1889 – 23 October 1971) was a lieutenant general in the United States Army who served during World War II as General of the Army Douglas MacArthur's Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3, the staff officer in charge of plans and operations.

Born in Spring Hill, Kansas on 23 December 1889, he was a 1912 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York. During World War I, he was aide-de-camp to Major General David C. Shanks, the New York Port of Embarkation commander at Hoboken, New Jersey, for which he was one of twelve Army officers who received the Navy Cross.

After the war, he attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and served on the staff of the Chief of Infantry in the War Department. He attended the Army War College and was posted to the staff of the Army's Hawaiian Division at Fort Shafter, Hawaii, as Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3.

In 1938, he became assistant chief of the Construction Branch in the G-4 Division of War Department General Staff. He became involved in the vast construction program of arsenals, depots, airbases and coastal defenses as the United States rearmed prior to its entry into World War II. 

In January 1942, he was sent to Australia, where he became Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3, at General MacArthur's General Headquarters (GHQ), Southwest Pacific Area. In this role, he was responsible for planning and overseeing the execution of MacArthur's major operations, including the New Guinea, Philippines and Borneo campaigns.

Chamberlin was director of the Intelligence Division, G-2, on the War Department General Staff from 1946 to 1948, when he became commander of the Fifth Army. He retired in September 1951, and was then employed as chief of security for the US Air Force's Arnold Engineering Development Center at Arnold Air Force Base, Tennessee. He died on 23 October 1971.

Stephen Jones Chamberlin was born in Spring Hill, Kansas on 23 December 1889. He was appointed to the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, which he entered on 2 March 1908 and from which he graduated on 12 June 1912.

Chamberlin was commissioned a second lieutenant in the 16th Infantry, which was then stationed at the Presidio of San Francisco. In May 1914, the regiment moved to El Paso, Texas. He transferred to the 8th Infantry on 1 February 1915 and served at Fort William McKinley in the Philippines. He was promoted to first lieutenant on 1 July 1916, becoming a battalion adjutant on 14 October. He was assistant to the post quartermaster from 31 October 1916 to 1 January 1917, and then Post Exchange Officer from 20 December 1916 to 9 June 1917. He was promoted to captain on 15 May 1917 and was acting Regimental Adjutant from 9 June to 1 September 1917.

With the United States now involved in World War I, Chamberlin became aide-de-camp to Major General David C. Shanks, the New York Port of Embarkation commander at Hoboken, New Jersey. Chamberlin was also the officer in charge of troop movements. On 2 March 1918, Chamberlin married Shank's daughter, Sarah Chapman, at St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church, New York on the corner of Madison Avenue and East 44th Street, in a simple ceremony attended only by Sarah's sister Katherine and Captain Maxwell Sullivan as best man.

Chamberlin was promoted to major on 7 June 1918. For his "distinguished service in the line of his profession as dispatch officer at the Port of Embarkation, Hoboken, New Jersey", he became one of only twelve Army officers to receive the Navy Cross during World War I. He was also awarded the Distinguished Service Medal. His citation read:
In September 1918, Shanks was appointed commander of the 16th Division at Camp Kearny, California, and Chamberlin was appointed the division's Assistant Chief of Staff. To prepare for the role, he attended a course at the Army War College. Following the Armistice with Germany, he was sent on a tour of the battlefields in France and Belgium.

In the aftermath of World War I, Chamberlin was reduced in rank to captain on 9 February 1919, but was promoted to major again on 1 July 1920. A year later he was posted to the Panama Canal Zone, initially as transportation officer, and then with 33rd Infantry. On returning to the United States in January 1922, he joined the staff of 19th Infantry Brigade at Fort McPherson, Georgia. He was transferred to the 22nd Infantry at Fort Benning, Georgia, on 17 February 1923.

From 1924 to 1925, he attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, graduating as an Honor Graduate. Duty then followed with the Third Corps Area from 30 June to 5 July 1925; with the National Guard at Staunton, Virginia from 5 July 1925 to 1 July 1926; in the Office Chief of Infantry at Washington, D.C.; and at Camp Perry, Ohio as Publicity Officer. He served on the staff of the Chief of Infantry in the War Department from 1926 to 1930, and then commanded a battalion of the 22nd Infantry from 1930 to 1932.

Chamberlin attended the Army War College from July 1932 to June 1933. Upon graduation, he was posted to the staff of the Army's Hawaiian Division at Fort Shafter, Hawaii, serving as Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3. After more than 15 years as a major, he was finally promoted to lieutenant colonel on 1 August 1935. On returning to the United States in July 1936, he became Assistant Professor of Military Science and Tactics for the high schools of Los Angeles.

In 1938, Chamberlin became Assistant Chief of the Construction Branch in the G-4 Division of War Department General Staff. At this time, the United States was embarking on a military buildup in response to a worsening international situation, which culminated in the outbreak of World War II on 1 September 1939. A major component of this build up was a vast construction program of arsenals, depots, airbases and coastal defenses. Some $175 million was allocated to construction under the Expansion Program, as it became known.

On 7 May 1940, the Assistant Chief of Staff, G-4, Major General Richard C. Moore, G-4 of the War Department General Staff, asked for an estimate of the cost to house an additional 1,200,000 men and balked at the estimate he received of $800 per head. To save on the cost of cantonments, Moore decided not to paint them. Chamberlin disagreed on the grounds that paint would reduce maintenance costs. President Franklin Roosevelt intervened and directed that the buildings be painted. As a result, an order was placed for of paint, resulting in an $11 million budget shortfall. Chamberlin was promoted to colonel on 14 February 1941. Commenting after the war on the construction program, he wrote:
In January 1942, Chamberlin was appointed Assistant Chief of Staff, G-4, of US Army Forces in Australia, arriving by air from Washington, D.C., on 9 January. He soon became Chief of Staff of US Army Forces in Australia, first under Major General Julian F. Barnes, and then under his successor, Lieutenant General George H. Brett. Chamberlin was promoted to brigadier general on 15 February 1942. General Douglas MacArthur arrived in Australia on 17 March to become Supreme Commander of the newly established Southwest Pacific Area (SWPA), which now included the US Army Forces in Australia. On 19 April, MacArthur formally established his General Headquarters (GHQ), and Chamberlin was appointed its Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3.

As G-3, Chamberlin was one of the most highly rated members of the GHQ staff, although not being part of the "Bataan Gang" – the group of officers who had escaped with MacArthur from the Philippines – made him something of an outsider at GHQ. Chamberlin was responsible for planning and overseeing the execution of MacArthur's major operations, including the New Guinea, Philippines and Borneo campaigns. One member of the staff later recalled:
Chamberlin jealously guarded his position. In late 1943, Chamberlin differed with one of his planners, Brigadier General Bonner Fellers, over a proposed landing at Hansa Bay. Fellers thought that Hansa Bay could be bypassed, but Chamberlin felt that this would be too risky. While Fellers was a newcomer to GHQ, he had known MacArthur for many years, and Fellers took his proposal directly to MacArthur, who approved it. A furious Chamberlin had Fellers fired from G-3. MacArthur made him his military secretary.

One of Chamberlin's challenges was working with the Australians. Their decentralized mode of planning was entirely different from the top-down approach used by GHQ, and Chamberlin found this a source of frustration, as it was difficult to extract information from them. Nonetheless, he established a good working relationship with the Australian Deputy Chief of the General Staff, Lieutenant General Frank Berryman.

When MacArthur began looking for a new chief of staff to replace Lieutenant General Richard K. Sutherland in 1945, he considered but rejected giving the post to Chamberlin. Chamberlin became Deputy Chief of Staff in February 1946, and was briefly acting as Chief of Staff from 2 May to 10 June 1946. For his services in the Southwest Pacific and the Occupation of Japan, Chamberlin was awarded three Army Distinguished Service Medals and the Silver Star. In September 1946, he was one of five American major generals who was made an honorary Commander of Order of the British Empire in the Military Division for his work with US Army Forces in Australia and GHQ SWPA.

From June 1946 to October 1948 Chamberlin was director of the Intelligence Division, G-2, on the War Department General Staff. He commanded the Fifth Army from 1948 to 1951, receiving promotion to lieutenant general on 24 January 1948. In 1949, he was chairman of a general officer committee which researched the role of race in the Army, and produced a report favoring the continuation of segregation and the maintenance of a quota limiting the number of African-Americans who could serve in uniform.

He retired in September 1951, and was then employed as chief of security for the US Air Force's Arnold Engineering Development Center at Arnold Air Force Base, Tennessee. He died at Hoag Memorial Hospital in Newport Beach, Orange, California on 23 October 1971. He was buried in Section 3, Site 1968 A WH of Arlington National Cemetery. His wife Sarah was subsequently interred with him in 1975. His papers are in the US Army Heritage and Education Center in Carlisle, Pennsylvania.




</doc>
<doc id="25365816" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25365816" title="Transformers: War for Cybertron">
Transformers: War for Cybertron

Transformers: War for Cybertron is a third-person shooter video game developed by High Moon Studios and published by Activision. It was released in North America on June 22, 2010 and in PAL regions on June 25, 2010 for Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and PC. were released for the Nintendo DS, one featuring an Autobot campaign, the other a Decepticon campaign. A game for the Wii called "" was developed by Next Level Games and utilizes the same characters and setting as "War for Cybertron". A sequel, "" was released on August 21, 2012 in North America and on August 24 in Europe.

The game takes place on the planet Cybertron, prior to the Transformers arrival on Earth. The Autobots and Decepticons are engaged in a civil war. The game can be played starting from either faction's perspective, but begins chronologically with the Decepticon campaign. The game revolves around the use of a substance known as Dark Energon, which the evil Decepticon leader Megatron believes will allow him to return the planet to what he refers to as a golden age.

"War for Cybertron" received generally positive reviews from critics. Aggregate websites GameRankings and Metacritic report scores in the mid 70% range across all three platforms. Several reviewers cited it as an improvement over past "Transformers" games. Critics generally felt that the cooperative and multiplayer versus modes were solid, but cited repetitive visuals in regards to the game's setting.

"War for Cybertron" is set on the planet Cybertron, prior to the Transformers' contact with the planet Earth. Robotic in nature, each Transformer has the ability to transform from their robot mode to an alternate form, such as a tank or jet. The Transformers are engaged in total civil war with one another. A group of evil Transformers form a splinter group separate from the main faction. Known as Decepticons, they follow Megatron, their powerful and ruthless leader. The main faction, known as the Autobots, follow the command of Zeta Prime. However, Zeta Prime is killed, leaving behind an inexperienced leader, Optimus, who must lead the Autobot forces to prevent Megatron from corrupting the planet, itself a Transformer, with Dark Energon. The Decepticon story is told in the first five chapters of the game, with the Autobot story directly following it. Players may choose to start either campaign first regardless of chronological order.

In the Decepticon campaign, Megatron fights to return the Transformers' home planet of Cybertron to what he refers to as a golden age. It opens as Megatron, having heard legends about Dark Energon, an unstable substance with the power to corrupt life on the planet, and the Decepticons attack an orbital research station guarded by the Decepticon Sky Commander named Starscream and his forces. After fighting through hundreds of Starscream's soldiers; Megatron, Barricade and Brawl reach the Dark Energon manufacturing plant, and Megatron immerses himself in it. Inspired by Megatron's ability to handle the Dark Energon, Starscream asks him to teach him how to control it in return for his service. Shocked by his betrayal, Starscream's colleague Jetfire escapes the space station, vowing to warn the Autobot leader Zeta Prime.

Megatron sends Starscream, and his twin brothers Thundercracker and Skywarp to reactivate an Energon bridge which will feed the station with raw Energon, allowing the manufacturing of more Dark Energon. Once they succeed, Megatron then develops a plan to infect the core of Cybertron with Dark Energon, feeling that he can gain control of the planet once it is infected. He launches a full-scale assault on the Autobot capital city of Iacon, looking for an item called the Omega Key, which he will use to enter Cybertron's core and infect it. The Decepticons learn that Zeta Prime has placed the key under his personal guard. Megatron's forces enter the chambers of Zeta Prime and defeat him in battle. Zeta Prime tells Megatron that the Omega Key is not actually what unlocks access to the core, but is the means to activate the true key, a colossal Transformer known as Omega Supreme. After hearing this, Megatron presumably kills Zeta Prime.

Now activated, Omega Supreme pursues Megatron and his minions relentlessly. Megatron, Soundwave and Breakdown devise a plan to lure Omega Supreme to a rooftop defended with turrets, where the giant Transformer is ambushed. Omega Supreme sustains heavy damage and plummets to Cybertron's lower levels. The Decepticons follow Omega Supreme and engage him in a lengthy final battle, in which Omega is finally defeated, infected with Dark Energon, and captured by the Decepticons. Megatron forces Omega to open the door to Cybertron's core and travels there with his minions. Upon arrival he infects the core of Cybertron, also a Transformer, with Dark Energon, which then begins to spread over the entire planet.

The Autobot campaign starts with Zeta Prime, leader of the Autobots, being reported dead by scout Bumblebee who personally informs Optimus of this. Optimus then decides to temporarily take the mantle of leadership. Optimus, Bumblebee, and Optimus' friend Ratchet lead a defensive campaign to protect their home city of Iacon. The trio activate the city's defense guns and reactivate the communication grid. They then travel to the Decagon Plaza where the three Autobots battle the former Autobot Starscream and after severely wounding him, they force him to retreat.

Shortly afterward, the Autobots receive a distress call from Zeta Prime, - revealed to be alive - who informs them that he is being held at Kaon prison. Taking Bumblebee and Sideswipe with him, Optimus allows himself and the others to be captured in order to infiltrate Kaon. With help from Aerialbot Air Raid, the Autobots succeed in releasing all of Kaon's Autobot prisoners, who escape on Decepticon transports. Optimus, accompanied by Bumblebee and Sideswipe, find Zeta Prime's cell guarded by the loyal decepticon communications officer Soundwave. A fight ensues in which he deploys his minions Frenzy, Rumble and Laserbeak. Eventually, Soundwave and his minions retreat due to extensive damage, but not before Soundwave delivers a fatal shot to Zeta Prime. The Autobots release Zeta Prime, who dies shortly thereafter from his previous injuries after his battle with Megatron and being shot by Soundwave. Optimus returns to Iacon with Zeta Prime's body and speaks with the high council who declares Optimus the new Prime and informs him of Megatron's activities.

Optimus is given the task of removing the Dark Energon from Cybertron's core by the council. Optimus and his old friend Ironhide, along with rookie Autobot soldier Warpath first attempt to rescue Omega Supreme, who is being tortured by Dark Energon, from the Decepticons. They call in Ratchet who heals Omega Supreme. The Autobots free Omega Supreme and gain access to Cybertron's core. Struggling against a mysterious corrupted worm and countless Decepticons, Optimus then speaks with Cybertron's core, which informs him that it has been heavily damaged by the Dark Energon. It states that it can repair itself by shutting down, but the process will take millions of years during which Cybertron will become cold, barren, and lifeless. The core then tells Optimus that if he carries a small piece of the core with him, the core can still survive during the repairs. Optimus accepts the burden and the core relinquishes the Autobot Matrix of Leadership.

With the planet soon to shut down, Optimus orders the evacuation of all Autobot cities. As the Autobot evacuation transports reach orbit, many are attacked by Megatron's orbital space station. Silverbolt, leader of the Aerialbots takes Air Raid and Jetfire with him to reclaim Starscream's station - which belonged to the Autobots - and destroy vital systems, but during the attack they realize that the station has been altered by Megatron and it is now a massive Decepticon known as Trypticon. After fighting him outside Cybertron's orbit for a while, the Aerialbots witness the damaged Trypticon plunge into Cybertron, and the Autobots band together to narrowly defeat him in one final battle. In the aftermath of the battle Optimus commissions a massive vessel known as the "Ark" to transport the remaining Autobots into space. Optimus and a small band of remaining Autobots stay to defend Cybertron from Megatron for as long as possible.

"War for Cybertron" is played from a third person perspective. Transformers are classified into four main categories, Leader, Soldier, Scientist, and Scout. Each character in the campaign is classified as one of these types, and their weaponry, abilities and vehicle form are largely influenced by their character class. Players can change between forms at will, and each form has unique abilities. While in robot form characters can also collect different weapons, reminiscent of those found in first-person shooters. While in vehicle form each character can boost their speed.

Each campaign level gives the player a choice of three Transformers. The campaign can be played in single-player or cooperatively via online multiplayer, and players can enter or leave the game at any time. If fewer than three players are present, the game's AI controls the remaining playable characters. Cooperative and competitive modes of the game are limited to online play, with no split screen features available. The game levels are designed to allow characters to comfortably navigate and play the game in either mode.

Competitive multiplayer games do not allow players to control official, named characters, and instead must design their own Transformer. Similar to the campaign, generic multiplayer characters are split into four character classes. Contrary to the campaign, however, each created character features some amount of customization. Players can select a base model and vehicle form, then alter major colors for their character and modify weapon loadouts and abilities based on that character class. The multiplayer aspect also features an experience and leveling system, including perks, and upgrades reminiscent of "", another Activision game.

"War for Cybertron" has several multiplayer modes to choose from. Deathmatch is a free-for-all game type where the player with the most kills at the end of the game is the winner. In Team Deathmatch players are divided into Autobot and Decepticon teams. The winning team is the one who earns the most kills. Conquest is a capture-and-hold style game, similar to the conquest mode found in the series. Multiple control points are spread across the level. The object is for players to capture enemy control points by standing near them for a set amount of time while defending their own control points. In Countdown to Extinction players must take an active bomb and place it at an enemy base, similar to the Assault mode in the "Halo" series. Power Struggle is the game's equivalent to the common King of the Hill game type. Finally Code of Power is a mode consisting of two and a half minute rounds where teams vie for a giant melee weapon. Also available is the Escalation game mode, the only multiplayer mode where players can control characters from the campaign or downloadable content. Players choose a faction and then work cooperatively to defeat continuous waves of enemy robots until all players are defeated, similar to the Horde mode found in "Gears of War" and the "Halo" series Firefight game modes. Players earn credits by defeating enemies which can be used to unlock ammunition, weaponry, health and new areas in each map.

"War for Cybertron" was announced December 16, 2009, and was released in North America on June 22, 2010 with the PAL region release following on June 25, 2010. It is powered by Unreal Engine 3. Physics for the game are handled using the Havok physics library. A demo was released on June 10, 2010 which allowed for players to play various multiplayer matches using two of the game's character classes. Developer High Moon Studios designed the friendly AI so that as a player progresses through the story any accompanying characters will help the player, but still require the player to advance through the game. "The buddies don't advance the story for you. They get to the point to kinda show you where to go, but then they'll take up defensive positions and wait for you to progress the story" said Game Director Matt Tieger. "They're not finishing objectives for you, but they like to stay near you, they'll heal you if you get too wounded, they're pretty smart."

"War for Cybertron" developer High Moon Studios and publisher Activision worked closely with Hasbro to create the design and story for the game. "I want to make the game I've been waiting 25 years to play" said Tieger. The studio brought the concept and idea to Hasbro for approval. It began with a sketch of Bumblebee. "That was that first sketch that we slid across the table to Hasbro and said 'What do you guys think?' And that's where it all started" said Tieger. High Moon presented the idea of setting the game on Cybertron during the Transformers' civil war between the Autobots and Decepticons. Aaron Archer, Senior Design Director for Hasbro, stated of the Cybertron-based setting "that's a really cool place [...] and the early days of that civil war between the Autobots and Decepticons was a story that hadn't really been fleshed out in any format."

Each of the characters were totally redesigned for the game, taking cues from previous iterations from the Transformers lore. "What they've allowed us to do is take a licensed property and treat it like a brand new IP" stated Tieger. The vehicle modes for car-based characters initially consisted of wheels, however the developers found that it crippled gameplay by removing the player's ability to strafe while in vehicle mode. Taking the dilemma to Hasbro, the two companies agreed that characters would turn their wheels down and hover while in vehicle mode, allowing for more movement. The vehicles would then revert to the traditional wheeled mode while using a character's boost, maintaining what the "Transformers" license had established with previous canon.

The world of Cybertron was designed in such a way that the Transformers would have a proper scale on their homeworld. "It doesn't make sense that things would be smaller than them in their world," Tieger said, adding "the key character in scale was making their world gigantic and huge." Matt Krystek, Lead Designer at High Moon stated that since the game is not tied to a movie they were able to tell their own story. He cited the as the inspiration for the game. Jim Daly, Lead Concept Artist at High Moon also cited the G1 universe as the main inspiration for the design of Cybertron itself, also stating that there were elements from Disney's TRON, Blade Runner, and the Aliens franchise.

Hasbro's Aaron Archer stated the game would be only part of a bigger group of media. "This won't be the only touch point. It's a big place that we're going to build off of." At a BotCon 2010 panel, "War for Cybertron" Creative Director Matt Tieger stated Activision is currently in talks with Hasbro on creating additional titles. He also added that Hasbro is "considering" expanding the brand further into the realm of video games. Joe Moscone, Senior Account Manager for Hasbro's public relations team, further clarified that "War for Cybertron" is in the same continuity as the "" animated series and "" novel, and that this would be the primary continuity going forward. Hasbro has released a toy line based on the "War for Cybertron" setting. Transforming figures of Optimus Prime, Bumblebee, Megatron and Soundwave from the game have been released by Hasbro under the "" banner.

The soundtrack for the console versions was composed by Tyler Bates. The ending theme is "Till All Are One" by Stan Bush, from his 2007 album "In This Life". Peter Cullen returns to voice Optimus, having voiced the character several times in the "Transformers" franchise. Other voice actors include Kari Wahlgren as Arcee, Liam O'Brien as Air Raid, Johnny Yong Bosch as Bumblebee, Fred Tatasciore as Megatron, Ratchet, Omega Supreme, and Trypticon, Keith Szarabajka as Ironhide, Steven Blum as Barricade and Shockwave, Nolan North as Brawl, and Sam Riegel as Starscream.

Two downloadable content packs were produced for console versions of the game. The first, entitled simply "Character and Map Pack 01", was announced on July 2, 2010. "Character and Map Pack 01" contains the three previously pre-order exclusive characters, Demolishor, Jazz and Shockwave, as well as two new characters, Onslaught and Scattershot. Four new multiplayer maps are also included. Two maps are exclusive to the game's Escalation mode, while the other two are used in all other game modes. It was released July 27, 2010. The second pack, known as "Character and Map Pack 02", adds the characters Dead End and Zeta Prime and five new maps. It was released September 7, 2010.

Critical reaction has been generally positive, with many reviews citing that "War for Cybertron" is an improvement over past "Transformers" games. Aggregate scores across all three platforms were fairly uniform. The PC version holds a score of 76.25% at GameRankings and 76/100 at Metacritic. The PlayStation 3 version has a 78.47% and 77/100 at the two aggregate sites, while the Xbox 360 version reports scores of 79.45% and 76/100. Individual review scores ranged from a 50% approval by "Edge" magazine to a 94% approval by Gaming Trend.

Reviewers praised the in-game voice acting. G4TV's Matt Kell noted that Peter Cullen's voice work as Optimus was "commanding and familiar", adding that the other actors "even do their best to replicate the voices of the original cartoon." Mike Nelson of "Game Informer" agreed and noted the game's excellent dialogue, stating "the script has all the overwrought melodrama you’d expect from giant talking robots." Several critics also gave high marks for "War for Cybertron"s multiplayer. IGN's Arthur Gies noted the influences from "Unreal Championship", "Tribes", "Team Fortress 2", and "" adding that ""War for Cybertron" leverages its transformation mechanic to create something that feels shockingly new." Tom McShea of GameSpot noted that the game's Escalation mode provided a "Transformers" twist on "Gears of War"s Horde mode. "GamePro"s Kat Bailey noted that the multiplayer was "probably the most appealing part of the package", adding it had a "strong suite [of] options." 1UP.com's Matt Miller lauded the ability to play through the game's campaign with up to three players online, as did G4TV's Matt Kell. Both reviewers also praised the new character designs, with Kell calling them "inventive." Wired.com's John Mix Meyer gave praise to the game's campaign length, stating "The game’s 10-hour single-player campaign means there’s plenty of time for the crazy transformations to strut their stuff." John Hamblin of Eurogamer praised the transformation animations. He stated players will "occasionally wish there was a "Max Payne" slow-mo option so you could appreciate the nuance of these feats a little more."

The repetitive visual design of Cybertron drew criticism from critics. Tom McShea of GameSpot stated that "the majority of the game entails walking through similar-looking corridors." Giant Bomb's Jeff Gerstmann also cited repetitive visuals, but conceded that "the metallic world of Cybertron doesn't lend itself particularly well to a lot of environmental variety." 1UP.com's Matt Miller also raised issue with the repetitive visuals, but provided a counterpoint in saying "there are a host of features in place to save the game from spiraling into mediocrity." John Hamblin of Eurogamer and Tom McShea of GameSpot also pointed out the game's vast lack of ammunition. "Watching Lord Megatron repeatedly suffering the indignity of being shot at by drones while he desperately scours the debris looking for an elusive ammo box [...] is just sad" stated Hamblin. He was further critical of the game's checkpoint system, which often leaves players in difficult situations upon respawning.

The first downloadable content pack received mixed reception from IGN's Arthur Gies. While he praised the design of the multiplayer maps, he noted that the lack of online players for "War for Cybertron" hurt the ability to play the new content online. Gies stated that he attempted to host the two Escalation maps, adding that he waited for several minutes for players to join, but had no success. "That's the problem", he stated. ""War for Cybertron"s multiplayer is all-but-abandoned." Gies went on to cite a peak population of approximately 4,600 players on Xbox Live, 800 on PlayStation Network, and only 158 players on the PC version at the time of his writing. Despite the lack of online players he felt the content may fit a player's needs, stating "If you've got nine other friends who bought "War for Cybertron" and can set up your own private matches, then "Character and Map Pack 01" might be worth checking out."

A sequel to "War for Cybertron" was announced in November 2010. "This is the most highly-rated, critical success of any game that's had the Hasbro brand yet and we're looking forward to a sequel in 2012," stated Hasbro representative Mark Belcher. The game was slated for a 2012 release and its official title, "Transformers: Fall of Cybertron", was revealed on October 6, 2011. It is a direct continuation of "War for Cybertron", completing the story of the planet Cybertron's demise and the exodus of the Transformers. One new Autobot, Grimlock was confirmed in the title announcement.



</doc>
<doc id="25406902" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25406902" title="50 euro note">
50 euro note

The fifty euro note (€50) is one of the middle value euro banknotes and has been used since the introduction of the euro (in its cash form) in 2002. The note is used by some 343 million Europeans and in the 23 countries which have the euro as their sole currency (with 22 legally adopting it). In August 2018, there were about 10,030,000,000 fifty euro banknotes in circulation in the eurozone. It is by far the most widely circulated denomination, accounting for over 46% of the total banknotes. Estimates suggest that the average life of a fifty euro banknote is about four years before it is replaced due to wear.

It is the fourth smallest note, measuring 140 mm × 77 mm, and has an orange colour scheme. The note depicts bridges and arches/doorways in the Renaissance era (15th and 16th centuries). The €50 note contains several complex security features such as watermarks, invisible ink, holograms and microprinting that document its authenticity.

The full design of the Europa series €50 banknote was revealed on 5 July 2016. The new 50 note was released on 4 April 2017.

The euro was founded on 1 January 1999, when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe. For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency, only used in accounting. Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002, when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the 12 countries in the eurozone, such as the Dutch guilder and the Portuguese escudo.
Today, the €50 note is used by some 332 million Europeans and in the 22 countries which have it as their sole currency (with 20 legally adopting it).

Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, Estonia in 2011, Latvia in 2014, and Lithuania in 2015.

The changeover period during which the former currencies' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months, from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002. The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state. The earliest date was in Germany, where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001, though the exchange period lasted for two months more. Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender, they continue to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from ten years to forever.

Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank, Wim Duisenberg. He was succeeded on 1 November 2003 by Jean-Claude Trichet, whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 to March 2012. Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank, incumbent Mario Draghi.

The first series issues do not reflect the expansion of the European Union, as Cyprus is not depicted on the notes as the map does not extend far enough east, and Malta is also missing as it does not meet the current series' minimum size for depiction.

Since the European Central Bank plans to redesign the notes every seven or eight years after each issue, a new 50 note was put into circulation on 4 April 2017. New production and anti-counterfeiting techniques are employed on the new notes, but the basic design remained on the same theme (bridges and arches) and continues to use colours identical to the previous series. However, the new note is visibly distinguishable from the old one.

The fifty euro note is the fourth smallest note, measuring × , with an orange colour scheme. Each euro banknote depicts bridges and arches/doorways in a different historical European style; the €50 note shows the Renaissance era (15th and 16th centuries). Although Robert Kalina's original designs were intended to show real monuments, for political reasons the bridge and the window are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era.

Like all euro notes, the €50 note shows the denomination, the EU flag, the signature of the president of the ECB, the initials of the ECB in the different EU languages, a depiction of EU territories overseas, the stars from the EU flag and various security features.

The fifty euro note contains the following security features:



The European Central Bank is closely monitoring the circulation and stock of the euro coins and banknotes. It is a task of the Eurosystem to ensure an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes and to maintain their integrity throughout the euro area.

In January 2019, there were €50 banknotes in circulation around the Eurozone. for €.

This is a net number, i.e. the number of banknotes issued by the Eurosystem central banks, without further distinction as to who is holding the currency issued, thus also including the stocks held by credit institutions.

Besides the date of the introduction of the first set to January 2002, the publication of figures is more significant through the maximum number of banknotes raised each year. The number is higher the end of the year.

The figures are as follows (Nov. 3, 2017) :

On 4 April 2017, a new 'Europe' series was issued.

The first series of notes were issued in conjunction with those for a few weeks in the series 'Europe' until existing stocks are exhausted, then gradually withdrawn from circulation. Both series thus run parallel but the proportion tends inevitably to a sharp decrease in the first series.

The latest figures provided by the ECB are the following :

Legally, both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the 7 different euro banknotes. In practice, only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes. The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations.

There are several communities of people at European level, most of which is EuroBillTracker, that, as a hobby, it keeps track of the euro banknotes that pass through their hands, to keep track and know where they travel or have traveled. The aim is to record as many notes as possible in order to know details about its spread, like from where and to where they travel in general, follow it up, like where a ticket has been seen in particular, and generate statistics and rankings, for example, in which countries there are more tickets. EuroBillTracker has registered over 161 million notes as of November 2016, worth more than €3 billion.


</doc>
<doc id="25407491" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25407491" title="The Bacon Cookbook">
The Bacon Cookbook

The Bacon Cookbook: More than 150 Recipes from Around the World for Everyone's Favorite Food is a cookbook on bacon by James Villas. It was published by Wiley in 2007. Villas is a former food editor for "Town & Country" magazine, and "The Bacon Cookbook" is his 15th book on food. He notes on the book's jacket that he was "beguiled by bacon since he was a boy." He describes the appeal of bacon in the book's preface, and in the introduction recounts the history of the product, as well as its variations from different locations internationally. Chapters are structured by type of recipe and food course, and in total the book includes 168 recipes.

The book received generally positive reception in book reviews and media sources, receiving praise in "Publishers Weekly" and "Library Journal". In 2009 the National Pork Board highlighted recipes from the book for International Bacon Day. Chef Bobby Flay highlighted one recipe from "The Bacon Cookbook", for "Bacon-Wrapped Figs Stuffed With Almonds In Port", as one of his favorites. "AM New York", "The Baltimore Sun", and the "Star Tribune", recommended the book in articles on suggested gift-giving ideas. "The Independent" highlighted the book as number 11 on a list of "The 50 Best Cookbooks".

In the preface to the book, Villas states that vegetarians and those that do not eat pork for religious reasons are "haunted instinctively by the sensuous, irresistible enticement". He asserts, "There's no one who doesn't love bacon. It's the greatest food God has ever created." Villas asks, "Who, under any circumstances, is not rendered almost helpless by the tantalizing sound of bacon sizzling slowly in a skillet, by the taunting backwoods aroma that permeates the air ...?" He notes that "the greatest and most beloved food on earth" is one of the worlds oldest forms of cooked meat. The author comments on the surge in interest in bacon products in the years prior to the book's publication, "Just the 40 percent increase in bacon consumption in the United States over the past five years might have justified my writing this book." The book includes photographs by Andrea Grablewski.

The introduction contains a guide to "the international world of bacon", and Villas compares dishes Salt Pork and Pancetta; and Paprikaspeck and Bauchspeck. The introduction also includes a list of places to receive mail-order products. The book goes over the history of curing bacon, discussing the various international traditions. Smokehouses listed as resources in the book include Benton's in Tennessee, Newsom's in Kentucky, Edwards & Sons in Virginia, Nueske in Wisconsin, and Lazy H Smokehouse in Kirbyville, Texas. Villas instructs the reader in techniques of smoking bacon, how to buy and store it, and how to utilize bacon fat for cooking purposes.

Villas explains the derivation of the phrase "bring home the bacon", writing, "An Old English tradition whereby a flitch, or side, of bacon was offered as a prize to any man who could swear before the church that for a year and a day he had neither quarreled with his wife nor wished himself single." He recounts how the Chinese discovered methods of preserving pork bellies around 1500 B.C. By the first century A.D., Romans had established a practice of breeding hogs for the production of bacon. During the Middle Ages, bacon and beans was considered a staple food for the poor. According to Villas, bacon was eaten aboard the "Mayflower", and was a staple food product in the early American colonies. Villas describes how Oscar F. Mayer began to package sliced bacon for his customers during the 1920s. The author describes contemporary practices of utilizing old-fashioned style curing and smoking methods by food manufacturers in the United States.

Chapters are structured according to each type of recipe, including main course, soup, and breads. 168 recipes from the United States and globally are included in the book. The author notes that bacon is not as bad nutritionally as had previously been thought. He compares the nutritional characteristics of two slices of cooked bacon to one pork hot dog, noting that the bacon contains approximately "73 calories, 202 milligrams of sodium, 6 grams of fat and 11 milligrams of cholesterol", while the hot dog has "182 calories, 638 milligrams of sodium, 17 grams of fat and 29 milligrams of cholesterol". "If health concerns sometimes make you feel guilty about loving bacon ... relax ...yes, it’s high in sodium and fat, but if eaten in moderation or used as a flavoring agent ... it is a guilt free indulgence," writes Villas. Breakfast dishes include French Cheese and Bacon souffle, and Bacon Scrapple. A recipe for BLT sandwich is included in the section on sandwiches, but the majority of Villas's other sandwich recipes are more extreme, and include ingredients such as Jamaican smoked fish. Dishes that contain vegetables include Lima Bean and Bacon Casserole; and Spanish Chicken, Bacon, Meatball and Chickpea Stew. For dessert, Villas includes six recipes such as bacon-wrapped figs, and Bacon and Peanut Butter Chocolate Truffles, and Portuguese Egg and Bacon Pudding.

James Villas is a former food editor for "Town & Country" magazine. The back flap of the book's jacket notes that Villas was "beguiled by bacon since he was a boy." Prior to "The Bacon Cookbook", Villas had written other cookbooks including "The Glory of Southern Cooking", "My Mother's Southern Kitchen", and "Biscuit Bliss". "The Bacon Cookbook" is his 15th book on food. In the lead-up to the 2009 International Bacon Day, Villas commented to "Pork Magazine", "People are starting to realize that bacon is no longer just a breakfast staple. Bacon is, without a doubt, one of the most versatile and flavorful options in the grocery aisle. Most importantly, a little bacon goes a long way. A sprinkle can enhance not only the flavor, but also the aroma and appeal of nearly any dish. We’re seeing chefs and home cooks add bacon to dishes you wouldn’t expect, like popcorn or cookies, and take traditional tastes to another dimension." Villas explained to "Salon", "Bacon has the perfect balance of sweet, salty, smoky flavor, and the perfect balance of meaty and crispy texture." Villas commented to "CBS News" that his book was part of a growing interest in bacon products, "We have a lot more conscientious producers today, you know, really turning out fresh great product like we've got here in this store. I mean quality bacon. And America really should be out there searching for this stuff. And it'll change your life. It will really change your life."

A review in "Publishers Weekly" called the book an "exuberant parade of pork fat", and commented, "there's plenty good to be had in these pages". Writing for "Library Journal", Judith Sutton concluded, "There are, in fact, several other cookbooks devoted to bacon, including Sara Perry's "Everything Tastes Better with Bacon", but with its irresistible recipes and wealth of information and lore, Villas's new title is recommended for most collections." Amy Culbertson of the "Fort Worth Star-Telegram" also compared the Villas's work to another book on bacon, writing, "His is a more definitive cookbook than last year's "Seduced by Bacon" by Joanna Pruess". The book was highlighted in the "Holiday Cookbook Roundup: Gift Guide" column of "The Austin Chronicle", where writer Mick Vann concluded, "This is one of the few cookbooks you'll find where every single recipe makes you want to head straight for the stove, whether it's a bacon, goat cheese, and sweet-onion pie; Russian borscht; beef-stuffed plantains; or braised Japanese pork belly. For those fellow bacon lovers in our midst, Villas' The Bacon Cookbook is required reading." In honor of International Bacon Day in 2009, the National Pork Board offered recipes from "The Bacon Cookbook". Bonnie Stern of "Financial Post" recommended the book, and commented, "Few of us can resist the allure of sizzling, smokey, crispy bacon. Though not usually high on the list of foods that are considered good for you, if you don't eat it often, you can have your bacon and eat it, too. If you want to know all about bacon, have a look at The Bacon Cookbook by James Villas".

Chef Bobby Flay highlighted the recipe from "The Bacon Cookbook" for "Bacon-Wrapped Figs Stuffed With Almonds In Port" as one of his favorites. Jonathan Cheung, co-owner of the cookbook store Bon Appétit in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, recommended the book to his customers when they asked for books on cooking with pork products. "AM New York" highlighted the book among its recommendations of "Best cookbooks to give as gifts", noting that the author, "presents a mouthwatering array of recipes to nudge the pork lover." Writing for "The Advocate", Cheramie Sonnier commented, "James Villas comes through once again with a cookbook that is sure to please cooks who love both classic comfort foods and exotic new dishes." The "San Jose Mercury News" noted that Villas "turns his meticulous eye to the cured pork product" in the book, which includes "recipes featuring bacon in every imaginable way". The "Winston-Salem Journal" observed, "His history of bacon, short and to the point, should be required reading for bacon lovers." "The Baltimore Sun" highlighted the book in an article "Gifts to savor", commenting that "James Villas covers everything about this trendy ingredient". Marialisa Calta of "The Douglas Daily Dispatch" wrote, "in the unusual-but-oddly-compelling-single-subject-cookbook category, props go to “The Bacon Cookbook” by James Villas". Writing for the "Star Tribune", Lee Svitak Dean recommended the book as a holiday gift for cooks, commenting, "It's all here, from guacamole and bacon canapés to New England apple and bacon griddlecakes and German fennel and bacon soup." "No publishing season is complete without a bacon book," wrote Kristen Browning-Blas of "The Denver Post", who noted that Joanna Pruess's "Seduced by Bacon" was released the previous year. The "New York Daily News" noted that the book "includes an introductory primer on the many wondrous bacon varieties along with easy-to-follow instruction for more than 150 international dishes, from guacamole with bacon to bacon-duck stew." "The Independent" highlighted the book as number 11 on a list of "The 50 Best Cookbooks", commenting, "Bacon is a standard choice for many a simple supper, but there is nothing standard about Villas's book. The irresistible smell of bacon oozes from the pages, as Villas shows the versatility of bacon, even bacon desserts – for example, bacon and peanut butter chocolate truffles. Vegetarians beware; these dishes could prove too tempting."




</doc>
<doc id="25444689" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25444689" title="Angels Cry (song)">
Angels Cry (song)

"Angels Cry" is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her twelfth studio album, "Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel" (2009). It was written and produced by Carey, Tricky Stewart and James "Big Jim" Wright, with additional songwriting from Crystal Johnson. On the album's track listing, "Angels Cry" is preceded by a one-minute, four second prelude called "Angel (The Prelude)", which consists of Carey performing purely in her whistle register. The prelude then leads into "Angels Cry", a song about trying to fix a broken relationship because true love only happens once. Carey released "Angels Cry" as a remix single featuring Ne-Yo in January 2010 for a proposed "Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel" remix album called "Angels Advocate", which was ultimately shelved.

"Angels Cry" was written and produced by Mariah Carey, Tricky Stewart and James "Big Jim" Wright, with additional songwriting from Crystal Johnson, for Carey's twelfth studio album "Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel" (2009). The recording process was handled by Brian Garten and Brian "B-Luv" Thomas at The Boom Boom Room in Burbank and Honeywest Studios in New York City, and they were assisted in the process by Luis Navarro. It was mixed by Phil Tan at Soapbox Studios in Atlanta. Additional engineering was carried out by Carlos Oyanedel and Damien Lewis. The keys and Hammond B3 were performed by Stewart and Wright. "Angels Cry" is preceded by a one-minute, four second prelude called "Angel (The Prelude)". The prelude was written and produced by Carey, Stewart and Wright. Oyanedel, Lewis and Tan carried out the additional engineering and mixing as with "Angels Cry", however Garten and Thomas recorded the prelude at the Studio at the Palms in Las Vegas in addition to Honeywest Studios. The prelude consists of Carey performing only whistle notes.

Carey revealed that she intended to re-release "Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel" as a remix album in early 2010, titled "Angels Advocate", consisting of remixes of the standard songs with new featured artists, including Mary J. Blige, Snoop Dogg, Trey Songz, R. Kelly, T-Pain, Gucci Mane and OJ da Juiceman. "Angels Cry" and "Up Out My Face" from "Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel" were released as remix singles with Ne-Yo featuring on the former and Nicki Minaj on the latter. The remix version of "Angels Cry" featuring Ne-Yo was released to rhythmic contemporary and urban contemporary radio in the United States on January 26, 2010. It was made available for digital download on February 23, 2010, in Canada and the United States. A release date of February 23, 2010, for the album was slated, and then pushed back to March 9. It was then further pushed back to March 30. However, it was confirmed in March 2010 that production of "Angels Advocate" had halted and the project was shelved indefinitely. Island Def Jam stated that the singer was instead working on a new project and "new surprises". "Metro" revealed that Carey was possibly recording a Christmas album.

"Angels Cry" is an R&B song on which Carey uses her higher vocal register over an instrumental of a piano and hand clapping. Lyrically, the song is about maintaining hope that a fading relationship can be salvaged because true love only happens once. Carey sings "I’m willing to live and die for our love/Baby we can get back that shine." However, the lyrics "Super natural love conquers all" could also be interpreted as feeling God's love. Adam Holz of "Plugged In" thought that the lyrics were "depressing," while Lauren Murphy of Entertainment IE felt that the lyrics "When you and I say goodbye, I felt the angels cry" were too sentimental. Although Ann Powers of "Los Angeles Times" thought that the song had a "sad" tone, she praised its production. Musically, the remix does not greatly differ from that of the original apart from a new second verse by Ne-Yo.

Digital Spy's Robert Copsey praised the track. He wrote that it was one of the standouts on "Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel" and that "it's about as close to 'classic' Mariah as 'new' Mariah gets". He complimented Carey's "classy" and "effortless" vocals, and added that Ne-Yo gave the track an emotional "extra dimension". Copsey likened the song to one of Carey's previous singles, "We Belong Together" (2005): "It's a bit of a 'We Belong Together' retread, but it's a thoroughly pleasant 'We Belong Together' retread". A reviewer for DJ Booth commented that the song sounded as thought it could have been released in 1994. Bill Lamb of About.com placed "Angels Cry" in his list of the album's best tracks.

Leonie Cooper of "The Guardian" gave a mixed review of the remix. Although she did not express her dislike for the track, she felt that it was too similar to Carey previous material, writing that it is middle-of-the road "inoffensive semi-soul fodder we've had to come to expect from her." Cooper was, however, critical of the decision to include Ne-Yo and that his addition makes the song even more bland. Robbie Daw of Idolator also felt that the track was a "typically Mariah-esque ballad". Michael Cragg of musicOMH was critical of the song, writing that it is a "limp ballad" which he thought was trying too hard at recreating some of Carey's previous material, and concluded by writing that it "ultimately ends up making you want to hear the original version more than anything".

In the United States, the remix peaked at number twenty-six on the Adult Contemporary chart, becoming her twenty-eighth career entry and Ne-Yo's first. It is the second song from "Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel" to enter the chart following Carey's single release cover of "I Want to Know What Love Is" which peaked at number ten; it is also the first time Carey had charted two songs on the Adult Contemporary chart from the same album since her sixth studio "Butterfly", where its title track and "My All" peaked at numbers eleven and eighteen in 1997/98. The remix also peaked at number ninety on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Elsewhere, the track peaked at number eighty-nine in Japan and number ninety on the UK Singles Chart, but reached number twenty-eight on the UK R&B Chart. It did however achieve some success in South Korea, peaking at number four on the international Digital Singles chart.

The accompanying music video for the remix of "Angels Cry" was directed by Carey's husband, Nick Cannon. In December 2009, Cannon spoke of the video's concept, saying "This video is going to be simplistically genius! No bells and whistles, just documenting history and brilliance. Two of the worlds greatest song writers in the studio crafting a masterpiece. I hope the world is ready to hear 'Angels Cry. It premiered simultaneously with the video for "Up Out My Face" with Minaj on Vevo on January 28, 2010. The video shows Carey and Ne-Yo collaborating on the song together in a recording studio.

The video starts with Carey walking in the rain to meet Ne-Yo who is waiting for her in the studio. Clips of Carey singing in desperation in the rain are intercut with footage of her recording her vocals in the recording booth. For his scenes, Ne-Yo sings as he stands next to as well as plays the piano as Carey reminisces by herself, while other scenes show him in the booth with Carey as they sing their parts together. At the video's climax, both singers are belt the final note in the booth, which is followed by them walking out of the studio where it has stopped raining and the sun is shining. Robbie Daw wrote that the video gave him "chills". He also commented on the use of product placement of Carey's perfume "M" and her own brand of champagne. Melinda Newman of HitFix thought that the video appeared to have a bigger production budget than that of the video for "Up Out My Face" with Minaj, but noted that it was still "low-key" for a Carey video. Newman further commented that while the singer appears to be wearing albeit little make-up, she looked more natural and "beautiful" than ever. Leonie Cooper thought that the video made the "bland" song more appealing: "the video, with a moist Mariah mithering in the rain, preposterous sequinned gold boots, a puppy in the studio, and shameless pimping of her latest perfume, kind of makes up for it."



</doc>
<doc id="25540483" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25540483" title="Texas Park Road 3">
Texas Park Road 3

Park Road 3 (PR 3) is a Park Road located near Fort Davis, in the U.S. state of Texas. The highway connects the Indian Lodge of Davis Mountains State Park to State Highway 118 (SH 118). The entire length of the road is located within the park. The highway was constructed in 1933 by the Civilian Conservation Corps and incorporated into the state highway system in 1937 as one of the system's original park roads.

The highway currently has one suffixed route, Park Road 3A, also known as Skyline Drive. This route is long, which is longer than its parent route. The route was designated in 1965.

PR 3's main road begins at SH 118. Immediately after the intersection, PR 3 divides into two one-way roadways separated by the park headquarters and reuniting just beyond. The road then continues westward through Keesey Canyon one-half mile (0.8 km) passing a couple of small hiking trails to the intersection with PR 3A. Beyond PR 3A, several drives branch off as loops accessing campsites, staff residences, and other park facilities. The road makes a sharp curve and a steep upward grade before ending at Indian Lodge west of the intersection with PR 3A.

In 1924, the Texas Legislature directed the State Parks Board, a predecessor agency to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, to consider establishing a major destination park within the Davis Mountains. After the parks board failed to receive appropriations or donated land for a new park, the Legislature then instructed the State Highway Department, which preceded the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT), to build a Davis Mountains State Park Highway in 1927. Landowners finally agreed to donate land for the park in 1933 to boost the local economy devastated by the Great Depression. With the creation of the park, a state park highway was no longer necessary, and that highway initially became SH 166.

Construction of PR 3 began in 1933 soon after the establishment of the state park. Like the park, the road was originally constructed by the Civilian Conservation Corps. The road at this time consisted of the main route between the park entrance and Indian Lodge.

On September 22, 1936, the state highway commission initiated an investigation at the request of the state's parks board into the incorporation of certain park roads as part of the state highway system after which the highway commission would assume maintenance of these roads. The highway commission accepted the park road in Davis Mountains State Park and seven other parks as the original park roads in the state system on June 22, 1937.

In 1939, SH 118 was extended from Fort Davis to Kent over the portion of SH 166 at the terminus of PR 3. The state ended the SH 166 designation over that same portion in 1941.
The entire highway is in the Davis Mountains State Park, Jeff Davis County.

Park Road 3A (PR 3A) known as Skyline Drive is a suffixed spur of PR 3. The road travels from a junction with PR 3 to the border of the state park, and provides access to a hiking trail leading to Fort Davis National Historic Site. 

The road begins at PR 3 and crosses Keesey Creek before turning east in Keesey Canyon. Like PR 3, the road also has connecting drives acting as loops and cul-de-sacs to campgrounds and park facilities. After leaving the campground, the road begins steeply ascending the ridge between Keesey and Hospital canyons on a climb requiring several switchbacks. The road connects with drives to scenic overlooks, picnic tables, and trail heads before terminating after at a scenic overlook and trail head at the boundary between the park and Fort Davis National Historic Site.

Park Road 3A was first created by the CCC in 1933, when the state park was built. In 1965, the Texas Department of Transportation numbered the route Park Road 3A.

Major junctions

The entire highway is in the Davis Mountains State Park, Jeff Davis County.




</doc>
<doc id="25558340" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25558340" title="Battle of the Ch'ongch'on River">
Battle of the Ch'ongch'on River

The Battle of the Ch'ongch'on River (), also known as the Battle of the Ch'ongch'on, was a decisive battle in the Korean War, and it took place from November 25 to December 2, 1950, along the Ch'ongch'on River Valley in the northwestern part of North Korea. In response to the successful Chinese First Phase Campaign against the United Nations forces, General Douglas MacArthur launched the Home-by-Christmas Offensive to expel the Chinese forces from Korea and to end the war. Anticipating this reaction, the Chinese People's Volunteer Army Commander Peng Dehuai planned a counteroffensive, dubbed the "Second Phase Campaign", against the advancing UN forces.

Hoping to repeat the success of the earlier First Phase Campaign, the Chinese 13th Army first launched a series of surprise attacks along the Ch'ongch'on River Valley on the night of November 25, 1950 at the western half of the Second Phase Campaign (), effectively destroying the Eighth United States Army's right flank while allowing Chinese forces to move rapidly into UN rear areas. In the subsequent battles and withdrawals during the period of November 26 to December 2, 1950, although the US Eighth Army managed to avoid being surrounded by Chinese forces, the Chinese 13th Army were still able to inflict heavy losses onto the retreating UN forces which had lost all cohesion. In the aftermath of the battle, the US Eighth Army's heavy losses forced all UN forces to evacuate North Korea and to withdraw to the 38th parallel.

In the wake of the United Nations (UN) forces' successful landing at Inchon and the subsequent destruction of the Korean People's Army (KPA) by mid-1950, the Eighth United States Army crossed the 38th parallel and advanced rapidly towards the Sino-Korean border. Alarmed by this development, China's Chairman Mao Zedong ordered the Chinese People's Volunteer Army (PVA) to intervene in Korea and to launch the First Phase Campaign against the UN forces. Between October 25 and November 4, 1950, the PVA 13th Army surprised and defeated the Republic of Korea (ROK) II Corps and the US 1st Cavalry Division in a series of battles around Onjong and Unsan, destroying the right flank of the US Eighth Army while forcing the UN forces to retreat back to the Ch'ongch'on River. Although Chinese forces were able to break through the UN line, logistics difficulties forced the Chinese to withdraw on November 5, 1950.

Despite the success of the Chinese First Phase Campaign, the UN planners still believed that China had not intervened in Korea on a large scale. The suddenness of the Chinese withdrawal in the face of a victory further reinforced this belief. Working on the assumption that only 30,000 Chinese troops could remain hidden in the hills, General Douglas MacArthur ordered the bombing of the bridges over the Yalu River in an effort to cut off Chinese reinforcements. Confident that the UN air force could detect and disrupt any troop movements across the Yalu River, MacArthur launched the Home-by-Christmas Offensive on November 24 to rout the remaining Chinese and North Korean forces and to end the Korean War.

Unknown to the UN planners, however, there were already 180,000 Chinese troops stationed in Korea, with more reinforcements infiltrating across the border. Although the PVA was ordered to maintain a defensive posture in North Korea until Soviet weapons could arrive in the spring of 1951, its earlier successes convinced the Chinese leadership that the PVA was capable of turning the tide of UN advance. Encouraged by the fact that the UN did not know their true numbers, PVA Commander Peng Dehuai outlined the Second Phase Campaign, a counteroffensive aimed at pushing the UN forces back to a line halfway between Ch'ongch'on River and Pyongyang. As a part of a deception plan to further reinforce the weak appearance of Chinese forces, Peng ordered all units to rapidly retreat north while releasing POWs along the way. With 230,000 troops at his disposal and another 150,000 heading to the Chosin Reservoir, Peng authorized the start of the Second Phase Campaign on November 22, 1950.

The battle was fought along the UN front line around the Ch'ongch'on River and its tributaries, which is located south of the Sino-Korean border. The UN front line stretched horizontally from the Korean west coast to the Taebaek Mountains in central Korea, while the Ch'ongch'on River crosses into the north of the UN line at the town of Kujang-dong. From west to east, a series of towns, such as Chongju, Yongsan-dong, Ipsok, Kujang-dong, Tokchon, and Yongwon dot the front line, and connecting those towns are a series of road junctions located at Sinanju, Anju, Kunu-ri and Pukchang-ni. A road runs south from Kunu-ri into Sunchon and eventually into Pyongyang, and it would later become the main retreat route for the UN forces stationed at the center of the front line. The hilly terrain on the northern bank of the Ch'ongch'on River formed a defensive barrier that allowed the Chinese to hide their presence while dispersing the advancing UN forces. The battle was also fought over one of the coldest Korean winters in 100 years, with temperatures dropped to as low as .

Acting on MacArthur's instructions, General Walton Walker of the Eighth Army started the Home-by-Christmas Offensive at 10 a.m. on November 24, 1950. With a reconstituted ROK II Corps placed on the Eighth Army's right flank, the advance was led by the US I Corps to the west, US IX Corps in the center, and the ROK II Corps to the east. The three UN Corps advanced cautiously in a continuous front line in order to prevent more ambushes similar to the Chinese First Phase Campaign, but the lack of manpower stretched the UN forces to the limit. Except for the strong Chinese resistances against the ROK II Corps, the Eighth Army met little opposition, and the line between Chongju to Yongwon was occupied on the night of the November 25.

Despite the lack of manpower, the US Eighth Army had three and half times the firepower of the opposing Chinese forces. The US Fifth Air Force, which was responsible for the air support, also had little opposition due to the lack of anti-aircraft weapons by the Chinese. Boosted by a Thanksgiving feast with roasted turkeys on the eve of the advance, the morale was high among the UN ranks, and home by Christmas and Germany by spring was in everyone's mind. The high morale, however, caused a degradation of troop discipline, and most of the soldiers had discarded their equipment and ammunition supply before the battle. A rifle company from the US IX Corps, for example, started its advance with most of the helmets and bayonets thrown away, and there were on average less than one grenade and 50 rounds of ammunition carried per man. Because the UN planners did not foresee that the war would be dragged into a winter campaign, all elements of the Eighth Army started the offensive with a shortage of winter clothing.

While the Eighth Army was advancing, the PVA 13th Army was hiding in the mountains with the 50th and 66th Corps to the west, the 39th and the 40th Corps in the center and the 38th and 42nd Corps to the east. Anticipating the UN advances, the Chinese planned a series of counterattacks to catch the Eighth Army off guard. Hoping to repeat the success of the earlier First Phase Campaign, the 38th and 42nd Corps would first attack the ROK II Corps and to destroy the UN right flank, then cut behind the UN lines. At the same time, the 39th and 40th Corps would hold the US IX Corps in place while preventing any reinforcements to the ROK II Corps. The 50th and 66th Corps would stay behind and check the advances of the US I Corps.

Although the PVA 13th Army had a nominal strength of 230,000 men, its actual strength during the battle could be as low as 150,000 men. The PVA 66th Corps, for example, had only 6,600 men per division at the start of the battle, as opposed to the expected 10,000 men per division. There was also only one firearm available for every three Chinese soldiers, and the rest were employed as grenade throwers. Because most of the Chinese howitzers and guns were left behind in Manchuria, mortars were the only artillery support available for the Chinese. For the counteroffensive, the average Chinese soldier was issued with only five days worth of rations and ammunition, and resupply could only be obtained by scavenging on the battlefield. To compensate for its shortcomings, the Chinese relied extensively on night attacks and infiltrations in order to avoid the UN firepower. The primitive logistics system had also allowed the Chinese to maneuver over the rough hilly terrains, thus enabled them to by-pass the UN defenses and to surround the isolated UN positions. Because the Chinese had captured large numbers of Nationalist weapons during the Chinese Civil War, most of the Chinese weapons were composed of US made small arms such as the Thompson submachine gun, the M1 Garand rifle, the M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle, the bazooka and the M2 mortar.

As the US Eighth Army stopped its advance on the afternoon of November 25, 1950, the PVA 13th Army commenced the Second Phase Campaign. A massive frontal attack was launched against the entire UN line from Yongsan-dong to Yongdong-ni. To the west, the ROK 1st Infantry Division of the US I Corps was attacked by the PVA 66th Corps at Yongsan-dong. In the center, strong probing actions by the PVA 39th and 40th Corps were carried out against the US IX Corps at Ipsok and Kujang-dong. In the east, the PVA 38th and 42nd Corps broke through ROK II Corps' line at Tokchon and Yongdong-ni. The Home-by-Christmas Offensive was completely stalled on the morning of November 26.

In the aftermath of the Battle of Onjong, the Chinese recognized the ROK II Corps as the most vulnerable unit of the Eighth Army. Besides lacking the firepower of their US counterpart, the ROK II Corps also held the most difficult terrain on the UN right flank. At 10 a.m. on November 24, the ROK 7th Infantry Division on the II Corps' left flank attacked north from Tokchon. At the same time, the ROK 8th Infantry Division on the II Corps' right flank advanced north from Yongdong-ni, but their advance was halted by the PVA 38th and 42nd Corps stubborn resistance. The continuous fighting for the next two days failed to create any gains for the Koreans. During the advances, the Chinese defenses managed to create a wedge in the center of the ROK 7th Infantry Division, forcing the division to commit most of its reserves on the front line. Meanwhile, the ROK 6th Infantry Division in the II Corps' rear could only offer its 2nd Infantry Regiment as the corps' reserve due to the earlier losses at Onjong.

As the Koreans were preparing their defensive positions on the dusk of November 25, the two Chinese corps were mobilizing for a decisive counterattack against the Eighth Army's right flank. The PVA 38th Corps planned to attack in full force against the ROK 7th Infantry Division's center and right flank, while two divisions from the 42nd Corps started to march through the hills in order to bypass the ROK 8th Infantry Division's right flank. Given the importance of this assault, Han Xianchu, one of Peng's deputies, personally commanded the 38th and 42nd Corps for the rest of the battle.

The PVA 38th Corps landed the first blow against the ROK II Corps at 5 p.m. on November 25. Aided by total surprise, the PVA 113th Division of the 38th Corps first shattered the ROK 7th Infantry Division's Reconnaissance Company on the division's right flank, creating a gap between the ROK 7th and 8th Infantry Division. Simultaneously, the PVA 114th Division of the 38th Corps attacked the center-right of the ROK 7th Infantry Division, pushing the ROK 5th and 8th Infantry Regiment back in the process. When the ROK 7th Infantry Division's center and right were in complete chaos, the PVA 112th and the 113th Division of the 38th Corps slipped past the UN lines and advanced towards Tokchon. With only one battalion in reserve to check the Chinese divisions, the Tokchon garrison and the ROK 7th Infantry Division headquarters were soon surrounded and attacked by the two Chinese divisions at 4 a.m. on November 26. Under heavy pressures from the PVA 114th Division, the ROK 5th and 8th Infantry Regiment tried to fall back to Tokchon, but the Chinese ambushes in the rear scattered the unsuspecting Koreans. On the afternoon of November 26, Tokchon was captured by the Chinese, and the ROK 3rd Infantry Regiment on the ROK 7th Infantry Division's left flank drifted westward and joined the US 2nd Infantry Division.

While the ROK 7th Infantry Division was being annihilated at Tokchon by the PVA 38th Corps, the ROK 8th Infantry Division was also being routed, at Yongdong-ni by the PVA 42nd Corps. With the PVA 125th Division tying down the ROK 10th and 21st Infantry Regiment at Yongdong-ni, the 124th and the 126th Division tried to infiltrate the ROK 8th Infantry Division's rear by marching through the hills east of Yongdong-ni. At 1 p.m. on November 25, the ROK 16th Infantry Regiment to the ROK 8th Infantry Division's rear spotted the two Chinese divisions at Maengsan, south of Yongdong-ni. Surprised by this development, the ROK 8th Infantry Division ordered the 16th Infantry Regiment to block the Chinese advance while the ROK 10th and 21st Infantry Regiment were retreating from Yongdong-ni. But before the order could be carried out, the Chinese struck first after learning their trap had been discovered. As the ROK 10th and 21st Infantry Regiment were retreating from Yongdong-ni early in the morning of November 26, the PVA 125th Division ambushed both ROK regiments, forcing the Koreans to abandon their heavy equipment and to scatter into the hills. Meanwhile, following the bonfires made by the Koreans for the cold weather, the PVA 124th Division overran a battalion from the ROK 16th Infantry Regiment and attacked the ROK 8th Infantry Division's command post at Maengsan. With the entire division dispersed, the ROK 8th Infantry Division headquarters and the ROK 16th Infantry Regiment broke out of Maengsan on November 27 and retreated from the battlefield.

During the chaos of the battle, Major General Yu Jae-hung of the ROK II Corps did not receive news from the front line until midnight of November 25 — five hours after the Chinese had entered the Korean rear. Responding to the crisis, Yu committed the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment of the 6th Infantry Division to block the Chinese divisions. As the 2nd Infantry Regiment marched towards the front on the morning of November 26, the PVA 113th Division intercepted the regiment and destroyed its command post, scattering the ROK II Corps' entire reserve in the process. With most the ROK II Corps' units destroyed by November 27, the UN right flank had fallen to the Chinese.

Although the UN aerial reconnaissance observed on November 27 that the Chinese forces on the UN right flank were moving rapidly into the Eighth Army's rear, Walker still ordered the rest of the Eighth Army to continue the offensive north. Convinced that the collapse of the ROK II Corps was merely a small counterattack by the Chinese, Walker ordered the US I and IX Corps to shift eastward in order to cover the ROK II Corps' sector. By that time, however, the US I and IX Corps had already suffered heavy losses from the Chinese counteroffensive at Kujang-dong, Ipsok and Yongsan-dong.

On the left of the ROK 7th Infantry Division, ROK II Corps, the US 2nd Infantry Division of the IX Corps was placed in the path of a major Chinese supply line. During the Home-by-Christmas Offensive, US 9th Infantry Regiment led the division's advance northward along the Ch'ongch'on River, while the US 38th Infantry Regiment was placed on the division's right flank. The offensive started with little resistance against the US 2nd Infantry Division, although the 9th Infantry Regiment was stalled by Chinese defenses at Hill 219, north of Kujang-dong on November 25. In order to renew the offensive on the next day, the 23rd Infantry Regiment of the US 2nd Infantry Division was moved into the rear of the 9th Infantry Regiment. At the same time, the 38th Infantry Regiment had arrived at Somin-dong, a town on the road between Kujang-dong and Tokchon. When the aerial reconnaissance detected an increase in Chinese activities, the 38th Infantry Regiment's A Company was sent on a patrol into Chinese territory.

To ensure the success of the Chinese counterattack against ROK II Corps, the PVA 40th Corps was assigned the mission of protecting the PVA 38th Corps' flank against the US 2nd Infantry Division. To accomplish this mission, the PVA 119th Division of the 40th Corps would first attack Somin-dong and to prevent the Americans from reinforcing the Koreans. The 120th Division would then fight its way across the Ch'ongch'on River and tie down the bulk of the US 2nd Infantry Division. Finally, the 118th Division would flank the Americans from the west and capture Kujang-dong from the rear.

On the night of the Chinese counteroffensive, the PVA 120th Division first accidentally stumbled upon the US 9th Infantry Regiment on the northern bank of the Ch'ongch'on River. The surprise encounter between the two sides soon left the 9th Infantry Regiment with only three rifle companies combat effective. Unaware that the 1st Battalion of the US 23rd Infantry Regiment had pulled up behind the US 61st Field Artillery Battalion, four Sharp Sword Companies from the PVA 359th Regiment of the 120th Division proceeded to cross the river and attacked the US artillery positions. Although the 61st Battalion was routed by surprise, the US 23rd Infantry Regiment quickly knocked out two of the unsuspecting Chinese companies. The surviving Chinese troops drifted eastward and occupied a hill named Chinaman's Hat, enabling the Chinese to overlook the entire 23rd Infantry Regiment's positions.

While the PVA 120th Division commenced its attack on the US 2nd Infantry Division's center, the PVA 119th Division was also trying to drive a wedge between Kujang-dong and Tokchon. In a series of confusing battles between the PVA 119th Division and the US 38th Infantry Regiment, the patrolling A Company of the 38th Infantry Regiment was first splintered under Chinese attacks. Adding to the confusion, Chinese reconnaissance teams lured the Americans into exposing their positions, and the resulting Chinese counter fire caused the loss of the G Company on the 38th Infantry Regiment's center. The Chinese had also penetrated the 38th Infantry Regiment's left flank, blocking the regiment's retreat route in the process. By the morning of November 26, Chinese troops were spotted all around the 38th Infantry Regiment.

The Chinese promptly withdrew as the morning came on November 26, and a counterattack by the 38th Infantry Regiment later reopened the road to the rear. When the ROK 3rd Infantry Regiment of the ROK 7th Infantry Division suddenly appeared in the 38th Infantry Regiment's sector, Colonel George B. Peploe of the 38th Infantry Regiment realized the right flank of the US 2nd Infantry Division and the entire Eighth Army had collapsed. Under orders from Major General Laurence B. Keiser, commander of the US 2nd Infantry Division, Colonel Peploe immediately took command of the ROK 3rd Infantry Regiment while trying to refuse his right flank. At the same time, Colonel Paul L. Freeman of the 23rd Infantry Regiment had also tried to lead his regiment to capture Chinaman's Hat, but without much success.

The Chinese immediately renewed their attacks on the night of November 26. A counterattack from Chinaman's Hat soon captured the 23rd Infantry Regiment's command post. On the 23rd Infantry Regiment's left, the 9th Infantry Regiment's G Company was also overran by the attacking Chinese forces, forcing Colonel Charles C. Sloane Jr. to withdraw the remnants of his regiment across the river. Chinese ambushes in the rear then decimated the rest of the 9th Infantry Regiment. To the US 2nd Infantry Division's right, Commander Wen Yuchen of the PVA 40th Corps ordered the 119th Division to destroy the 38th Infantry Regiment in order to protect the Chinese breakthrough on the UN right flank. The ferocious fighting soon forced the 38th Infantry Regiment to fight its way back to Kujang-dong in order to rejoin the division.

Although Walker did not cancel the Home-by-Christmas Offensive on November 27, Keiser ordered his division to withdraw to Kujang-dong. Before Keiser's order was complete on November 28, Walker instructed Major General John B. Coulter of the IX Corps to set up a new defensive line at Kunu-ri — south of the US 2nd Infantry Division. Full scale retreat of the US 2nd Infantry Division started on the night of November 27, with the Chinese attacking everywhere against the Americans. As the division's convoy tried to move south, they were met with machine gun and mortar fire from numerous Chinese roadblocks in the rear. Chinese bazooka teams had also knocked out several vehicles while others were trying to swarm the tanks and to lob grenades into their hatches. With some losses, the US 2nd Infantry Division broke through the PVA 118th Division's blockade and arrived at Kunu-ri on the night of November 28.

For the Home-by-Christmas Offensive, US 25th Infantry Division of the IX Corps advanced on the left of the US 2nd Infantry Division along the Kuryong River, one of the northern tributaries of the Ch'ongch'on River. On November 24, the 25th Infantry Division started its offensive at the city of Yongbyon, south of Ipsok. To lead the offensive, five companies of infantry, armor and artillery were drawn from the 25th Infantry Division to form a special task force named "Task Force Dolvin". With Task Force Dolvin leading the offensive on the eastern bank of the Kuryong River, the US 24th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Infantry Division was placed on division's right to maintain contact with the 2nd Division, while the US 35th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Infantry Division was on the western bank of the river advancing from Yongsan-dong to Unsan. The 27th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Infantry Division was located in the division's rear as reserves.

Because of the earlier UN defeat at the Battle of Unsan, the US 25th Infantry Division expected to encounter heavy Chinese resistance during its advance. But the Chinese screening forces withdrew with the American advance. Aside from the harassing fire, the US 25th Infantry Division did not encounter strong resistance along the way. Ipsok was captured by Task Force Dolvin on November 24, and several American POWs from the Unsan battle were also recovered at the town. When Task Force Dolvin proceeded to capture a series of hills north of Ipsok on the next day, Chinese resistance started to stiffen. During the hill battles on the afternoon of November 25, the Eighth Army Ranger Company of Task Force Dolvin suffered heavy losses against the Chinese defenses, and the task force stopped its advance at dusk.

While the US 25th Infantry Division was advancing, the opposing PVA 39th Corps was waiting for instructions from the PVA High Command. But the Chinese still conducted a series of probing actions against the American positions on the night of November 25. The Chinese patrols soon destroyed the rest of the Ranger Company, while numerous Chinese reconnaissance teams disguised as Americans infiltrated Task Force Dolvin's positions. On the right of Task Force Dolvin, the mountainous terrains scattered US 24th Infantry Regiment while blocking most of its radio transmissions. Upon learning the destruction of the Ranger Company, Major General William B. Kean of the US 25th Infantry Division sent the 2nd Battalion of the 27th Infantry Regiment to reinforce Task Force Dolvin. He also sent the assistant division commander Brigadier General Vennard Wilson to command of the task force, renaming the task force "Task Force Wilson".

After the successful attack against the Eighth Army's right flank, the PVA High Command gave the go ahead for the 39th Corps to attack the US 25th Infantry Division on November 26. The PVA 115th Division of the 39th Corps was immediately mobilized for an assault against Task Force Wilson and the US 24th Infantry Regiment, while the 116th and 117th Division were moving to attack Ipsok and to cut the American retreat route. The crushing attack soon left the task force decimated and reeling. The PVA 347th Regiment of the 115th Division first met the C Company on the task force's center, and after the sharp encounter most of the C Company's men were missing in action. On the right flank, the 115th Division attacked the task force's B Company. Met with waves of Chinese suicide bombers, the B Company was reduced to 26 soldiers out of the original 200. Some Chinese snipers and infiltrators even managed to reach Task Force Wilson's command post, resulting in the death of the task force's executive officer. As the entire task force's line collapsing, the E Company sleeping at the task force's rear was pushed to the front line. Although the tank fire from the E Company stopped the Chinese advance, the company was reduced to just one platoon after the battle. Chinese forces in the rear had also attacked the task force's artillery at Ipsok, preventing fire support during the night. In the aftermath of the night battle, the task force found itself surrounded, and the Chinese troops were chanting in all directions against the Americans. When Wilson tried to evacuate the wounded, Chinese roadblocks ambushed the medical convoy just south of the 2nd Battalion's perimeter.

With only the 2nd Battalion of Task Force Wilson remaining combat effective on the morning of November 27, Wilson ordered the task force to withdraw to Ipsok. Under heavy air cover, the 2nd Battalion broke through PVA 348th Regiment's roadblock and reached Iposk on the afternoon. Meanwhile, the US 24th Infantry Regiment had lost contact with most of its units, and the regiment commander Colonel John T. Corley could only collect one battalion from his regiment on the morning of November 27. On November 28, Walker shifted the US I Corps eastward by attaching the US 25th Infantry Division to the US I Corps, while ordering the 25th Infantry Division to withdraw to the Ch'ongch'on River. With the US 35th Infantry Regiment rejoining the 25th Infantry Division after the battle at Yongsan-dong, the 25th Infantry Division withdrew south and Task Force Wilson was dissolved by Kean on November 28.

After an extensive refit in the aftermath of the Unsan battle, ROK 1st Infantry Division was placed on the US I Corps right flank at Yongsan-dong on November 20. As part of the Home-by-Christmas Offensive, the ROK 1st Infantry Division was to advance north and to capture the town of Taechon while the US 35th Infantry Regiment of the US 25th Infantry Division was advancing north from Yongsan-dong on the Korean right flank. At the same time, the US 24th Infantry Division of the US I Corps would advance towards Chongju on the ROK 1st Infantry Division's left flank.

On the morning of November 24, the ROK 1st Infantry Division advanced towards the town of Taechon with its 11th and 12th Infantry Regiment on point. Although Chinese booby traps and mortar fire tried to delay the Koreans along the way, the 1st Infantry Division still managed to envelop the town by the dusk of November 24. But unknown to the Koreans, the 1st Infantry Division was marching into a Chinese assembly area, and the resistance around Taechon immediately increased as the result. On the night of November 24, the defending PVA 66th Corps counterattacked the Koreans with infantry and cavalry charges, and the Chinese and Korean troops were soon locked in a seesaw battle from November 25 to 26.

As the battle around Taechon dragged into the night of November 26, the ROK 11th Infantry Regiment on the division's right became disorganized. Brigadier General Paik Sun-yup of the ROK 1st Infantry Division soon brought up the 15th Infantry Regiment from his reserve to relieve the 11th Infantry Regiment. After receiving news on the Chinese attack against the 25th Division across the Kuryong River, Paik had also directed his division to defend against the upcoming Chinese counteroffensive. As the morning came on November 27, the Chinese troops around Taechon did not stop their assault even under punishing UN air strikes, and some of the attacks spilled into US 24th Infantry Division's area. Upon noticing their flank was buckling, the US 24th Infantry Division and the US 35th Infantry Regiment started the retreat southward to the Ch'ongch'on River.

At 1 p.m. on November 27, Peng ordered the PVA 66th Corps to destroy the ROK 1st Infantry Division before the Koreans could retreat to the Ch'ongch'on River. On the evening of November 27, the PVA 66th Corps launched a massive attack against the ROK 1st Infantry Division, the US 5th Regimental Combat Team of the 24th Infantry Division and the US 35th Infantry Regiment. After midnight, the Chinese attacks broke through the Korean lines and captured Yongsan-dong, resulting in the loss of the ROK 11th, 15th and US 35th Infantry Regiment's command posts. The ROK 11th and 15th Infantry Regiment were soon scattered while the retreating US 35th Infantry Regiment was blocked at Yongsan-dong with Chinese forces attacking from behind. Under heavy pressure, the US 35th Infantry Regiment fought its way through the town and rejoined the US 25th Division on the afternoon of November 28. At the same time, Paik rallied the broken ROK regiments and recaptured Yongsan-dong. The ROK 1st Infantry Division held the town against the subsequent Chinese attacks until it withdrew from the battle on November 29.

Kunu-ri is a crossroad village on the northern bank of the Kaechon River, one of Ch'ongch'on River's southern tributaries. As the Chinese counteroffensive grew in strength against the Eighth Army's center, Kunu-ri had become a major bottleneck for the US IX Corps' retreat. In an effort to stabilize the front on November 28, Walker ordered the US 2nd Infantry Division to retreat from Kujang-dong and to set up a new defensive line at Kunu-ri. The importance of Kunu-ri was also noted by the Chinese, and on November 27, Peng instructed the PVA 38th Corps to cut the US IX Corps retreat route. The PVA 114th Division of the 38th Corps would capture Kunu-ri by marching westward on the road from Tokchon, while the PVA 112th Division would follow on a parallel route through the hills north of the road.

With the US 2nd Infantry Division still engaged at Kujang-dong, Coulter ordered the Turkish Brigade in the IX Corps reserve to block the Chinese advance. On the night of November 27, the Turks took up defensive position at Wawon to the east of Kunu-ri. They were soon met with the PVA 342nd Regiment from the 114th Division. The ensuing battle between the Chinese regiment and the brigade's advance battalion continued for much of the November 28, resulting in 400 Turkish casualties. As dusk came on November 28, the Turkish Brigade tried to retreat west to Sinim-ri to set up stronger defensive positions, but the PVA 342nd Regiment caught up with the brigade and attacked its rear, completely surrounding the brigade. With communications cut between the brigade and the Turkish headquarters, the PVA 340th and the 342nd Regiment from the 114th Division then fragmented the brigade during the night battle. The trapped Turks broke out of the Chinese encirclement on the morning of November 29 and the brigade was attached to the US 2nd Infantry Division.

Although the Turkish Brigade was crippled by the Chinese, its delaying action allowed the US 2nd Infantry Division to secure Kunu-ri on the night of November 28. With the US 23rd Infantry Regiment setting up defensive positions to the north of Kunu-ri on the morning of November 29, the US 38th Infantry Regiment tried to occupy the hills to the northeast of Kunu-ri. But the American soon found the PVA 112th Division had already occupied the hills. The 38th Infantry Regiment was then forced to occupy a lower position at away from the Chinese. At the same time, the remnants of the Turkish Brigade joined up with the US 38th Infantry Regiment, covering the regiment's right flank on the northern bank of the Kaechon River.
On the afternoon of November 28, MacArthur started to recognize that a crisis was growing in Korea. With the start of the Battle of Chosin Reservoir on November 27, MacArthur gathered his field commanders, including Walker, for a conference in Tokyo. During the conference, MacArthur learned about the situation on the Eighth Army's right flank and judged that the Eighth Army was in great danger. He instructed Walker to withdraw from the battle before the Chinese could surround the Eighth Army. After the conference at November 29, Walker ordered all Eighth Army units to retreat to a new line around Sunchon, south of Kunu-ri.

Following Walker's orders, most of the Eighth Army's major units promptly broke contact with the Chinese and withdrew, but the US 2nd Infantry Division was forced to stay at Kunu-ri in order to hold off the Chinese forces on the Eighth Army's right flank. By the time the 2nd Infantry Division tried to withdraw on the night of November 29, the two Chinese divisions attacked the US 38th Infantry Regiment. The PVA 112th Division first struck the 38th Infantry Regiment on the left flank, but the American defenses held firm, forcing the Chinese to go on the defensive. Meanwhile, the PVA 114th Division attacked the Turkish Brigade and the right flank of the 38th Infantry Regiment. The Chinese outflanked the Turks by attacking along the southern bank of the Kaechon River, then crossed the river in the UN rear areas. Upon noticing this development, Brigadier General Tahsin Yazıcı of the Turkish Brigade ordered a withdrawal, leaving the right flank of the 38th Infantry Regiment completely uncovered. By the dusk of November 29, Chinese had cut the road between the 38th Infantry Regiment and Kunu-ri, and the Americans had to retreat by infiltrating the Chinese lines. At 4 a.m. on November 30, the 38th Infantry Regiment crossed the Kaechon River under the cover of the 23rd Infantry Regiment and Kunu-ri was under Chinese control.

In the aftermath of the ROK II Corps' collapse on November 27, Peng immediately ordered the PVA 38th Corps to cut the road between Kunu-ri and Sunchon in the US IX Corps rear, while the PVA 42nd Corps would surround the entire Eighth Army by rushing south through Pukchang-ni and capture Sunchon. At the same day, Walker shifted the Eighth Army's line eastward by attaching the US 1st Cavalry Division and the Anglo-Australian 27th Commonwealth Infantry Brigade to the US IX Corps. The US 1st Cavalry Division would contain the Chinese breakthrough at Pukchang-ni, while the 27th Commonwealth Brigade secured the road between Kunu-ri and Sunchon.

With the new orders on November 28, the US 5th Cavalry Regiment of the 1st Cavalry Division left Kunu-ri to rejoin the division to the northeast of Sunchon. With the US 5th Cavalry Regiment absent and the 8th Cavalry Regiment still recovering from devastating losses from the battle at Unsan, Major General Hobart Gay of the US 1st Cavalry Division placed the US 7th Cavalry Regiment to the south of Pukchang-ni, behind the remnants of the ROK 6th Infantry Division. Lacking reinforcements, the ROK 6th Infantry Division was quickly routed by the PVA 42nd Corps on the night of November 28. Chinese forces then attacked the 7th Cavalry Regiment under the cover of the fleeing Korean soldiers and refugees pouring into the American front. Under Gay's order, the 7th Cavalry Regiment withdrew southwest to the town of Sinchang-ni on the morning of November 29, and the Chinese resumed the drive southward. A fierce battle between the PVA 125th Division and the 7th Cavalry Regiment broke out during the night of November 29, but by the morning of November 30 the PVA 42nd Corps' advance was halted.

The PVA 38th Corps, on the other hand, was marching towards the Kunu-ri—Sunchon road virtually unopposed. On 7 a.m. at November 28, the PVA 113th Division of the 38th Corps occupied the town of Samo-ri, placing it right in the path of the 5th Cavalry Regiment and besides the Kunu-ri—Sunchon road. An hour and half later, the advance platoon from the 5th Cavalry Regiment was ambushed and destroyed. With its advance blocked, the 5th Cavalry Regiment tried to dislodge the Chinese garrison, but it was forced to turn back by the afternoon. The 113th Division then occupied the valley containing the Kunu-ri—Sunchon road at that night and blocked the retreat route of the US 2nd Infantry Division. Upon receiving the news on November 29, 1st Battalion, Middlesex Regiment, part of 27th Brigade, tried to clear the valley from the south, but the attack was halted due to the lack of heavy weapons.

One of the first victims of the new Chinese roadblock was a convoy from the Turkish Brigade, and it was ambushed on the night of November 28. A military police patrol was sent to investigate, but most of its members were killed by the morning. With the battle still raging at Kunu-ri, the news of the Chinese roadblock reached the US 2nd Infantry Division on November 29. Keiser sent the Reconnaissance Company and the remnants of the 9th Infantry Regiment to dislodge the Chinese, but the roadblock held firm even with a platoon of tanks attacking it. With the battle at Kunu-ri ended by the night of November 29, the PVA 112th Division joined the 113th Division and the roadblock grew to in depth.

The 2nd Infantry Division, however, did not know the strength of the roadblock on the night of November 29. At the same time, the US 25th Infantry Division Military Police mistakenly reported that the alternative retreat route from Kunu-ri to Anju was also blocked by Chinese. Later, Coulter ordered Keiser to withdraw by breaking the roadblock with the 27th Commonwealth Brigade. On the early morning of November 30, Keiser made the decision to withdraw through the valley.

On the morning of November 30, the 9th Infantry Regiment led the withdrawal by attacking the roadblock. Four tanks were first sent down the road and the Chinese held their fire. Encouraged by this development, Colonel Sloane ordered the 9th Infantry Regiment to press forward, but Chinese machine gun and mortar fire immediately stopped the advance at 9 a.m. The ROK 3rd Infantry Regiment attached to the 2nd Infantry Division was sent to reinforce the US 9th Infantry Regiment, but it was routed by friendly fire. With no contacts between the American commands and the British units, the Middlesex Regiment advanced to the south end of the valley without attacking the roadblock. Believing that the roadblock was short and the British were attacking up the road, Keiser ordered the 2nd Infantry Division to run through the blockade at 10 a.m.

As the 2nd Infantry Division entered the valley, later known as the "Gauntlet", the Chinese machine guns delivered punishing fire while mortar shells saturated the road. The length of the roadblock caught the 2nd Infantry Division by surprise, and the road was soon filled with wrecked vehicles and wounded and dead soldiers. Those who tried to take cover in the ditches were promptly left behind by the convoy rushing south, and unit cohesion instantly evaporated. During the day, the air cover tried to suppress the Chinese positions with some success, but with no air cover at night, the Chinese attack intensified. Finally, the Chinese blocked the road completely by destroying the US 38th and 503rd Artillery Battalion of the 2nd Infantry Division, and the immobilized artillery pieces forced the rest of the division to abandon all vehicles and to retreat by hiking through the hills. At the rear of the division, Colonel Freeman attempted to save his 23rd Infantry Regiment by retreating through the Kunu-ri—Anju road. In one of the last acts of the battle, the 23rd Infantry Regiment fired off its stock of 3,206 artillery shells within 20 minutes, and the massive barrage shocked the Chinese troops from following the regiment. The last stragglers from the US 2nd Infantry Division finally arrived at Sunchon on December 1, and by December 2 the Eighth Army had completely lost contact with the Chinese.

In the aftermath of the battle, US Eighth Army's casualty number exceeded 11,000 in the first count. A large number of documents, including all records from the US 2nd Infantry Division and the US 24th Infantry Regiment, were lost during the battle, and this made it difficult for historians to either analyze the events in detail or to assess the exact battle damage and losses incurred. However, it was later approximated that the US 2nd Infantry Division had suffered 4,037 casualties, and most of its artillery pieces, 40 percent of its signal equipment, 45 percent of its crew-served weapons, 30 percent of its vehicles were lost during the battle. Thus, the US 2nd Infantry Division was deemed to be crippled, and Keiser was relieved from command by the end of the battle. The other US unit that had reported significant losses was the US 25th Infantry Division with 1,313 casualties. The Turkish Brigade had also reported 936 casualties with 90 percent equipment, 90 percent vehicle and 50 percent artillery losses, and the brigade was rendered combat ineffective. The South Korean casualties could not be estimated due to the complete absence of South Korean records during the first half of the Korean War, but according to Paik, the ROK II Corps' headquarters was forced to disband in the aftermath of the battle. As for Chinese losses, Peng estimated 45,000 casualties by the end of the battle, and the official Chinese history attributed less than 20,000 casualties to combat, while the rest were attributed to the lack of adequate winter clothing and the lack of food. For its role in setting up the Gauntlet against the US 2nd Infantry Division, the PVA 38th Corps was awarded the title "Ten Thousand Years Corps" by Peng on December 1, 1950.

With the US 2nd Infantry Division, the Turkish Brigade and the ROK II Corps out of action, the US Eighth Army was reduced to just two corps, composed of four divisions and two brigades. Meanwhile, the over-extended Chinese logistics system had also left the victorious 13th Army half-starved and incapable of any further offensive operations. But during the chaotic UN retreats, no reconnaissance was conducted to determine the state of the Chinese forces. As a result, Walker ordered the Eighth Army to abandon North Korea on December 3, much to the surprise of the Chinese commanders. The following withdrawal to the 38th parallel is often referred to as "the longest retreat in US military history." Aside from extremely low morale after the battle, the entire Eighth Army was also gripped with "bug out fever" during the retreat, and a song called the "Bugout Boogie" was composed to commemorate the Eighth Army's defeat. Walker died two days before the Christmas of 1950 when a truck driven by a South Korean soldier collided with his jeep, and Lieutenant General Matthew B. Ridgway assumed the command of the US Eighth Army. At the UN, all hopes for a unified Korea were abandoned, and a ceasefire at the 38th parallel was proposed to China on December 11, 1950.

Having decisively won the battle and once again turned the tide of the war in favor of the Communists, the Battle of the Ch'ongch'on River represented the peak of the Chinese military's performance in Korea. However, Mao interpreted the UN ceasefire as a weakness that China should further exploit. Against advice from Peng and other senior military leaders, Mao ordered the PVA to invade South Korea—a mission that was beyond the Chinese military's abilities while breaking the fragile Chinese supply lines. Recognizing the Chinese difficulties, Ridgway then led the Eighth Army to inflict severe losses on the PVA during the Chinese offensives of 1951.






</doc>
<doc id="25558793" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25558793" title="Northwest Airlines Flight 253">
Northwest Airlines Flight 253

Northwest Airlines Flight 253 was an international passenger flight from Amsterdam Airport Schiphol in the Netherlands, to Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport in the United States. The flight was the target of a failed al-Qaeda bombing attempt on Christmas Day, December 25, 2009, in which a passenger tried to set off chemical explosives sewn to his underwear. There were 290 people on board the aircraft—an Airbus A330-323E operated by Northwest Airlines, which had merged with Delta Air Lines the year before. Had the attempt succeeded, it would have surpassed American Airlines Flight 191 as the deadliest aviation occurrence on U.S. soil and tied Iran Air Flight 655 as the eighth-deadliest of all time. The incident was also the second in 2009 involving an Airbus A330, after the crash of Air France Flight 447 on June 1. This was also the final accident/incident involving Northwest Airlines as it closed down a month later when it merged with Delta Air Lines.

The convicted bomber in the "Christmas Day bombing attempt" was 23-year-old Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, a Nigerian man who had concealed plastic explosives in his underwear but failed to detonate them properly. A Dutch passenger, Jasper Schuringa, tackled and restrained him and put out the fire with the aid of others. Abdulmutallab was handcuffed while the pilot safely landed the plane. In all, three people were injured: Abdulmutallab, Schuringa, and one other passenger. Upon landing in Detroit, Abdulmutallab was arrested and taken to a hospital for treatment of his burns. On December 28, 2009, al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) claimed responsibility for the attempted bombing. On January 6, 2010, a federal grand jury indicted Abdulmutallab on six criminal charges, including attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction and attempted murder.

Reports indicated that the U.S. had received intelligence regarding a powder bomb planned attack by a Yemen-based Nigerian man. While describing security measures taken by U.S. and foreign governments in the immediate aftermath of the attack, U.S. Secretary of Homeland Security, Janet Napolitano, said, "once the incident occurred, the system worked." She cited "the actions of the passengers and the crew on this flight" to show "why that system is so important." After heavy criticism, she stated the following day that the system "failed miserably", this time referring to Abdulmutallab's boarding the flight with an explosive device. U.S. President Barack Obama called the U.S.'s failure to prevent the bombing attempt "totally unacceptable", and ordered an investigation.

On April 6, 2010, it was reported that President Obama had authorized military action that took out Anwar al-Awlaki, a Muslim cleric who was accused by the Obama administration of being a Yemen-based al-Qaeda commander behind the plot. Al-Awlaki was killed on September 30, 2011.

On Christmas Eve, December 24, 2009, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, a 23-year-old Nigerian, boarded Virgin Nigeria Flight 804 at Accra Airport in Accra, Ghana and arrived at Murtala Muhammed Airport in Lagos, Nigeria. Eight days earlier at the KLM Royal Dutch Airlines office in Accra, Ghana, he had paid $2,831 in cash for his Lagos-Amsterdam-Detroit round-trip ticket with a January 8, 2010 return date. Kevin Drum, a political blogger for "Mother Jones", said that Ghana and Nigeria are largely cash-based economies, so it would be normal for someone to buy an airplane ticket with cash in those countries.

Abdulmutallab left Lagos on Christmas Eve at 23:00 aboard KLM Flight 588, a Boeing 777 bound for Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam. In Amsterdam, on Christmas Day, Abdulmutallab checked in for Northwest Airlines Flight 253 to Detroit with only carry-on luggage. On March 24, 2011, the "Associated Press" reported that Abdulmutallab chose to attack Detroit because the plane ticket there was the least expensive of tickets to potential U.S. targets, which included Chicago and Houston. Initially, some media rumored that Abdulmutallab tried to fly to Detroit because it was a major hub of the U.S. automotive industry.

Kurt and Lori Haskell, an American couple, said that while waiting to board Flight 253 at Schiphol Airport, they saw a "poor-looking African-American teenager around 16 or 17," who Kurt Haskell claims was Abdulmutallab, with a second man, who was "sharp-dressed", possibly of Indian descent, around 50 years old, and who spoke "in an American accent similar to my own."

According to Lori Haskell, the second man told the ticket agent: "We need to get this man on the plane. He doesn't have a passport." The ticket agent said nobody was allowed to board without a passport. The well-dressed man replied: "We do this all the time; he's from Sudan." Lori Haskell said the two men were directed down a corridor, to talk to a manager. "We never saw him again until he tried to blow up our plane," Lori Haskell said of Abdulmutallab.

Only U.S. citizens are permitted to board international flights to the U.S. without passports, and even then only if the airline confirms their identity and citizenship, said a spokesperson for U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP). A CBP official and spokesman confirmed there were not any Sudanese refugees on the plane. The Dutch counter-terror agency said that Abdulmutallab presented a valid Nigerian passport and U.S. entry visa when he boarded Flight 253.

Haskell suggested authorities should, "Put the video out there to prove I'm wrong." Federal agents later said they were trying to identify and find the well-dressed man. U.S. authorities had initially discounted the passenger accounts, but agents later said there was a growing belief that the man played a role in ensuring Abdulmutallab "did not get cold feet".

Flight 253, a Northwest Airlines Airbus A330-323E twinjet, registered N820NW, with 279 passengers, 8 flight attendants, and 3 pilots aboard, left Amsterdam around 08:45 local time. The plane was scheduled to arrive in Detroit at 11:40 EST, and was painted in Delta Air Lines' livery, as Northwest was a subsidiary of Delta at the time.

Witnesses reported that as the plane approached Detroit, Abdulmutallab went into the plane's lavatory for about 20 minutes. After returning to his seat at 19A (near the fuel tanks and wing, and against the skin of the plane), he complained that he had an upset stomach. He was seen pulling a blanket over himself.

About 20 minutes before the plane landed, on its final descent, he secretly ignited a small explosive device consisting of a mix of plastic explosive powder and acid. Abdulmutallab apparently had a packet of the plastic explosive sewn to his underwear, and injected liquid acid from a syringe into the packet to cause a chemical reaction. While there was a small explosion and fire, the device failed to detonate properly. Passengers heard popping noises resembling firecrackers, smelled an odor, and saw the suspect's pants, leg and the wall of the plane on fire.

There were no air marshals on the flight, but several passengers and crew noticed the explosion. Jasper Schuringa from the Netherlands, a passenger on the other end of the same row, saw Abdulmutallab sitting and shaking. He tackled and overpowered him. Schuringa saw the suspect's pants were open, and that he was holding a burning object. "I pulled the object from him and tried to extinguish the fire with my hands and threw it away," said Schuringa, who suffered burns to his hands. Meanwhile, flight attendants extinguished the fire with a fire extinguisher and blankets, and a passenger removed the partially melted, smoking syringe from Abdulmutallab's hand.

Schuringa grabbed the suspect, and pulled him to the business class area at the front of the plane. A passenger reported that Abdulmutallab, though burned "quite severely" on his leg, seemed "very calm," and like a "normal individual." Schuringa stripped off the suspect's clothes to look for additional weapons, and he and a crew member restrained Abdulmutallab with plastic handcuffs. "He was staring into nothing" and shaking, said Schuringa.

Passengers applauded as Schuringa walked back to his seat. The suspect was isolated from other passengers until after the plane landed. A flight attendant asked Abdulmutallab what he had in his pocket, and the suspect replied: "Explosive device." When the attack triggered a fire indicator light within the cockpit, the pilot requested rescue and law enforcement. The plane made an emergency landing at Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport in the Downriver Detroit community of Romulus, Michigan.

The "Toronto Star" reported that the plane's flight route would have had it over Canadian airspace when the attempted bombing occurred. Representatives of two pilot associations told the "Star" that Detroit Metro airport would have been the nearest suitable airport at which to attempt an emergency landing.

While the plane suffered relatively little damage, the suspect incurred first and second degree burns to his hands, as well as second-degree burns to his right inner thigh and genitalia. Two other passengers were also injured. When the plane landed, Abdulmutallab was handed over to U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officers, and taken into custody for questioning and treatment of his injuries in a secured room of the burn unit of the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor. Schuringa was also taken to the hospital. One other passenger incurred minor injuries.

Immediately after his arrest, Abdulmutallab talked to authorities about the plot for about 50 minutes, without having been informed of his Miranda rights. After emerging from surgery, he was informed of his rights and stopped talking to investigators for several weeks.

Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents, led by Special Agent in Charge Andrew Arena, arrived at the airport after the plane landed. The aircraft was moved to a remote area so authorities could re-screen the plane, the passengers, and the baggage on board. A bomb-defusing robot was first used to board the plane, and the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) interviewed all passengers. Another passenger from the flight was placed in handcuffs after a dog alerted officers to his carry-on luggage; he was searched, and released without charges. While for several days thereafter federal officials denied that this second handcuffing had occurred, they later reversed this position, and confirmed that a second passenger had indeed been handcuffed.

The substance that the suspect tried to detonate was a combination of more than of pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN), a crystalline powder that is often the active ingredient of plastic explosives, the high explosive triacetone triperoxide (TATP), and other ingredients. PETN is among the most powerful of explosives, and chemically resembles nitroglycerin. The powder was analyzed by the FBI at Quantico, and an FBI affidavit filed in the Eastern District of Michigan reflected preliminary findings that the device contained PETN. The authorities also found the remains of the syringe. The suspect apparently carried the PETN onto the plane in a -long soft plastic container, possibly a condom, attached to his underwear. Much of the container was lost in the fire. "ABC News" cited a government test indicating that of PETN can blow a hole in the side of an airliner, and posted photos of the remains of Abdulmutallab's underwear and explosive packet.

In a public test conducted by the BBC, the test plane's fuselage remained intact, indicating that the bomb would not have destroyed the aircraft, though it did show window damage that would likely have led to cabin depressurization. This test was undertaken at ground level, with zero pressure differential between the cabin and the surrounding environment. This was claimed to have no effect on the overall result of the test, which aimed to simulate the explosion at . It was not demonstrated what would happen at a typical cruising altitude of between and , where the pressure differential would have caused the fuselage to be under a far greater stress than at ground level.

Al-Qaeda member Richard Reid (the "Shoe Bomber") had tried to detonate 50 grams of the same explosives in his shoes during an American Airlines flight on December 22, 2001.

On December 27, 2009, two days after the original incident, the crew of another Flight 253 requested emergency assistance with a Nigerian passenger whom they said had become "verbally disruptive". The crew questioned the passenger after other passengers expressed concern that he had been in the lavatory for over an hour. It was later determined that the man was a businessman who had fallen ill from food poisoning during the flight, and did not pose any security risk.

The suspect in the attempted bombing was Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, a 23-year-old Nigerian born into a middle-class family. Abdulmutallab was raised in Kaduna, in Nigeria's Muslim-dominated north, a place he returned to on his vacations.

In high school at the British International School in Lomé, Togo, Abdulmutallab was known to be a devout Muslim, who frequently discussed Islam with schoolmates. He visited the U.S. for the first time in 2004.

For the 2004–05 academic year, Abdulmutallab studied at the San'a Institute for the Arabic Language in Sana'a, Yemen, and attended lectures at Iman University. He began his studies at University College London in September 2005, where he was president of the school's Islamic society in 2006 and 2007, during which time he participated in, along with political discussions, such activities as martial arts and paintballing. During those years, he came to the attention of MI5, the UK's domestic counter-intelligence and security agency, for radical links and connections with Islamic extremists. To protect his privacy, they did not pass the information along to American officials.

On June 12, 2008, Abdulmutallab applied for and received from the U.S. consulate in London a U.S. multiple-entry visa, valid to June 12, 2010, with which he visited Houston, Texas, from August 1–17, 2008. In May 2009, Abdulmutallab tried to return to Britain, supposedly for a six-month "life coaching" program at what the British authorities concluded was a fictitious school; accordingly, his visa application was denied by the United Kingdom Border Agency. His name was placed on a UK Home Office security watch list, which meant he was not permitted to enter the UK, though he could pass through the country in transit and was not permanently banned. The UK did not share the information with other countries.

Abdulmutallab returned to the San'a Institute to study Arabic from August to September 2009. "He told me his greatest wish was for "sharia" and Islam to be the rule of law across the world", said one of his classmates at the Institute. Abdulmutallab left the Institute after a month, but remained in Yemen.

Earlier, his family had become concerned in August when he called them to say he had dropped the course, but was remaining there. By September, he routinely skipped his classes at the institute and attended lectures at Iman University, which intelligence officials from the United States suspected to have links to terrorism.

The San'a Institute obtained an exit visa for him at his request, and arranged for a car that took him to the airport on September 21, 2009 (the day his student visa expired), but the school's director said, "After that, we never saw him again, and apparently he did not leave Yemen". In October, Abdulmutallab told his father via text message saying that he did not want to attend business school in Dubai, and wanted instead to study Islamic law and Arabic in Yemen. When his father refused to pay for it, Abdulmutallab said he was "already getting everything for free". He text-messaged his father, saying "I've found a new religion, the real Islam", "You should just forget about me, I'm never coming back", and "Forgive me for any wrongdoing, I am no longer your child". The family was last in contact with their son in October 2009.

On November 11, 2009, British intelligence officials sent the U.S. a message indicating that a man named "Umar Farouk" had spoken to Anwar al-Awlaki, a Muslim spiritual leader supposedly tied to al-Qaeda, pledging to support "jihad", but the notice did not mention Abdulmutallab by name.

On November 19, his father reported to two CIA officers at the U.S. Embassy in Abuja, regarding his son's "extreme religious views", and told the embassy that Abdulmutallab might be in Yemen. Acting on the report, the U.S. added Abdulmutallab's name in November 2009 to its 550,000-name Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment, a database of the U.S. National Counterterrorism Center. It was not added, however, to the FBI's 400,000-name Terrorist Screening Database, the terror watch list that feeds both the 14,000-name Secondary Screening Selectee list and the U.S.'s 4,000-name No Fly List. Abdulmutallab's U.S. visa was not revoked either.

Yemeni officials said that Abdulmutallab left Yemen on December 7 (flying to Ethiopia, and two days later to Ghana). Ghanaian officials said Abdulmutallab was there from December 9 until December 24, when he flew to Lagos.

Two days after the attack, Abdulmutallab was released from the hospital in which he had been treated for burns sustained during the attempted bombing. He was taken to the Federal Correctional Institution, Milan, a federal prison in York Charter Township, Michigan, near Milan.

A number of sources reported contacts between Abdulmutallab and Anwar al-Awlaki, the late Muslim lecturer and spiritual leader who the U.S. accused as a senior al-Qaeda talent recruiter and motivator. al-Awlaki, previously an imam in the U.S., who had moved to Yemen, also had links to three of the 9/11 hijackers, the 2005 London subway bombers, a 2006 Toronto terror cell, a 2007 plot to attack Fort Dix, and the 2009 suspected Fort Hood shooter, Nidal Malik Hasan. In 2006, he was banned from entering the UK; al-Awlaki repeatedly used a video link for public speeches from 2007 to 2009.

"The Sunday Times" reported that Abdulmutallab first met and attended lectures by al-Awlaki in 2005, when he was in Yemen to study Arabic. He attended a sermon by al-Awlaki at the Finsbury Park Mosque. The two are also "thought to have met" in London, according to "The Daily Mail". "Fox News" reported that Abdulmutallab repeatedly visited Awlaki's website and blog. "CBS News" and "The Daily Telegraph" reported that Abdulmutallab attended a video teleconference talk by al-Awlaki at the East London Mosque. University of Oxford historian and professor of international relations Mark Almond wrote that the suspect was "on American security watch-lists because of his links with... Al Awlaki".

"CBS News" reported that the two had communicated in the months before the bombing attempt, and other sources have said that at a minimum, al-Awlaki was providing spiritual support for Abdulmutallab and the attack. According to federal sources, over the year prior to the attack, Abdulmutallab had repeatedly communicated with al-Awlaki.

Intelligence officials suspected that al-Awlaki may have told Abdulmutallab to go to Yemen for al-Qaeda training. One government source described intercepted "voice-to-voice communication" between the two during the fall of 2009, saying that al-Awlaki "was in some way involved in facilitating [Abdulmutallab]'s transportation or trip through Yemen. It could be training, a host of things."

Abdulmutallab reportedly told the FBI that he had trained under al-Awlaki at an al-Qaeda training camp in Yemen.

Yemen's Deputy Prime Minister for Defense and Security Affairs, Rashad Mohammed al-Alimi, said Yemeni investigators believe the suspect traveled in October to Shabwa, where he may have obtained the explosives and received training. He met with suspected al-Qaida members in a house built by al-Awlaki and used by al-Awlaki to hold religious meetings. "If he went to Shabwa, for sure he would have met Anwar al-Awlaki," al-Alimi said. Al-Alimi also said he believed al-Awlaki was alive. And Abdul Elah al-Shaya, a Yemeni journalist, said a healthy al-Awlaki called him on December 28 and said that the Yemeni government's claims as to his death were "lies". Shaya declined to comment as to whether al-Awlaki had told him about any contacts he may have had with Abdulmutallab. According to Gregory Johnsen, a Yemeni expert at Princeton University, Shaya is generally reliable.

At the end of January 2010, a Yemeni journalist, Abdulelah Hider Sha’ea, said he met with al-Awlaki, who told Sha'ea that he had met and spoken with Abdulmutallab in Yemen in late 2009. Al-Awlaki also reportedly called Abdulmutallab one of his students, said that he supported what Abdulmutallab did but did not tell him to do it, and that he was proud of Abdulmutallab. A "New York Times" journalist who listened to a digital recording of the meeting said that while the tape's authenticity could not be independently verified, the voice resembled that on other recordings of al-Awlaki.

Al-Awlaki released a tape in March 2010, in which he said, in part:

Beginning December 18, 2009, President Obama authorized attacks on suspected Al-Qaeda bases in Yemen. On April 6, 2010, "The New York Times" reported that President Obama had authorized the targeted killing of al-Awlaki. Al-Qaeda in Yemen released a video in 2010 that showed Abdulmutallab and others training in a desert camp. The tape includes a statement from Abdulmutallab justifying his actions against "the Jews and the Christians and their agents." Al-Awlaki was killed in a U.S. airstrike in Yemen on September 30, 2011.

On December 28, 2009, Obama, in his first address after the incident, said that the event "demonstrates that an alert and courageous citizenry are far more resilient than an isolated extremist". On the same day, Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) announced that it was responsible for the attempted bombing. AQAP said that the attack, during "their [Americans'] celebration of the Christmas holidays", was to "avenge U.S. attacks on the militants in Yemen".

On January 24, an audio tape said to be from Osama bin Laden praised the bombing attempt and warned of further attacks against the United States, but did not claim responsibility for it. The short recording, which was broadcast on Al Jazeera television, said: "The message delivered to you through the plane of the heroic warrior Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab was a confirmation of the previous messages sent by the heroes of the September 11." An adviser to the U.S. President said he could not confirm whether the voice was that of bin Laden. In the past, the CIA has usually confirmed Al Jazeera reports on tapes attributed to bin Laden.

While in custody, Abdulmutallab told authorities he had been directed by al-Qaeda. He said he had obtained the device in Yemen, and was told to detonate it when the plane was over the United States. Abdulmutallab said he had contacted al-Qaeda through a radical Yemeni imam (who according to "The New York Times" on December 26 was not believed to be al-Awlaki) whom he had reached through the internet.

"The New York Times" reported on December 25 that a counter-terrorism official had told them Abdulmutallab's claim of connection with al-Qaeda "may have been aspirational". But U.S. Representative Jane Harman (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Intelligence, Information Sharing, and Terrorism Risk Assessment, said the following day that a federal official briefed lawmakers about "strong suggestions of a Yemen-al Qaeda connection" with the suspect. On January 2, 2010, President Obama said that AQAP trained, equipped, and dispatched Abdulmutallab, and vowed retribution.

In reaction to suggestions that the U.S. launch a military offensive against the alleged terrorists' sanctuary in Yemen, "The Washington Post" noted that Yemeni forces equipped with U.S. weapons and intelligence had carried out two major raids against AQAP shortly before the bombing attempt, and that the terror group may have lost top leaders in a December 24, 2009 airstrike.

On March 24, 2011, the "Associated Press" reported that before Abdulmutallab set off on his mission, he visited the home of al-Qaeda manager Fahd al-Quso to discuss the plot and the workings of the bomb. In addition, the "AP" said that Abdulmutallab targeted Detroit because the plane ticket there was cheaper than the tickets to either Houston or Chicago. This suggests that al-Qaeda in Yemen chose to attack "targets of opportunity," rather than Osama bin Laden's preference of "symbolic targets."

Jasper Schuringa, who was en route to Miami, Florida for a vacation, stopped Abdulmutallab from causing too much damage and received burn injuries in the process. In a statement, Schuringa, who was in seat 20J on the flight, said he was able to locate Abdulmutallab, help to extinguish the fire that the explosive had caused, and helped to restrain Abdulmutallab using plastic cuffs. Schuringa lives in Amsterdam, and was born in 1977 in Curaçao, Netherlands Antilles. Schuringa is a graduate of Leiden University, Leiden. He is a film director of low-budget Dutch films for an Amsterdam-based media company, and was the assistant director for "National Lampoon's Teed Off Too".

Dutch Deputy Prime Minister Wouter Bos phoned Schuringa on behalf of the Dutch government the day after the attack, and conveyed the government's compliments and gratitude for Schuringa's part in overpowering the suspect. Dutch Member of Parliament Geert Wilders called Schuringa "a national hero" who "deserves a royal honor", which Wilders said he would ask the Dutch government to award.
According to the Dutch newspaper "De Volkskrant", Queen Beatrix expressed her feelings of gratitude towards Schuringa. On May 21, 2010, Schuringa received the Honorary Medal of the city Amsterdam from then-acting mayor of Amsterdam, Lodewijk Asscher, for his "extraordinary heroism." In December 2010, Schuringa was also awarded the Silver Carnegie Medal from the Dutch division of the Carnegie Hero Fund.

The U.S. investigation into the incident was managed by the Detroit Joint Terrorism Task Force, which is led by the FBI and includes U.S. Customs and Border Protection, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the Federal Air Marshal Service, and other law enforcement agencies. Among other questions, they were attempting to determine what kind of training Abdulmutallab received, who else (if anyone) was in the same training program, whether others were preparing to launch similar attacks, whether the attack was part of a larger plot, whether the attack was a test run, and who, if anyone, assisted Abdulmutallab.

President Barack Obama was notified of the incident by an aide while on a vacation in Kailua, Hawaii, and spoke with officials from the Department of Homeland Security. He instructed that all appropriate measures be taken in response to the incident. The White House called the attack an act of terrorism.

The U.S. is examining what information it had before the attack, why its National Counterterrorism Center did not make a connection between the warning from Abdulmutallab's father and intercepts by the National Security Agency of conversations among Yemeni al-Qaida leaders about a "Nigerian" to be used for an attack (months before the attack took place), and why the suspect's U.S. visa was not withdrawn.

On January 7, 2010, James L. Jones, the National Security Advisor, said Americans would feel "a certain shock" when a report detailing the intelligence failures that could have prevented the Christmas Day attack would be released that day. He said that President Obama would be "legitimately and correctly alarmed that things that were available, bits of information that were available, patterns of behavior that were available, were not acted on."

The U.S. also increased the installation and use of full-body scanners in many of its major airports as a result of the attack. The scanners are designed to be able to detect bombs under clothing, and 11 airports, including O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, began to receive the machines in March 2010. The TSA said that it had plans to have 1,000 of the machines in airports by the end of 2011. Before, the U.S. had only 40 scanners across 19 airports. The government also said that it planned to buy 300 additional scanners in 2010 and another 500 in the following fiscal year, starting October 2010. It costs around an estimated $530 million to purchase the 500 machines and hire over 5,300 workers to operate them. However, the U.S. government has stated that being scanned is voluntary and that passengers who object to the process could choose to undergo a pat-down search or be searched with hand-held detectors. Under new rules prompted by the incident, airline passengers traveling to the U.S. from 14 nations would undergo extra screening: Afghanistan, Algeria, Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Libya, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen. The inclusion of non-Muslim Cuba on the list was criticized.

Gordon Brown, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, said that the UK would take "whatever action was necessary". The day after the attack, British police searched a family-owned flat where Abdulmutallab had lived while in London.

Dutch counter-terrorism agency NCTb said that it had started a probe into where the suspect originated. Dutch officials also said that they will now use 3D full-body scanning X-ray technology on flights departing to the U.S., despite protests from privacy advocates. Dutch officials said that security must take priority over the privacy of the individuals being scanned, but the scanners are not designed to compromise an individual's privacy, as the imagery resolution is only high enough to detect non-metallic objects under clothing, such as powdered explosives. Members of the Second Chamber (Lower House) of the Dutch parliament demanded an explanation from Minister of Justice Hirsch Ballin, asking how the suspect managed to smuggle explosives on board, despite Schiphol's reportedly strict security measures.

The incident also raised concerns regarding security procedures at Nigeria's major international airports in Lagos and Abuja. In response to criticism, Nigerian civil aviation officer Harold Demuran announced that Nigeria would also set up full-body scanning X-ray machines in Nigerian airports.

In response to the incident and to comply with new U.S. regulations, the Canadian government said it would install full body scanners at major airports. The first 44 scanners were planned to be installed at airports in Vancouver, Calgary, Edmonton, Winnipeg, Toronto, Ottawa, Montreal, and Halifax.

Delta Air Lines, which owned Northwest until all operations were merged into Delta on January 31, 2010, said its Detroit group did not handle security for the flight. It released a statement calling the incident a "disturbance," and saying that Delta was "cooperating fully with authorities". Delta's CEO, Richard Anderson, said in an internal memo that "Having this occur again [after 9/11] is disappointing to all of us... You can be certain we will make our points very clearly in Washington."

In January 2010, ICTS International, a security firm that provides security services to Schiphol airport, and G4S (Group 4 Securicor Aviation Security B.V.), another security firm, traded blame over the security oversight, as did authorities at Schiphol Airport, the Federal Aviation Authority, and U.S. intelligence officials. According to "Haaretz", the failure was twofold: An intelligence failure, as Obama stated, in the poor handling of information that arrived at the State Department and probably also the CIA from both the father of the would-be bomber and the British security service; and a failure within the security system, including that of ICTS.

On December 26, a criminal complaint was filed against Abdulmutallab in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, charging him with two counts: placing a destructive device in, and attempting to destroy, a U.S. civil aircraft. Abdulmutallab was arraigned and officially charged by U.S. District Court Judge Paul D. Borman later the same day at the University of Michigan Hospital.

On January 6, 2010, a federal grand jury indicted Abdulmutallab on six criminal counts including attempted use of a weapon of mass destruction and attempted murder. "Not guilty" pleas were entered on the behalf of Abdulmutallab at the hearing. If convicted, Abdulmutallab could face a life sentence plus 90 years. He faced his first court hearing, a detention hearing, on January 8, 2010.

When asked about his decision to prosecute Abdulmutallab in federal court rather than have him detained under the law of war, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder defended his position, saying that it was "fully consistent with the long-established and publicly known policies and practices of the Department of Justice, the FBI, and the United States Government as a whole," and that he was confident that Abdulmutallab would be successfully prosecuted under the federal criminal law. Holder had originally been asked by U.S. Senator Mitch McConnell, as well as several others, about his choice.

On February 16, 2012, Abdulmutallab, who had pleaded guilty but remained unrepentant, was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole. He is currently incarcerated at the ADX Florence supermax prison, near Florence, Colorado.

The U.S. government did not raise the Homeland Security Advisory System terrorist threat level, orange at the time (high risk of terrorist attacks), following the attack. The Department of Homeland Security said that additional security measures would be in place for the remainder of the Christmas travel period. The TSA detailed several of the measures, including a restriction on movement and access to personal items during the last hour of flight for planes entering U.S. airspace. The TSA also said that there would be more officers and security dogs at airports.

On December 28, Transport Canada announced that for several days it would not allow passengers flying to the U.S. from Canada a carry-on bag, with some exceptions. British Airways said that passengers flying to the U.S. would only be permitted one carry-on item. Other European countries increased baggage screening, pat-down searches, and random searches for passengers traveling to the U.S. A spokesperson for Schiphol Airport said that heightened security would be in place for "an indefinite period". However, in spite of the extra measures said to have been put in place to prevent a follow-up attack, Stuart Clarke, a photoreporter from the British newspaper "Daily Express", claimed to have smuggled a syringe containing fluid, which could have been a liquid bomb detonator onto another plane. On January 3, 2010, Clarke said he boarded a jet from Schiphol Airport bound for Heathrow Airport just five days after the Christmas Day attack, and that the airport appeared to have imposed no additional security, such as precautionary pat-downs which could easily have discovered the syringe which he claimed he kept in his jacket pocket throughout.

White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs and Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano said several times on Sunday talk shows that "the system had worked", a statement that engendered some controversy. The next day they retracted the statements, saying that the system had in fact "failed miserably." According to Napolitano, her initial statement had referred to the rapid response to the attack that included alerts sent to the 128 other aircraft in U.S. airspace at the time, and new security requirements for the final hour of flight, rather than the security failures that allowed the attack to happen. Napolitano had originally stated on "This Week" that "once this incident occurred, everything went according to clockwork" and that "once the incident occurred, the system worked".

The day after the attack, the U.S. House Homeland Security Committee and Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee both announced that they would hold hearings in January 2010 to investigate how the device passed through security, and whether further restrictions should be placed on air travel; the Senate hearings began on January 21.

Four days after the attack, Obama said publicly that Abdulmutallab's ability to board the aircraft was the result of a systemic failure that included an inadequate sharing of information among U.S. and foreign government agencies. He called the situation "totally unacceptable." He ordered that a report be delivered detailing how some government agencies had failed to share or highlight potentially relevant information about the suspect before he allegedly tried to blow up the airliner. Two days later Obama received the briefing, which included statements that information about the suspect had failed to cross agency lines, and that the failures to communicate within the U.S. government had led to the threat posed by Abdulmutallab not being known by certain agencies until the attack. Obama said he would meet with security officials and specifically question why Abdulmutallab was not placed on the U.S. no-fly list, despite the government having received warnings about his potential al-Qaeda links.

On January 27, 2010, an official from the U.S. State Department said that Abdulmutallab's visa was not revoked because federal authorities believed that it would have compromised a larger investigation. The official, Patrick F. Kennedy, said intelligence officials had told the State Department that letting Abdulmutallab keep his visa would allow for a greater chance of exposing the terrorist network.

On May 7, 2012, American officials claimed that they had thwarted another Al Qaeda plot that would have targeted a civilian passenger plane not unlike Northwest Airlines Flight 253. American officials stated that the attack would have involved a more sophisticated bomb, also planted in undergarments, and would have been deployed near the anniversary of the killing of Osama Bin Laden. Officials did not state whether any persons had been arrested or charged in their operation.

An American official told "MSNBC" that the bomb was received by American security personnel in April, "was never near a plane" and "never posed a risk." They speculated that the bomb might have been constructed by Ibrahim al-Asiri, who is accused of constructing the explosives used by Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab in 2009.



</doc>
<doc id="25561044" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25561044" title="2009–10 Plymouth Argyle F.C. season">
2009–10 Plymouth Argyle F.C. season

The 2009–10 season was the 115th season in the history of Plymouth Argyle Football Club, their 85th in the Football League, and 41st in the second tier of the English football league system. Their 21st-place finish in the 2008–09 season meant it was their sixth successive season playing in the Championship. Their campaign ended disappointingly as they were relegated to League One with 11 wins, 8 draws, and 27 losses from 46 matches. The club exited both domestic cup competitions at the first stage, being eliminated by Newcastle United in the third round of the FA Cup and by Gillingham in the first round of the League Cup. The club changed managers in December due to a string of poor results as Paul Sturrock was replaced by Paul Mariner.

The club began their league campaign with two draws, but defeat by Cardiff City marked the beginning of a seven-game losing streak. Results improved in October and November before three more successive defeats saw Sturrock replaced by Mariner. Performances gradually improved and the club won both of their fixtures during the Christmas period, including a 4–1 win against Reading; their best of the season. The club signed Damien Johnson in the winter transfer window from Birmingham City and made a number of signings on loan, including Kenny Cooper and David Stockdale, in order to try to improve their league position. A succession of draws and narrow defeats followed in February, which prompted Mariner to make more signings.

Argyle lost three of their next nine matches to give themselves a chance of avoiding relegation, but their win at Doncaster Rovers proved to be the last game that they would collect any points in. Defeats at home to Middlesbrough and away to Watford left the club on the brink of a return to England's third tier, and that was confirmed in their next game. Newcastle United won 2–0 at Home Park to secure the Championship title, and relegated the home side at the same time. The club finished 23rd in the league table after defeat by bottom club Peterborough United on the final day of the season, eight points adrift of safety. Jamie Mackie finished as the club's top scorer with eight goals in all competitions, and captain Carl Fletcher was voted Player of the Year.

The 2008–09 season was Paul Sturrock's first full campaign in his second spell as the club's manager. The club secured their status in the second tier of English football for a sixth season after finishing 21st in the league table, five points above Norwich City. A number of players returned to their parent clubs at the end of the season after successful loan spells, including Craig Cathcart, David Gray, Alan Judge and Paul Gallagher. Sturrock wanted to bring Gallagher back to the club on a permanent basis, but was eventually unsuccessful after admitting before the season finished that the transfer fee and wages were an issue. Three apprentices of the club's youth system were offered professional contracts in May, including Irish youth international Joe Mason. The club's first signing of the summer was Carl Fletcher, who returned to Home Park permanently after signing on loan in February. Fletcher replaced Karl Duguid as the team captain, and Romain Larrieu was named club captain. Sir Roy Gardner was confirmed as the club's new chairman in July, replacing Paul Stapleton who remained on the new board as vice-chairman. The club added to their squad that month with the permanent signings of Bradley Wright-Phillips, Kári Árnason and Réda Johnson, while Jermaine Easter and long-serving Frenchman Mathias Kouo-Doumbé were among the players who left. Doumbe was released from his contract by mutual consent in August after five years with the club.

Plymouth Argyle began their campaign at Selhurst Park on 8 August against Crystal Palace, with Carl Fletcher captaining his new side against his former club. An early goal from Hungarian international centre-back Krisztián Timár put Argyle ahead but the home side responded in the second half to give both teams a share of the points. Argyle faced Queens Park Rangers in their first home game of the season and an injury-time own goal from Kaspars Gorkšs salvaged a point after the visitors had taken the lead in the first-half. Alan Gow's first goal for the club in their next match against Cardiff City was merely a consolation, as a hat-trick from Michael Chopra consigned Argyle to their first league defeat of the season. A stoppage time goal from Derby County's Miles Addison denied Argyle their third draw of the season after they had taken a first-half lead through Alan Judge, and a second 3–1 home defeat followed a week later, this time against Sheffield Wednesday. A first-half goal from Jamie Mackie gave Argyle hope of their first victory of new the season at The Hawthorns against West Bromwich Albion, but the home side responded with three goals either side of half-time to claim a comfortable win.

The club's poor run of form continued in their next home match against Watford, as they suffered their fifth straight defeat and slipped to the bottom of the league table. Another 3–1 defeat, against Newcastle United, was followed by a second successive 1–0 home defeat against Nottingham Forest, to leave Argyle with just two points from their first seven matches. Paul Sturrock kept faith with the young defensive pairing of James Chester and Shane Lowry for their next game against Peterborough United, and two second-half goals Mackie and Rory Fallon secured Argyle's first three points of the new season. "It's nice to get three points, but now we have to build on it," said Sturrock. "There's no point in us getting this result and then kicking ourselves in the teeth again." Argyle earned their first home win of the season four days later against Scunthorpe United. A penalty from Judge gave the hosts a 2–1 win after Fallon's opening goal was cancelled out by Scunthorpe striker Gary Hooper. Their upturn in results was halted by Blackpool, who won 2–0 at Bloomfield Road. The hosts opening goal was scored by Marcel Seip, a player on loan from Argyle. He took part in the match following a request from former manager Ian Holloway, a decision which was criticised by supporters but defended by senior Argyle officials. "I suppose it was bound to happen that Marcel would score the goal, but I don't think we should look on it as anything other than probably the cover should have been better," said executive director Keith Todd. "We understood exactly what we are doing."

An Argyle Hall of Famer returned to Home Park on 18 October 2009, when former England international Paul Mariner was appointed as the club's new head coach. "In football, there is not much sentiment. But, if sentiment is involved in this scenario, then they gave me my very first chance as a player so I grabbed it with both hands," said Mariner on the New England Revolution website, the club he left to rejoin Argyle. "Plymouth Argyle are in my blood. Obviously the teams you're associated with are the ones you look for every week, and when they came knocking on my door asking me to be employed there, I was delighted." His first match in the dugout alongside Sturrock ended in disappointment as Argyle lost 3–1 to Bristol City at Ashton Gate. They faced Ipswich Town, another side struggling for form, at home in their next match and a first-half goal from Fletcher put Argyle ahead, but their hopes of claiming three points were dented when the visitors equalised through striker Jon Stead, who capitalised on a poor back pass from Gary Sawyer. Welshman Darcy Blake, on loan from Cardiff City, was shown a straight red card late in the game as it ended all square. Their final game of October took place on Halloween against Middlesbrough, in Gordon Strachan's first game as their new manager. Argyle came away from the Riverside Stadium with all three points, in a game that saw Adam Johnson miss from the penalty spot, thanks to a second-half goal from Mackie to lift them to 22nd in the league table, within three points of Doncaster Rovers.

The club began November in the same fashion they ended the previous month – with a win. Judge and Fallon scored again to secure a 2–1 home victory against Doncaster Rovers, and pull Argyle clear of the relegation zone. They looked like earning a valuable point when they travelled to play Leicester City but were denied by a 94th-minute goal from midfielder Andy King. Another home defeat, this time to Sheffield United followed, which left Sturrock desperate to improve morale among his squad, but a third consecutive 1–0 defeat at Swansea City, during which Lowry was sent off, signalled the end of Paul Sturrock's second spell as manager. Paul Mariner was placed in charge until further notice. "It's a sad day, but obviously a happy day for me because I'm getting my chance to be a manager in the league," said the former striker. "He's a great friend of mine. The bond that we have together is quite remarkable and we have a mutual respect for each other." His first match was a 2–0 defeat at Preston North End, but he took positives from the performance.

John Carver, right-hand man to former Barcelona manager Sir Bobby Robson at Newcastle United, arrived as the club's new assistant manager on 17 December 2009, but the club suffered another 1–0 defeat at home, against Coventry City, two days later. Argyle travelled to Cardiff on Boxing Day to play Cardiff City at their new stadium, and came away with an important three points thanks to a late goal from Sawyer. They recorded their biggest win of the season two days later against Reading. A brace from Judge, and first goals of the season for Kári Árnason and Ashley Barnes secured a 4–1 win at Home Park and six points from their two games over the Christmas period. Argyle returned to league action after their FA Cup ties on 16 January, looking for another three points against Crystal Palace but an early goal from young striker Victor Moses won the game for the visitors. Another must-win home game followed against Derby County and a fifth goal of the season from Jamie Mackie boosted their survival bid. A defeat by fellow struggler's Sheffield Wednesday, coupled with other results going against them, left Argyle five points from safety, with a tough match to come against West Bromwich Albion a week later. A single goal from striker Simon Cox kept Albion in touch at the top of the table and left Argyle deep in relegation trouble again, six points from safety.

A stoppage time penalty from Shane Long earned a crucial 2–1 win for Reading in Argyle's next match, but they came from a goal behind to claim a 3–1 victory at Barnsley four days later, which included a 35-yard effort from former Barnsley player Fallon. Paul Mariner was full of praise for his team and singled out youngster Yannick Bolasie, who made his debut for the club. "We played with intellect. We got the ball down, rather than panicking a little bit; we stroked it around; we retained position at vital times," he said. "The introduction of Bolasie was a breath of fresh air. I think even the Barnsley fans would probably say they liked to see what he was doing. He brought a lot to the table for us." A double-header of home matches were next on the agenda for Argyle, against Swansea City and Leicester City, and they both ended in 1–1 draws. New signing Damien Johnson scored late on against Swansea, and Craig Noone scored his first goal of the season to earn a point against Leicester. An end-to-end game at Bramall Lane against Sheffield United ended in a 4–3 defeat, which included a number of defensive mistakes. Argyle went 3–0 before finally sparking into life, scoring twice thanks to Bolasie and a first for young Irish striker Joe Mason. A lapse in concentration from David Stockdale, on loan from Fulham, gifted the hosts a fourth goal before a 20-yard volley from Mackie set up a frantic finale. In the aftermath, Paul Mariner heaped praise on Mason, describing him as "an incredible talent."

Argyle salvaged a late point against Preston North End at the start of March, but remained in serious trouble at the bottom end of the table, seven points adrift of safety with 13 matches remaining. A 2–0 defeat followed at Queens Park Rangers, with Adel Taarabt playing a part in both of the home sides goals. Draws at Home Park were proving to be an Achilles' heel for Argyle, but they secured a creditable 1–1 draw at play-off chasing Coventry City, having taken the lead through a glancing header from Árnason. Three days later, a 20-yard strike from captain Fletcher earned Argyle their fifth home win of the season in a 3–2 thriller against Bristol City. They had taken a 2–0 lead through Chris Clark and an overhead kick from Bradley Wright-Phillips, his first for the club. However, the visitors responded in the second-half with two goals from Nicky Maynard before former Welsh international Fletcher scored with seconds to spare. Argyle travelled to play Scunthorpe United looking to keep up the momentum, but threw away a lead to be defeated by a deflected effort from Martyn Woolford.

They were on the road again three days later when they faced Ipswich Town at Portman Road. Argyle came away with all three points courtesy of goals from Wright-Phillips and Mason on what was a special night for Paul Mariner. "It was pretty special and I was a little choked up," he said. "It was a special night. When I moved to the States 20 years ago, I didn't think it would come to fruition but it was a tremendous reception from the fans, and I can't thank them enough. Bringing Plymouth Argyle here in my present role was a special occasion." Former manager Ian Holloway returned to Home Park for the first time since his departure in November 2007 in the club's next game, and he left happy as Blackpool side claimed all three points after a 2–0 victory, with Charlie Adam at the heart of their attacking threat. Argyle played out an entertaining 0–0 draw at home with Barnsley three days later, but it did little to help in their battle against relegation, still five points away from safety. They produced another rousing away performance against Doncaster Rovers to earn a 2–1 win, coming from behind with second-half goals from Mason, and an injury time header from Wright-Phillips. In order to stay up, Argyle knew that they had to make the most of their remaining home games, but they went down 2–0 on 5 April to an efficient Middlesbrough side, which left them four points adrift with four games left. A solitary goal from Watford's Heidar Helguson dealt Argyle's survival hopes an almost fatal blow at Vicarage Road, but vice-captain Karl Duguid remained upbeat about their chances of defeating the league leaders in their next game. "We'll be upbeat, and we'll go for the win against Newcastle next Monday."

It was a night of contrasting emotions at Home Park. A 2–0 win for the visitors confirmed Argyle's relegation to League One and Newcastle's promotion back to the Premier League as champions at the first attempt. Hours after the match, the club's board declared that it remained determined to steer it to the top flight of English football. Paul Mariner reaffirmed his commitment to the club, vowing to put things right. "I feel the pain of the supporters because this is the club that gave me my first start," he said. "The reason I came here was because of the vision that the club can get into the Premiership. Now we've got another couple of hurdles before we do that but I firmly believe that we can do it." Argyle's penultimate game of the season took place at the City Ground against Nottingham Forest, who had already qualified for the play-off's, and they secured a comfortable 3–0 victory against the relegated side. The club signed off their campaign with another home defeat against Peterborough United on 2 May. Argyle took the lead in the first-half from a fine individual goal from Wright-Phillips but conceded two goals after the break to Craig Mackail-Smith. Four days later, the club announced that they would be searching for a new manager, with Paul Mariner reverting to his original role as head coach. He said: "I am disappointed that we could not produce the results we wanted last season. I am a realist and understand why and how the board came to the conclusion they have done. I am committed to this club and want only to help it regain Championship status as soon as possible and build on that." Work on a new state-of-the-art Fibrelastic pitch at Home Park began the following week.

The third round draw for the FA Cup paired Argyle with Newcastle United, which left assistant manager John Carver with mixed emotions. Neither side could break the deadlock in a competitive contest at Home Park. Argyle striker Rory Fallon forced a good save from Tim Krul before the visitors had chances of their own, the majority of which went to Fabrice Pancrate. Newcastle looked likely to win the game late on but were denied by goalkeeper Romain Larrieu, who tipped a looping volley from Nicky Butt over the crossbar. The match saw the return of Chris Barker to the Argyle defence after a lengthy spell on the sidelines because of injury, and manager Paul Mariner was full of praise for his performance. "For him to come and do what he did against such a high powered, attacking team as Newcastle and playing 90 plus minutes was pretty remarkable. He's a very strong character and very experienced." The replay at St James' Park was Argyle's next match due to the wintry weather, and they were on the wrong end of a 3–0 scoreline. Newcastle striker Peter Løvenkrands gave the home side a two-goal lead at half-time and completed his hat-trick after 72 minutes. "His timing of his runs is pretty special and for the first goal, his finish was fantastic," said Mariner. The match on Tyneside was to be the last in an Argyle shirt for Cillian Sheridan who returned to Celtic in Scotland the next day when his loan spell with the club finished, having made 13 appearances, scoring no goals.

Having been drawn to face Gillingham in the first round of the League Cup, the club's manager, Paul Sturrock, planned to make a couple of changes to the team that faced Crystal Palace on the opening day of the new season, with youngster Joe Mason included in the squad. Two first-half goals were enough to take the hosts into the second round. Simeon Jackson put Gillingham ahead after 42 minutes and Andy Barcham scored a second just before the half-time break. Argyle reduced the deficit four minutes into the second-half when Luke Summerfield from a direct free kick, but they couldn't find an equaliser. The visitors should have forced extra time but Jamie Mackie spurned a chance when he pulled his shot wide with only the goalkeeper to beat. The defeat extended Sturrock's unfortunate run in the League Cup as a manager, having won just once in nine attempts. "I must have the worst record of all managers in cup competitions, it's unbelievable," he said. "One or two of my defenders didn't defend properly tonight. It's not proper to name people but there were some glaring attempts to clear the ball and that's where we had problems."

Pre-season for Plymouth Argyle began on 1 July 2009 when the first team squad returned to Harpers Park. A week of intense training followed, before the club's first match of the new season took place on 13 July 2009 against Cornish side Truro City. In a match which featured trialist Kári Árnason, Argyle scored a goal in each half to earn a comfortable win. A youthful Argyle team headed across the city of Plymouth the next day to take on Plymouth Parkway. The visitors fell behind to an early goal but responded with three of their own in an entertaining friendly, including a brace from Republic of Ireland youth international Joe Mason. The first team were in action again the next day, against Torquay United. The visitors went behind twice but looked like leaving Plainmoor with a win until Torquay converted a penalty in the 90th minute. The squad then departed for a tour of Scotland, and stopped off in the north of England on the way in order to play a friendly against Skelmersdale United on 18 July 2009. Argyle came away with a 2–0 win after scoring a goal in each half. A picturesque setting greeted the squad as they took to the field against Livingston on 20 July 2009. An 81st-minute penalty from Luke Summerfield wasn't enough to save Argyle from their first defeat of the season.

Hungarian international Zoltán Szélesi joined the squad in training ahead of their next match against Romanian champions Unirea Urziceni. They came from behind to record a 2–1 win in a feisty encounter, with Steve MacLean scoring the decisive goal. Argyle returned to England to play against Morecambe on 25 July 2009, and included a triallist called Réda Johnson in their defence, who appeared in the match under a pseudonym. Two second half goals ensured that they left Christie Park with a win. The club's only pre-season friendly to take place at Home Park was against Scottish club Heart of Midlothian on 29 July 2009. Neither side could break the deadlock in a dour 0–0 draw. Swindon Town were the opposition for Argyle's penultimate friendly. A goal from Marcel Seip after 57 minutes set the visitors on their way to a 2–0 victory at manager Paul Sturrock's old club. Argyle's final pre-season match took place on 3 August 2009 against Tiverton Town. A young team containing only two senior professionals, Yoann Folly and Simon Walton, secured a 1–0 win at Ladysmead.




</doc>
<doc id="25566062" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25566062" title="Cyclone Emma (2006)">
Cyclone Emma (2006)

Tropical Cyclone Emma was a weak but unusually large tropical cyclone that affected a substantial portion of Western Australia during the 2005–06 Australian region cyclone season. Forming out of an area of low pressure on 25 February, the precursor to Emma slowly tracked southward. Although classified tropical, the structure of the system represented that of a monsoonal storm. However, low wind shear and well-developed outflow gradually allowed convection to develop near the centre of circulation. As the system approached the Pilbara coastline of Western Australia on 27 February, it intensified into a Category 1 cyclone and attained peak 10-minute sustained winds of 75 km/h (45 mph). After moving inland near Mardie, Emma weakened to a tropical low but became exceedingly large; its cloud cover obscured most of Western Australia. The remnants of the weak storm persisted until 1 March, at which time they dissipated over the Great Australian Bight.

Although a weak storm, rainfall from Emma caused flooding in numerous parts of Western Australia. In Karratha, six people required rescue after their cars became stranded in floodwaters. The most significant damage took place along the Murchison River which swelled to roughly in width. Although only one town was threatened by the river, large areas of farmland were inundated by the expanding river, leading to substantial agricultural losses. Despite the extensive flooding, no fatalities were reported as a result of Emma.

Tropical Cyclone Emma originated from an area of low pressure that formed to the southeast of Java on 22 February 2006. Over the following few days, a monsoonal trough developed over the Timor Sea, leading to an increased likelihood of tropical cyclone formation from the initial low within several days. On 25 February, the Australian Bureau of Meteorology began monitoring the system as a tropical low. The low tracked slowly towards the south throughout the day and the centre of circulation relocated farther south late on 26 February. By this time, the Bureau of Meteorology anticipated the low to develop into a tropical cyclone and attain winds of 95 km/h (60 mph ) before moving over land in Western Australia.

Early on 27 February, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) classified the system as a tropical depression. During the day, a QuikSCAT pass revealed a broad low-level circulation with the highest winds located around the periphery of the storm, a characteristic of monsoonal systems. Although it was situated within a region of low wind shear and underneath an anticyclone, convective activity was mostly present in the system's large outer bands. Later that day, the Bureau of Meteorology upgraded the system to a Category 1 cyclone on the Australian intensity scale and named it Emma. At this time, Emma was located roughly 305 km (190 mi) north of Onslow, Western Australia. Several hours later, the JTWC classified Emma as Tropical Storm 15S following the development of convection near the centre of circulation.

The storm continued to track southward in response to a strong mid to upper-level ridge situated over central Australia. Emma attained its peak wind speed of 75 km/h (45 mph ) late on 27 February as it neared landfall. However, the JTWC assessed Emma to have been slightly weaker, peaking with winds of 65 km/h (40 mph ). The storm maintained this intensity through its landfall early on 28 February near Mardie along the Pilbara coastline. Shortly after moving over land, the JTWC declared Emma extratropical and issued their final advisory on the storm. The Bureau of Meteorology, however, continued to monitor the cyclone as it rapidly tracked over Western Australia. Over land, the storm became unusually large, with outer bands from the storm covering most of Western Australia. Late on 28 February, the lowest barometric pressure in relation to Emma, 988 hPa (29.18 inHg), was recorded at Meekatharra. The remnants of Emma persisted through most of 1 March before the system moved over the Great Australian Bight and dissipated.

The Australian Bureau of Meteorology uses 10-minute sustained winds, while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center uses one-minute sustained winds. The Bureau of Meteorology's peak intensity for Emma was 75 km/h (45 mph) 10-minute sustained, or 85 km/h (50 mph) one-minute sustained. The JTWC's peak intensity for Emma was 65 km/h (40 mph) one-minute sustained, or 55 km/h (35 mph) 10-minute sustained.

Ahead of the storm, oil and mining operations in threatened regions were temporarily shut down. Already suffering from the impacts of Cyclones Clare and Daryl, residents were warned about the likelihood of flooding due to the already saturated grounds. The Bureau of Meteorology also issued tropical cyclone warnings for most of the Pilbara coastline on 28 February. The same day, the Fire and Emergency Services of Australia issued a Yellow Alert for Point Samson, Roebourne, Wickham, Dampier, Karratha, and Mardie. Residents in these areas were advised to evacuate if necessary and ensure that all cyclone preparations had been completed. Shelters were also opened for residents who sought need for one. Schools throughout the Pilbara region were also closed for several days as a result of the storm.

Due to the low intensity of the storm at landfall, little or no wind damage took place from Emma. On land, sustained winds were recorded up to and gusts up to . A storm surge of was recorded at Dampier but, no damage resulted from it. Heavy rains produced by the storm caused moderate to severe flooding in Western Australia. In Karratha, six people were rescued from two cars after they became stranded on a flooded road. Total rainfall from the storm was , recorded at Karratha Airport. Localised flooding was reported in Pannawonica and Tom Price. Some buildings reported minor flooding but overall structural damage was minimal. The of rain that fell in a 24-hour span in Karratha pushed the city above its annual average rainfall totals in the first two months of the year. Near the Yarraloola Station, the Robe River overflowed its banks, inundating the area and forcing the evacuation of everyone in the homestead. In the Gascoyne region 30 cattle drowned after flood waters rapidly overtook a pasture.

In the Murchison region, rainfall exceeding brought the worst floods in decades, inundating numerous farms and causing substantial agricultural losses. Two weeks after the storm passed, the mouth of the Murchison River was closed after a ship became stranded in the swollen river. By 14 March, the river had broadened to roughly in places normally in width. These values marked the largest flood ever recorded in the river's history. Officials distributed sandbags to build temporary levee to protect low-lying areas. The largest operation took place at Kalbarri, near the mouth of the river, where 60 firefighters and 18 volunteers worked to put up 9,000 sandbags. The Billabalong and Twinpeaks stations were also isolated from surrounding areas after the Murchison River inundated the area. Several stations in the area remained under water for over a month and farmers requested urgent assistance from the government to help alleviate losses. Initial damage from the storm was placed at A$1 million ($706,580 USD).

Flood waters from the Murchison River finally began to recede on 17 March; however, it took several weeks for the river to return to its normal level. Although Emma had only minor effects in Carnarvon, the town enacted a A$14 million ($10 million USD) flood protection plan in the wake of the storm. The plan would lead to the construction of new levees in areas surrounding the town and keep flood waters within Nicol Bay Flats. Additionally, four sections of the North West Coastal Highway were set to be upgraded for similar reasons. Due to the combined effects of Cyclones Clare, Darryl, Jim, Emma, Kate and Glenda, gold production in Australia fell by 8 percent, resulting in earnings losses of A$130 million.




</doc>
<doc id="25567507" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25567507" title="Claire Redfield">
Claire Redfield

Claire has also appeared in various other media, including several additional video games, the computer-animated film "", and the non-canon live-action films "", "" and "", as well as in the promotion and merchandise for the franchise. She was very well received by critics and became one of the most popular "Resident Evil" characters.

Claire first appears in "Resident Evil 2" (1998), which revolves around her search for her missing brother Chris, an officer in the local police special force S.T.A.R.S.. Claire arrives in the Midwestern United States town of Raccoon City to find it overrun by zombies. She soon meets up with a rookie cop Leon S. Kennedy, but along the way she is separated from him. The rest of the game focuses on Claire's struggle to escape from the city alive. She maintains radio contact with Leon and teams up with a young girl named Sherry, while fighting against the various undead creatures infesting the Raccoon Police Department building, including the mutated scientist William Birkin. Claire eventually escapes from the city through the Umbrella Corporation's underground research complex along with Leon and Sherry, after the three of them manage to destroy Birkin. In the game's epilogue, Claire leaves to continue her search for Chris, while Leon and Sherry are rescued by the U.S. military.

Claire, still searching for her brother, is a playable for the bulk of "" (2000), set three months after the events of "Resident Evil 2". After an unsuccessful infiltration of Umbrella's medical branch in Paris, Claire finds herself imprisoned on Umbrella-owned Rockfort Island. She escapes following another viral outbreak caused by a rival corporation of Umbrella's and teams up with fellow ex-prisoner Steve Burnside. Claire manages to discover the whereabouts of her brother and send a message to Leon. Claire, Steve and the arriving Chris escape from the island, only to find themselves in another of Umbrella's secret labs, this time in Antarctica, before they are taken captive by the antagonist Alexia Ashford. The second half of the game follows Chris trying to save his captured sister from Umbrella. Chris finds his way into the Antarctic lab and rescues her before their final battle with Alexia, which costs Steve's life, and the siblings escape from the facility via the transport airplane he used to get there. During the game's ending they vow to put an end to the Umbrella Corporation. In the PlayStation 2 version, "Veronica X", Claire also has a brief encounter with the series' main villain Albert Wesker that would have resulted in her death had Wesker not been called away by his associates.

Claire returned as a protagonist in the episodical game "" (2015), set between the events of "Resident Evil 5" and "Resident Evil 6". Claire is now a member of TerraSave, a non-profit humanitarian aid and protest activism organization. The game follows her and Barry Burton's daughter Moira as they get kidnapped and find themselves trapped in a mysterious abandoned prison island. There they fight Alex Wesker and the "Afflicted" creatures. In the end both of them survive the events along with Barry, who arrived to look for them, and a little girl named Natalia Korda.

Claire is playable in "" (2009), which retells the events of "Resident Evil 2", "Code: Veronica", in "" (2001), the entire plot of which is actually just her nightmare dream after the escape from Antarctica in the original "Code: Veronica", and in "Resident Evil: Uprising", a mobile game version of "Resident Evil 2". She is a further playable in the non-canonical spin-off games "" (2011), and in "" (2012) where she is also one of the game's bosses in the game's main mode. In addition, Claire is one of two playable characters in "Resident Evil: Zombie Busters", which started as a browser game in the Capcom Party line and in 2011 was converted for mobile phones. She is an unlockable bonus character in sports game "Trick'N Snowboarder" (1999), and in 2013 she has been added to the browser-based social game "Onimusha Soul", for which she was redesigned to fit the feudal Japan theme. She returned in "Resident Evil 2" (2019), a remake of the 1998 game.

Claire Redfield was originally known as 'Elza Walker', the female lead in the original version of "Resident Evil 2" (in 1997, after a year of work, this version of the game was scrapped by the development team and is now widely referred to as ""Resident Evil 1.5""). In the released version of the game, rewritten by Noboru Sugimura, Elza Walker, a blond college student and motorcycle racer, was changed into Chris Redfield's sister named Claire. Her appearance and background remained mostly unchanged, but she was given an explanation for her skills with firearms and other weapons and her reason for coming to Raccoon City was to search for Chris, as opposed to trying to recruit fans at Raccoon City university to form a racing team back in her hometown. She was given physical features which more closely resemble her brother, her signature jacket with "Made in Heaven" printed on the back, and a sheath for a standard-issue S.T.A.R.S. knife from Chris. These changes that occurred were done to connect "Resident Evil 2" to the original game. 

"Code: Veronica" producer Shinji Mikami said "Claire became a lot tougher than I Imagined. I thought she should look the same, but the game director made her that way because she had such an experience in "Resident Evil 2", she could handle any situation now!" For "Revelations 2", the now hardened and aggressive Claire was redesigned to be a contrasting character to the young, immature and easily scared Moira Burton, who was defined as a purely supporting character, and they both serve different roles in the story and have different functions. The game's producer Michiteru Okabe said: "Really, only after did we look back and say, 'Oh, I guess they are both girls.' Which is good, because it means we’re treating them as whole characters and not just as their gender. What we settled on is the idea that you have different roles -- it isn’t two against the world, it’s one against the world with a helper." Okabe also cited Claire's "great popularity with fans" and the game's writer Dai Satō being "a big fan of her personally" as factors that led to Claire's return.

For the remake of the original "Resident Evil 2", the "modernized" Claire has been redesigned and modeled after Canadian model Jordan McEwen. Her hair style is different and her hair is no longer brownish red; instead, she is a more generic brunette. Her wardrobe was also redesigned, with her original hotpants replaced by jeans trouses and the jacket now being long-sleeved.

In Paul W. S. Anderson's series debut "" (2007), Claire is the leader of a convoy of zombie apocalypse survivors who, at the end of the film, go to Alaska in search of a safe haven. A live action spin-off featuring Claire as the main character has also been suggested. In "" (2010), Claire is ambushed by the Umbrella Corporation and manipulated by a device that controls her and impairs her memory by injecting a drug into her bloodstream, before she is rescued by Alice and reunited with her brother Chris. Together, the three manage to defeat Albert Wesker with the help of convoy survivor K-Mart, who had been a close friend of Alice and Claire, and find themselves preparing to fend off an attack by Umbrella led by a device-controlled Jill Valentine. Claire did not return in "" (2012), where she, Chris, and K-Mart are presumed dead but were captured by Umbrella. She returned in the sixth and last film in the series, "" (2016), where she teams up with Alice and the Red Queen to save the remnants of humanity.

The character of Claire Redfield from the "Resident Evil" live-action universe did not exist in the early drafts of "Extinction", as Jill Valentine was supposed to re-appear from her debut in "" (2004). Later, Anderson and producer Jeremy Bolt decided to have a separate game character appear alongside the previous film's lead Alice: "We thought, rather than bring Jill back, put her with another game heroine." The "Extinction" version of Claire has no connection to the video game character and her look was redesigned. Since "Afterlife", however, Larter was dressed in the outfit more resembling Claire's costumes in the games and she is red-haired in the follow-up films. Her design in "The Final Chapter" for instance was inspired by that from "Revelations 2".

The video game series' Claire plays a major role in the computer-animated film "" (2008), reuniting her with Leon S. Kennedy. The film is set seven years after the events of "Resident Evil 2" and Claire has become a prominent TerraSave member. In it, Claire and the police officer Angela Miller are rescued from a bio-terrorist incident at the Harvardville Airport by Leon. Together, the three of them survive a zombie outbreak at the WilPharma Corporation's research complex, and eventually expose and arrest the corrupt scientist Frederic Downing.

A romantic comedy retelling of the story of "Resident Evil 2", centered on Claire, Leon and Ada, was released by Chingwin Publishing in the two-issue Taiwanese comic "Èlíng Gǔbǎo II" in 1999. Claire is also prominently featured in S.D. Perry's 1999 novels "" (a novelization of "Resident Evil 2") and "Resident Evil Code Veronica" (a novelization of the game of the same title and the last book in the series), as well as in the 1998–1999 manhua "Shēnghuà Wēijī 2" ("Biological Crisis 2"), and in the comic book adaptation series "Resident Evil" by Capcom (1998) and "Resident Evil: Code Veronica" by WildStorm (2002).

In Perry's 1999 original-story novel "Resident Evil: Underworld", Claire, Leon, Rebecca Chambers and several S.T.A.R.S. officers infiltrate an Umbrella facility in Utah to uncover their secrets. She is also one of main characters in Naoki Serizawa's manga "Biohazard: heavenly island", serialized in "Weekly Shōnen Champion" magazine in 2015, in which she is a TerraSave investigator on an isolated South American island.

Claire appeared in George A. Romero's Japanese TV commercial for "Resident Evil 2" and in a viral marketing video to promote "Resident Evil 5" (despite her not appearing in actual game). In 2000, a 1,800-unit special "Claire Redfield red" limited edition series of the Dreamcast game console was released in Japan. Several action figures of Claire were released by various manufacturers, including one by Toy Biz in 1998, as well as two by Moby Dick Toys, two by Palisades Toys, and one by Volks in 2001. A Claire block-style figure was released by Dragon in the Kubrick's "Resident Evil" line, while Vanilla Chop produced a resin kit. One of costumes for the character C. Viper in the fighting game "Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3" was inspired by Claire's iconic look in "Resident Evil 2".

The character of Claire Redfield was very well received by critics and general public alike for her good looks and survival prowess. Readers of German magazine "Mega Fun" voted her as #2 "Video-Babe" of 1998. She was one of the seven nominees for the Nintendo Power Awards 1999 in the category "Best New Hero" for "Resident Evil 2" (the Nintendo 64 version), placing third by popular vote, and the staff of Eurogamer nominated her for the Gaming Globes 2000 awards in the category "Female Lead Character". Claire was chosen as one of the 20 "muses" of video games by Brazilian magazine "SuperGamePower" in 2001. Rob Wright of Tom's Games listed Claire among the 50 greatest female characters in video game history in 2007 and "CHIP" ranked her as 16th on their 2008 list of top "girls of gaming". Her guest appearance in "Trick'N Snowboarder" placed fifth in GamesRadar's 2010 list of best character cameos and in 2015 "Entertainment Monthly" placed Claire Redfield and Steve Burnside among the top ten tragic relationships in video games. In 2017, Inverse's Jessica Famularo ranked her as the third best character in the series: "She’s feminine and stronger for it — Claire is definitely an example of the sort of female protagonist games need." Retrospectively, "Famitsu" included her among the best Japanese video game characters of the 1990s.

Several publications included Claire among the most attractive video game characters. "Dreamcast Magazine" ranked this "gun-toting, zombie killing, foxy babe" as the fifth top "girl on the Dreamcast" in 2000, while "Dreamcast Das Offizielle Magazin" opined she is more beautiful than Lara Croft. Omar Ali of Gaming Target included Claire Redfield and Jill Valentine together in his 2001 list of "all time favorite leading ladies in video games" noting them for being "two girls who made the dead rise up with their looks." In 2008, she was included in GameDaily's list of top "hottest game babes" (ranked 42nd) and in UGO's list of top "videogame hotties" (ranked 46th). In 2011, Peter Rubin of "Complex" ranked the live-action version of Claire as 15th on the list of "hottest women in video game movies" and rated Ali Larter's likeness to the character at 56%. That same year, Rich Knight of "Complex" pitted the video game version of Claire against Jill Valentine in the feature "Battle of the Beauties", category "zombie killer", but chose Jill over her. Lisa Foiles of "The Escapist" ranked Claire as the third "cutest redhead" in video games and Brazilian GameHall's Portal Play Game ranked Claire as the 56th best-looking video game woman ever in 2014. There was also an urban legend-style rumor of a nude code for Claire in "Resident Evil - Code: Veronica".

GameDaily featured her among the "chicks who will kick your ass" listed alongside Ada Wong, Jill and Sheva Alomar, and Jesse Schedeen of IGN chose her as one of the characters to recruit for an ultimate counter-zombie strike force. The book "Level Up!: The Guide to Great Video Game Design" called Claire a "perfect example" of the theme "opposites attracts", as she and her fellow Raccoon City survivor Sherry (a little girl dressed in a Japanese school uniform in "RE2") "couldn't be more different." Featuring her in their 2009 list of top nine greatest video game heroines of all time, Peter Hartlaub of the "San Francisco Chronicle" chose Claire as an example of a positive female game character that "Brandi Chastain would be proud of." In 2015, "The Guardian"'s Holly Nielsen listed Claire among the attractive female characters who in her opinion "were intelligently written and who were not overtly sexy" and Gita Jackson of "Paste" wrote an article about Claire Redfield's wardrobe, which "shows us that femininity, emotionality and practicality aren’t exclusive from each other." "Official PlayStation Magazine (UK)" retrospective on "RE2" opined Claire and Leon both "demonstrat[ed] the absolute apex of apocalyptic fashion."

IGN included Claire among the characters they would like to see returning for "Resident Evil 6", with Schedeen calling Claire "leagues above that walking bag of useless called Sheva." PlayStation Universe too chose Claire (in her original outfit from "Resident Evil 2") as one of the five characters they wanted to appear in "Resident Evil 6"s Mercenaries mode as she "is long overdue a canonical appearance in the series." In 2012, "RE6" producer Hiroyuki Kobayashi wrote they have "heard a lot of love for Jill and Claire recently and people asking if they’ll be in the next "Resident Evil"." Including Claire among the 30 best characters in the three decades of Capcom's history, GamesRadar staff commented in 2013: "Sadly she's fallen into the background of the series, which makes sense she avoided work as a government zombie hunter, but we hope Capcom has plans for her in the future. Here's a suggestion: a co-op focused "RE" that teams Claire up with the almost as underused Jill. It's your move Capcom." Reacting to Claire's return in "Revelations 2" IGN's Mitch Dyer wrote: "The "Resident Evil" series places women in prominent, powerful, playable roles. Jill Valentine, Rebecca Chambers, Sheva Alomar, and Ada Wong, to name a few. Still, they're often opposite a male lead. This is the first time a "Resident Evil" game has revolved around the story of two women. It's fun to get to play as Claire again." According to a CVG preview of "Revelations 2", "she's older, calmer and more capable, but she still retains everything that made her compelling in the first place. Where Rachael from the first "" was part centrefold, part melted-ice cream, Claire feels distinct from many women in the "Resi" universe in that there's more to her than lady-lumps and lycra. She's the perfect choice for the game's brand of isolated horror."



</doc>
<doc id="25590170" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25590170" title="Joseph Carpenter Silversmith Shop">
Joseph Carpenter Silversmith Shop

The Joseph Carpenter Silversmith Shop is a historic building that was built between 1772 and 1774 on the green in Norwichtown, now a section of Norwich, Connecticut. It is a by -story clapboarded building with a gambrel roof. The interior has a single brick chimney that was used for the forge, but it has been modified and adapted for modern use with modern doors, electric lighting and heat, and a disappearing overhead stairway that leads to the attic. Joseph Carpenter (1747–1804) was a successful of silversmith, clockmaker, and pewterer, and shared the building with his brother, a merchant. The shop was added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 6, 1970, and was listed as a contributory property for the Norwichtown Historic District on January 17, 1973.

Born in 1747 to Joseph and Elizabeth Carpenter (née Lathrop), Joseph Carpenter was a successful silversmith in Norwich, Connecticut. The shop was constructed between 1772 and 1774 and Joseph shared it with his brother Gardner Carpenter, who operated a mercantile business from the shop. In 1775, Joseph Carpenter married Eunice Fitch, and they had six children. He died in 1804. Carpenter was noted to be one of the "most successful of the Norwich silversmiths, clockmakers and pewterers..."

Facing southeast on the Norwichtown green, the Joseph Carpenter Silversmith Shop is a by -story clapboarded building with a gambrel roof. Constructed between 1772 and 1774, the building was built on a stone foundation and has a stone stoop leading to the front entrance. The gambrel roof is framed without a ridge pole. It overhangs the front and back facades by , but does not project the sides. At the time of the National Historic Register of Places nomination, the roof used wooden shingles. The interior has a single brick chimney that was used for the forge. The main floor was originally open, with only a single supporting post in the center, but this was later partitioned into several rooms. Modern additions to the shop include modern doors, electric lighting and heat, and a disappearing overhead stairway that leads to the attic. The shop's cellar was not described in the survey. In 1915, the house passed out of the Carpenter family, and it was restored by Norman Isham in 1916. In 1956, the building came into the ownership of the "Society of the Founders of Norwich, Connecticut, Inc.". According to the 1966 edition of "Fodor's Modern Guides", the Joseph Carpenter Silversmith Shop was "still furnished as it was when Mr. Carpenter plied his trade." The National Historic Register of Places noted that the partitioning was "recent" at the time of its 1970 nomination. In 1997, a $5000 grant was used to replace the roof.

The Joseph Carpenter Silversmith Shop is an example of a small frame silversmith's shop, and is believed to be the only surviving example in New England. The shop was added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 6, 1970 and it was listed as a contributory property for the Norwichtown Historic District on January 17, 1973. As early as 1917, the shop was the subject of a preservation effort. The shop was photographed by the Historic American Buildings Survey. The shop was featured as part of a historic house tour in 1993's "Reflections on the Past."



</doc>
<doc id="25618026" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25618026" title="RMS Queen Mary 2">
RMS Queen Mary 2

RMS "Queen Mary 2 (also referred to as the QM2") is a transatlantic ocean liner. She is the largest ocean liner ever built, having served as the flagship of the Cunard Line since succeeding the "Queen Elizabeth 2" in 2004. As of 2019, "Queen Mary 2" is the only passenger ship operating as an ocean liner.

The new ship was named "Queen Mary 2" by Queen Elizabeth II in 2004 after the first of 1936. "Queen Mary" was in turn named after Mary of Teck, consort of King George V. With the retirement of "Queen Elizabeth 2" in 2008, "Queen Mary 2" is the only transatlantic ocean liner in line service between Southampton, England, and New York City, United States, operating for a part of each year. The ship is also used for cruising, including an annual world cruise.

She was designed by a team of British naval architects led by Stephen Payne, and was constructed in France by Chantiers de l'Atlantique. At the time of her construction, "Queen Mary 2" held the distinctions of being the longest, at , and largest, with a gross tonnage of , passenger ship ever built. She no longer held this distinction after the construction of Royal Caribbean International's (a cruise ship) in April 2006, but remains the largest ocean liner ever built.

"Queen Mary 2" was intended for routine crossings of the Atlantic Ocean, and was therefore designed differently from many other passenger ships. The liner's final cost was approximately $300,000 US per berth. Expenses were increased by the high quality of materials, and having been designed as an ocean liner, she required 40% more steel than a standard cruise ship. "Queen Mary 2" has a maximum speed of just over and a cruising speed of , much faster than a contemporary cruise ship. Instead of the diesel-electric configuration found on many ships, "Queen Mary 2" uses integrated electric propulsion to achieve her top speed. Diesel engines, augmented by gas turbines, are used to generate electricity for electric motors for propulsion and for on-board use.

Some of "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s facilities include fifteen restaurants and bars, five swimming pools, a casino, a ballroom, a theatre, and the first planetarium at sea.

"Queen Mary 2" is the flagship of Cunard Line. The ship was constructed for eventual replacement of the aging "Queen Elizabeth 2", the Cunard flagship from 1969 to 2004 and the last major ocean liner built before the construction of "Queen Mary 2". "Queen Mary 2" had the Royal Mail Ship (RMS) title conferred on her by Royal Mail when the ship entered service in 2004 on the Southampton to New York route, as a gesture to Cunard's history.

"Queen Mary 2" is not a steamship like many of her predecessors, but is powered primarily by four diesel engines, with two additional gas turbines used when extra power is required; this integrated electric propulsion configuration is used to produce the power to drive her four electric propulsion pods as well as powering the ship's hotel services. The spaces for these prime movers are also split, and controls are also backed up, with the intention of preventing a single failure from disabling the ship.

Like her predecessor "Queen Elizabeth 2" she is built for crossing the Atlantic Ocean, and also is regularly used for cruising. In the winter season she cruises from New York to the Caribbean on twelve- or thirteen-day tours. "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s open ocean speed sets the ship apart from cruise ships, such as "", which has a service speed of ; "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s normal service speed is . While the hull of a cruise ship will typically have a block coefficient of 0.73 (1.0 would represent a rectangular block) "Queen Mary 2" is more fine-lined, with a block coefficient of 0.61.

Cunard completed a design for a new class of , 2,000 passenger liners on 8 June 1998, but revised them upon comparing those specifications with Carnival Cruise Line's "Destiny"-class cruise ships and Royal Caribbean International's "Voyager" class.

In December 1998, Cunard released details of "Project Queen Mary", the project to develop a liner that would complement "Queen Elizabeth 2". Harland and Wolff of Northern Ireland, Aker Kværner of Norway, Fincantieri of Italy, Meyer Werft of Germany, and Chantiers de l'Atlantique of France were invited to bid on the project. The contract was finally signed with Chantiers de l'Atlantique, a subsidiary of Alstom, on 6 November 2000. This was the same yard that built Cunard's former rivals, the and of the Compagnie Générale Transatlantique. 

Her keel was laid down on 4 July 2002, in the construction dock at Saint-Nazaire, France, with the hull number "G32". Approximately 3,000 craftsmen spent around eight million working hours on the ship, and around 20,000 people were directly or indirectly involved in her design, construction, and fitting out. In total, 300,000 pieces of steel were assembled into 94 "blocks" off the dry dock, which were then stacked and welded together to complete the hull and superstructure.
After floating out on 21 March 2003, the "Queen Mary 2" was fitted out in the large fitting out basin ("Bassin C"), the first ship to use this huge dry dock since the shipyard built large tankers in the 1970s, such as the MV Gastor. Her sea trials were conducted during 25–29 September and 7–11 November 2003, between Saint-Nazaire and the offshore islands of Île d'Yeu and Belle-Île. The final stages of construction were marred by a fatal accident on 15 November 2003, when a gangway collapsed under a group of shipyard workers and their relatives who had been invited to visit the vessel. In total, 32 people were injured and 16 were killed, after a fall into the drydock.

Construction was completed on schedule. On 22 December 2003, "Queen Mary 2" left Saint-Nazaire and arrived in Southampton, England, on 26 December 2003. On 8 January 2004, the liner was officially named by Queen Elizabeth II.

"Queen Mary 2"&apos;s principal naval architect was Carnival's in-house designer, Stephen Payne. Payne intended many aspects of the ship's design to resemble notable aspects of former ocean liners, such as "Queen Elizabeth 2" and the ship's predecessor "Queen Mary". These features include the three thick black lines that wrap around either edge of the ship's bridge screen, and at the stern end of the superstructure, which are to recall the appearance of the crossovers of the forward decks on the first "Queen Mary".

"Queen Mary 2" has of exterior deck space, with wind screens to shield passengers as the ship travels at high speeds. Three of the ship's four swimming pools are outdoors. One of the pools on Deck 12 is covered with a retractable magrodome. The indoor pool is on Deck 7, in the Canyon Ranch Spa Club.

In common with liners such as , there is a continuous wrap-around promenade deck on Deck 7. The promenade passes behind the bridge screen and allows passengers to completely circumnavigate the deck while protected from the winds. One circuit of the promenade is a distance of . The flanking promenades are created by the need to step the superstructure in, to allow for space for lifeboats. By SOLAS standards, the lifeboats should have been lower on the ship's hull ( above the waterline), but for the sake of "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s appearance as well as to avoid the danger of large North Atlantic waves damaging the boats in a storm, Payne convinced SOLAS officials to exempt "Queen Mary 2" from this requirement, and the boats are above the waterline.

Payne's initial intent was to make the ship's stern profile with a spoon shape, similar to that on most previous ocean liners, but the mounting of the propeller pods required a flat transom. The compromise was a Constanzi stern – a combination of the two; the Constanzi stern provides the transom required for azimuthal pod propulsors and has better seaholding characteristics in a following swell than a standard transom stern. In common with many modern ships, both passenger and cargo, "Queen Mary 2" has a bulbous bow to reduce drag and thereby increase speed, range, and fuel efficiency.
While of a design similar to that of "Queen Elizabeth 2", "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s funnel has a slightly different shape, because a taller funnel would have made it impossible for the ship to pass under the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge in New York City at high tide. The final design permits a minimum of of clearance under the bridge.

As "Queen Mary 2" is too large to dock in many ports, passengers are ferried to and from the ship in tenders, which can be used as lifeboats in an emergency. These are stored while at sea in davits alongside the lifeboats. To transport passengers to shore the tenders pull up to one of four loading stations, each of which has a large hull door that hydraulically opens outwards to form a boarding platform, complete with railings and decking.

"Queen Mary 2" is a post-Panamax ship. As a result, "Queen Mary 2" must circumnavigate South America to cross directly between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The decision not to constrain her height to transit the Panama Canal was taken as "Queen Elizabeth 2" only transited once a year, during the world cruise. Cunard decided to pass up the convenience of the occasional passage in favour of a greater passenger capacity.

As is the case with many modern passenger ships, many of the major public rooms on board "Queen Mary 2" are on the lowest public decks of the ship, with the passenger cabins stacked above. This is the opposite of the traditional practice on ocean liners, but the design allowed for larger rooms to be contained within the stronger hull, as well as for more passenger cabins to have private balconies higher up on the ship, where they are less affected by large waves. Payne attempted to create a central axis to the two main public room decks (similar in fashion to the "Normandie"), but a full vista is broken by various public rooms that span the full beam of the ship. The dining rooms were placed further aft, though not directly at the stern, where the fore-and-aft pitching of the ship is most noticeable, and might cause discomfort to dining passengers.

Deck 2, the lowest passenger deck, contains the Illuminations theatre, cinema and planetarium (the first at sea); Royal Court Theatre; Grand Lobby; "Empire Casino"; "Golden Lion Pub"; and the lower level of the "Britannia Restaurant". Deck 3 holds the upper levels of "Illuminations", the "Royal Court theatre" and the "Britannia Restaurant", as well as a small shopping arcade, "Veuve Cliquot champagne bar", the "Chart Room", "Sir Samuel's" wine bar, the "Queen's Room", and the "G32" Nightclub. The other main public deck is Deck 7, on which are the "Canyon Ranch Spa", "Carinthia Lounge", "King's Court", the "Queen's Grill Lounge", and the "Queen's Grill" and "Princess Grill" restaurants for higher-fare passengers. The public rooms on Deck 8 include the à la carte "Verandah Restaurant" an 8,000-volume library (the largest of any cruise ship), a book shop and the upper part of the Canyon Ranch Spa. Also on Deck 8 is a large outdoor pool and terrace at the stern. The kennels, located aft on starboard side of Deck 12, are available only for transatlantic crossings. They can accommodate up to twelve dogs and cats in six small and six large cages.
The King's Court area on the ship is open twenty four hours a day, serving as a buffet restaurant for breakfast and lunch. The overall space is divided into quarters, with each section decorated according to the theme of the four separate alternate dining venues that are "created" each evening through lighting, tableware, and menus: Lotus, which specialises in Asian cuisine; the Carvery, a British style grille; La Piazza, with Italian food; and the Chef's Galley, which offers an interactive experience to food preparation.

The passengers' dining arrangements on board are dictated by the type of accommodation in which they choose to travel. Around 85% of passengers are in "Britannia" class, and, therefore, dine in the main restaurant. However, passengers can choose to upgrade to either a "junior suite", and dine in the "Princess Grill"', or a suite, and dine in the "Queens' Grill". Those in the two latter categories are grouped together by Cunard as "Grill Passengers", and they are permitted to use the "Queens' Grill Lounge" and a private outdoor area on deck 11 with its own whirlpool. This feature is also present on both "Queen Victoria" and "Queen Elizabeth". However, all other public areas can be used by all passengers.

As the Britannia Restaurant takes up the full width of the ship on two decks, a 'tween deck, called Deck 3L, was devised to allow passengers to walk from the Grand Lobby to the Queen's Room without traversing the dining room mid-meal. The deck consists of two corridors that run beneath the upper balcony of the restaurant on Deck 3, and above the main dining area on Deck 2. This is why the balcony of the Britannia has tiers that step up towards the hull. This arrangement is illustrated on the hull where there is a stack of three rows of windows in the area where the main restaurant sits, the two upper and lower most rows illuminate the dining room, while the centre row serves Deck 3L. There is a similar arrangement through the Royal Court Theatre. As well, the passages that run on either side of Illuminations on Deck 3 ramp upwards to compensate for the change in deck elevation between the entrance to Illuminations and an elevator bank forward of the room.

More than 5000 commissioned works of art are visible in "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s public rooms, corridors, staterooms and lobbies, having been created by 128 artists from sixteen different countries. Two of the most notable pieces are Barbara Broekman's tapestry, an abstract depiction of an ocean liner, bridge, and New York skyline which spans the full height of the Britannia Restaurant, and the British sculptor John McKenna's sheet bronze relief mural in the Grand Lobby, a 7 m square portrait of the ship fabricated in bronze inspired by the Art Deco mural in the main dining room of the original "Queen Mary".

"Queen Mary 2"&apos;s power plant comprises four sixteen-cylinder Wärtsilä 16V46CR "EnviroEngine" marine diesel engines, generating a combined at 514 rpm, and two General Electric LM2500+ gas turbines, provide a further ; these drive electric generators, which in turn provide the power to drive four Alstom electrical motors located inside the podded propulsors (and thus entirely outside the vessel's hull). Such an arrangement, known as integrated electric propulsion (IEP), provides for economical cruising at low speed combined with an ability to sustain much higher speeds when required, and has been common in naval vessels for some time. 

The propulsors are Rolls-Royce Mermaid azimuth thruster type podded propulsion units, each with one forward-facing low-vibration propeller with separately bolted blades. The forward pair of thrusters is fixed, but the aft pair can swivel through 360°, removing the need for a rudder. The "Queen Mary 2" is the first quadruple-propeller passenger ship completed since the SS "France" in 1961. "Queen Mary 2" carries eight spare blades on the foredeck, immediately forward of the bridge screen. In addition to the primary thrusters, the ship is also fitted with three bow thrusters, with a power output of 3.2 MW each. These allow the ship to turn in its own length while in port, to conduct more complex docking manoeuvres.
Unusually, "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s gas turbines are not housed along with her diesels in the engine room deep in her hull, but instead are in a soundproofed enclosure directly beneath the funnel. This arrangement allowed the vessel's designers to supply the oxygen-hungry turbines with air intakes without having to run air ducts the height of the ship, which would have wasted valuable interior space.

"Queen Mary 2" has a fully integrated bridge system designed by British firm Kelvin Hughes, which controls the ship's navigation systems, radar, dynamic positioning system, and engine monitoring system. Kelvin Hughes supplied many of the ship's components, including the Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) and eight multifunction display units.

Fresh water aboard "Queen Mary 2" is supplied by three seawater desalination plants. The plants, each with a capacity of per day, use multiple effect plate (MEP) distillation technology. The plants' energy is supplied primarily by steam and cooling water from the ship's gas turbines and diesel engines, or if needed by steam from the ship's two oil-fired boilers. The traditional multiple-effect distillation technology has been improved for the ship's plant, so that scaling of plates is reduced, vastly reducing maintenance required. The desalinated water has a very low salt content of less than five parts per million. Average total water production is per day with a capacity of so that there is ample spare capacity. The ship could easily be supplied by only two of the three plants. Potable water tanks have a capacity of , enough for more than three days of supply. If the engines are running on low load (when the ship is running at a slow speed) the engine jacket cooling water temperature is insufficient to heat the seawater to run the desalination plants. In that case steam from oil-fired boilers is used to heat the sea water. This is uneconomical as generating steam is expensive. It may be cheaper, therefore, to buy water in a particular port than to produce it on board. The seawater intakes are located in the hull of the ship. Concentrated salt solution (brine) is discharged to the sea closer to the ship's stern together with cooling water from the engines. An additional plant was added during the 2016 refit.

When designing "Queen Mary 2", the designers considered that tighter environmental regulations would be implemented while the ship was in service, such as energy efficiency, the reuse of treated wastewater for non-potable uses and zero discharge of solid waste into the sea.

According to Cunard, the ship exceeds some requirements of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships (MARPOL 73/78) of the International Maritime Organization. It discharges waste into the sea only in areas more than from any coast, even though MARPOL allows discharge of treated organic waste and treated bilge water closer to the shore. Discharges of potentially harmful substances, in particular the residual oil content of treated bilge water and air emissions, are monitored regularly to ensure compliance with environmental standards. In areas where air pollution from sulfur dioxide, which causes acid rain, is a concern, the ship switches to low-sulfur fuel to minimise air pollution.

According to the carbon offset company Climate Care, passenger ships release more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere per passenger mile than long haul flights. Cunard attempted to reduce the carbon footprint of "Queen Mary 2" by improving engine efficiency and reducing friction while the ship is in motion. In November 2008, the ship was given a refit in Hamburg, part of which involved the repainting of the hull in paint which is designed to reduce drag and improve fuel economy. According to Blohm+Voss, her 2016 refit included the installation of "scrubbers" and exhaust gas filters to reduce emissions.

On 12 January 2004 "Queen Mary 2" set sail on her maiden voyage from Southampton, England, to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, in the United States, carrying 2,620 passengers. She was under the command of captain Ronald Warwick, who had previously commanded "Queen Elizabeth 2". Warwick is the son of William (Bill) Warwick, who had also been a senior Cunard officer and the first captain of "Queen Elizabeth 2". The ship returned to Southampton late from her maiden voyage after bow doors covering the thrusters failed to shut in Portugal.

During the 2004 Summer Olympics "Queen Mary 2" sailed to Athens and docked at Piraeus for two weeks for use as a floating hotel, serving the then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Tony Blair and his wife Cherie, French President Jacques Chirac, then United States President George W. Bush, and the United States Olympic men's basketball team. According to Cunard, "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s passengers have also included jazz musician Dave Brubeck and singers Rod Stewart, Carly Simon, and James Taylor.

One 2005 transatlantic crossing saw "Queen Mary 2" carrying, in a locked steamer trunk, the first United States copy of J. K. Rowling's book "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince", autographed by the author. In a promotional press release for the event, Cunard said that this marked the first time a book had been transported to its international launch aboard an ocean liner.

In January 2006 "Queen Mary 2" embarked on a circumnavigation of South America. Upon departure from Fort Lauderdale, one of her propeller pods was damaged when it struck a channel wall, forcing the ship to sail at a reduced speed, which resulted in Commodore Warwick's decision to skip several calls on its voyage to Rio de Janeiro. Many of her passengers threatened to stage a sit-in protest because of the missed calls, before Cunard offered to refund the voyage costs. "Queen Mary 2" continued to operate at a reduced service speed and several itinerary changes were necessary until repairs had been completed after the ship returned to Europe in June, where "Queen Mary 2" paid a visit to dry dock and the damaged propeller pod was unseated. In November, "Queen Mary 2" was drydocked once more at the Blohm+Voss yard in Hamburg (drydock Elbe 17) for the reinstallation of the repaired propeller pod. At the same time, sprinkler systems were installed in all of the vessel's balconies to comply with new safety regulations which had come into effect since the MS "Star Princess" fire. Additionally, both bridge wings were extended by two metres to improve visibility.
After completing the journey around South America, on 23 February 2006, "Queen Mary 2" met her namesake, the original , which is permanently docked at Long Beach, California. Escorted by a flotilla of smaller ships, the two "Queens" exchanged a "whistle salute" which was heard throughout the city of Long Beach. "Queen Mary 2" met the other serving Cunard liners and "Queen Elizabeth 2" on 13 January 2008 near the Statue of Liberty in New York City harbour, with a celebratory fireworks display; "Queen Elizabeth 2" and "Queen Victoria" made a tandem crossing of the Atlantic for the meeting. This marked the first time three Cunard "Queens" have been present in the same location. Cunard stated this would be the last time these three ships would ever meet, due to "Queen Elizabeth 2"&apos;s impending retirement from service in late 2008. However this would prove not to be the case, as the three "Queens" met in Southampton on 22 April 2008. "Queen Mary 2" rendezvoused with "Queen Elizabeth 2" in Dubai on Saturday 21 March 2009, after the latter ship's retirement, while both ships were berthed at Port Rashid. With the withdrawal of "Queen Elizabeth 2" from Cunard's fleet and its docking in Dubai, "Queen Mary 2" became the only ocean liner left in active passenger service.

On 3 August 2007 three men were stopped by police while escorting and piloting a replica of the first American combat submarine within of "Queen Mary 2", which was docked at the cruise ship terminal in Red Hook, Brooklyn. The replica was created by New York artist Philip "Duke" Riley and two out-of-town residents, one of whom claimed to be a descendant of David Bushnell, who had invented it. The Coast Guard issued Riley a citation for having an unsafe vessel, and for violating the security zone around "Queen Mary 2".
On 19 October 2011, "Queen Mary 2" had her registry changed to Hamilton, Bermuda, from her previous home port of Southampton, to allow the ship to host on-board weddings. This marked the first time in its 171-year history that Cunard has not had a ship registered within the UK. Bermuda is a member of the Red Ensign Group and the ship continues to fly the undefaced Red Ensign rather than the Bermuda Red Ensign.

On 10 January 2007, "Queen Mary 2" started her first world cruise, circumnavigating the globe in 81 days. On 20 February, she met her fleet-mate, "Queen Elizabeth 2", also on her 2007 world cruise, in Sydney harbour. This is the first time two Cunard "Queens" had been together in Sydney since the original "Queen Mary" and "Queen Elizabeth" served as troop ships in 1941. Despite the early arrival time of 5:42 am, the "Queen Mary 2"&apos;s presence attracted so many viewers that the Sydney Harbour Bridge and Anzac Bridge were blocked. With 1,600 passengers leaving the ships in Sydney, Cunard estimated the stopovers injected more than $3 million into the local economy.

On 10 January 2012, the ship embarked on a three-month world cruise from Southampton, travelling south and then east around Africa, a first ever circumnavigation of Australia, to Japan, then back to Southampton along the south coastline of Eurasia and through the Suez Canal.

In October 2009, "Queen Mary 2" celebrated her fifth year in service with an 8-night voyage around the British Isles. The voyage included maiden visits to Greenock and Liverpool.

Carried aboard "Queen Mary 2" is the Boston Cup. Sometimes referred to as "The Britannia Cup", this artifact was created for Sir Samuel Cunard in Boston, United States, to commemorate the arrival of his first vessel . Cunard had selected Boston as the American port for his Atlantic service, which resulted in a strong connection between Boston and the Cunard Line. It is believed that the cup was presented to Sir Samuel Cunard sometime in 1840, but for much of its life it was missing. It was discovered in an antique shop in 1967 and returned to Cunard, where it was placed aboard "Queen Elizabeth 2". In 2004, when "Queen Mary 2" became the flagship, the Boston Cup was placed aboard "Queen Mary 2". It is in a glass case, aft of the Chart Room lounge.

In July 2007 the National Geographic Channel broadcast an episode of the documentary series "Megastructures" about "Queen Mary 2". The vessel also featured in the pilot episode of the documentary TV series "Mighty Ships".

The propulsor pods fitted to "Queen Mary 2" have been prone to failure, attributed to the motors' thrust bearings, which continued to show a tendency to fail even after numerous attempts at redesign. In January 2009, Carnival, through its Cunard division, sued Rolls-Royce in the United States. The line alleged that the Mermaid pod propulsion systems fitted to "Queen Mary 2" were inherently defective in design, and that Rolls-Royce knew about the design deficiencies and deliberately conspired to mislead, deceive and defraud in the course of winning the contract. In January 2011, the court awarded Carnival US$24 million (approximately UK£15 million at the time of verdict).

Two years after the first Cunard Royal Rendezvous on the same date "Queen Mary 2" met up with and the then brand-new for another Royal Rendezvous in New York City on 13 January 2011. and made a tandem crossing of the Atlantic for the event. All three ships met in front of the statue of Liberty at 6:45 pm for Grucci fireworks. The Empire State Building was lit up in red to mark the event.

On 5 June 2012, the three Queens met again, but this time in Southampton to celebrate the Diamond jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II.

"Queen Mary 2" has rendezvoused with ocean rowing teams in the middle of the Atlantic. On 30 July 2010 she met up with "Artemis Investments", whose rowing crew were Don Lennox, Livar Nysted, Ray Carroll, Leven Brown. Carroll had been a former engineer and was patched through via marine VHF radio and "Queen Mary 2's" tannoy system to speak to the captain and crew. On 26 September 2013 "Queen Mary 2" resupplied solo-rower Mylène Paquette and her vessel "Hermel" with a replacement satellite phone, drogue anchor and groceries. "Queen Mary 2" changed her course by 20 degrees and only added 14 miles to the overall distance of the crossing.

On 10 June 2017, Queen Mary 2, commanded by Captain Christopher Wells, came to the rescue of a stranded solo yachtsman, 73-year-old Mervyn Wheatley, whose craft "Tamarind" had been disabled by a strong storm while participating in the Observer Single-handed Trans-Atlantic Race. British and Canadian coastguards coordinated this long-range rescue after they detected Tamarind's distress beacon. "Queen Mary 2" was guided to Wheatley's position by a Royal Air Force Lockheed Hercules C130 aircraft.

A small fire broke out in the gas turbine engine room (located high on the ship behind the Queen Mary 2 sign) on the evening of 5 October 2011. The fire was started in one of the ship's gas turbines. No injuries were reported, and crew on board the ship safely extinguished the fire.

On 23 September 2010, an incident occurred in "Queen Mary 2"'s aft harmonic filter room. This resulted in the shutdown of all four propulsion motors and a loss of electrical power throughout the ship. Within an hour, the ship's main generators were restarted and the ship was able to resume passage. Later investigations found that an explosion was caused by electrical arcing within the aft harmonic filter igniting leaked dielectric fluid vapour.

On 6 July 2013 "Queen Mary 2" departed New York en route to Southampton on her 200th transatlantic voyage. On board speakers were Stephen Payne OBE—the ship's designer—and presenter and newsreader Nick Owen, who presented talks about the ship's design.

On 6 May 2014, all three Queens met up for the first time in Lisbon, Portugal. The three ships sailed abreast of each other from Lisbon to Southampton. On 9 May 2014 "Queen Elizabeth" and "Queen Victoria" led "Queen Mary 2" up the Southampton channel where they docked in formation at the QEII terminal and performed a birthday salute to "Queen Mary 2". The anniversary included a tour of the ship by His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh.

On 25 May 2015, all three Queens met, once again, at Liverpool, in order to celebrate the 175th anniversary of the shipping line. After arriving at Liverpool the previous day, "Queen Mary 2" made a brief excursion to the entrance of the River Mersey to welcome her two fleetmates into port in the early afternoon. The three Cunarders then sailed, in formation, towards Liverpool. The ships spent several hours together, before the departure of "Queen Mary 2" to Saint Peter Port, Guernsey.

On 2 July 2015, "Queen Mary 2" began a "175th Anniversary Crossing" in Southampton. She sailed first to Liverpool, leaving that city after a fireworks display on 4 July, the actual anniversary date of Cunard's first transatlantic voyage. "Queen Mary 2" followed the route of the original ship "Britannia", calling first at Halifax, Nova Scotia. After a day there, she headed first upriver into the harbor, using her bow thrusters and swivel-pod motors to negotiate the tight turnaround to come back down close to the cityfront. A 21-gun salute and bagpipe band honored the ship.

From Halifax, the ship sailed to Boston and was there for a full day at the cruise terminal. (Boston was the terminus of the original crossing in 1840.) In the evening, the captain backed the ship out of the slip and continued backing up all the way to the Maritime History Museum, where a fireworks display was presented before "Queen Mary 2" sailed away. After a night and day at sea, the vessel entered New York Harbor early the morning of 14 July and docked at the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal. Later in the evening the vessel sailed to the lower harbor, between the Statue of Liberty and the Battery, for the "Forever Cunard Queen Mary 2 Light Show."

In June 2016, "Queen Mary 2" was put through a $132 million/£90 million renovation at Blohm+Voss over 25 days. Major changes include the addition of fifteen individual staterooms, thirty additional balcony staterooms, and ten more animal kennels.




</doc>
<doc id="25645441" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25645441" title="100 euro note">
100 euro note

The one hundred euro note (€100) is one of the higher value euro banknotes and has been used since the introduction of the euro (in its cash form) in 2002. The note is used daily by some 343 million Europeans and in the 23 countries which have it as their sole currency (with 22 legally adopting it). In August 2018, there were approximately 2,725,000,000 hundred euro banknotes in circulation in the eurozone. It is the third most widely circulated denomination, accounting for over 12% of the total banknotes.

It is the third largest note measuring × and has a green colour scheme. The hundred euro notes depict bridges and arches/doorways in the Baroque and Rococo style (between the 17th and 18th century). The hundred euro note contains several complex security features such as watermarks, invisible ink, holograms and microprinting that document its authenticity.

The new banknotes of the Europa series 100 euro banknote will start circulating on 28 May 2019.

The euro was founded on 1 January 1999, when it became the currency of over 300 million people in Europe. For the first three years of its existence it was an invisible currency, only used in accountancy. Euro cash was not introduced until 1 January 2002, when it replaced the national banknotes and coins of the countries in eurozone 12, such as the French franc and the Spanish peseta.

Slovenia joined the Eurozone in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, Estonia in 2011 Latvia in 2014, and Lithuania joined in 2015.

The changeover period during which the former currencies' notes and coins were exchanged for those of the euro lasted about two months, going from 1 January 2002 until 28 February 2002. The official date on which the national currencies ceased to be legal tender varied from member state to member state. The earliest date was in Germany, where the mark officially ceased to be legal tender on 31 December 2001, though the exchange period lasted for two months more. Even after the old currencies ceased to be legal tender, they continued to be accepted by national central banks for periods ranging from ten years to forever.

Notes printed before November 2003 bear the signature of the first president of the European Central Bank, Wim Duisenberg, who was replaced on 1 November 2003 by Jean-Claude Trichet, whose signature appears on issues from November 2003 to March 2012. Notes issued after March 2012 bear the signature of the third president of the European Central Bank, incumbent Mario Draghi.

Until now there has been only one series of euro notes, however a new series, similar to the current one, is planned to be released. The European Central Bank will, in due time, announce when banknotes from the first series lose legal tender status.

As of June 2012, current issues do not reflect the expansion of the European Union, as Cyprus is not depicted on current notes as the map does not extend far enough east and Malta is also missing as it does not meet the current series' minimum size for depiction. Since the European Central Bank plans to redesign the notes every seven or eight years after each issue, a second series of banknotes is already in preparation. New production and anti-counterfeiting techniques will be employed on the new notes, but the design will be of the same theme and colours identical of the current series; bridges and arches. However, they would still be recognisable as a new series.

The one hundred euro note measures at × and has a green colour scheme. All bank notes depict bridges and arches/doorways in a different historical European style; the hundred euro note shows the Baroque and Rococo style (between the 17th and 18th century). Although Robert Kalina's original designs were intended to show real monuments, for political reasons the bridge and art are merely hypothetical examples of the architectural era.

Like all euro notes, it contains the denomination, the EU flag, the signature of the president of the ECB and the initials of said bank in different EU languages, a depiction of EU territories overseas, the stars from the EU flag and twelve security features as listed below.

The hundred euro note is protected by:

The 100 euro notes are made of pure cotton fibre, which improves their durability as well as making the banknotes have a distinctive feel. The printer code is positioned at the right of 9 o'clock star.

The European Central Bank is closely monitoring the circulation and stock of the euro coins and banknotes. It is a task of the Eurosystem to ensure an efficient and smooth supply of euro notes and to maintain their integrity throughout the euro area.

In January 2019, there are €100 banknotes in circulation around the euro area for €.

This is a net number, i.e. the number of banknotes issued by the Eurosystem central banks, without further distinction as to who is holding the currency issued, thus also including the stocks held by credit institutions.

Besides the date of the introduction of the first set to January 2002, the publication of figures is more significant through the maximum number of banknotes raised each year. The number is higher the end of the year.

The figures are as follows:

The latest figures provided by the ECB are the following :

Legally, both the European Central Bank and the central banks of the eurozone countries have the right to issue the 7 different euro banknotes. In practice, only the national central banks of the zone physically issue and withdraw euro banknotes. The European Central Bank does not have a cash office and is not involved in any cash operations.

There are several communities of people at European level, most of which is EuroBillTracker, that, as a hobby, it keeps track of the euro banknotes that pass through their hands, to keep track and know where they travel or have traveled. The aim is to record as many notes as possible in order to know details about its spread, like from where and to where they travel in general, follow it up, like where a ticket has been seen in particular, and generate statistics and rankings, for example, in which countries there are more tickets. EuroBillTracker has registered over 176 million notes as of May 2018, worth more than €3.257 billion.


</doc>
<doc id="25670432" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25670432" title="Asplenium bradleyi">
Asplenium bradleyi

Asplenium bradleyi, commonly known as Bradley's spleenwort or cliff spleenwort, is a rare epipetric fern of east-central North America. Named after Professor Frank Howe Bradley, who first collected it in Tennessee, it may be found infrequently throughout much of the Appalachian Mountains, the Ozarks, and the Ouachita Mountains, growing in small crevices on exposed sandstone cliffs. The species originated as a hybrid between mountain spleenwort ("Asplenium montanum") and ebony spleenwort ("Asplenium platyneuron"); "A. bradleyi" originated when that sterile diploid hybrid underwent chromosome doubling to become a fertile tetraploid, a phenomenon known as allopolyploidy. Studies indicate that the present population of Bradley's spleenwort arose from several independent doublings of sterile diploid hybrids. "A. bradleyi" can also form sterile hybrids with several other spleenworts.

While "A. bradleyi" is easily outcompeted by other plants in more fertile habitats, it is well adapted to the thin, acidic soil and harsh environment of its native cliffs, where it finds few competitors. Its isolated situation on these cliffs protects it from most threats, but quarrying and mining of the cliffs, rock climbing, and other activities that disturb the cliff ecosystem can destroy it.

"Asplenium bradleyi" is a small fern with dark green, pinnate-pinnatifid to bipinnate fronds. These form evergreen, perennial tufts. Notable characteristics are the dark stem, whose color extends well up the axis of the leaf blade, a deeply cut acroscopic lobe or pinnule at the base of each pinna, and toothed pinna edges. However, some of these characteristics are variable, and may not be observed in all individuals of "A. bradleyi". Some specimens have rounded, rather than toothed edges and others lack dark coloration throughout most of the stem. The fronds are monomorphic, the sterile and fertile fronds appearing the same size and shape.

Its rhizomes (underground stems) are short and parallel to the ground, or sometimes curving upwards, so the fronds spring up in a cluster. The rhizome is about in diameter, covered with narrowly triangular scales that are dark reddish to brown and strongly clathrate (bearing a lattice-like pattern). The scales are long and 0.2 to 0.4 millimeters wide, with untoothed or shallowly toothed edges. The stipe (the stalk of the leaf, below the blade) is upright, long, occasionally as much as . It lacks wings, and is reddish- to purplish-brown and shiny. It is one-third to three-quarter times the length of the blade. Small brown scales at the base of the stipe diminish to hairs as one moves towards the tip of the leaf.

The overall shape of the blade ranges from oblong (tapering at the ends but about the same width throughout) to lanceolate (slightly wider a short distance above the base, tapering to a point at the apex). It is squared off at the base and tapers at the tip. The blade ranges from long, rarely to , and in width, and may be thin or somewhat thick. The blade is cut into 5 to 15 pairs of pinnae (possibly as low as 3 or as high as 20 in unusual specimens), which are themselves deeply lobed or further subdivided into pinnules. The lower pinnae are stalked, while the upper pinnae are not. They are variable in shape, tending to have a squared-off or very broadly curved base, and are typically widest at or near the base. The acroscopic lobe or pinnule nearest the rachis (located on the apical side of each pinna) tends to be enlarged, and the pinnae are toothed. They vary from in length and at the middle of the frond.

Each pinna on a fertile frond has three or more pairs of sori. These are long, and rusty or dark brown in color. They are located between the margin and the midvein of the pinnae. The sori are covered by opaque indusia with untoothed edges. The indusia from white to light tan in color and have a membraneous texture. Each sporangium holds 64 spores. The species has a chromosome number of 144 in the sporophyte, indicating an allotetraploid origin. It sporulates from June to December.

Variants of "A. bradleyi" have been reported. Specimens found growing in a very shaded environment, which lacked color in the rachis and were simply pinnate, have been mistaken for green spleenwort ("A. viride"). But even under such conditions, "A. bradleyi" has a more leathery leaf texture than "A. viride", and their ranges do not overlap. In 1923, Edgar T. Wherry described what he believed to be a new species of fern, Stotler's spleenwort ("A. stotleri") (after T.C. Stotler, its discoverer). Wherry believed it to be the hybrid of lobed spleenwort ("A. pinnatifidum") and "A. platyneuron". However, it was later shown to be simply a form of "A. bradleyi" with rounded, rather than sharp, teeth. A dwarfed form of "A. bradleyi", with fronds about long, was discovered in Illinois by Wallace R. Weber and Robert H. Mohlenbrock. This form lacked dark color in the stipe and rachis except for the very base; some slightly larger specimens, with a frond, retained the normal coloration of these structures.

Among fertile species, "A. bradleyi" most closely resembles its parent species "A. montanum". Several characteristics exit to distinguish them: the pinnae of "A. bradleyi" are toothed and less deeply lobed or cut than "A. montanum" (where the pinnae are often fully cut to pinnules), the dark color of the stipe extends into the rachis, the upper pinnae lack stems, and the overall shape of the leaf blade is parallel-sided, rather than lance-shaped. "A. bradleyi" also shows some resemblance to black spleenwort ("A. adiantum-nigrum") (although their ranges do not overlap). The latter may be identified by its distinctly triangular-shaped leaf blade, more deeply cut leaves (the pinnules of its basal pinnae are lobed), and enlarged basiscopic, rather than acroscopic, pinnules.

"Asplenium bradleyi" is similar to two hybrid species of which it is a parent, Graves' spleenwort ("A. × gravesii"), a hybrid with "A. pinnatifidum", and Wherry's spleenwort ("A. × wherryi"), a backcross with "A. montanum". In "A. × gravesii", the dark color of the stipe ends at the base of the leaf blade, the pinnae are more shallowly lobed and the enlargement of acroscopic lobes or pinnules is less distinct, and the apical portion of the blade forms a long, tapering tip with slight lobes (as in "A. pinnatifidum"), rather than being cut into pinnae. In addition to the general reduction of the toothiness of "A. bradleyi", "A. × gravesii" also shows faint winging along the stipe. Likewise, in "A. × wherryi", the dark color of the stipe again ends at the base of the leaf blade, the overall shape of the blade tends to be more distinctly lance-shaped, and the fronds are somewhat more deeply cut than "A. bradleyi", progressing from bipinnate in the lower half to pinnate-pinnatifid and finally pinnate at the apex. Finally, the diploid hybrid "A. montanum × platyneuron", from which "A. bradleyi" arose by chromosome doubling, is essentially identical in appearance to "A. bradleyi". On close examination, its spores are found to be abortive, and the sori are smaller and not do not become fused with each other as they grow, as they do in fertile "A. bradleyi".

The scientific discovery of "A. bradleyi" occurred in 1871, when Frank Howe Bradley collected a number of specimens near Coal Creek, on Walden's Ridge in East Tennessee. Bradley sent some of them to Daniel Cady Eaton, who recognized it as a species distinct from "A. montanum" and named it for Bradley in an 1873 publication.

While both Asa Gray and Eaton identified "A. bradleyi" as a hybrid intermediate between "A. montanum" and "A. platyneuron", the English botanist R. Morton Middleton proposed in 1892 that it was identical or closely related to "A. viride". This conclusion was based on the examination of forms growing in shade on the Cumberland Plateau which lacked color in the rachis, and was endorsed by contemporary Tennessee botanists such as Augustin Gattinger and Kirby Smith. This was rebutted in 1893 by Amos A. Heller, who pointed out that most collections of "A. bradleyi" had a dark stipe and that it possessed an auricle (the acroscopic pinnule) which "A. viride" lacked. Instead, Heller perceived in some of his specimens from the lower Susquehanna River affinities to "A. montanum" and "A. pinnatifidum". Middleton, nevertheless, continued to maintain his theory of an affinity with "A. viride", and speculated that "A. bradleyi" was not a hybrid, but an "intermediate" between "A. viride" and lanceolate spleenwort ("A. obovatum" ssp. "lanceolatum").

Edgar T. Wherry speculated at length on the hybrid origins of "A. bradleyi" and other Appalachian spleenworts in 1925, but the scheme he proposed was later found to be untenable, although he did recognize the contribution of "A. platyneuron" to its ancestry. Herb Wagner, in 1953, suggested instead that it was the hybrid of "A. montanum" and "A. platyneuron", noting that Eaton and W. N. Clute had already made tentative suggestions along those lines. His cytological studies the following year showed that "A. bradleyi" was an allotetraploid, the product of hybridization between "A. montanum" and "A. platyneuron" to form a sterile diploid, followed by chromosome doubling that restored fertility.

These findings were later supported by chromatographic analysis of flavonoid compounds. Chromatograms of "A. bradleyi" showed a combination of all the compounds found in "A. montanum" and all those in "A. platyneuron". "A. × wherryi" showed the same pattern, as it also contains chromosomes from both of those species. A specimen of "A. stotleri" was subsequently shown to form the same chromatograms as well. This showed that it was not descended to "A. pinnatifidum", whose chromatograms contain compounds inherited from walking fern ("A. rhizophyllum"), and verified that "A. stotleri" was simply a form of "A. bradleyi". Allozyme analysis in the 1980s also supported these hybrid origins of "A. bradleyi".

The species was segregated from "Asplenium" as "Chamaefilix bradleyi" by Farwell in 1931. The change was not widely accepted and current authorities do not recognize this segregate genus.

The sterile diploid hybrid of "A. montanum" and "A. platyneuron", which resembles "A. bradleyi" except for its abortive spores and smaller sori, was not collected until 1972, at Crowder's Mountain, Georgia. Even though the diploid hybrid is rarely collected, allozyme studies show that "A. bradleyi" has multiple origins; that is, different populations of "A. bradleyi" have originated from the chromosome doubling of independently formed diploids. Despite their independent origins, these populations are probably interfertile and not reproductively isolated from one another.

In addition to its parental species, "A. bradleyi" hybridizes with several other spleenworts. Its hybrid with "A. pinnatifidum" was recognized as such by William R. Maxon in 1918. He named it "A. gravesii" for its discoverer, Edward W. Graves. It can also backcross with its parental species. Wherry collected specimens of "A. bradleyi × montanum" from a cliff near Blairstown, New Jersey in 1935. It is not thought to have been collected again until 1961, when it was described and named in Wherry's honor. Specimens believed to be "A. bradleyi × platyneuron" were collected at an early date at McCall's Ferry, along the Susquehanna River. The site of collection was submerged by the building of the Holtwood Dam. A preliminary report of both diploid "A. bradleyi" and "A. bradleyi × platyneuron" from Sequatchie County, Tennessee was made in 1989.

One of the "Appalachian spleenworts", "A. bradleyi" can be found along the Appalachian Mountains from northern New Jersey and Pennsylvania southwest to Georgia and Alabama, and occasionally along the Ohio Valley to the Ozarks and Ouachitas, where it is found in Missouri, Arkansas, and eastern Oklahoma. Populations in Maryland and New York are considered historical. Populations are generally scattered in the Appalachians, but more frequent in the Ozarks and Ouachitas.

"Asplenium bradleyi" can be found on steep, acidic rocks from altitudes of . Sandstone is a common substrate, but it can also be found on schist, gneiss, granite, or other acidic rocks. Like "A. montanum", the soil formed when these rocks weather must be subacid (pH 4.5–5.0) to mediacid (pH 3.5–4.0) to support "A. bradleyi"; it is slightly calcium-tolerant. It usually grows tightly wedged into horizontal or vertical crevices in exposed rock or cliff faces. These microsites are too small for most other vascular plants to survive, except for a few other spleenworts. Some mosses and lichens may occur in the same habitat. The soil there is typically composed of a mixture of acidic sand weathered from the rock and decomposing organic materials, often including old fronds. Fronds are frequently lost and decompose in summer when the soil is drier, but the crevices are usually moist or wet in winter and spring. Some shade may be present, but dense shade is not tolerated. "A. bradleyi" specializes in growing in this rather hostile environment, and competes poorly with other plants in even slightly richer environments.

The inaccessibility of its habitat affords some protection for "A. bradleyi". Quarrying and strip mining may threaten the sandstone cliffs, especially on the Cumberland Plateau. Rock climbers and botanical collectors have also damaged populations of the fern. Toxic runoff from atop cliffs can affect them, and they may also be threatened by both natural and anthropogenic shading of cliffs due to increased tree growth at the cliff base, invasive vines overrunning the cliff face, or the piling of slash against the cliff after logging.

"Asplenium bradleyi" is protected as an endangered species in the states of Illinois, Indiana, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, and is considered threatened in Ohio. Acadia Cliffs State Nature Preserve in Ohio, acquired in 1994, contains the state's only protected population of "A. bradleyi".




</doc>
<doc id="25673121" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25673121" title="Russian battleship Georgii Pobedonosets">
Russian battleship Georgii Pobedonosets

Georgii Pobedonosets ( Saint George the Victorious) was a battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy, the fourth and final ship of the . She was, however, only a half-sister to the others as her armor scheme was different and she was built much later than the earlier ships. She participated in the pursuit of the mutinous battleship in June 1905, but her crew mutinied themselves. However, loyal crew members regained control of the ship the next day and they ran her aground when "Potemkin" threatened to fire on her if she left Odessa harbor. She was relegated to second-line duties in 1908. She fired on during her bombardment of Sevastopol in 1914, but spent most of the war serving as a headquarters ship in Sevastopol. She was captured by both sides during the Russian Civil War, but ended up being towed to Bizerte by the fleeing White Russians where she was eventually scrapped.

"Georgii Pobedonosets" was originally intended as a version of rearmed with three and four guns, but this changed when the decision was made to provide her with three twin 12-inch turrets rather than the barbettes used by her sisters. The turrets were significantly heavier than the barbette mountings so the armour scheme was revised in compensation. However this revised design was still deemed overweight and rejected. The Naval Ministry held a competition for a replacement, but these were rejected by the Naval Technical Committee in turn. So a modified version of "Sinop", with barbettes, was chosen again as the most readily available choice. The height of her armour was lowered to reduce the overweight condition of her half-sisters. Other changes were made while building, but they came early in the process and did not seriously delay her completion past her contractual date of 13 September 1893. These changes included smaller mountings for her main guns that eliminated the sponsons needed in her sisters for the forward barbettes, the substitution of 35-calibre guns for the older 30-calibre guns and steel armor imported from Schnider et Cie of France replaced the compound armour used in her half-sisters.

"Georgii Pobedonosets" was long at the waterline and long overall. She had a beam of and a draft of . She displaced at load, over more than her designed displacement of .

She had two 3-cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines driving screw propellers in diameter. Sixteen cylindrical boilers provided steam to the engines. The engines and boilers were both imported from Maudslay and Sons of the United Kingdom and were overweight. The engines had a total designed output of , but they only produced on trials and gave a top speed of . At full load she carried of coal that provided her a range of at a speed of and at .

Her main armament consisted of three pairs of Obukhov Model 1886 35-calibre guns mounted in two twin barbette mounts side by side forward and one aft of the superstructure. They had a maximum elevation of 15° and could depress to −2°. Each of the forward mounts could traverse 30° across the bow and 35° abaft the beam, or a total of 155°. The rear mount could traverse 202°. Their rate of fire was one round every four minutes, fifty seconds, including training time. They fired a shell at a muzzle velocity of to a range of at maximum elevation. They also had a 'heavy' shell available that weighed that was fired at a velocity of although the range is not available.

The seven 35-calibre guns were mounted on broadside pivot mounts in hull embrasures, except for one gun mounted in the stern in the hull. The eight single-barrelled Hotchkiss guns were mounted on the battery deck to defend the ship against torpedo boats. Ten Hotchkiss guns were mounted in the fighting top. She carried seven above-water torpedo tubes, three tubes on each broadside and a tube in the stern.

In contrast to her half-sisters the armour used on "Georgii Pobedonosets" was steel. The belt armor had a maximum thickness of which reduced, in steps, down to forward and down to aft. Its height was reduced by in comparison to the other ships of the class to to reduce weight. However this left only six inches of her belt above her load waterline as she was still overweight, a decrease of from her half-sisters. The deck armour was outside the citadel and reduced to over it.

"Georgii Pobedonosets" was named after Saint George the Victorious. She was built by the Russian Steam Navigation Company (RoPIT) at Sevastopol. She was laid down on 5 May 1891, launched on 9 March 1892, and completed in 1893, although her trials lasted until mid-1895. She spent her career in the Black Sea Fleet. She began her trials in September 1893, but they were not completed until the middle of 1895.

In 1905, "Georgii Pobedonosets" briefly joined the "Potemkin" mutiny. On 29 June 1905, the ship was one of eight vessels (three battleships, a cruiser and four torpedo boats) sent to capture the in Odessa. The next day the fleet approached "Potemkin", then suddenly retreated. She then followed them, deliberately goading the officers to order the sailors to fire on their comrades. The crew of "Georgii Pobedonosets" refused: "We won't fire! We won't man the guns! We refuse to engage the Potemkin." Her sailors cheered the rebel sailors' bravery. Dorofey Koshuba, a member of the revolutionary sailors' organisation "Tsentralka", broke into the armoury, ordered Captain Ilya Guzevich to halt the ship, pushing him away when he refused. The ship halted, Guzevich pleaded with the sailors to go to Sevastopol, even offering to let the 70 revolutionaries onto "Potemkin". Afanasi Matushenko, the leader of "Potemkin"s crew, arrived with several revolutionaries who made a speech that inspired the sailors to arrest the officers. This was enough to make his second-in-command, Lieutenant Grigorkov, commit suicide. Apart from this, the seizure was bloodless. The sailors elected a committee (Koshuba and nine others), locked the officers in the stateroom and ripped off their epaulettes. The officers were put ashore in Odessa. It was decided that the petty officers should be put ashore too the next day. Senior Boatswain A. O. Kuzmenko became captain.

The next day, however, loyal crew members regained control of the ship and they ran her aground and surrendered to the authorities. In August 1905, 75 mutineers were tried. Koshuba and two others were executed and 19 sailors got 185 years of hard labour.

In 1907, the Naval General Staff made a proposal for a radical reconstruction that was similar to the proposals to reconstruct and made before the Russo-Japanese War that involved cutting her down by one deck and replacing her armament with two twin-gun turrets equipped with 12-inch 40-calibre guns and the compound armor replaced by Krupp armor. This new proposal differed from the older one in that eight guns replaced the ten six-inch guns originally planned. This was rejected as she still would have lacked the speed to stay with the main fleet and the hull protection required to withstand high-explosive shell fire.

She became a training ship in 1908 and her 6-inch 35-calibre guns were replaced by modern 6-inch 45-calibre guns. She was modified as a harbour guard ship in 1911 and her 12-inch guns were removed. Six more six-inch guns were added for a total of fourteen. She fired three rounds, missing each time, at the German battlecruiser during her bombardment of Sevastopol on 29 October 1914, but spent the bulk of World War I as a static headquarters ship in Sevastopol. After the Russian Revolution, she joined the Red Black Sea Fleet in December 1917. She was captured by the Germans in 1918 in Sevastopol and was handed over to the Allies in December 1918. The British sabotaged her engines on 25 April 1919. She was captured by both sides in the Russian Civil War, but eventually became part of Wrangel's fleet and was towed to Bizerte in 1920. She was sold for scrap between 1930 and 1936.




</doc>
<doc id="25693804" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25693804" title="Richard Basset">
Richard Basset

Richard Basset (died between 1135 and 1144) was a royal judge and sheriff during the reign of King Henry I of England. His father was also a royal justice. In about 1122 Basset married the eventual heiress of another justice; the marriage settlement has survived. In 1129–30 Basset was co-sheriff of eleven counties. Basset and his wife founded a monastic house in 1125 from their lands, which before the donation were equivalent to 15 knight's fees.

Basset was the son of Ralph Basset, who was a royal justice under Henry I. While it is not known whether Richard was Ralph's eldest son, Richard inherited Ralph's estates in Normandy, which were near Montreuil-au-Houlme. He also inherited his father's English estates at Colston Basset, Kingston Winslow, and Peatling Parva. The bulk of Ralph's English lands did not go to Richard, however. Basset's brother Nicholas signed over his own inheritance to Richard. Ralph Basset was considered one of the "new men" of Henry I. William Basset, the abbot of the Benedictine monastery of the abbey of St Benet of Hulme, may have been a relative, as he granted lands to Richard Basset in return for a £10 annual rent. Another relative may have been the Robert Basset who witnessed nine charters of Ranulf de Gernon, Earl of Chester.

In 1125, the king appointed Basset to oversee the lands of Peterborough Abbey after the death of the abbot. The revenues of a vacant abbey went to the king, and Basset's job was to secure Peterborough's income for King Henry.

In 1129–30, Basset served as sheriff of Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire, Essex, Hertfordshire, Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Norfolk and Suffolk, and Surrey together with Aubrey de Vere II. The number of shrievalties was unusual, and is known from the Pipe Roll of 1130. According to the entries in the Pipe Roll, de Vere and Basset did not function as traditional sheriffs, farming the revenues, but were instead responsible for the entire royal revenue in those counties.

As well as his service as a sheriff, Basset also served as a royal justice, hearing pleas in Leicestershire in 1129 and 1130. Between 1131 and 1133, Basset appears to have been a frequent attendee at the royal court, as he witnessed a number of documents. He was present at the councils held at Northampton in 1131 and at Westminster in 1132. Basset witnessed no royal documents after 1133, when King Henry left England for Normandy for the final time.

After King Henry's death in 1135, Basset was not employed as a royal official, either as a justice or as a sheriff. He appears once as a witness to a charter of King Stephen's in 1136, but the authenticity of this document has been questioned. He had built a castle in Normandy at Montreuil-au-Houlme, but Basset did not have possession of it in 1136, when it was held against Stephen's opponents by William de Montpincon.

Basset's lands did not form a compact estate, as they were spread over 11 counties. In 1135, Basset's lands totalled 184.25 carucates of land, and were later considered 15 knight's fees. In Leicestershire, Basset held most of the lands held by Robert de Buci at the time of the Domesday Survey of 1086. The lands were held by Basset of the king by right of his wife, but how the lands had passed into her family is unclear. In addition, Basset held land in Leicestershire from both King David I of Scotland and from Robert de Beaumont, the Earl of Leicester.

In 1125, Basset and his wife founded an Augustinian Order priory at Launde in Leicestershire, This priory, Launde Priory, was endowed with the village of Loddington in Leicestershire and a number of churches in that county and others.

Basset married Matilda, the daughter and eventual heiress of Geoffrey Ridel (d. 1120), some time between 1120 and 1123. Matilda had a brother Robert, who was mentioned in her marriage settlement. By the terms of the settlement, Robert Ridel was placed under the guardianship of Richard Basset until he was knighted and married to Basset's niece. The marriage settlement describes Matilda's dowry as being worth four knight's fees. Basset also received the right to arrange marriages for Matilda's sisters. Robert's lands were to come to Basset if Robert had no children. Not long after the settlement was written, Basset was in possession of the lands that should have been Robert's.

Basset witnessed a royal charter in 1135 but was dead by 1144, when his lands were granted by the Empress Matilda and her son Henry to Richard's son Geoffrey Ridel. His other sons were Ralph Basset, who held lands near Drayton, and William Basset, who held lands near Sapcote. William became a royal justice and sheriff like his father. Richard also had two daughters: Sibil, who married Robert de Cauz, and Matilda, who married John de Stuteville. Ralph inherited the ancestral lands in Normandy. The Norman chronicler Orderic Vitalis wrote that Basset built a tower on his ancestral lands of Montreuil in Normandy purely to demonstrate his status and wealth.

Ralph inherited the ancestral lands in Normandy. The Norman chronicler Orderic Vitalis wrote that Basset built a tower on his ancestral lands of Montreuil in Normandy purely to demonstrate his status and wealth.



</doc>
<doc id="25738716" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25738716" title="Ljótólfr">
Ljótólfr

Ljótólfr is a minor character in the mediaeval "Orkneyinga saga", who is purported to have flourished in the mid-12th century. The "Orkneyinga saga" was compiled in about 1200, and documents the reigns of the earls of Orkney. It depicts Ljótólfr as a nobleman who lived on the Outer Hebridean island of Lewis. During the 12th century, the Hebrides formed part of the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles.

The "Orkneyinga saga" relates how Ljótólfr was a friendly acquaintance of the Viking chieftain Sveinn Ásleifarson, who is one of the major characters of the entire saga. The saga states that Ljótólfr housed Sveinn for some time on Lewis, and took in Sveinn's brother, who was banished from Orkney. Ljótólfr's son, Fugl, appears in the saga, although he is depicted at being at odds with Sveinn, until a relative of Fugl's negotiates peace between the two. Several historians have considered Ljótólfr to be an ancestor of Clan MacLeod; one of these considered Ljótólfr to be the eponymous ancestor of the clan—although the current understanding of the clan's ancestry regards another man as the eponym.

Ljótólfr is a minor character in the "Orkneyinga saga". He is purported to have flourished in the mid-12th century, and to have lived on the Outer Hebridean island of Lewis. Ljótólfr has a son, Fugl, another minor character in the saga, who is also described as being from the island.

The main source for Ljótólfr is the "Orkneyinga saga", which was compiled sometime around 1200 by an unknown Icelander. The saga is thought to have been based upon poetry, oral tradition, and other written material. It can be summed up as an account of the lives of many of the earls of Orkney between the 9th and 13th centuries. According to research fellow Ian Beuermann, the saga is useful not for the specific events it describes, but rather for what it reveals about "the ideas shaping the texts during the periods of composition or revision". For example, it is possible that even one of the main characters of the saga, Sveinn Ásleifarson, never existed, or at least that the historical Sveinn differed from the saga's portrayal of him. Another source which mentions Ljótólfr is Þormóður Torfason's 17th-century Latin history of Orkney, which follows the "Orkneyinga saga".

In the 11th century, the earls of Orkney were at the height of their power. The Earl of Orkney, Þórfinnr Sigurðarson, also ruled Caithness and Sutherland, and seems to have controlled the western seaboard of Scotland, and the Hebrides. Historian Magnús Stefánsson described the political situation of the Hebrides and the Isle of Man during the 11th and early 12th century as being unstable, and suffering from the rivalries of petty kings and chieftains. In 1079, the Hebridean warlord Gofraidh Crobhán was able to unite the Hebrides and the Isle of Man into an effective independent kingdom. In 1098–9, the Norwegian king Magnús Óláfsson invaded the Hebrides, and asserted his right over the islands; he did so again in 1102–3. He is thought to have planned to unite Orkney, the Hebrides, and the Isle of Mann, under the control of his son. In 1103, Magnús was slain in Ireland, and no Norwegian king set foot in the islands for over a century and a half. With Magnús' death, the Outer Hebrides were brought back under the control of the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles, whose kings tactfully recognised Norwegian sovereignty. In 1156, the kingdom was partitioned following an inconclusive sea battle between the warlord Somhairle mac Gille Brighde, and the Manx king Gofraidh mac Amhlaibh: the Outer Hebrides remained under the control of Gofraidh, but the Inner Hebrides were ruled separately by Somhairle. Two years later, Somhairle successfully invaded the Isle of Man, took the throne, and ruled the entire Kingdom of Mann and the Isles until his death in 1164.

One of the most prominent characters of the "Orkneyinga saga" is the Viking chieftain Sveinn Ásleifarson, who lived on the island of Gairsay, in Orkney. The saga relates how Sveinn's father, Óláfr Hrólfsson, was one of several chieftains who supported Páll Hákonsson, Earl of Orkney, in a victorious sea battle against a fleet led by Ölvir Rósta in support of Rögnvaldr Kolsson, who had been appointed the earl of half of Orkney by the King of Norway. Óláfr was later burned to death inside his own house by Ölvir, the grandson of Frakökk, an ambitious woman, portrayed as a villain in the saga. Frakökk attempted to win the Earldom of Orkney for her descendants—particularly Ölvir.

The saga relates how in Orkney, Sveinn murdered one of the earl's followers, and immediately fled to the Bishop of Orkney. The bishop protected Sveinn by sending him away to the "Suðreyjar", into the care of Holdboði Hundason, a chieftain on the Inner Hebridean island of Tiree. Later, in early spring, the saga relates how Sveinn travelled to Atholl, where he stayed for a long period of time. From Atholl, Sveinn made his way back towards Orkney by land, and on the journey northwards, he passed through Thurso, in Caithness. The saga notes that Sveinn was accompanied by Ljótólfr, and that Sveinn had spent much of the previous spring with Ljótólfr. The chieftain who lived at Thurso was an earl named "Óttarr", who is described as "a man worthy of honour". Earl Óttarr was a brother of Frakökk, and the saga relates how Ljótólfr negotiated a truce between Sveinn and Earl Óttarr, after Sveinn's father was killed by Ölvir.

The saga states that Sveinn made numerous Viking expeditions throughout the Hebrides, and into the Irish Sea zone. On one such occasion, Sveinn set up a base on the Isle of Man, where he married a wealthy widow. Some time later, Sveinn and his men were attacked by a force led by Holdboði, and in consequence Sveinn left the island and sailed north into the Hebrides to Lewis.

Further on in the saga, it is stated that Sveinn's brother, Gunni Óláfsson, had children with Margrét Hákonardóttir, mother of Haraldr Maddaðarson, Earl of Orkney, Mormaer of Caithness. Because of this relationship with his mother, Haraldr banished Gunni from the earldom, and enmity arose between Sveinn and the earl. Sveinn then sent Gunni to stay with Ljótólfr on Lewis, with whom Sveinn himself had stayed at an earlier time. The saga also states that at this time, Ljótólfr's son, Fugl, was with Haraldr, and consequently there was a "coldness" between Fugl and Sveinn. The saga relates that Sveinn stole a ship from Fugl, who had been travelling to Orkney to meet Haraldr. However, subsequently a relation of Fugl's, named "Anakol", who became a friend of Sveinn, succeeded in making peace between the two. Historian Garreth Williams noted that Anakol's name is Gaelic in origin, and like Ljótólfr and Fugl, he is described as being originally from the Hebrides. The saga also states that he was from a good family.

Captain F. W. L. Thomas, a 19th-century antiquarian, proposed that Ljótólfr was the eponymous progenitor of Clan MacLeod. However, today the accepted understanding is that the clan's eponymous ancestor is another man, Leod, who flourished about a century after Ljótólfr. Leod's name, and the modern surname "MacLeod", are considered to be ultimately derived from the Old Norse personal name "Ljótr". This name is derived from the Old West Norse word "ljótr", meaning "foul", "ugly", "misshapen". The personal name "Ljótólfr" is composed of two elements—the first, "liút", is derived from the Germanic word meaning "light", "shining"; the second element, "ólfr", is derived from a Germanic word meaning "wolf". While the current understanding of Leod's ancestry does not include a man named "Ljótólfr", the 20th-century clan historian Alick Morrison considered it possible that Ljótólfr could be an ancestor of Leod, albeit on his distaff side; Morrison even suggested that Leod's name could have been derived from Ljótólfr.

The MacLeods have two main branches—"Sìol Thormoid" (Scottish Gaelic: "seed of Tormod") and "Sìol Thorcaill" ("seed of Torcall"). "Sìol Thorcaill" was the dominant family on Lewis from the Late Middle Ages until the end of the 16th century. The Gaelic names "Tormod" and "Torcall" are derived from the Old Norse names "Þórmóðr" and "Þórketill". Thomas noted that these names were also those of two men with Lewis connections, who are both recorded in the 13th-century kings' saga "Hákonar saga Hákonarsonar". One of these men was Þórketill Þórmóðsson, who according to the saga, was slain near the Isle of Skye in about the year 1230. Thomas proposed that this man could be a grandson of Ljótólfr. Another man who appears in the saga, Þórmóðr Þórkelsson, was forced to flee Lewis, leaving behind his wife, retainers, and goods; according to Thomas, this shows that Þórmóðr was a resident on the island. Thomas noted that Þórmóðr Þórkelsson was married in about 1231, and on the assumption that each generation could be estimated to be 30 years, Thomas gave Þórmóðr's birth at 1201; his (supposed) father, Þórketill, at 1171; Þórketill's father Þórmóðr at 1141; and this man's father at 1111. Thomas concluded that the elder Þórmóðr would have been born at about the time Ljótólfr flourished on Lewis.





</doc>
<doc id="25746600" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25746600" title="1957 Pacific hurricane season">
1957 Pacific hurricane season

The 1957 Pacific hurricane season was a moderately active year in which 13 tropical cyclones formed. The hurricane season ran through the summer and fall months which conventionally delimit the period during which most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean. The first tropical cyclone developed on July 15. The final storm dissipated on December 6, becoming one of the few Pacific storms to exist outside of the seasonal dates. Of the season's 13 storms, five of these formed or crossed into the central Pacific.

During the season, five storms impacted land. Hurricane Twelve was the deadliest, leaving eight casualties in Mazatlán and the costliest was Hurricane Nina, causing an estimated $100,000 in losses. In addition to the damage, four people were killed by Nina in Hawaii. Hurricane Six killed seven people and Hurricane Ten killed two in Mexico.

The first hurricane of the season was identified by the National Weather Bureau in San Francisco, California on July 15. The previous day, the "S.S. Garvel Park" recorded sustained winds of 50 mph (85 km/h) when it was situated roughly 75 mi (120 km) south of Manzanillo, Mexico. Although listed as a Category 1 hurricane for its entire known existence by the hurricane database, the storm was not confirmed to have attained hurricane intensity until July 21. The storm took a steady westward track during the early portion of its existence in response to a strong ridge located north of Hawaii. On July 18, the National Weather Bureau discontinued advisories on the storm as no information on it was being received.

On July 21, a vessel named "Cape Horn" relayed information regarding the storm to the National Weather Bureau, leading to them re-issuing advisories on the storm, upgrading it to a hurricane. The following day, a reconnaissance mission from Oahu, Hawaii located the storm's 40 mi (65 km) wide eye and recorded sustained winds of 80 mph (130 km/h) and gusts up to 115 mph (185 km/h). Shortly after, the storm likely attained its peak intensity as a high-end Category 1 hurricane, with winds of 85 mph (140 km/h). Early on July 23, warning responsibility of the storm was given to the National Weather Bureau in Honolulu, Hawaii.

Upon transferring responsibility, the hurricane was given the name Kanoa, the Hawaiian name meaning "the free one". As the storm approached Hawaii, it began to weaken as convection filled the eye. The storm's track mirrored that of the shipping lane between the Panama Canal and Hawaii, leading to several ships being affected. Colder air also began to enter the circulation, leading to further weakening. By the time the system reached Hawaii, it was no more than an area of disturbed weather. The remnants of Kanoa persisted until July 26, at which time they dissipated over the Hawaiian Islands. The remnants of the storm brought beneficial rainfall to most of Hawaii, with heavy rains being reported in parts of the Big Island.

Roughly two weeks after Kanoa dissipated, the season's second hurricane was identified over the open waters of the eastern Pacific on August 6. This storm traveled in a similar fashion to Kanoa in response to a high pressure system over the northern Pacific. By August 9, the system turned northwest and weakened. Cold, dry air began to enter the storm as it accelerated over cooler waters. Several reconnaissance missions were flown into the storm due to rapid changes in the storm's wind field and structure. Late on August 10, the system intensified into a Category 1 hurricane and its forward motion slowed as it turned more westward.

Although at an unusual latitude, the storm maintained this intensity for over a day before weakening to a tropical storm. During the afternoon of August 13, the small system re-intensified into a hurricane. Reconnaissance reported that gale-force winds extended no more than 100 mi (155 km) from the storm's eye. Shortly thereafter, the system further intensified into a Category 2 hurricane, attaining maximum winds of 105 mph (160 km/h). Weather maps at the time depicted the storm as having a minimum pressure of 987 mbar (hPa). By August 14, the storm began to weaken once more, gradually becoming a tropical storm on August 15. After turning northward, the cyclone became extratropical at a high latitude of 39.8°N.

As Hurricane Two intensified over open waters, the season's third storm was identified on August 9. Initially tracking westward, the hurricane turned sharply north, maintaining an intensity of 85 mph (140 km/h) during its known existence. Briefly slowing on August 11, the system quickly picked up forward speed as it turned northwestward, paralleling the coastline of the Baja California Peninsula. On August 14, the hurricane turned north once more; however, it lost its identity the following day off the coast of Baja California.

Hurricane Della was first identified on September 1 southeast of Hawaii as a tropical depression. The depression quickly intensified into a tropical storm as it traveled northwest; however, operational advisories were not issued until September 3. By that time, a ship reported they had encountered a storm and recorded winds of 100 mph (155 km/h). Radar images also depicted an eye had developed within the storm. After becoming a hurricane, Della began a gradual turn towards the southwest. During the day on September 4, the storm passed roughly 10 mi (15 km) south of the French Frigate Shoals, bringing strong winds gusting up to 110 mph (175 km/h). During the storm's passage, a pressure of 980 mbar (hPa) was recorded, the lowest in relation to the storm. By September 9, Della began to turn westward as it approached the International Date Line with winds of 85 mph (140 km/h).

During the day, the storm crossed 180°, entering the western Pacific basin and being re-designated as a typhoon. The storm tracked steadily northwestward, attaining a peak intensity of 125 mph (205 km/h), a high-end Category 3 storm, before turning back towards the east. The storm gradually weakened, transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on September 17 and again crossing the International Date Line. The system dissipated shortly thereafter over open waters. Throughout its existence, Hurricane/Typhoon Della traveled roughly , the longest known track of any Pacific hurricane at the time.

The fifth tropical cyclone of the season was first identified as a tropical storm several hundred miles southeast of Hawaii on September 9. The storm quickly attained winds of 50 mph (85 km/h) before weakening. By September 11, the system weakened to a tropical depression. Later that day, the system entered an area with no ships available for reporting. However, no ships reported a storm in the region for several days, signifying the depression's dissipation.

On September 17, a new hurricane was identified just off the southern coast of Mexico with winds of 85 mph (140 km/h). Moving northwestward, the storm eventually made landfall near Acapulco, Mexico at this intensity. Shortly after moving over land, the storm lost its identity.

High winds and heavy rains from the storm caused moderate damage to structures and vessels throughout Acapulco, Mexico. Several roads were washed out or flooded by the storm. Seven people were killed throughout the region by the storm, including one U.S. citizen who was electrocuted by a downed power line.

Several days after Hurricane Six lost its identity over Mexico, a new tropical storm formed near the southern edge of the Gulf of California on September 20. Some forecasters stated that the system may have been the remnants of the preceding storm which regenerated. However, the Hurricane Database did not confirm this. The system tracked nearly due north, attaining maximum winds of 50 mph (85 km/h), nearing the coastline of Mexico several times. However, the storm did not make landfall during its existence. On September 22, it turned westward before dissipating just off the coast of Baja California Sur.

The fifth tropical cyclone to form or enter the central Pacific was first identified on September 25 several hundred miles south of the Hawaiian Islands. Traveling nearly due west, the storm attained an intensity of 50 mph (85 km/h) before weakening. By September 27, the storm weakened to a tropical depression and later dissipated on September 28 over open waters.

The shortest lived storm of the season, Tropical Storm Nine, formed south of Mexico on September 26. The system attained peak winds of 50 mph (85 km/h) during its existence. Later that day, the center of the storm relocated several dozen miles to the west. Shortly thereafter, the storm dissipated on September 27 over open waters.

The tenth known storm of the season was identified on October 1 several hundred miles southwest of the tip of the Baja California Peninsula. Maximum winds observed during the storm's existence reached 85 mph (140 km/h); however, no air pressure was recorded. Initially tracking westward, the system turned northwest and later northeast by October 3. After a brief acceleration on October 4, the hurricane slowed as it neared the coastline of Baja California. Early on October 5, the storm crossed the Peninsula as a Category 1 hurricane before entering the Gulf of California. The hurricane made another landfall near Navojoa, Mexico later that day. Rapid weakening took place as the storm moved over the high terrain over northern Mexico. Early on October 6, the system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over New Mexico before dissipating several hours later.

At least two people were killed after their home collapsed on them a result of the storm in Mexico. Severe cotton crop damage was reported in the Mexican states of Sonora and Baja California Sur and bridges were washed away by flood waters.

The season's eleven known storm identified several hundred miles south of Mexico on October 17. Quickly tracking northwestward, the storm attained an intensity of 85 mph (140 km/h) during its existence. Early on October 19, the hurricane turned due north, brushing the coastline of Mexico before dissipating just offshore the following day.

The strongest storm of the season, Hurricane Twelve, was first identified as a tropical depression several hundred miles southwest of Sonora, Mexico on October 20. Tracking northeastward, the system gradually intensified into a tropical storm. Late on October 21, the storm underwent a brief period of explosive intensification, strengthening from a 50 mph (85 km/h) tropical storm to a 140 mph (220 km/h) Category 4 hurricane in roughly six hours. The hurricane maintained this intensity for a further six hours before making landfall near Mazatlán. Rapid weakening took place as the hurricane moved inland, with the system dissipating during the afternoon of October 22.

Throughout the affected region, eight people were killed by the storm. Extensive property damage was reported in the region, including the complete collapse of the local baseball stadium. Power lines and telegraph wires were downed throughout the region and high winds reportedly tossed vehicles into buildings. Many shrimp trawlers sank in the storm, leaving substantial losses in Mexico's shrimping industry.
The last storm of the 1957 season, Hurricane Nina, was an unusually late-forming system. It was first identified on November 29 as a tropical storm to the southwest of Hawaii. Steadily tracking north-northeast, the storm intensified into a Category 1 hurricane, by which time it was given the name Nina. As it approached Hawaii, the National Weather Bureau issued warnings for the storm, advising residents to take precaution and possibly evacuate. However, the storm turned westward before moving over the Hawaiian Islands with winds of 85 mph (140 km/h). Gradual weakening took place as the storm continued to move over open waters. Nina eventually dissipated after turning south on December 6.

Waves up to damaged up to 50 homes across Hawaii and roughly 12 of them being destroyed on Kauai alone. One person was killed on land after being electrocuted by a downed power line. Offshore, a sampan called the "Setsu Maru" sent a distress call reporting that the boat was sinking 10 miles east of Niihau. All three people aboard the boat were reported dead as a result. In all, damage from the hurricane was estimated at $100,000.
During 1957, hurricanes that formed east of 140°W were not given names by the local warning center. Those that either crossed or formed west of that point were named by the National Weather Bureau in Honolulu, Hawaii. These names were taken from the names used for Pacific typhoons. Three names were used in 1957, they were Kanoa, Della and Nina. Due to the lack of major damage from these storms, their names were not retired. However, once the Central Pacific adopted its own naming scheme, these names were no longer used.

This is a table of the storms in 1957 and their landfall(s), if any; the table does not include storms that did not make landfall, which is defined as the center of the storm moving over a landmass. Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect (an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident), but are still storm-related. Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical or a wave or low.




</doc>
<doc id="25790707" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25790707" title="Tjunkiya Napaltjarri">
Tjunkiya Napaltjarri

Tjunkiya Napaltjarri (also known as Tjunkiya Kamayi, Tjungkiya, Tunkaii Napaltari, Kowai or Kamayi) (c. 1927–2009) was a Pintupi-speaking Indigenous artist from Australia's Western Desert region. She is the sister of artist Wintjiya Napaltjarri.

Tjunkiya's paintings are held in major public art collections, including those of the National Gallery of Australia, the Art Gallery of New South Wales, the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory and the National Gallery of Victoria.

Tjunkiya was born around 1927: the main biographical reference work for the region gives a date of circa 1927; while the Art Gallery of New South Wales suggests circa 1930. The ambiguity around the year of birth is in part because Indigenous Australians operate using a different conception of time, often estimating dates through comparisons with the occurrence of other events.

'Napaljarri' (in Warlpiri) or 'Napaltjarri' (in Western Desert dialects) is a skin name, one of sixteen used to denote the subsections or subgroups in the kinship system of central Australian Indigenous people. These names define kinship relationships that influence preferred marriage partners and may be associated with particular totems. Although they may be used as terms of address, they are not surnames in the sense used by Europeans. Thus 'Tjunkiya ' is the element of the artist's name that is specifically hers.

A Pintupi speaker, Tjunkiya was born in the area northwest of Walungurru (known as Kintore, Northern Territory), near the Western Australian border, and west of Alice Springs), after which her family moved to Haasts Bluff. She became second wife to Toba Tjakamarra, father of one of the prominent founders of the Papunya Tula art movement, Turkey Tolson Tjupurrula. At Haasts Bluff she had ten children: these included sons Billy Rowe and Riley Rowe, both of whom painted for Papunya Tula, and daughter Mitjili (born c. 1948), who married Long Tom Tjapanangka and went on to paint at Haasts Bluff. From Haasts Bluff the family moved to Papunya and in 1981 to Kintore.

Tjunkiya was the sister of artist Wintjiya Napaltjarri, who was also a wife to Toba. Seriously ill in the mid-1990s, Tjunkiya died in 2009.

Contemporary Indigenous art of the western desert began when Indigenous men at Papunya began painting in 1971, assisted by teacher Geoffrey Bardon. Their work, which used acrylic paints to create designs representing body painting and ground sculptures, rapidly spread across Indigenous communities of central Australia, particularly following the commencement of a government-sanctioned art program in central Australia in 1983. By the 1980s and 1990s, such work was being exhibited internationally. The first artists, including all of the founders of the Papunya Tula artists' company, had been men, and there was resistance amongst the Pintupi men of central Australia to women painting. However, there was also a desire amongst many of the women to participate, and in the 1990s large numbers of them began to create paintings. In the western desert communities such as Kintore, Yuendumu, Balgo, and on the outstations, people were beginning to create art works expressly for exhibition and sale.

Like a number of the other central and western desert women in the region, Tjunkiya was introduced to painting through the Minyma Tjukurrpa (Women's Dreaming) painting project in the mid-1990s. Along with sister Wintjiya and other women, she participated in a painting camp in 1994 which resulted in "a series of very large collaborative canvases of the group's shared Dreamings". Western Desert artists such as Tjunkiya frequently paint particular 'dreamings', or stories, for which they have responsibility or rights. In this case, twenty-five women were involved in planning the works, which included three canvases that were 3 metres square, as well as two that were 3 by 1.5 metres, and Tjunkiya and Wintjiya performed a ceremonial dance as part of the preparations. Tjunkiya and her sister were determined to participate in the project despite cataracts interfering with their vision. Sources differ on when Tjunkiya and her sister Wintjiya had the cataracts removed: Vivien Johnson implies around 1999, but art centre coordinator Marina Strocchi, who worked closely with the women, states that both had the operation in 1994.

In the early 2000s she and her sister painted at Kintore, but in 2008 they were working from their home: "the widows' camp outside her 'son' Turkey Tolson's former residence". Tjunkiya and her sister Wintjiya did not confine their activities to painting canvases. The National Gallery of Victoria in 2001 purchased a collaborative batik work, created in 1994 by the sisters in cooperation with several other artists, together with a work completed by Tjunkiya alone. The sisters also worked using drypoint etching, with 2004 a print by Tjunkiya – "Rumiya kutjarra #2" – held by the National Gallery of Australia.

Works by Tjunkiya are held in major private collections, such as Nangara (also known as the Ebes Collection). Her work has been acquired by the Art Gallery of New South Wales, the National Gallery of Australia, the National Gallery of Victoria, the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory, and the Northern Territory Supreme Court. Works by both Tjunkiya and her sister Wintjiya are traded in the auction market, fetching prices of a few thousand dollars.

In 1996, Tjunkiya was represented in the "Papunya Women" group exhibition at Utopia Art Gallery in Sydney, while in 2000 she had an exhibition at Melbourne's William Mora Galleries and was included in the Art Gallery of New South Wales' major exhibition, "Papunya Tula: Genesis and Genius".



</doc>
