<doc id="21728182" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21728182" title="Not All Dogs Go to Heaven">
Not All Dogs Go to Heaven

"Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" is the 11th episode of the seventh season of the American animated television series "Family Guy". It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 29, 2009. The episode was directed by Greg Colton and written by Danny Smith. In the episode, Quahog hosts its annual "Star Trek" convention and the cast members of "" are guests. After he was unable to ask the actors any questions at a Q&A session, Stewie builds a transporter in his bedroom to beam the cast over and spend the day with them. Meanwhile, Meg becomes a born-again Christian and tries to convert the atheist Brian to Christianity.

The episode garnered mixed reviews from critics and received a 4.8/7 Nielsen rating. "Star Trek: The Next Generation"s Patrick Stewart, Jonathan Frakes, Brent Spiner, LeVar Burton, Gates McFadden, Michael Dorn, Wil Wheaton, Denise Crosby, and Marina Sirtis all guest starred as themselves, and Adam West and Rob Lowe appear at the end of the episode in a live-action scene.

Meg catches the mumps when the Griffins attend Quahog's annual "Star Trek" convention, because Peter forced her to stand next to an irresponsible attendee with the mumps to take a picture, believing him to be in costume as an alien. While recovering in bed, Meg becomes a born-again Christian after watching Kirk Cameron on television and begins irritating everyone with her beliefs. Meg is horrified to learn that Brian is an atheist and attempts to convince him to repent and convert to Christianity, but he repeatedly refuses. Finally taking drastic measures, Meg spreads the word of Brian's atheism around Quahog, which generally hates atheists, making him a social outcast.

Upon being made an outcast, Brian is banned from every bar and convenience store in Quahog, making it impossible for him to drown his sorrows. Desperate, and suffering from delirium tremens (he hallucinates seeing several alcoholic beverages begging him to drink them), Brian fakes his repentance and convinces Meg to cease all hostilities against him so he can get back to drinking, but she takes him to burn books that are "harmful to God" (including "On the Origin of Species" by Charles Darwin, "A Brief History of Time" by Stephen Hawking, and a book titled "Logic for First Graders"). A disgusted Brian admits his bluff and attempts to convince Meg that what she is doing is wrong. When Meg refuses to listen, Brian points out to her that if there were truly a loving God, then he would not have created Meg to have an attractive mother like Lois but have her to more physically resemble Peter, and that she would not be brought into a world where everyone holds her in contempt. Feeling ashamed, Meg concedes to Brian's argument and apologizes for her behavior, confessing that she does not know how she can feel loved. Brian then assures her that the answers are inside herself, and the real meaning of their existence is out there somewhere. Afterward, it is revealed that the entire "Family Guy" universe takes place within the molecules of a lampshade in the shared bedroom of Adam West and Rob Lowe.

Meanwhile, furious that he did not get a chance to ask the cast of "" any questions at the convention, and the fact that the cast instead answered questions completely unrelated to "Star Trek", Stewie builds an authentic "Star Trek" transporter and beams the cast over to interview them (in a nod to the TNG episode "Skin of Evil", Denise Crosby is killed in a show of force). Stewie decides to spend the whole day with the cast, which includes stealing Cleveland's van, having lunch at McDonald's, going bowling, and going to a carnival. However, they complain about minor things and greatly annoy Stewie, who beams everyone back after stating that they have ruined "Star Trek: The Next Generation" for him.

"Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" was directed by series regular Greg Colton, in his second episode of the season (his first one being "Road to Germany"). It was written by regular writer and recurring voice actor Danny Smith, in his first episode of the season. Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors. Seth MacFarlane, "Family Guy"s creator and executive producer, is a fan of "Star Trek" and made two guest appearances as engineer Ensign Rivers on "", in "" (season 3, episode 20) and "" (season 4, episode 15). Former "" cast members have also made other appearances in "Family Guy": Patrick Stewart, for example, briefly voiced Peter Griffin (normally played by MacFarlane) in "No Meals on Wheels" (season 5, episode 14), his "American Dad!" character, Avery Bullock in "Lois Kills Stewie" (season 6, episode 5), and his "Star Trek: The Next Generation" character Captain Jean-Luc Picard in "Peter's Got Woods" (season 4, episode 11); Jonathan Frakes, Michael Dorn and Marina Sirtis also appeared in "Peter's Got Woods" as their respective "Star Trek: The Next Generation" characters William Riker, Worf, and Counsellor Deanna Troi.

"Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" features the entire original cast of "Star Trek: The Next Generation": Stewart as Captain Picard; Frakes as Riker; Gates McFadden as Doctor Beverly Crusher; Brent Spiner as Lieutenant Commander Data; Dorn as Worf; Sirtis as Troi; LeVar Burton as Chief Engineer Geordi La Forge; Wil Wheaton as Wesley Crusher; and Denise Crosby, whose character Tasha Yar died during "Star Trek: The Next Generation"s first season. It is also the first time the cast, minus Crosby, has worked together since the 2002 feature film "Star Trek Nemesis", although the actors did not meet when they recorded their speaking parts. Including Crosby, the last time that the entire cast worked together was the 1990 episode "Yesterday's Enterprise".

Wil Wheaton, who played Wesley Crusher on "", recorded his parts for the episode on September 20, 2007. Seth MacFarlane directed the recording sessions with the guest stars.

"Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" received a 4.8/7 Nielsen Rating. 

Ahsan Haque of "IGN" called the episode "surprisingly refreshing", saying the scenes with the "Star Trek" cast lived up to expectations. He also found "Meg's journey of seeking acceptance through religion" well handled. Steve Heisler of "The A.V. Club" gave the episode a C grade, criticized "Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" as boring and formulaic and stated that the writers "have no idea how to best use Meg".



</doc>
<doc id="21776705" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21776705" title="Dæmonicus">
Dæmonicus

"Dæmonicus" is the third episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series "The X-Files" and the show's 185th episode overall. It first premiered on the Fox network in the United States on December 2, 2001. The episode was written and directed by executive producer Frank Spotnitz. The episode is a "monster-of-the-week" episode, a stand-alone plot which is unconnected to the mythology, or overarching fictional history, of "The X-Files". The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 5.5 and its premiere was viewed by 5.80 million households. The episode received mixed reviews from television critics.

The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal, called X-Files; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett (Robert Patrick), Monica Reyes (Annabeth Gish), and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson). In this episode, Doggett, Reyes, and Scully investigate a series of bizarre killings that seem to be due to demonic possession but which Doggett believes is a hoax. The agents soon meet Josef Kobold (James Remar), a man who seems to be playing some sort of demonic game.

"Dæmonicus" was written by Spotnitz to develop the new settings for the show's Monster-of-the-Week episodes, as well as the series in general. One of the major steps taken was to move Scully from the X-Files office to the FBI Academy at Quantico. When creating Josef Kobold, the episode's antagonist, Spotnitz researched various crimes and criminals, until he learned about Caryl Chessman, a man who had been sentenced to death on a technical charge of kidnapping. Series co-star Robert Patrick had issues remembering and delivering his lines, due to the theme of demonic possession, which reportedly made him uneasy.

Following a bizarre double-murder with Satanic ritual overtones in Weston, West Virginia, John Doggett (Robert Patrick) and Monica Reyes (Annabeth Gish) are offered the case. Doggett and Reyes ask Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) to do an autopsy on the murder victims. The agents come to the conclusion that one of the murder victims was somehow tricked into killing his wife, while evidence at the scene points to two perpetrators. A single clue, the word "Daemonicus", is left spelled out on a Scrabble board the victims had been playing before being attacked. When Reyes claims to have felt the presence of evil, Doggett responds with great irritation. Dr. Monique Sampson calls them, saying that the murders may be connected to an escaped mental patient, Dr. Kenneth Richman, and a guard, Paul Gerlach.

Meanwhile, in a wooded area, the two perpetrators, both wearing demon masks, face each other some twenty paces apart. One of the perpetrators raises his gun and shoots the other. At the mental institution, the two agents interview Josef Kobold (James Remar), the neighbouring patient of Richman. The answers Kobold gives are unsettling for the agents, as he says that one of the perpetrators has killed again, showing them the location and warning them of "something horrible" happening there. After the dead perpetrator's body is recovered, Scully performs an autopsy and discovers that the body belongs to Gerlach.

The agents ask Kobold for help finding the remaining perpetrator. When speaking to Kobold, he suddenly speaks in a strange backward whispering and erupts in convulsions. Reyes hears the word "medicus," meaning "physician." After putting Kobold in the custody of another guard named Custer, Doggett and Reyes race to Sampson's home and find her dead, with a dozen hypodermic needles jammed into her face. During a one-on-one confrontation, Kobold taunts Doggett about his personal life before vomiting all over him. That night, the power suddenly goes out in the mental institution: Custer approaches Kobold's cell and witnesses him turning into a demon.

Doggett phones Scully to tell her that Kobold claims Richman is at an old marina near Annandale, Virginia. Scully drives there, but is attacked by Richman. When Doggett and Reyes arrive, they hear a gunshot from inside an abandoned warehouse. There, they find Richman dead. Scully explains that he was holding her at gunpoint until they arrived, then shot himself. After Scully's lecture to FBI cadets, Doggett explains to her and Reyes that Kobold planned the entire ordeal as a game and got away with it. Explaining that the word "Dae/moni/cus" was code for the chosen victims' names, in a game Kobold devised to culminate in his eventual escape from the asylum. That the "demons" angle was merely to get the X-files' involvement and that they were all thoroughly "checkmated" by Kodold. Reyes, though accepting of Doggett's theories, is still nevertheless disconcerted with the true feeling of evil that she experienced, and believes Doggett was equally out of sorts because, though loath to admit it, he too felt its presence.

"Dæmonicus" was written and directed by executive producer Frank Spotnitz, marking his third credit as a writer and first credit as director for the season. The episode also marked the second time that Spotnitz helmed an episode's directing, with the first being "Alone". "Daemonicus" is the first Monster-of-the-Week episode of season nine, meaning a stand-alone episode unconnected to the series' wider mythology; as season nine was promoted as the "new" "X-Files", it was important to develop new settings for the show. One of these new settings was to move Dana Scully from the X-Files office to the FBI Academy at Quantico. The scenes at the FBI Academy were shot at a lecture hall at UCLA. Spotnitz’s wife, Melissa, appears as one of the students in Scully’s class.

Spotnitz later called Kobold, the episode's main antagonist, "the devil, in a cell." When creating Kobold, Spotnitz researched various crimes and criminals, until he came across the name of Caryl Chessman, who had been sentenced to death on a technical charge of kidnapping. He was then able to connect the word "chessman" to the idea that, for Kobold, his crimes were all a game. Spotnitz wanted the villain to be a character that "could help", and not a character that would just tell the viewers "what "The X-Files" was again".

Series co-star Robert Patrick had issues remembering and delivering his lines due to the theme of demonic possession, which reportedly "was freaking" him out. He later explained, "It was the first time that I couldn't do my lines. Usually I would show up, and they'd always put the camera on me first [but this time] I couldn't do it."

The finished episode contains several sequences of Josef Kobold vomiting. Spotnitz had not intended the finished product to feature all the shots but the editor at that time, Chris Cooke, "cut it that way." Spotnitz felt that it "was so completely over the top." To create the shots, the production crew used tubes which supplied the faux vomit. The tubes were discreetly fitted to actor James Remar's mouth. Remar, in turn, only had to open his mouth during the shooting of the sequence. Spotnitz later joked that he had "a thing for vomiting".

"Dæmonicus" first premiered on the Fox network in the United States on December 2, 2001. The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5.5, meaning that it was seen by 5.5% of the nation's estimated households and was viewed by 5.80 million households. "Dæmonicus" was the 68th most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending December 2. The episode later aired in the United Kingdom on BBC One on November 17, 2002.

The episode received mixed reviews from television critics. Jessica Morgan of Television Without Pity gave the episode a "C" grade rating. Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated the episode one-and-a-half stars out of five. The two criticized Spotnitz "attention seeking direction", citing the "strange cross fades" and "exaggerated camera angles" as detractors. Furthermore, they were critical about the story, writing that it was "all over the place". Ultimately, Shearman and Pearson concluded that the entry was an example of "this new season [needing] to try a little harder" in order to become a success.

Zack Handlen of "The A.V. Club" gave the episode a "C–" and wrote that while the episode had a lot of gruesome moments, such as the corpses with snakes inside of them and the gristly murders, the "meandering structure, over-emphasized grimness, and deadening pace render all of these elements inert". He also felt that, after "Nothing Important Happened Today"—which he called a "snooze-fest"—"Daemonicus" was a "disheartening [way] to get back to monster of the week episodes". Other reviews were more positive. M.A. Crang, in his book "Denying the Truth: Revisiting The X-Files after 9/11", said the episode was "sluggishly paced" but praised the "wonderfully tense atmosphere" and Spotnitz's "stylish directing choices". In a season review, Michelle Kung from "Entertainment Weekly" called the episode "worthy", but noted that it was overshadowed by the show's "ludicrous conspiracy plots".




</doc>
<doc id="21792590" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21792590" title="SS Merion">
SS Merion

SS "Merion" was an ocean liner built in 1902 for the American Line, a subsidiary line of the International Mercantile Marine (IMM). She also sailed for the Red Star Line and the Dominion Line—both subsidiary lines of IMM—during her passenger career. After the outbreak of World War I she was bought by the British Admiralty and converted to serve as a decoy resembling the Royal Navy battlecruiser . In May 1915, while posing as "Tiger" in the Aegean Sea, "Merion" was sunk by the German submarine .

"Merion" was built by John Brown & Company of Clydebank, Scotland for the American Line, a subsidiary of the International Navigation Company, and launched on 26 November 1901. The ship was long (between perpendiculars) and abeam. She had a gross register tonnage (GRT) of 11,621. The ship had twin screw propellers powered by twin triple-expansion steam engines, and, at top speed, could move . As built, "Merion" had accommodations for 150 second- and 1,700 third-class passengers. "Merion" was named after a suburb of Philadelphia, PA, as was her sister ship, the "SS Haverford". The towns were home to Clement Griscom, Director of the International Navigation Company. 

Upon completion, the ship was chartered to the Dominion Line, a subsidiary line of International Mercantile Marine (IMM) with which International Navigation had merged in 1902. The liner sailed for Dominion on her maiden voyage on 8 March 1902 from Liverpool to Boston. After completing eleven voyages on that route, "Merion" was returned to the American Line in March 1903. The following month she began sailing on the Liverpool–Philadelphia route on which she sailed most of the rest of her passenger career. She was briefly chartered to the Red Star Line in 1907 for one Antwerp–New York voyage.

The liner had several mishaps during her passenger career. On 2 March 1903, an article in "The Washington Post" reported that "Merion" had run aground shortly after leaving Queenstown while en route to Liverpool from Boston. The ship was freed from her perch near Chicago Knoll by the rising tide, but when she got underway again became stuck fast in almost the same spot. At press time, two British Admiralty tugs had been dispatched to free the ship. Almost exactly a year later, "Merion" collided with the steamer "Clan Grant" off Tuskar Rock on 30 March 1904 and was damaged. On 24 December 1912, "Merion" collided with a tanker off the Delaware coast and sustained damage which included two flooded compartments. The ship was beached below Cross Ledge, but was refloated and made way under her own power back to Philadelphia, after discharging her cargo and passengers.

After the outbreak of World War I in Europe, "Merion" was equipped with four guns for defensive purposes. "Merion" was the subject of a protest by the German Consul at Philadelphia, when she docked at that port equipped with those guns, counter to rules regarding armed ships in neutral ports. The still-neutral United States required that the guns be removed before they would allow "Merion" to sail; her guns were stowed belowdecks when she departed Philadelphia on 5 September 1914. "Merion"s final voyage on the Liverpool–Philadelphia route began on 31 October, after which she was sold to the British Admiralty.

"Merion" was employed as part of a program that disguised ocean liners to resemble Royal Navy capital ships. "Merion" was patterned after the British battlecruiser and deployed in the Mediterranean. For this duty, the liner was equipped with canvas-and-wood replicas of "Tiger"s guns, and her crew had to stow them whenever approached by neutral ships. The ship was also overloaded with ballast to make the ship ride lower in the water to match the profile of the real "Tiger".

On 29 May 1915, the German submarine , apparently tempted by the prospect of sinking a British battlecruiser, allowed five loaded transports to sail past before launching a torpedo attack on "Merion". One torpedo from "UB-8" struck the liner and exploded, sending some of the "cement and stones" used as ballast into the air. Some of "Merion"s crew that were knocked overboard by the explosion were able to float ashore on nearby Strati Island on remnants of the liner's false guns. Despite being severely overloaded, "Merion" did not immediately sink, remaining afloat more than 24 hours before finally succumbing to the attack on 31 May. Four crew were killed during the. "Merion"s sinking.


</doc>
<doc id="21845408" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21845408" title="Blaine Anderson">
Blaine Anderson

Blaine Devon Anderson is a fictional character from the American musical comedy-drama television series "Glee". Played by Darren Criss, Blaine was introduced in the sixth episode of the second season as the openly gay lead singer of the Dalton Academy Warblers, a rival show choir to New Directions, the show's primary musical group. Blaine initially served as a mentor for New Directions member Kurt Hummel (Chris Colfer). Chemistry between the two, combined with fan support for the couple, led series co-creator Ryan Murphy to pair them romantically. Their relationship has been well received by critics, and they have been named "one of the most beloved TV couples of the millennium" by Jarett Wieselman of the "New York Post". At the beginning of the third season, Blaine transfers to McKinley High and joins New Directions; concurrently, Criss was promoted from recurring guest star to the show's main cast.

Criss auditioned for "Glee" several times before being cast as Blaine, including for the lead role of Finn Hudson. He believed he would be ill-suited to that character, but identifies with Blaine, having been raised among the "gay community". He plays Blaine as charismatic and confident, and finds his youthful self-acceptance a fitting counterpoint to common media portrayals of gay characters.

As the Warblers' lead vocalist and subsequent New Directions member, Blaine has performed a number of songs on the television series. His first, a cover version of "Teenage Dream" by Katy Perry, became the fastest-selling "Glee" single, reached number eight on the "Billboard" Hot 100, and was certified gold in the U.S. Tracks by the Warblers have sold over 1.3 million copies. The songs became popular enough to warrant a Warbler soundtrack album, "". Blaine has received mostly positive reviews from critics; Criss has been awarded a Rising Star accolade from the Gay and Lesbian Entertainment Critics Association for his portrayal. While the Blaine–Kurt ("Klaine") relationship has been met with acclaim, an episode storyline in which Blaine questioned his sexuality attracted negative reviews for undermining his previous characterization as a confident gay teenager.

Blaine Anderson is introduced in the episode "Never Been Kissed" as the lead soloist of the Dalton Academy Warblers a cappella musical group. He meets Kurt Hummel (Chris Colfer), a member of the rival glee club New Directions. When Kurt asks if Blaine is gay, Blaine matter-of-factly says he is; Kurt tells Blaine that he is being bullied at school for being gay, and Blaine reveals that he too was harassed at his old school, so he transferred to Dalton Academy, which enforces a no-bullying policy. Blaine befriends Kurt, and helps him stand up to his tormentor, Dave Karofsky (Max Adler). When the threats and violence against Kurt reach a dangerous level, he transfers to Dalton Academy. He falls in love with Blaine, who is initially oblivious to Kurt's feelings even as their friendship grows. Blaine enlists Kurt's help to serenade his crush Jeremiah (Alexander Nifong), the assistant manager at a local Gap store. Jeremiah is subsequently fired and rebuffs Blaine. Kurt confesses his feelings, and Blaine tells Kurt that he cares for him, but is terrible at romance and does not want to risk damaging their friendship.

Kurt and Blaine attend a party hosted by New Directions co-captain Rachel Berry (Lea Michele). The attendees play spin the bottle, which results in Rachel and Blaine kissing. In the aftermath, Blaine wonders whether he might be bisexual, and goes on a date with Rachel. When she kisses him again while they are both sober, he concludes that he is indeed gay, which relieves Kurt.

After learning of Kurt’s ignorance of sexual matters, Blaine visits Kurt's father, Burt (Mike O'Malley), and prompts him to give Kurt "the talk" about sex. As the Warblers prepare to perform at the Regional show choir competition, Kurt admits that he is jealous of how many solos Blaine gets. At a subsequent group meeting, Kurt arrives late and announces that the group's mascot canary is dead; he sings "Blackbird" in honor of the bird. While Kurt is singing, Blaine has a revelation, and later tells Kurt that he reciprocates his feelings and kisses him. At Regionals, the two sing a duet of "Candles" by Hey Monday. The Warblers lose to New Directions, but while Kurt is very disappointed, Blaine tells him that even though they lost, in reality, they won each other which makes losing Regionals worth it. After Kurt transfers back to McKinley, he invites Blaine to be his date at his junior prom in "Prom Queen"; both are shocked when Kurt wins Prom Queen due to having received an overwhelming number of unwanted write-in votes in the secret balloting. Karofsky, the Prom King, leaves to avoid dancing with a guy in the traditional dance between King and Queen, and Kurt dances with Blaine instead. After Kurt returns from Nationals in New York, he and Blaine admit their love for one another.

In the first episode of the third season, "The Purple Piano Project", Blaine transfers to McKinley High at the beginning of his junior year to be closer to Kurt, who is a senior, and joins New Directions. He later auditions for the role of Bernardo in the school musical "West Side Story", so as not to compete against Kurt who wants to play the male lead, Tony, but is cast as Tony himself. In the episode "The First Time", Blaine is pursued by Sebastian Smythe (Grant Gustin), a new Dalton Academy Warbler. Kurt and Blaine meet up with Sebastian at a gay bar, Blaine gets drunk, and afterward tries to get Kurt to have sex with him in the car. Kurt refuses, they have a fight, and Blaine decides to walk home. After the "West Side Story" opening night, they apologize to each other, and decide to go to Blaine's house. They are later shown in bed together, apparently having just had sex for the first time. When New Directions and the Warblers informally compete in "Michael" to determine which club can perform Michael Jackson's music at the upcoming show choir Regionals, Sebastian throws a slushie containing rock salt at Kurt, but Blaine interposes himself and is hit in the eye; his cornea is badly scratched and requires surgery. His eye heals, and he is back in time for New Directions to defeat the Warblers at Regionals. Blaine's older brother Cooper (Matt Bomer), a successful actor in commercials, visits Ohio, and the two achieve a rapprochement. Blaine's relationship with Kurt is later strained when Kurt text-flirts with a boy he met while preparing for his NYADA audition, and by Kurt's eagerness to leave for New York after graduation, which would separate the two at least until Blaine graduated the following year. The two patch things up, the glee club wins at Nationals, and the pair is still a couple at the end of the school year, though Blaine is still uneasy about the prolonged physical separation facing them.

In the first episode of the fourth season, "The New Rachel", Blaine becomes the lead singer of New Directions and successfully prompts Kurt to follow his New York City dreams. In addition, Blaine successfully runs for senior class president with Sam (Chord Overstreet), and the two subsequently develop a friendship. Kurt inadvertently pulls away from Blaine due to his Vogue.com internship; distraught and feeling isolated from his friends, Blaine cheats on Kurt. After confessing to Kurt of his infidelity, Kurt severs all ties. New Directions' Nationals trophy is stolen by Hunter Clarington (Nolan Gerard Funk), the new captain of the Dalton Academy Warblers. When Blaine goes to Dalton Academy to retrieve it, Hunter and Sebastian attempt to seduce Blaine into returning to the Warblers. Blaine becomes conflicted, believing that he does not belong in New Directions. Sam ultimately convinces him that, despite having done a bad thing to Kurt, Blaine is still a good person and an important member of New Directions.

Kurt begins to mend their relationship in "Thanksgiving", just before New Directions loses at Sectionals to the Warblers, and they spend Christmas together in New York City. Though he and Kurt continue to be on good terms, Blaine finds himself developing a crush on his best friend, Sam, which he knows will come to nothing as he knows Sam is not gay; the two of them team up to find evidence that the Warblers cheated at Sectionals, which means New Directions will be competing at Regionals. He ends up going to the Sadie Hawkins dance with Tina Cohen-Chang (Jenna Ushkowitz), who has developed a crush on him, but as friends only. When Kurt comes to Lima for the wedding of glee club director Will (Matthew Morrison) and Emma (Jayma Mays)—which Emma flees—he and Blaine make out beforehand, and sleep together afterward, though they do not resume a permanent relationship.

Blaine had briefly joined the Cheerios when it looked like New Directions would be disbanding after their Sectionals loss, and cheerleading coach Sue (Jane Lynch) blackmails Blaine into rejoining; Blaine and Sam hatch up a plan to bring Sue down from the inside. Blaine eventually confesses to Sam that he has feelings for him, to which Sam assures him that he is somewhat flattered by Blaine's honesty and attraction, and that it would not change the fact that Blaine is still Sam's best friend. Blaine still loves Kurt and asks Burt for his permission to propose to Kurt, but Burt tells him they're too young to marry, and advises him to wait. Blaine remains determined, however, and while shopping for a ring, he meets Jan (Patty Duke), a lesbian jeweler who has been with her partner Liz (Meredith Baxter) for over thirty years. Jan offers to be a mentor to him, and Blaine and Kurt later have dinner with Jan and Liz, where Jan and Liz explain how their relationship evolved over the years and their experience with the growing mainstream acceptance of gay people. New Directions wins at Regionals, and Will and Emma get married immediately afterward, with the glee club, plus some graduates including Kurt, in attendance. Blaine is shown, after the ceremony is over, holding a jewelry box behind his back.

In the season premiere, "Love Love Love", Blaine and Kurt agree to be boyfriends again. Blaine still wants to marry Kurt, and stages an elaborate and successful marriage proposal at Dalton Academy where he and Kurt first met, accompanied by New Directions, and all their rival show choir groups, including the Warblers. He auditions for NYADA and is accepted. New Directions comes in second at Nationals, and is disbanded by Sue for not being champions. Blaine graduates as class valedictorian, and then moves to New York to be with Kurt. They start off living together, but though they remain engaged, Blaine ultimately moves out because the two of them realize they still need their own space. The relationship between them goes through rocky patches, including Blaine's insecurity when Kurt becomes popular at school, and when an influential socialite and NYADA supporter hears Blaine perform and takes an interest in his future career, though she is not impressed by Kurt and ultimately tries to break them up, though she fails and ultimately supports them both. Their engagement is strengthened by having weathered these storms, and Blaine moves back in with Kurt.

Blaine returns to Lima after Kurt ended their engagement, having become so despondent that his schoolwork suffered and he was cut by NYADA. He becomes the coach of the Dalton Academy Warblers, and begins dating Dave Karofsky after a chance encounter at the local gay bar. Kurt, having realized he still loves Blaine and regretting that he ended the engagement, arranges for his NYADA off-campus semester to be in Lima, helping Rachel to coach a reinstated New Directions—Will had left McKinley High to coach Vocal Adrenaline. Unfortunately, by the time he arrives, Blaine and Karofsky are already a couple, and there is further strain between Kurt and Blaine as coaches of rival show choirs. In "The Hurt Locker, Part Two", Sue, who "ships Klaine" and is desperate for Kurt and Blaine to reunite, locks them both in a fake elevator and refuses to let them leave until they kiss. After resisting for a great many hours, Blaine and Kurt share a passionate kiss, but do not reunite afterward. In "Transitioning", Blaine sings a duet with Kurt, "Somebody Loves You", and afterward, kisses Kurt. The following day, Blaine, knowing that he is still in love with Kurt, breaks up with Karofsky; however, Kurt is still seeing an older man, Walter. In "A Wedding", Kurt tells Walter that he is going to Brittany and Santana's wedding with Blaine, not him, and on Walter's advice, returns to Blaine; the two again become a couple. At the wedding, Brittany insists that Kurt and Blaine get married alongside her and Santana. Though skeptical at first, Kurt and Blaine agree and get married, with Burt officiating the joint ceremony. Dalton Academy burns down in "The Rise and Fall of Sue Sylvester", and the Warblers who transfer to McKinley are accepted into New Directions, with Blaine joining Rachel and Kurt as the coaches of the combined glee club. In the series finale, "Dreams Come True", after New Directions wins Nationals, Blaine and Kurt leave for New York, with Blaine attending NYU and Kurt returning to NYADA along with a reinstated Rachel. The episode jumps ahead to 2020, and Blaine and Kurt are shown to be actors and a celebrity married couple; they also visit schools to entertain and talk about acceptance. Rachel, who is married to Jesse, is pregnant with Blaine and Kurt's child.

Blaine is portrayed by actor Darren Criss, who had auditioned for "Glee" several times for several roles before the character Blaine was created. He originally auditioned to play Finn Hudson. Criss made several audition videos for "Glee", of which he posted only one to the social networking website MySpace where he sang a cover of Bill Withers' song "Lean on Me". Although the series writers have seen them, he considers them supplemental to his main audition, which was for series creator Ryan Murphy. Murphy had not seen any of Criss's previous auditions, but knew he was the right actor for Blaine as soon as he saw this one. The actor cut his long hair before auditioning, to suit the "serious and preppy" role.

Prior to the production of season two, rumors circulated that upcoming episodes would feature a love interest for Kurt. Initial fan and media speculation suggested that Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet) was created to fill this role; however, according to Overstreet, Sam's storyline quickly paired him with Quinn Fabray (Dianna Agron) as a result of the chemistry the producers detected between him and Agron. In September 2010, it was confirmed that Criss would join the show in a "much-talked-about new gay role". Media speculation suggested that Blaine would be Kurt's new love interest. His original character description was: "a cute and charismatic gay student from a rival Glee club named the Dalton Academy Warblers—will maintain a strictly platonic friendship with McKinley High's most out and proud pupil. But could that change as the season progresses? Yes, it could." Murphy stated that Blaine's arc would be a significant one. He explained, "He sort of becomes Kurt's mentor and then maybe love [...] Kurt really admires him and respects him."

Following his first few appearances, it was reported that Criss had been confirmed as a series regular for the remainder of season two and for season three of "Glee". This was based on comments by Murphy, who said: "Darren has become such a sensation in one week, which I love. I think there's a hunger for him and a positive relationship role model. He’ll definitely continue through the year and longer." However, the actor later denied that his role had been upgraded and said: "It's never really been officially confirmed to me. I think the option is there and that they want to keep Blaine around." Murphy revealed that Blaine may join New Directions during the third season. Criss hoped that this would not come to pass, as he enjoys being at Dalton Academy, but conceded: "it's not my call. I'm happy to serve whatever story they want." For the third season of "Glee", Criss was promoted to a series regular, and Blaine did join New Directions when he transferred to McKinley High to be with Kurt.

Upon Blaine's first appearance, Criss described his character as being a "very charismatic, put-together, composed guy." He stated that although Blaine is gay, he is not "overly queeny, and not too butch either," and that while his sexuality is a "huge part of who he is", it is not a major facet of how he wishes to be perceived. Due to similarities which stem from their shared sexuality, Blaine "sees a lot of himself in Kurt, in terms of experiences and the way they feel about the world around them. He feels the need to impart his knowledge, be a source of strength for him, and really help him through what he's going through." Initially, Criss felt that the most important element of his character was to give Kurt "someone he can relate to", and demonstrate that Kurt could have "a young out male friend, a support system".

Criss discussed his personal connection with Blaine in an interview with "Vanity Fair". He explained that he grew up among the "gay community", being with theater performers, so was raised without a concept of sexuality being an issue. Criss stated that, although he identifies as straight, "it really doesn't come into play with me in this role. As an actor, your objective is always to play the scene. And this in case, he happens to be a gay teen." Talk show host and media personality Ellen DeGeneres deemed Blaine "a very confident gay teen, which is something you don't see much on television." However, Amy Reiter of the "Los Angeles Times" assessed that "despite the image he projects, he, too, is just a kid trying to figure things out as he goes along." Criss feels that Blaine's confidence is an important aspect of his character, as it is rare for gay teenagers on television to be so "sure of themselves." He hopes that "all the kids struggling with this issue can look to a guy like Blaine and feel [inspired] by his confidence."

The Kurt–Blaine relationship, sometimes referred to by the portmanteau "Klaine" by "Glee" fans and the media, developed slowly. As the series showrunner, Murphy felt tasked with keeping the two apart as long as possible. He was initially unsure whether the relationship would become a romantic one, and intended to gauge public response to their friendship before planning future developments. He commented, "Part of me thinks he should be the boyfriend, part of me thinks he should just be the mentor. I didn't want to decide that until we got into sort of the middle of the season." In December 2010, Colfer said, "Fans really want it to happen. It's funny how many people want to see these boys hook up. We'll see." Based on the characters' chemistry and the "immediate outcry" from fans who wanted to see them as a couple, Murphy decided to have Blaine become Kurt's love interest. Criss noted: "We all want to see Kurt happy, and like all great love stories, if you have two people that can be together you've got to hold it up."

Considering Blaine and Kurt's potential future together, Murphy planned to treat them the same as all other "Glee" relationships, by making their pairing "as flawed and as exposed as everyone else's." This sentiment was re-iterated by executive producer Brad Falchuk, after the characters kissed for the first time. He revealed that their relationship would not run smoothly, and observed that once couples start dating, "Everything goes to hell." Colfer suggested that Kurt returning to McKinley may cause difficulties in their relationship, but noted "Distance makes the heart grow fonder, right? That’s what they tell me. So even if they do go through some bumps in the road, it would be very realistic." In a Q&A with Billboard on the day "Born This Way" ran with Kurt's McKinley return, Criss stated that Blaine and Kurt were "in the honeymoon stages" of their relationship, and would still be "at the end of the [second] season".

In a July 2012 interview with "E! News", Colfer said, "I would like to do something besides say 'I love you,' and I think Darren [Criss] and I agree on that. We're ready for the next step. They've been together for a while. Let's throw some spice and drama into that." Colfer quipped that he did not know what was in store for the couple, "I hear mixed things. I hear they're still together but then maybe they're breaking up." In September 2012, Criss seconded Colfer, "We're like an old married couple now. Let's shake it up!"

In the second season episode "Sexy", Blaine reveals he has a strained relationship with his father.

As Blaine, Criss features in many musical performances, which have been released as singles, available for download. His first performance, "Teenage Dream" by Katy Perry, was featured on the soundtrack album "". It reached number eight on the "Billboard" Hot 100 in the week ending November 27, 2010, and was the best-selling song in the U.S. that week, selling 214,000 copies: the largest figure for a "Glee" title. It was only the second U.S.-certified gold single in the show's history. Both "Billboard" Jillian Mapes and Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" deemed "Teenage Dream" the best song of "Never Been Kissed", the episode in which it featured. The "Daily News" Anthony Benigno gave the song an "A", and noted that it was "flawless" and improved on Perry's original. The performance was nominated for the Best Gay Moment of the Year and Favorite Music Video awards at the 2010 "AfterElton.com" Visibility Awards. A "Billboard" cover-feature on Criss noted that the performance "arguably ushered in the trend of more current pop hits being reworked by the ["Glee"] cast."

Later songs performed by Blaine and the Warblers became popular enough to warrant a Warbler soundtrack album, "Glee: The Music Presents the Warblers". The tracks had sold over 1.3 million copies as singles by the time the album was released. Blaine performed the lead vocal on covers of Train's "Hey, Soul Sister", which peaked at number 32 in Canada, "Bills, Bills, Bills" by Destiny's Child, which reached number 44 in the U.S., and Robin Thicke's "When I Get You Alone", which got to number 47 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. Criss downplayed his performance of "Bills, Bills, Bills", and jested that he ought to issue the group's lead singer, Beyoncé Knowles, an apology for his cover. Blaine also led on "Silly Love Songs" by Wings, and Maroon 5's "Misery", which reached 45 and 52 respectively in the U.S., and Pink's "Raise Your Glass", which peaked at number 30 in Australia.

Blaine duetted with Kurt on Frank Loesser's "Baby, It's Cold Outside", which was included on "" and reached number 53 in Canada. It was reportedly the most downloaded track of the album, and called "by far the gayest thing that has ever been on TV" by Colfer. Murphy expressed his pride in the number for "push[ing] the envelope a bit." Jessica Ronayne of "Zap2it" called the duet one of the Christmas episode's few saving graces. Blaine and Kurt also duetted on Neon Trees' "Animal" and Hey Monday's "Candles", which peaked at 62 and 71 in the U.S. respectively. In an April 2011 interview, Criss stated that he did not feel established enough within the cast to make song suggestions, but had mentioned liking "Animal" to Murphy, who included it in a script soon thereafter. Blaine shared a duet of "Don't You Want Me" by The Human League with Rachel, which Reiter deemed a musical highlight of the episode "Blame It on the Alcohol". It was included on "", and peaked at number 44 in Australia.

Over the course of the season, Blaine's musical performances leading the Warblers became so prevalent that he was called out for it on-screen. Criss offered the insight: "Blaine definitely had his moment in the sun. I think it's time to focus back on the characters that fans of the show really know and love. Completely objectively from watching the show, I was like, 'Why does Blaine get all these songs? This is ridiculous. I want to hear other people doing stuff.' I think we're focusing a little more back on New Directions and taking a little bit of a break from the Warblers."

In the first episode of season three of "Glee", "The Purple Piano Project", Blaine sings "It's Not Unusual" by Tom Jones when he transfers to McKinley and quits the Warblers for New Directions. After successfully auditioning later in the season for the school's production of "West Side Story" with "Something's Coming" from the musical, he sings "Tonight" in rehearsal and "One Hand, One Heart" in performance, both with his co-star Rachel. He sings lead or co-lead on several songs with New Directions, including "Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)"; "Perfect" and "Let It Snow! Let It Snow! Let It Snow!" with Kurt; "Control" and "Man in the Mirror" with Artie and others; and his first original song, the duet "Extraordinary Merry Christmas", with Rachel.

In special tribute episode to Michael Jackson, "Michael", Blaine sings "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'". Futterman wrote that Blaine's "slick showmanship" made him a "natural for lead vocals", and "TVLine"s Michael Slezak called it "the best use of Darren Criss' voice on Glee in quite some time" and gave it an "A−". "Entertainment Weekly" Joseph Brannigan Lynch also gave it an "A−", and said Criss "captured the excitement and the spunky bravado of the original". MTV's Kevin P. Sullivan was another fan of "the sheer awesomeness of Darren Criss" on the song, and characterized it as "a tribute that's more respectful than any other in the episode".
In the fourteenth episode of the third season, "On My Way", Blaine performs "Cough Syrup" by Young the Giant, which is sung during the Dave Karofsky suicide sequence. Futterman said Blaine "flawlessly deliver[ed] the vocal". Lynch called it a "chilling rendition" that was "hard to shake" and gave it an the same grade given by Slezak, who wrote, "taken on its own, Blaine's vocal was strong and passionate—perhaps better than the original". Bobby Hankinson of the "Houston Chronicle" said it was the "best" of the episode, and added that the "scene was really, really well done and carried maximum emotional punch". In the following episode, "Big Brother", Blaine shares a duet of Gotye's "Somebody That I Used to Know" with his brother Cooper (Matt Bomer). Crystal Bell of "HuffPost TV" called it the "highlight of the episode", and it was Hankinson's favorite performance: "Bomer and Criss did a fantastic job bringing it to life". Futterman said that "it was initially disconcerting to envision" two brothers singing about a "former love", but she noted that it "was less weird in context". In its first week, the cover sold 152,000 digital downloads in the US, and was number twenty-six on the "Billboard" Hot 100.

Blaine has received mostly positive reviews from television critics. Ellen DeGeneres praised Criss's portrayal, and described him as one of "Glee" breakout stars. "Entertainment Weekly" named him one of the breakout stars of 2010, with the comment: "It took about 2 minutes and 11 seconds on "Glee" for Darren Criss to turn into a bona fide Gleek phenomenon. [...] And it doesn't hurt that his character Blaine's warm relationship with the show's other openly gay character, Chris Colfer's Kurt, continues to resonate with fans." In November 2010, the publication also named Criss the series' best guest-star to date, and praised him for "seamlessly entering the fold with his charm and great voice." Ronayne deemed him "a much better addition to the show than Chord Overstreet". Following his "Glee" debut, Criss won the We're Wilde About You Rising Star Award at the 2011 Dorian Awards, presented by the Gay and Lesbian Entertainment Critics Association. He also won the 2011 Teen Choice Award for Choice TV Breakout Star.

Indecision over his sexuality in the episode "Blame It on the Alcohol" drew some negative reviews of Blaine. Reiter noted that, "So much of Blaine's charm has been his certainty about who he is." Though she found his subplot with Rachel "fun", she commented: "Blaine's overwrought speech in the coffee shop after Rachel asks him out just felt off-key. Saying 'bye' to the Blaine sexual-confusion storyline wouldn't make us angry at all." Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" also criticised the storyline, which, he wrote, "seemed like it might be an interesting, complicated look at teenage sexuality and how it can seem formed but might be more fluid than most teens would give it credit for, then lost its nerve and took the easy way out." "AfterElton.com" Chris O'Guinn felt that the only aspect of the storyline handled acceptably was Blaine questioning whether he was bisexual, rather than outright straight. He criticized the shallow examination of his feelings, and wrote: "Bisexuality is such a contentious issue that it should not be fumbled this way. For a character to say 'maybe I'm bi' in one scene and then the next say, 'nope, definitely gay' is almost cruel in how dismissive it is toward bisexuals by trivializing the intense confusion that many bisexual people feel in coming to terms with their orientation." In a more positive review, Canning opined that Blaine and Kurt's conversation about sexuality was "great". He was "glad it wasn't an easy talk for either of them" and said that it "felt very real for kids in this situation."
Blaine and Kurt's relationship has been generally well received. They were named Favorite TV Couple at the 2010 "AfterElton.com" Visibility Awards, and have been lauded for "leading the way" in representing gay teenagers on television by "Entertainment Weekly". Jarett Wieselman of the "New York Post" referred to them as "one of the most beloved TV couples of the millennium". When they "finally solidified what their relationship actually is" in the episode "Silly Love Songs", "IGN" Robert Canning noted that his opinion of Blaine improved. He commented: "I love that the [serenading of Jeremiah] blew up in Blaine's face. The character has always come off to me as annoyingly arrogant, but "Silly Love Songs" humanized the guy. Guess I may have to like him now." Their first kiss, in the episode "Original Song", was met with critical acclaim. Mark Perigard of "The Boston Herald" wrote, "It was utterly, sweetly romantic, and Criss sold the hell out of the moment. It's long overdue and it will silence the growing legion of critics out there who were unhappy with the pace of this story." "Entertainment Weekly" Mandi Bierly was so impressed with the scene that she was initially concerned it may be a dream sequence, "because we don't get romantic, unapologetic first kisses like that between young gay characters on network TV." She wrote, "Relationships aren't easy. They’ll make mistakes. But if they stay true to themselves, and continue to be as open and honest with each other, we're in for something special." Kevin Fallon of "The Atlantic" thought the kiss was "sweet", and stated that he was pleased that it attracted no controversy whatsoever. Aly Semigran of MTV praised the interaction between Blaine and Kurt. She called the kiss scene a "sweet, real and, shockingly, un-hyped moment", and praised Criss and Colfer for "handl[ing] it with dignity and honesty".

While Lesley Goldberg of "The Hollywood Reporter" was pleased Blaine's season three transfer to McKinley in the first episode increased Criss' screen time with Colfer and the New Directions cast, she stated that the move "screams of co-dependency." In contrast, "Entertainment Weekly" Abby West found it romantic, and noted: "Blaine and Kurt, with their budding love and witty, pseudo-urbane ways, are my favorite couple to watch. ... I look forward to hearing [Blaine] sing more, watching him bump up against the insular Glee clubbers, and seeing him show off his non-uniform attire". Several reviewers were unhappy with the second episode's revelation that Blaine was a junior, not a senior like Kurt, as had been implied in the previous season. VanDerWerff wrote that Blaine "seems to have simultaneously gotten younger and had a complete personality transplant over the summer", "Billboard" Rae Votta noted "the continuity-bending plot point that he's somehow a Junior and not a Senior like his boyfriend", and Samantha Urban of "The Dallas Morning News" allowed her exasperation to show: "Oh really, "Glee"? Blaine's a junior? Blaine's younger than Kurt? Fine. FINE."

Kurt and Blaine make the decision to have sex for the first time in "The First Time" episode; many critics were enthusiastic about the fact that a gay couple was being given such a storyline. Canning said that Kurt and Blaine's "attempts to get a little wild", and "trying to grow up faster than they should", were "the better parts of the episode as they felt the most realistic". Futterman praised their departure from the bar as a "very faithful and honest scene". VanDerWerff and BuddyTV contributor John Kubicek both had issues with Blaine's characterization. The latter asserted that he "just behaves however the writers need him to behave in order for the scene to work", while the former said that Blaine's season three storyline "hasn’t been bad by any means, but it does feel like Darren Criss is playing someone who’s quite a bit different from the guy he was playing last season". Bell was impressed by the way the characters' relationship "inspires gay youth in a way that we haven't seen on network television yet" and called them "amazing role models for all teens", and "The Atlantic" writer Kevin Fallon said it was "remarkable" and a "milestone" that "the decision by gay teen characters to lose their virginities is given equal weight to that of a straight couple".

Discussing public response to his character, Criss stated that he particularly enjoyed comments from "people from parts of the world who are maybe not as exposed to certain ideologies", but had reconsidered their stance on relationships and human rights as a result of the Blaine–Kurt storyline. He called this response "phenomenal", and said: "I was a straight kid growing up in a very gay community and it's something that I've had to watch so many friends have to struggle with and have no place to go to identify in kind of a grander media culture. To be a small piece of that machine is incredibly wonderful."


</doc>
<doc id="21987337" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21987337" title="Evan Turner">
Evan Turner

Evan Marcel Turner (born October 27, 1988) is an American professional basketball player for the Portland Trail Blazers of the National Basketball Association (NBA). He was drafted second overall by the Philadelphia 76ers in the 2010 NBA draft and played for them until he was traded in February 2014 to the Indiana Pacers. Turner plays the point guard, shooting guard and small forward positions.

Turner was a first-team 2010 NCAA Men's Basketball All-American and the 2010 National Player of the Year while playing at Ohio State University. Turner was also a two-time Big Ten Conference scoring champion and the 2010 Big Ten Conference Men's Basketball Player of the Year. He was twice the only player named as a unanimous first-team selection by both the coaches and the media to the All-Big Ten team (2008–09, 2009–10). By finishing first in scoring and second in both rebounds and assists in the conference in the 2009–10 season, he was the first men's basketball player to finish in the top two in each of these categories and the first to finish in the top five in each category in the same season. He is the conference record-holder for most career and single-season record for Conference Player of the Week awards.

Turner attended St. Joseph High School in Westchester, Illinois. By his senior season, he was one of the top high school basketball players at his position in the nation. As a true freshman, he helped lead the Buckeyes to the 2008 National Invitation Tournament championship. The following year, he was the Big Ten Conference scoring champion for the 2008–09 season and was a first-team 2009 All-Big Ten selection. That season, he was also an honorable mention All-American and was selected as a member of the 2009 All-Big Ten Conference Tournament team, and he became one of five Big Ten players to have been among the top ten in the conference in average points, rebounds, and assists in the same season. He is the conference record-holder for most career Player of the Week awards and despite missing over a month of his junior season for the 2009–10 Ohio State Buckeyes men's basketball team he also set the single-season record for Player of the Week awards. As a pro, he has participated in the Rising Stars Challenge and helped the 76ers reach the NBA playoffs in his first two NBA seasons. During his third season he became an everyday starter. With an impending free agent status, he was traded to Indiana during his fourth season.

Turner was born weighing . Within his first year, he endured chicken pox, pneumonia, asthma, and measles. The 1989 Chicago measles epidemic caused Turner to desperately need emergency room services. He encountered severe breathing problems that required the removal of his adenoids and tonsils. At the age of three, he was hit by a car, resulting in a concussion and stitches. Oversized baby teeth and an overbite caused a speech impediment that necessitated speech therapy.

Before high school, Turner and fellow NBA player Iman Shumpert were teammates on the 8th grade basketball team at Gwendolyn Brooks Middle School in Oak Park, Illinois. He played in the Summer 2004 AAU Boys 15-under Basketball National Championship Tournament for the Illinois Knights. As a high school sophomore, he helped lead St. Joseph to a run in the Illinois AA Boys High School basketball tournament, which helped him get the attention of NCAA Division I basketball coaches. At St. Joseph's, which had once produced Isiah Thomas, he was part of a Chicago area sophomore class (which included Derrick Rose, and his St. Joseph's teammate Demetri McCamey).

Turner started getting major Division I offers early in his junior year, At the beginning of his junior season, "Chicago Tribune" named him to its annual top Chicago metropolitan area basketball players list. His team went to the state sectional final before losing to Proviso East High School in the sectional final. After his junior season, he was considered one of the top 25 prospects in the country in his class and he was given special mention by the "Chicago Tribune" and honorable mention by the Associated Press for all-state honors. During the summer of 2006, he committed to Ohio State, which is located in Columbus, Ohio. Turner's decision was influenced by his relationship with his father, James Turner, who lived in Columbus, Ohio and whom Turner had visited every summer since he was ten years old.

During his senior season, his team was listed second to Rose's Simeon Career Academy in the preseason Tribune Chicago area high school basketball team rankings. That season, he was named to the first-team Associated Press 2006–07 Class AA all-state team, a day before Rose's Simeon eliminated Turner's St. Joseph in the Illinois Class AA supersectional. Turner and McCamey finished third and sixth to Rose in the Illinois Mr. Basketball voting, and the "Chicago Tribune" chose both of them as first team All-state selections. Turner was ranked as the #7, #13 and #16 small forward in the nation as a high school senior by ESPN, rivals.com, and scout.com respectively. He received scholarship offers from five Big Ten Conference basketball programs, as well as Wake Forest, DePaul and Notre Dame.

As a freshman, Turner averaged 27.1 minutes per game, 8.5 points per game and 4.4 rebounds per game over the course of the season and finished second on the team in assists and third in steals. Turner recorded his first career double double on January 19, 2008 at Thompson–Boling Arena against the Tennessee Vols with his first 20-point game and first 10-rebound game. That season, he helped Ohio State win the 2008 National Invitation Tournament by averaging 18.5 points, 7 rebounds, 4.5 assists and 3 steals in the tournament's semifinal and final round at Madison Square Garden. Turner had also scored in double digits in the quarterfinal round. He was also in the starting lineup for the other two NIT games. Turner contributed at least 24 minutes as a starter in each of the five tournament games.

As a sophomore, Turner was named player of the week three times during the 2008–09 Big Ten Conference men's basketball season (December 8, 2008, February 2, 2009, and February 9, 2009). On February 26, Turner became the only Big Ten player selected by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association (USBWA) as a Top 15 finalist for the Oscar Robertson Trophy. As a guard/forward for the Ohio State Buckeyes men's basketball team of the Big Ten Conference, he led his team in the following per-game statistical categories: points, rebounds, assists, and steals. Turner led the Big Ten in scoring as a sophomore. Turner and Manny Harris became the fourth and fifth players in conference history to finish in the top ten in the conference in points, rebounds and assists since assists became a statistic in 1983–84, following Steve Smith, Jim Jackson and Brian Evans.

Although Turner was not selected as a preseason All-Big Ten conference player, he was the only person chosen as a unanimous first-team All Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media at the end of the regular season. On March 5, the National Association of Basketball Coaches honored Turner as a District 7 (Big Ten) first-team selection along with four other sophomores. He was also chosen on March 10 by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association for its 2008–09 Men's Division I District V (OH, IN, IL, MI, MN, WI) Team, based on voting from its national membership. Turner was selected as a 2009 All-American honorable mention by the Associated Press. On March 15, he was selected to the 2009 Big Ten Conference Men's Basketball Tournament team, despite Ohio State's loss in the final game to Purdue. Turner played for the 2009 Junior USA World University Championships team, along with conference foes Robbie Hummel of Purdue and Talor Battle of Penn State. He helped them to the bronze medal and a 6–1 record.

His junior season began with numerous accolades. ESPN chose both Kalin Lucas and Turner to its 2009–10 NCAA Division I men's basketball season preseason second-team All-American list. FOX Sports preseason All-American list included him on its fifth team. Turner was named among the 50 preseason Wooden Award watch list nominees and the 50 preseason Naismith College Player of the Year watchlist nominees. The 24-member Big Ten media panel selected him as a first-team preseason All-Big Ten team member.
Turner, nicknamed "The Villain", opened the season by recording the first triple double by a Big Ten player since January 13, 2001, and the second in school history (Dennis Hopson was the first) during the Coaches vs. Cancer classic against Alcorn State University. This earned him his fourth career Big Ten player of the week honor and first of the 2009–10 Big Ten Conference men's basketball season. The following week, he ran his streak of double doubles to four to earn back-to-back player of the week honors. Two weeks after his first triple-double, he repeated the feat at home against Lipscomb University on November 24. This earned him his third consecutive Big Ten player of the week award. On December 5, 2009, in the fourth week of the season, he suffered transverse process fractures of the second and third lumbar vertebrae in his back, which was expected to cause him to be inactive for two months. Turner returned early from his injury on January 6, 2010. This occurred two days after Ohio State fell out of the top 25 in the 2009–10 NCAA Division I men's basketball rankings on January 4 in his absence. With Turner back in the lineup, Ohio State returned to the top 25 on January 18, and Turner earned his fourth Big Ten Player of the Week award on the same day after leading his team to wins over two ranked conference foes. Then on February 8, Turner established a new Big Ten Conference record with his eighth career Conference Player of the Week award, surpassing Glenn Robinson and Jackson. The fifth of the season also tied Robinson's single-season record. Two weeks after tying the single-season record, he broke the record when he averaged 24.5 points, 8.5 rebounds and 5.5 assists against two ranked conference opponents (No. 4 Purdue and at No. 11 Michigan State). Then he won the award again on March 1.
Turner helped lead the Buckeyes to the regular-season co-championship of the Big Ten Conference and helped them earn the number one seed in the 2010 Big Ten Conference Men's Basketball Tournament. On March 12, 2010, in their first game in the tournament, Turner helped the Buckeyes get a win over their arch-rival Michigan Wolverines with a last-second 37-foot three-pointer. In the second game, against Illinois, Turner scored 31 points, scoring the game-tying points to send the game to overtime and then the final four points in overtime to send the game into double overtime. Turner scored a total of 12 points in overtime. He then led Ohio State to victory in the championship game against Minnesota with another 31 points. Turner was named Tournament Most Outstanding Player and part of the All-Tournament team. Turner also repeated as the Big Ten scoring champion, and although he lost the rebounding championship to Mike Davis (9.167 to 9.161), he led the conference in defensive rebounds. He also ranked second in assists and third in steals. He improved upon his sophomore showing by becoming the first player to finish in the top two in average points (1st, 20.4), rebounds (2nd, 9.2) and assists (2nd, 6.0), becoming the first men's basketball player to do so and the first to finish in the top five in all three categories.

Turner was selected as a Midseason Top-30 finalist for the 2010 John Wooden Award in January. He was included on the March 15, 26-man final national ballot for the Wooden Award. From that ballot he was selected to the ten-man Wooden All-American team. Then the list was shortened to five finalists (Turner, Sherron Collins, John Wall, Wesley Johnson and Da'Sean Butler) who were flown out to Los Angeles for the announcement. On April 9, Turner was announced as the winner. In February, he was named a midseason Top 30 candidate for the Naismith College Player of the Year and was announced the recipient of the award in Indianapolis April 5, 2010. Turner won the USBWA's Robertson Trophy as the consensus choice by voters in all nine geographical districts. Fox, Associated Press and "Sporting News" selected him as their National Player of the Year. He earned 54 of the 65 Associated Press panel members' votes. He was recognized the National Association of Basketball Coaches' Division I Player of the Year.

By winning the Wooden, Naismith, Robertson, Fox Sports, NABC, TSN, and AP Player of the Year awards, he nearly swept all of the major player of the year awards. Wall won the Adolph Rupp Trophy (and Yahoo! Sports player of the year). Turner was again the only person chosen as a unanimous first-team All Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media at the end of the regular season and was selected as the 2010 Big Ten Men's Basketball Player of the Year. Turner was also selected as the Big Ten Conference male Athlete of the Year for all sports.

Turner was selected as a first-team 2010 NCAA Men's Basketball All-American by Associated Press, "Sporting News", Fox Sports, National Association of Basketball Coaches, United States Basketball Writers Association and Yahoo! Sports. He was also selected in March as one of six finalists for the Bob Cousy Award.

On April 7, 2010, Turner held a press conference and announced that he would forgo his final season of collegiate eligibility and enter the 2010 NBA draft, where he was expected to be selected as one of the top 3 draft picks. Turner signed with Michael Jordan's agent, David Falk.

He was selected with the 2nd overall pick by the Philadelphia 76ers in the 2010 NBA draft, and signed a 2-year deal with a third-year option worth an estimated $12 million.
On October 27, 2010, in his debut on the Philadelphia 76ers (also his 22nd birthday), Turner recorded 16 points, 7 rebounds, and 4 assists, coming off the bench for 30 minutes to lead the team in scoring in a 97–87 loss to the Miami Heat. On November 7, 2010, Turner got his first NBA start and ended the game with a double-double, recording 14 points and 10 rebounds to go with his 3 assists, in a 106–96 win over the New York Knicks in place of the injured Andre Iguodala. On December 29, 2010, Turner scored a career-high 23 points in a 123–110 win against the Phoenix Suns, going 9–12 from the field and a perfect 4–4 from the free throw line. He ended the season with fourteen starts and two double-doubles. The team had gone 27–55 the previous season, but were able to improve to 41–41 in Turner's first season. They reached the 2011 NBA Playoffs as the seventh seed, and were matched up against the new-look Miami Heat led by LeBron James and Dwyane Wade. Turner was praised for his aggressiveness in the series, handling Wade on the defensive side, and scoring 17 points and six rebounds on 50% shooting in the Sixers win in Game 4. That would be Philadelphia's only win of the series however, as they fell to the eventual Eastern Conference Champions Miami in five games.
On February 8, 2012, Turner was selected to play in the 2012 Rising Stars competition. During the game, he unveiled a new model of Li-Ning shoes. On March 7, 2012, in only his second start of the season, Turner recorded a career-high, 26 points, against the Boston Celtics. On March 9, 2012, and March 11, 2012, against the Utah Jazz and the New York Knicks, he posted back-to-back double doubles in his third and fourth consecutive start. He again scored 26 points on April 3, 2012, against the Miami Heat. On April 25, 2012, he recorded another double-double while setting a career-high with 29 points and adding 13 rebounds. Over the course of the season, he made twenty starts and recorded five double-doubles. He posted his first postseason double double on May 12, 2012, against the Boston Celtics in the first game of the Eastern Conference semifinals of the 2012 NBA Playoffs, with 16 points and 10 rebounds. He repeated the feat on May 21 in game five of the series, recording 10 rebounds and 11 points. He started 12 of Philadelphia's 13 playoff games, but the team was eliminated in the second round of the playoffs.
Turner started all 82 games during the 2012–13 NBA season and tallied 14 double-doubles, while averaging a career high 13.3 points 6.3 rebounds and 4.3 assists. On December 7, 2012, he posted a 26-point, 10-rebound double-double against the Boston Celtics and made the game-winning shot in overtime with 3.9 seconds remaining. On March 1, 2013, he fell one assist short of a triple-double with 22 points, 10 rebounds and 9 assists against the Golden State Warriors.
The 76ers did not sign Turner to an extension prior to the October 31, 2013, deadline, meaning that the 76ers had the right to make him a restricted free agent at the end of the season. On November 9, 2013, Turner established a new career high with 31 points, including the game-tying basket with 8.7 seconds remaining in the first overtime against the Cleveland Cavaliers. Turner hit the game-winning buzzer beater on December 20 against the Brooklyn Nets. Turner sat out on December 28 due to knee soreness, but he returned to the lineup the following night against the Los Angeles Lakers with 22 points, 7 rebounds and 6 assists. On January 22, 2014, Turner recorded a career-high 34 points in a 110–106 win over the New York Knicks, he also recorded 11 rebounds in the game. Turner hit the game-winning buzzer beater on January 29, 2014 against the Boston Celtics.

On February 20, 2014, Turner and Lavoy Allen were traded to the Indiana Pacers in exchange for Danny Granger and a second-round draft pick. Turner debuted for the Pacers on February 25, 2014. He scored 13 points and added 6 rebounds as part of the Pacers bench that scored a season-high 50 points against the Los Angeles Lakers. When the Pacers benched their entire starting lineup on April 6, he scored 23 to help the team to a win over the Milwaukee Bucks. Turner was reported to have an acrimonious relationship with Indiana teammate Lance Stephenson because both were "free agents to be...looking for their first big contract" who played the same style and they were both trying to fill the role of "next big thing". The conflict led to a fist fight between the two on April 21, 2014, in a team practice on the eve of the team's second game of the first round of the 2014 NBA Playoffs. Stephenson has a reputation for irritating people however. Less than a month earlier, Turner had come to the rescue when Stephenson had derailed against Dwyane Wade. In game 6 of the first round series against Atlanta with Indiana trailing 3–2, head coach Frank Vogel changed the rotation and Turner was left out, playing no minutes, while some of his playing time went to Rasual Butler. In Round 2 against the Washington Wizards, he returned to the lineup. In the first game of Round 3 against the two-time defending champion Miami Heat, he sat out with strep throat.

After Indiana elected not to make Turner an $8.7 million qualifying offer, he became an unrestricted free agent. According to his agent, Turner agreed to sign with the Boston Celtics on July 21, 2014. He officially signed with the Celtics on September 29, 2014. He began the season as a reserve, but when Marcus Smart and Rajon Rondo endured concurrent injuries, Turner scored a team-high 19 points in a starting role in a win against the Chicago Bulls. On December 8, 2014, against the Washington Wizards, Turner forced overtime by sinking a three-point shot with 0.9 seconds left in regulation, but missed a jump shot with 0.9 seconds remaining in the second overtime which would have given the Celtics the lead. When he was inserted into the starting lineup at point guard on December 31, 2014, against the Sacramento Kings, he posted a double double with 11 assists and 10 points. Chicago native Turner posted a season-high 29 points at the United Center against the Chicago Bulls on January 3. Turner hit his fourth (in eight attempts) career last second game winning shot with a three-pointer with 1.9 seconds left as his team trailed 89–87 against the Portland Trail Blazers on January 22, 2015. Then on February 11, 2015, he hit a game winner with 0.2 seconds left against Atlanta Hawks. Evan Turner posted his first career triple double on February 25, 2015, against the New York Knicks with 10 points, 10 assists and 12 rebounds. On March 13, 2015, Turner scored 24 of his season-high 30 points in the second half, including 16 in the fourth quarter to help the Celtics rally past the Orlando Magic. He posted two more triple doubles on March 23 against the Brooklyn Nets (19 points, 10 rebounds, and 12 assists) and on April 1 against the Indiana Pacers (13 points, 11 rebounds, and 12 assists). On April 10, he recorded a career-high 13 assists against the Cleveland Cavaliers. Turner played every game in the 2014–15 season and finished with averages of 9.5 points, 5.1 rebounds, and a career-high 5.5 assists per game. During the offseason, he was named as a participant in the first-ever NBA Africa Game.

On January 4, 2016, Turner started in place of an injured Avery Bradley and posted a 12-point, 11-rebound double-double against the Brooklyn Nets. He posted a 14-point, 10-rebound double-double off the bench against the New York Knicks on February 2. On February 16, at halftime of the Ohio State–Michigan game at Value City Arena, Turner's collegiate number, 21, was retired by Ohio State. On March 26, Turner posted a 17-point, 11-rebound double-double and blocked Devin Booker's potential game-tying shot with 3.9 seconds left against the Phoenix Suns.

On July 6, 2016, Turner signed a four-year, $70 million contract with the Portland Trail Blazers. Turner battled Maurice Harkless for the starting small forward role through the preseason, but in the end he lost out. He debuted with a 3-point, 5-rebound and 5-assist performance in a 113–104 win over the Utah Jazz in 26 minutes off the bench. With Harkless injured on December 8, Turner started against the Memphis Grizzlies and notched a 15-point, 10-rebound double-double in an 88–86 loss, despite a pair of go-ahead free throws by Turner with 27 seconds left. On January 5, 2017, he scored 15 of his season-high 20 points in the fourth quarter of the Trail Blazers' 118–109 win over the Los Angeles Lakers. Turner's 11 assists off the bench on January 11 against the Cleveland Cavaliers was the most by a Portland reserve in nearly 3 years. On February 8, he was ruled out for approximately five to six weeks after sustaining a fracture of the third metacarpal in his right hand the night before playing against the Dallas Mavericks. He returned to action, wearing a protective brace, on March 18 after missing 14 games. The team was 7–7 without Turner. He opened the 2017 NBA playoffs with a 12-point, 10-rebound double-double in a 12-point loss to the Golden State Warriors. The Trail Blazers were swept in four games, however.

On January 1, 2018, Turner scored a season-high 22 points in a 124–120 overtime win over the Chicago Bulls.

On April 1, 2019, Turner recorded his fourth career triple-double with 13 points, 11 rebounds and 10 assists off the bench in a 132–122 win over the Minnesota Timberwolves. He was a perfect 5 of 5 from the floor, making his triple-double just the seventh in NBA history to happen on five or fewer field goal attempts. Two days later, he had a second consecutive triple-double with 13 points, 12 rebounds and 11 assists off the bench in a 116–89 win over the Memphis Grizzlies, becoming the first Trail Blazer with back-to-back triple-doubles since Clyde Drexler in the 1989–90 season.

Turner's mother is Iris James, and he has two older brothers named Darius and Richard.

On August 23, 2010, CNBC reported that Turner had signed a multi-year endorsement contract with Chinese apparel maker Li Ning Company Limited.

On December 20, 2017, a semi-trailer truck crashed into Turner's pool at his Portland home.




</doc>
<doc id="22001120" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22001120" title="Virgil Brennan">
Virgil Brennan

Virgil Paul Brennan, (6 March 1920 – 13 June 1943), also known as Paul Brennan, was an Australian aviator and flying ace of the Second World War. Enlisting in the Royal Australian Air Force in November 1940, he briefly served in the European Theatre before transferring to Malta. Over the next five months, Brennan was officially credited with the destruction of 10 Axis aircraft from a total of twenty-four operational sorties. Reposted to England, he was assigned as a flying instructor and collaborated in the writing of "Spitfires over Malta", a book about his experiences on the island. Returning to Australia during 1943, Brennan was killed in a flying accident at Garbutt, Queensland, in June that year.

Brennan was born in Warwick, Queensland, on 6 March 1920 to Edgar James Brennan, a solicitor, and his wife Katherine (née O'Sullivan). He was educated at the Christian Brothers' School in Warwick, before moving on to Downlands College at Toowoomba and later Brisbane State High School. After leaving school, Brennan studied part-time at the University of Queensland, while simultaneously being employed as a law clerk in Brisbane.

On 8 November 1940, Brennan enlisted in the Royal Australian Air Force for service during the Second World War. Accepted for pilot training, he received his initial flight instruction in Australia. He later embarked for Canada, where he completed his flight training before being posted to the United Kingdom in August 1941, where he was appointed to an Operational Training Unit. On graduating from this course, he was allotted to No. 64 Squadron RAF. During this time, he was advanced to temporary flight sergeant on 4 January 1942, prior to receiving a posting to the Mediterranean Theatre the following month.

On arrival in the Mediterranean, Brennan was posted to No. 249 Squadron RAF. On 7 March 1942, Brennan was one of fifteen pilots sent to the island of Malta. Flying Supermarine Spitfires, the party took off from the aircraft carrier HMS "Eagle"; they were to spend the next few months in the defence of the island. As the Axis forces commenced a major aerial assault on Malta later that month, the Allied fighter pilots on the island were forced to "contend with fatigue and inadequate rations while battling the enemy's superior forces". On 17 March, Brennan claimed his first aerial victory when he shot down a Messerschmitt 109.

On 20 April 1942, Brennan added a further two aircraft to his tally when he destroyed a Messerschmitt 109, before bringing down a Junkers 88 later that day. Praised as "a most determined and courageous pilot", Brennan was subsequently recommended for the Distinguished Flying Medal. The announcement and accompanying citation for the award was published in a supplement to the "London Gazette" on 22 May 1942, reading:

Brennan scored further aerial victories on 10 May. The following day, German "Luftwaffe" General Albert Kesselring ordered a contingent of 20 Stukas and 10 Junkers Ju 88s with a small escort of fighter aircraft to bomb Grand Harbour, Malta. A formation of 50 Royal Air Force aircraft—37 Spitfires and 13 Hawker Hurricanes—were dispatched to intercept the group; Brennan was piloting one of the Spitfires. Attacking one of the Stukas, Brennan later recorded that the aircraft "disintegrated, with huge chunks flying off in every direction". During the battle, a total of 14 German aircraft were shot down, for the loss of 2 Spitfires. In an engagement the next day, Brennan was wounded in his left arm. He was commissioned as a pilot officer later that month.

By the conclusion of his combat tour in July 1942, Brennan had flown a total of twenty-two operational sorties and was credited with destroying 10 Axis aircraft over Malta, with one probably destroyed and a further 6 damaged. For his efforts in the destruction of Axis aircraft during this period, Brennan was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross. The notification of the decoration was published in a supplement to the "London Gazette" on 6 October 1942.

Embarking from Malta during July 1942, Brennan returned to the United Kingdom and was posted to No. 52 Operational Training Unit as an instructor with the rank of acting flight lieutenant. During this period, Brennan and fellow No. 249 Squadron pilot, Pilot Officer Raymond Hesselyn, collaborated with journalist Henry Bateson on writing "Spitfires over Malta", a novel relating the experiences of Brennan and Hesselyn during their time on Malta. On 17 April 1943, Brennan was repatriated from the United Kingdom and returned to Australia.

Arriving back in Australia, Brennan was posted to the newly raised No. 79 Squadron, based at Laverton, Victoria, on 1 May 1943. Later that month, the squadron was ordered to deploy to Goodenough Island, near New Guinea. During this time, Brennan related his previous combat experiences to fellow pilots, however his commanding officer, Squadron Leader Alan Rawlinson, noted that Brennan appeared "strained and tired". An advance party of the squadron was moved up to Goodenough Island that month, while the pilots followed during June.

On 13 June 1943, the pilots of No. 79 Squadron continued on their journey north, arriving at Garbutt airfield in Queensland. At approximately 14:00, Brennan landed his Spitfire in the wake turbulence of the aircraft ahead of himself and touched down on the left side of the runway. Brennan was informed that he was cutting in on the path of the Spitfire following him, which was to land on the right side of the runway. Brennan landed his aircraft short, and at the conclusion of his landing run turned across the path of the second Spitfire. In the ensuing collision, Brennan sustained severe injuries and was rushed to hospital; he died before arrival. Described as one with "an easy-going nature, an engaging sense of humour and ... loyal to his friends", Brennan was buried in Townsville War Cemetery.



</doc>
<doc id="22033929" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22033929" title="SS Batavier II (1897)">
SS Batavier II (1897)

SS "Batavier II" was a steam packet for the Batavier Line that sailed between Rotterdam and London for most of her career. The ship was built in 1897 by the Gourlay Brothers of Dundee. The Dutch ship could carry a limited amount of freight and up to 321 passengers. She was rebuilt in 1909 which increased her length by over .

During World War I, the Batavier Line attempted to maintain service, but in September 1916, "Batavier II" was seized as a prize by German submarine and sailed into Zeebrugge and retained. Ten months later, "Batavier II" was shelled by British submarine and sank near Texel.

"Batavier II" and her sister ship were built for William Müller and Company by the Gourlay Brothers of Dundee, Scotland. The ship was launched on 17 August 1897. As built, she was long (between perpendiculars) and abeam. "Batavier II" was powered by a single 4-cylinder, triple-expansion steam engine of that moved her up to . She could carry up to 321 passengers: 44 in first class, 27 in second class, and up to 250 in steerage. She was listed at .

Upon completion in October 1897, she joined the 683-ton "Batavier I" in packet service between Rotterdam and London. The pair were joined by "Batavier III" after her completion in November. In Rotterdam, the ships docked at the Willemsplein; in London, the ships originally docked near London Bridge, but in 1899 switched to the Customs House and Wool Quays near the Tower Bridge. Also beginning in 1899, Batavier Line service between Rotterdam and London was offered daily except Sundays; each of the ships made three round trips per week. In addition to passengers, "Batavier II" could also carry a limited quantity of freight. One example that may be typical was a load of of dry chemical wood pulp in 5 bales carried to London in March 1907. In 1909, "Batavier II" was rebuilt to and lengthened by to .

After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, the Batavier Line continued service on the Rotterdam–London route. In December 1914, "Batavier II" made news when porters handling what was identified as a crate of Swedish matches discovered an escaped German Army officer inside. The plan, apparently, was for him to be shipped from London to Rotterdam via "Batavier II". The plot unraveled when the porters could only move the heavy crate by rolling it, which knocked the man unconscious; the officer was returned to the custody of British military officials.

In June 1915, passengers on "Batavier II" witnessed an attack by two German airplanes against a British steamship between the Galloper and the North Hinder Lightships. The attack was broken off when two British airplanes arrived over the ship to engage the German aircraft; none of the airplanes were destroyed, and the ship was unscathed.

On 24 September 1916, after "Batavier II" had departed from Rotterdam, the ship was stopped by the German submarine . She was seized as prize and sailed into German-held Zeebrugge. There, "Batavier II"s Dutch crew and women and children passengers were released and sent via train to Rotterdam. The Germans confiscated the ship's cargo of food. Also on board "Batavier II" were four escaped Russian prisoners of war and Richard Hansemann, a German-born New York businessman. American newspapers carried reports of Hansemann's plight, reporting by 1 October that he would likely be impressed into the German Army.

"Batavier II"s whereabouts and activities over the next ten months are uncertain. She remained under German control for a time, but how long is not clear from sources. "Batavier II" was back under Dutch control by late July 1917.

On 27 July 1917, "Batavier II" was shelled by British submarine just outside Dutch territorial waters. Damaged by "E55"s gunfire, "Batavier II"s crew steered her back into Dutch territorial waters. "E55" then sent a prize crew on board "Batavier II" and sailed her back outside Dutch waters. By the time a Dutch torpedo boat arrived on the scene, "Batavier II" was taking on water and had drifted back into Dutch territory. The torpedo boat sent the message "respect neutrality" to "E55" which retrieved her prize crew and departed. Despite efforts to stem the flow of water, "Batavier II" sank from the Molengat North Buoy, off Texel.


</doc>
<doc id="22184259" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22184259" title="Ice block expedition of 1959">
Ice block expedition of 1959

The ice block expedition of 1959 () was a publicity stunt carried out by the Norwegian insulation material producer Glassvatt (today called Glava AS). Responding to a challenge from the radio station Radio Luxembourg, Glassvatt decided to equip a truck to bring a three-ton block of ice from Mo i Rana by the Arctic Circle, to Libreville by the Equator. There was no form of refrigeration applied, and the expedition was intended to display the efficiency of the insulating glass wool used. The truck also brought 300 kg of medicines to the hospital of Albert Schweitzer in Lambaréné.

The expedition then was followed by a worldwide press corps, and crowds of spectators gathered in various European cities along the route. Crossing the Sahara, where the truck repeatedly got stuck in the sand, proved both a dangerous and laborious task. Once the truck had made it through the desert, however, and reached its final destination, it was revealed that the ice block had lost only about 11% of its original weight. When the expedition reached its goal it generated much media attention for the company. It was called "the world's greatest publicity stunt". To mark the 50th anniversary of the event in 2009, the company made the original documentary of the expedition available online. They also released a new interview with the expedition's leader Sivert Klevan, who was 84 years old at the time of the interview.

In the autumn of 1958, Radio Luxembourg launched a challenge to transport three tons of ice from the Arctic Circle to the Equator. The radio station would award 100,000 francs for each kilogram (at the time, US$202.55 per kilogram; $1,487.19 or €1,120.19 per kg in 2009 currency) that remained at the destination; the only condition was that no form of refrigeration should be used. Managing director Birger Natvik at the Norwegian insulation material company Glassvatt (today Glava AS) saw the announcement and suggested that the company take on the challenge. He estimated that by isolating the ice with glass wool (""glassvatt"" in Norwegian) made from fibreglass, the driver could make several million francs. Once Radio Luxembourg realised the potential loss, they retracted the offer. By this point, however, the planned expedition had received so much attention that Glassvatt decided to go through with it anyway. Among the other sponsors were Shell, who provided the fuel, and Scania, who provided the truck. Altogether, sponsors from eight countries financed the expedition, including Glassvatt's French mother company, the Saint-Gobain corporation. The French sponsors wanted a French truck to be used, but the Norwegians insisted on a Scandinavian one. The latter position won through, and a Scania-Vabis was selected for the task. The expedition's leader later admitted that a French truck probably would have been more suitable for driving in the desert. On 22 February 1959, at 9:15 am, the expedition left Mo i Rana.

Responsibility for the expedition was given to Sivert Klevan, an engineer with a good instinct for public relations. The ice was to be procured from the glacier Svartisen, and a glaciologist was brought along to give advice. It soon became clear that the entire three-ton block could not be brought out in one go. Instead, 200 kg blocks were cut out with a chainsaw, carried away on a sled, and flown by helicopter down to the town centre. There they were melted together to make a block of ice weighing 3,050 kg. The block was placed in a specially constructed iron container, which was insulated with wood and glass wool. The container was placed on top of a truck that would carry it all the way to the Equator, accompanied by a van carrying equipment and a sedan with a film crew.

The first stop for the expedition was Oslo. There it was greeted by a great ceremony at Studenterlunden in front of the University. The truck was loaded with 300 kg of medicines, to the value of NOK 50,000. These medicines were to be delivered to the hospital of humanitarian Albert Schweitzer in Lambaréné, near the final destination of Libreville, the capital of Gabon. From Oslo the expedition continued to Helsingborg in Sweden and Copenhagen in Denmark, where more medicines were brought along. For public relations purposes the expedition made its way through several European citiesincluding Hamburg, Cologne, The Hague and Brusselsand was received with ceremony and much attention everywhere. In Belgium a problem arose over a missing customs declaration for the ice, but this was solved when a customs official agreed to accompany the cars through the country. Klevan later received a personal apology for this inconvenience, conveyed by the Norwegian foreign minister Halvard Lange from Lange's Belgian colleague and personal friend.

In Paris the expedition was escorted by police through the streets, and the crew members were invited to dine with the mayor. From Paris the truck continued to Marseille. There it was lifted aboard the freighter "Sidi Mabrouk", that sailed the cargo to Algiers. In Algiers a special crane had to be obtained to lift the truckweighing a total of sixteen tons, including the iceonto the shore. The container was drained at this point to see how much of the ice had melted. In spite of unusually hot European weather for the season, only four litres of water had been shed.

Crossing the Sahara was considered particularly perilous at the time because of guerilla forces hiding in the mountains. The medicines carried by the truck would have been valuable loot for these groups, and for the first part of the desert the expedition was accompanied by the French Foreign Legion. The instruction the men received was "No stops, drive for your lives, even if you get a flat tire." The crossing passed without violent incidents, however, and greater problems were presented by the elements. There were no roads in the desert, and the truck was heavily loaded and not especially adapted to the conditions. Several times it got stuck in the desert sand; the crew had to place steel plates underneath for traction and spend hours digging out the sand from under the wheels. This took a great toll on the men, who had a limited supply of water, in temperatures approaching 50 °C. The crew spent most nights in oases along the way, but on occasion also slept in sleeping bags in the sand.

At one point the expedition met a tribe of Tuaregs and greeted them by offering their camels water from the container. According to the commentary in the documentary film, the camels had never tasted anything as delicious as the Norwegian glacier water. This was not entirely true; the water was contaminated by the glass wool and tar paper, and it was barely drinkable. The expedition arrived at the Hoggar Mountains near the Tropic of Cancer after fourteen days of travelling. A measurement at that point showed a loss of 96 litres of water. Once the Sahara was traversed, after of driving, 177 litres had melted away. On average 15 litres melted each day in the desert.

After approximately three weeks, the expedition arrived in Lambaréné and met with Albert Schweitzer. Klevan later described the meeting with Schweitzer as the greatest moment of the entire expedition. Later, the hospital received 500 kg of Norwegian klippfisk (dried and salted cod), a particular favourite with the hospital's patients. The medicines were handed over, and the container was opened. Even though the drainage had been monitored throughout the expedition, there was still great excitement associated with seeing the result firsthand. The block of ice turned out to be almost entirely intact.

The expedition arrived at its final destination of Libreville on 21 March, after twenty-seven days. The block of ice was found to weigh 2,714 kg; it had lost only 336 kg along the way. Though it was unclear how much time the expedition would take, Klevan had initially estimated a loss of 10%; the end result was approximately 11%. A French representative of the company met the crew in Libreville. A personal friend of President Charles de Gaulle, he presented an offer to drive the ice back to Paris. If the crew accepted, the President himself would have received the crew under the Arc de Triomphe. The men, however, were too exhausted at that point to contemplate such an offer. Instead, arrangement were made for the vehicles to be brought back by freight, while the crew would fly home. The ice was cut up and divided between the citizens of Libreville, for whom this was a rare commodity. Klevan, always conscious of promotional opportunities, brought a portion of the ice back home with him. This ice was subsequently used in drinks served to journalists at the première of the expedition documentary back home in Oslo.

The expedition had been an enormous success, both in accomplishing the goal it had set out to accomplish, and by generating worldwide press coverage for the company and its product. The venture was reported on as far away as India. In 1979, Oslo Marketing Association commemorated the ice block expedition with a special event titled "The world's greatest publicity stunt". To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the event in 2009, Glava AS made the original documentary of the expedition available online. They also released a newly recorded interview with Sivert Klevan, who by that time was 84 years old.



</doc>
<doc id="22197563" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22197563" title="Army of the Danube">
Army of the Danube

The Army of the Danube () was a field army of the French Directory in the 1799 southwestern campaign in the Upper Danube valley. It was formed on 2 March 1799 by the simple expedient of renaming the Army of Observation, which had been observing Austrian movements on the border between French First Republic and the Holy Roman Empire. It was commanded by General Jean-Baptiste Jourdan, 1st Comte Jourdan (1762–1833).

The formation of the army was part of the French Directory's long term strategy to undermine Habsburg influence in the Holy Roman Empire, and, conversely, to strengthen French hegemony in central Europe after the wars of the First Coalition and the Treaty of Campo Formio in 1797. Despite the Treaty, Austria and France remained suspicious of each other's motives, and the purpose of the Army of the Observation was to watch for Austrian border transgressions. Understanding that the negotiations at the Congress of Rastatt were going no-where, the Army of Observation was instructed to cross the Rhine. Once across the Rhine, the Army of the Danube, was to secure strategic positions in southwestern Germany (present day Baden-Württemberg) and engage Archduke Charles' Austrian army. In the meantime, the Army of Helvetia, under command of André Masséna, would secure such strategic locations as St. Gotthard Pass, the Swiss Plateau, and upper Rhine basin.

The army participated in four battles. In the battles of Ostrach and first Stockach, the Army of the Danube withdrew after suffering heavy losses. After reorganization, in which elements of the army were combined with Massena's Army of Switzerland, it withdrew after an engagement with Charles' superior force at Zürich in early June 1799; only in the Second Battle of Zurich did the Army of the Danube secure an uncontested victory. In December 1799, the Army of the Danube merged with the Army of the Rhine.

Initially, such rulers of Europe as Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor viewed the revolution in France as an event between the French king and his subjects, and not something in which they should interfere. As the rhetoric grew more strident, the monarchies started to view events with distrust. Leopold, who had succeeded Joseph as Emperor in 1791, saw the situation surrounding his sister, Marie Antoinette, and her children, with greater and greater alarm. As the revolution grew more and more radical, he still sought to avoid war, but in the late summer, he, in consultation with French émigré nobles and Frederick William II of Prussia, issued the Declaration of Pillnitz, in which they declared the interest of the monarchs of Europe as one with the interests of Louis and his family. They threatened vague, but serious, consequences if anything should happen to the royal family.

By 1792, the French republican position had become increasingly difficult. Compounding internal economic and social problems, French émigrés agitated abroad for support of a counter-revolution that would restore an absolute monarchy. Chief among them were Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé (cousin of Louis XVI), Condé's son, Louis Henri, Duke of Bourbon, and Condé's grandson, Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien. From their base in Koblenz, immediately over the French border, they sought direct support for military intervention from the royal houses of Europe, and themselves raised a small army. The ascension of young and uncompromising Francis as Holy Roman Emperor-elect on the death of his father in July 1792 also contributed to their unease.

On 20 April 1792, the French National Convention declared war on Austria. In this War of the First Coalition (1792–98), France ranged itself against most of the European states sharing land or water borders with her, plus Portugal and the Ottoman Empire. Although the Coalition forces achieved several victories at Verdun, Kaiserslautern, Neerwinden, Mainz, Amberg and Würzburg, the efforts of Napoleon Bonaparte in northern Italy pushed Austrian forces across the Italian-Austrian border and resulted in the negotiation of the Peace of Leoben (17 April 1797) and the subsequent Treaty of Campo Formio (October 1797).

From October 1797 until the Army of the Danube crossed into Germany in March 1799, the signatories of the Treaty of Campo Formio had avoided armed conflict. Despite their agreement at Campo Formio, the two primary combatants, France and Austria, remained suspicious of each other's motives. Several diplomatic incidents undermined the agreement. The French demanded additional territory not mentioned in the Treaty. The Habsburgs were reluctance to hand over designated territories, much less additional ones. The Congress at Rastatt proved inept at orchestrating the transfer of territories to compensate the German princes for their losses. Ferdinand of Naples refused to pay tribute to France, followed by a general Neapolitan rebellion, the French suppression, and the subsequent establishment of the Parthenopean Republic. Republicans in the Swiss cantons, supported by the French army, overthrew the central government in Bern and established the Helvetic Republic.

Other factors contributed to the rising tensions. On his way to Egypt, Napoleon had stopped on Malta and forcibly removed the Hospitallers from their possessions, angering Paul, Tsar of Russia, who was the honorary head of the Order. The French Directory, furthermore, was convinced that the Austrians were conniving to start another war. Indeed, the weaker the French Republic seemed, the more seriously the Austrians, the Neapolitans, the Russians and the English actually discussed this possibility.

Military planners in Paris understood that the northern Rhine Valley, the south-western German territories, and Switzerland were strategically important for the defense of the Republic. The Swiss passes commanded access to northern Italy; consequently, the army that held those passes could move troops to and from northern and southern theaters quickly. The river was a formidable barrier to what the French perceived as Austrian aggression, and the state that controlled its crossings controlled the river itself. Finally, control of the Upper Danube would allow France to move its troops from Italy to the North Sea, or any point in between, offering immense strategic value.

Toward this end, in the early November 1798, Jourdan arrived in Hüningen, near the Swiss city of Basel, to take command of the Army of Observation, so-called because its function was to "observe" the security of the French border on the Rhine. Once there, Jourdan assessed the quality and disposition of the forces and identified needed supplies and manpower. He found the army woefully inadequate for its assignment. The Army, and its flanking armies, the Army of Helvetia (Switzerland) and the Army of Mayence, were equally short of manpower, supplies, ammunition, and training. Jourdan documented assiduously these shortages, pointing out in lengthy correspondence to the Directory the consequences of an under-manned and under-supplied army; his petitions seemed to have little effect on the Directory, which sent neither significant additional manpower nor supplies.

Jourdan's orders were to take the army into Germany and secure strategic positions, particularly on the roads through Stockach and Schaffhausen, at the western-most border of Lake Constance. Similarly, as commander of the Army of Helvetia, André Masséna would acquire strategic positions in Switzerland, in particular the St. Gotthard Pass, the passes above Feldkirch, particularly Maienfeld (St. Luciensteig), and hold the central plateau in and around Zürich and Winterthur. These positions would prevent the Allies of the Second Coalition from moving troops back and forth between the northern Italian and German theaters, and insure French access to these strategic passes. Ultimately, this positioning would allow the French to control all western roads leading to and from Vienna. Finally, to complete Vienna's isolation, the army of Mayence would sweep through the north, blocking further access to and from Vienna from any of the northern Provinces, or from Britain.

On March 1, 1799, the Army of Observation, in an order of battle of approximately 30,000 men in four divisions, crossed the Rhine at Kehl and Basel as units crossed, they took the name Army of the Danube.

The army advanced in four columns. First Division, the right wing, assembled at Hüningen, crossed at Basel and advanced eastward along the north shore of the Rhine toward Lake Constance. The Advanced Guard crossed at Kehl, and Vandamme led it north-east through the mountains via Freudenstadt. This column eventually became the left flank. It was followed across the Rhine, also at Kehl, by the II. Division. The Third Division and the Reserve also crossed at Kehl, and then divided into two columns, III. Division traveling through the Black Forest via Oberkirch, and the Reserve, with most of the artillery and horse, further south via the valley at Freiburg im Breisgau, where they would find more forage, and then over the mountains past the Titisee to Löffingen and Hüfingen.

Although Jourdan could have established a position on the immediate eastern slope of the mountains—and indeed he might have been better advised to do so—he pushed eastward across the Danube plain, taking a temporary position between Rottweil and Tuttlingen. Eventually he directed the army to establish a line centered in Pfullendorf. He planned to engage the Austrian army under the Habsburg commander-in-chief Archduke Charles on the Ostrach plateau.

While this may have seemed like a good plan, Jourdan's choice of ground created problems for him later. The plain below Pfullendorf was riddled with such streams and brooks as the Ostrach, a Danube tributary, which drained out of the marshes and swamps of Pfrungenried; in the spring of most years, this was not the best choice of ground. Although from Pfullendorf and the more moderate heights to the north of the village of Ostrach, Jourdan could establish reasonable artillery positions, the softness of the marshland itself would diminish the impact of a cannonade on the Austrian line. The marsh was also prone to fogginess, which would hinder visual planning and tactics. Furthermore, the softness of the ground would make the use of cavalry difficult, and cavalry maneuvers would be made more difficult by the likelihood of fog. Finally, the major part of Charles' army had wintered immediately east of the Lech, which Jourdan knew, because he had sent agents into Germany with instructions to identify the location and strength of his enemy. This was less than distant; any passage over the Lech was facilitated by available bridges, both of permanent construction and temporary pontoons and a traverse through friendly territory.

In March 1799, the Army of the Danube engaged in two major battles, both in the southwestern German theater. At the Battle of Ostrach, 20–22 March 1799, the first battle of the War of the Second Coalition, Austrian forces, under the command of Archduke Charles, defeated French forces. The French suffered significant losses and were forced to retreat from the region, taking up new positions at Messkirch (also spelled Mößkirch or Meßkirch), and then at Stockach and Engen. At the second battle, in Stockach, on 25 March 1799, the Austrian army achieved a decisive victory over the French forces, and again pushed the French army west. Jourdan instructed his generals to take up positions in the Black Forest, and he himself established a base at Hornberg. From there, General Jourdan relegated command of the army to his chief of staff, Jean Augustin Ernouf, and traveled to Paris to ask for more and better troops and, ultimately, when these were not forthcoming, to request a medical leave. The Army was reorganized, and a portion placed under the command of André Masséna and merged with the Army of Helvetia. Following the reorganization and change in command, the Army participated in the Battle of Winterthur and the First Battle of Zürich and, three months later, the Second Battle of Zürich.

The Battle of Ostrach, also called the "Battle by Ostrach", occurred 20–23 March 1799. In early March, the Army of the Danube pressed forward toward Pfullendorf and Ostrach, the former an imperial city in Upper Swabia and the latter a nearby village of 300 belonging to the Imperial Abbey of Salem. Their goal was to cut the Austrian line at Switzerland, preventing the Coalition use of Switzerland as an overland route between central and southern Europe. This would ostensibly isolate the armies of the Coalition in northern Italy and Germany, and prevent them from assisting one another; furthermore, if the French held the interior passes in Switzerland, they could use the routes to move their own forces between the two theaters.

The battle occurred during Holy Week in 1799, amid rain and dense fog, on the marsh southeast of the village. Initially, on 20 March, the French were able to take, and hold, the village of Ostrach and the nearby hamlet of Hoßkirch. On the morning of 21 March, as General Jourdan later wrote, as the Austrian army attacked, his men seemed to disappear in a cloud of redcoats, which referred to the Austrian Hussar and Grenadier uniforms. That evening, after more than 15 hours in general engagement, the Austrians flanked his left wing, and Saint Cyr's force was pressed back to the Pfullendorf heights. In the early morning, as the fog lifted, Jourdan could see the Archduke's formidable force arrayed on the plains below him. The archduke's arrangements made it clear that Jourdan could not keep the heights of Pfullendorf. As he withdrew, a portion of his right flank was cut off from the main force.

Although casualties appeared even in numbers for both sides, the Austrians fielded a significantly larger fighting force of nearly 55,000 at Ostrach, with another 60,000 stretched along a line between Lake Constance and Ulm. French casualties amounted to more than 12 percent of their force, and Austrian, approximately four percent. The French were forced back to Stockach, where on 25 March the armies engaged again, this time with greater losses on both sides, and a decisive Austrian victory.

At the Battle of Stockach, Jean-Baptiste Jourdan and Archduke Charles again directed the French force of 40,000 and the Austrian force of 80,000, respectively. While attempting to rally his troops, Jourdan was dismounted, nearly trampled to death by his soldiers, and barely escaped capture by the Austrians. Charles' personal intervention was crucial for the Austrians, and he was in the thick of the fighting, buying time for reinforcements to arrive. The French were defeated and driven back upon the Rhine.

The general engagement was brutal and bloody. Before daybreak on 25 March, the French left wing launched a headlong attack on the Austrian right wing, coordinated with assaults on the Austrian left. The ferocious attack forced the Austrians out of the woods in which they had been positioned overnight, and pushed them to the village of Schwanndorf. Fearing that his forces would shortly be flanked, Charles directed reinforcements to back up the right wing. The Archduke himself led eight battalions of Hungarian grenadiers into the fight, and during this part of the action, both the Prince of Anhalt and Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg were killed by French case shot. The main French assault on the Austrian center was stalled by the superior numbers.

On the French right flank, General Ferino attempted to push the Austrians back, first with a cannonade, followed by an attack through the woods on both sides of the road between the hamlet of Asch and Stockach. A third charge succeeded in taking the road, but the Austrian forces reformed the line and the artillery, now at the head of a wedge, bombarded the French troops. In a bayonet charge, the French took the hamlet of Wahlweiss, but Ferino's troops could not hold it and withdrew during the night. Jourdan then ordered a general withdrawal from the region, instructing his divisions to retreat along the lines of march they had followed into the region, and himself establishing a command post at Hornberg. He sent the cavalry to the western side of the Black Forest, where the horses could expect to find better forage.

By mid-May, 1799, the Austrians had wrested control of the eastern portions of the newly formed Helvetic Republic from the French as the forces of Hotze and pushed them out of the Grisons. Archduke Charles' own sizable force—about 110,000 strong—crossed the Rhine west of Schaffhausen, and prepared to join with the armies of Friedrich, Baron von Hotze and Friedrich Joseph, Count of Nauendorf on the Swiss Plateau by Zürich. The French Army of Helvetia and the Army of the Danube, now both under the command of André Masséna, tried to prevent this merger of the Austrian forces at the Winterthur crossroads.
Masséna sent the newly promoted General of Division Michel Ney and part of the Army of the Danube to Winterthur on 27 May 1799 to stop the Austrian advance from eastern Switzerland. If the Austrians succeeded in uniting Hotze's army from the east with Nauendorf's directly north of Zurich, and Archduke Charles' which lay to the north and west, the French would be half encircled at Zurich and dangerously exposed.

On the morning of 27 May, Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze assembled his force into three columns and marched toward Winterthur. Opposite him, Michel Ney deployed his force around the heights, the so-called Ober-Winterthur, a ring of low-lying hills some north of the city. The overall commander of the forward line, Jean Victor Tharreau, had informed Ney that he would send Jean-de-Dieu Soult's division to support him; Ney understood this to mean he was to make a stand along the entire outpost line, and that he would not be isolated. His small force would receive reinforcements from Soult's division. Consequently, Ney directed the weakest brigade, under the command of Gazan, to move up a long valley toward Frauenfeld, and another brigade, under the command of Roget, to take the right, preventing any Austrian flanking maneuver.

By mid-morning, Hotze's advanced guard had encountered moderate French resistance first from the two brigades Ney had at his disposal. The Austrian advance troops quickly overran the weaker brigade and took possession of the woods surrounding the village of Islikon. After securing the villages of Gundeschwil, Schottikon, Wiesendangen, and Stogen, further west of Islikon, Hotze deployed two of his columns facing the French front, while a third angled to the French right, as Ney had expected he would. Soult never appeared (he was later court martialed for insubordination), and Ney withdrew his forces through Winterthur, regrouping with Tharreau's main force in the outskirts of Zurich. A day later, Hotze's force united with the main Austrian force of Archduke Charles.

In the First Battle of Zürich, on 4–7 June 1799, approximately 45,000 French and 53,000 Austrians clashed on the plains around the city. On the left wing, Hotze had 20 battalions of infantry, plus support artillery, and 27 squadrons of cavalry, in total, 19,000 men. On the right wing, General Friedrich Joseph, Count of Nauendorf commanded another 18,000. The battle cost both sides dearly; General of Brigade Cherin was killed, on the French side, and on the Austrian side, "Feldzeugmeister" (General of Infantry) Olivier, Count of Wallis, was killed. On the French side, 500 died, 800 were wounded and 300 captured; on the Austrian side, 730 killed, 1,470 wounded, and 2,200 captured. When the Austrians took the French positions in the city, they also captured over 150 guns. Ultimately, French general André Masséna yielded the city to the Austrians, under Archduke Charles. Massena retreated beyond the Limmat, where he managed to fortify his positions. Hotze's force harassed their retreat, and secured the river shoreline. Despite Hotze's aggressive harassment of the French retreat, Charles did not follow up on the withdrawal; Masséna established himself on the opposite bank of the Limmat without threat of pursuit from the main body of the Austrian Army, much to the annoyance of the Russian liaison officer, Alexander Ivanovich, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy.

On 14 August 1799, a Russian force of 6,000 cavalry, 20,000 infantry, and 1,600 Cossacks, under Alexander Korsakov, joined Archduke Charles' force in Schaffhausen. In a vice-like operation, together with the Russians, they would surround André Masséna's smaller army on the banks of the Limmat, where it had taken refuge the previous spring. To divert this attack, General Claude Lecourbe attacked the pontoon bridges over which the Austrians crossed the Rhine, destroying most of them, and making the rest unusable.

Before Charles could regroup, orders arrived from the Aulic Council, the imperial body in Vienna charged with conduct of war, to overset his plan; Charles' troops were to leave Zurich in the supposedly capable hands of Korsokov, re-cross the Rhine and march north to Mainz. Charles stalled this operation as long as he could, but eventually he had to concede to Vienna's orders. Consequently, the Russian troops under a novice general replaced the Austrian troops and their seasoned commander in the strategically important city. Charles withdrew his force to the north of the Rhine and marched slowly toward Mainz. In Italy, the Russian generalissimo, Alexander Suvorov, was horrified when he heard this: he depended upon a stable Austro-Russian presence in Switzerland to protect his flank and he expected to join this army by September or October at the latest. Although the order to Charles to recross the Rhine and march north was eventually countermanded, by the time such instructions reached him, he had gone too far to return to Zurich in time.

In the Second Battle of Zürich, the French regained control of the city, along with the rest of Switzerland. Notably, Masséna out-generaled Korsakov; surrounded him, tricked him, and then took more than half his army as a prisoner. Massena also captured the baggage train and most of Korsakov cannons, and inflicted over 8,000 casualties. Most of the fighting took place on both banks of the river Limmat, up to the gates of Zürich, and in part within the city itself. Zürich had declared itself neutral, and was spared general destruction. General Oudinot commanded the French forces on the right bank and general Joseph Mortier, those on the left.

At the same time, Soult led a small force, some 150 musket-men, across the river Linth—the men held their muskets over their heads and waded across, through water to their chests—and protected the crossing site for the remainder of the force. Baron von Hotze, commander of the Austrian force there, advanced on the position near Richterswil to direct its defense, and was killed by a French musket ball. His successor, Franz Petrasch, could not push the French back, and organized a retreat from the region, falling back to St. Gallen and losing another 8,000 men and some guns. By the time Suvorov arrived in St. Gallen in early October, the Austrians and the Russians had been pushed out and he was forced to lead his men over the Alps to the Vorarlberg, resulting in additional losses.

The French army experienced a variety of command problems, especially in its early operations in southwestern Germany. After the defeat at Stockach, the army withdrew into the Black Forest. Jourdan relinquished command provisionally to Ernouf, who was a capable staff officer but had insufficient experience to hold together a varied and demoralized force. Jourdan retired to Strasbourg, where he was, or claimed he was, indisposed. By the time Masséna arrived to take command, organization and discipline was in shambles. Only four divisional generals had remained at their posts: Klein, Ferino, Souham, and Vandamme. Decaen was under arrest in Strasbourg, pending a Courts-martial, as was d'Hautpoul, for his failure to organize a timely cavalry attack at Stockach. The others had disappeared to different parts of the southwest or had gone to France. No one knew where Bernadotte had gone, and Saint Cyr had retired to Mannheim. The latter was at least reachable. Lecourbe, who had been injured at Stockach, had withdrawn to Paris to recover; in a strategically astute move, he remained there until late November, when he was able to offer Napoleon direct assistance in his coup, and thus acquired Bonaparte's attention and gratitude.

Initially, the Army included five future Marshals of France: Jean-Baptiste Jourdan, its commander-in-chief, François Joseph Lefebvre, Jean-Baptiste Drouet, Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr, and Édouard Adolphe Casimir Joseph Mortier. After the defeat at Ostrach, the Army was reorganized and command shifted to another future marshal, André Masséna.

The Army of Switzerland and portions of the Army of the Danube merged in a joint command under André Masséna in April 1799; in June, portions of the Army of the Danube were used to strengthen the Army of the Rhine. Both the Army of the Rhine and the Army of the Danube subsequently merged in 24 November 1799 to form a new, enlarged army designated the Army of the Rhine.



</doc>
<doc id="22221311" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22221311" title="Case of the Hooded Man">
Case of the Hooded Man

R v Williams (1913) 8 Cr App R 133 (known as the Case of the Hooded Man and the Eastbourne Murder) was a 1912 murder in England that took its name from the hood the defendant, John Williams, wore when travelling to and from court. After the murder of a police inspector in Eastbourne, with no witnesses and little forensic evidence, Edgar Power, a former medical student, told the police that his friend John Williams had committed the murder. Power helped the police conduct a sting operation to catch Williams; police also interrogated Williams's girlfriend Florence Seymour, who then confessed to having helped Williams hide the murder weapon.

However, Seymour later recanted her story, and another man came forth claiming to know the identity of the real killer. This new evidence, along with the behaviour of the judge in both the initial case and the appeal, made the case controversial enough that Members of Parliament from the three major political parties directly questioned the Home Secretary on the matter. Despite many requests for clemency, all appeals were denied, and Williams was executed in 1913. The case was one of the first investigations in Britain to use the emerging science of ballistics.

On 9 October 1912, the driver of a horse-drawn carriage noticed a man crouching near the front door of the house of Countess Flora Sztaray, located on South Cliff Avenue in Eastbourne. Sztaray was known to possess large amounts of valuable jewellery and to be married to a rich Hungarian nobleman. The driver, who was Sztaray's coachman, informed Sztaray of the man's presence, whereupon Sztaray telephoned the police. Inspector Arthur Walls was sent to investigate. When Walls arrived on the scene, he observed a man lying on the portico above the front door. Walls called out, "Now then, my man, you just come down." The man fired two shots, the first of which struck and killed Walls.

The police had only two clues: some footprints in the garden, and a hat that they found in a nearby gutter. The police took moulds of the footprints and endeavored to trace the hat, but with no success. However, during routine questioning of local residents, police learned that earlier in the afternoon of the murder, a man had been seen sitting with a heavily-pregnant young woman on a bench at one end of South Cliff Avenue; the man had also been seen wandering the street while the young woman sat on the bench alone, leading police to suspect that the man was assessing the lay of the land.

The following day, a former medical student named Edgar Power visited the police, claiming that he knew the identity of the murderer. Power said that the murderer was one George McKay, who was living in Eastbourne under the name "John Williams" with his pregnant girlfriend, Florence Seymour. Power knew Williams through Williams's brother, who was Power's best friend. Williams's brother had received a note that morning from Williams, which he had passed on to Power. Power gave the note to the police. It read: 

If you would save my life come here at once to 4 Tideswell Road. Ask for Seymour. Bring some cash with you. Very Urgent. 

Power told the police that the letter had been written by Williams and that Williams had tried to burgle Sztaray's house and killed Inspector Walls. According to Power, Williams met with his girlfriend—Florence Seymour—after the murder, and the two decided to bury the gun on the beach and send a letter to Williams' brother asking for money to return to London, which was then given to Power. Power's motive in coming to the police was that he was in love with Seymour.

In order to trap Williams, Power asked Williams to meet him at Moorgate Street Station the following day. Police were lying in wait and arrested both Power and Williams at the Moorgate station. Police covered Williams's head with an apron to prevent him from being photographed and thus possibly influencing witnesses. However, no one had glimpsed the murderer's face, and no one selected Williams from an identity parade. Power was immediately released.

Upon his release, Power went to Seymour and told her that the police knew what had happened and that the only way to save Williams was to dig up the gun and move it somewhere safer. Seymour and Power retrieved the gun on 15 October;
several police officers were lying in wait and immediately arrested both Seymour and Power. Power was released a few hours later; Seymour was retained for questioning. Seymour was pregnant and in poor condition both physically and mentally; after a few hours of questioning, she wrote and signed a statement which incriminated Williams. In her statement, Seymour stated that Williams

had left her for half an hour near the Countess's house on the night of the murder, returning without his trilby hat, and afterwards throwing away a burglar's rope with a hook on the end of it, also with him burying a revolver on the beach he had broken in two.
Despite Seymour's statement, Williams maintained that he was innocent of the murder and the burglary, saying that "whoever did that did it to get to [Sztaray's] papers for political purposes. No doubt she is mixed up in some foreign political business. I would not commit a crime like that."

Williams appeared at the Magistrates Court in Eastbourne for an initial hearing. He was not represented by either a solicitor or a barrister, and pleaded not guilty. On his way to and from the court Williams's head was again covered with an apron to prevent him from being photographed; the press accordingly dubbed him "the hooded man." The police decided that Seymour should take the witness stand as soon as possible to avoid her going back on what she had told the police. As such she was called to the witness box by Cecil Whiteley (who was Treasury Counsel at the time) to go through her statement line by line. She was physically exhausted and fainted four times in the witness box; this and other interruptions meant that the initial hearing took four days. Eventually the case was referred to the Assizes for trial.

The trial of John Williams for the murder of Inspector Arthur Walls began on 12 December 1912 at the Lewes Assizes, with Arthur Channell sitting as a judge. By this time, Williams had found a solicitor who had arranged for Patrick Hastings and C. F. Baker to represent him in court. The Crown was represented by Sir Frederick Low and Cecil Whiteley. The trial proved a popular one, with crowds of people outside the court house trying to see the defendants or barristers involved. A local newspaper described it as "the most sensational murder trial ... within living history."

Florence Seymour was the first person called to the witness box. She said that her statement was false, and that she had only made it because Edgar Power had told her that she would be charged with murder if she did not. This immediately disrupted the case for the prosecution; Frederick Low had made it clear in his opening statement that their case rested primarily on Seymour's testimony. Low received permission from the judge to treat Seymour as a hostile witness; despite this, she refused to say anything that would incriminate Williams. Hastings did not cross-examine her, only asking if what she had said in court was true; she said that it was and then burst into tears.

After calling a number of minor witnesses (including the cab driver and the owner of the building Williams and Seymour lived in), the prosecution called Edgar Power. Power testified that Williams had bragged about shooting Walls in response to Powers' chaffing him about being a poor shot. According to Power, Williams responded to the chaff by saying, "Well, that was a good shot anyhow," referring to the shot that had killed Walls. Williams' barrister Hastings later described Power as "[the most] utterly contemptible human being I have ever met," and during his cross-examination Hastings highlighted Power's betrayal of his close friends, Williams and Seymour.

The defendant, John Williams, was called next. Williams claimed that the package containing the rope and the gun had been given to him by a fellow thief called "Freddy Mike", who had asked him to keep the package until Mike came to collect it. After the murder, Williams was scared that he would be suspected, since he had a gun and had been arrested previously for burglary.

Following the testimony of Seymour, Power, and Williams, it became clear the jury could not convict Williams based on witness testimony alone. There was, however, some circumstantial evidence: an empty holster found by the police among Williams' possessions showed evidence of a revolver recently being inside it. The police enlisted the aid of an expert in the new science of forensic ballistics, Robert Churchill; it was one of the first times the police made use of ballistics in a case.

Churchill was able to prove, by firing a different gun of the same design, that the bullet that killed the police officer had been fired from a revolver of the same make and calibre as the gun reported to be Williams'. However, the prosecution needed proof that the bullet had been fired from that particular revolver. At the suggestion of Chief Inspecter Bower, photographers attempted to photograph the inside of the gun barrel in order to prove that the bullet had been fired from that particular revolver; the attempts were unsuccessful, and Churchill instead made a cast of the inside of the gun from dental wax. The method has been called "far from satisfactory," but it was sufficient to convict Williams.

In his summing up, Judge Channell commented that the acts of the defendant in hiding the gun and fleeing Eastbourne "were acts which a guilty man would be very likely to do." He also told the jury that, while there was no direct evidence linking Williams to the murder, many cases had resulted in a conviction with even less evidence. After around fifteen minutes of deliberations, the jury returned a verdict of guilty, and Channell sentenced Williams to death.

Immediately after the verdict was read, Williams' solicitor announced that he would appeal the verdict. He asked Hastings again to represent the defendant, this time in the Court of Criminal Appeal. The Court met on 13 January 1913, and consisted of Lord Alverstone, Mr Justice Phillimore and Mr Justice Ridley. Hastings argued that Mr Justice Channell had misdirected the jury in the initial case, and that therefore their decision was void. Lord Alverstone dismissed the appeal without hearing the other side of the argument, saying that he could find no evidence of misdirection. Hastings felt that Alverstone had been biased from the start, later writing that "from the outset of the hearing it was apparent that he was satisfied with the prisoner's guilt, and no legal argument seemed to make the least impression on him."

Shortly after the appeal was dismissed, Williams received a letter from "Freddy Mike", who stated that not only did he know the real murderer, but that the murderer was his twin brother who had killed the police inspector before fleeing to France. Williams immediately showed the letter to his solicitor, who contacted Scotland Yard. Accompanied by Chief Inspector Bower, Williams' solicitor visited Freddy Mike, who again told the same story. A copy of the letter was sent to the Home Secretary, Reginald McKenna, along with a statement by Florence Seymour in which she claimed that her confession had been given after threats by the police.

When Freddy Mike's statement became known to the public, various petitions and campaigns to free Williams were organised throughout the country. A petition containing 35,000 signatures requesting a reprieve was sent to the Home Secretary. As soon as the House of Commons opened on 23 January 1913, McKenna was questioned by Labour, Conservative, and Liberal MPs. Robert Munro, MP for Wick Burghs, made a speech asking the Home Secretary to take into account the conflicting accounts, lack of any direct evidence, and the way the judge had directed the jury, and pardon Williams. In this he was supported by Will Crooks, the Marquess of Tullibardine, and Ian Macpherson.

McKenna replied that: 
"The house will understand that there is no part of the Home Secretary's duty which throws greater responsibility upon him or is indeed more painful, then that which has to be exercised in connection with the prerogative of mercy. Of course, any man would be only too glad to find a scintilla of evidence or reason, or I might say to invent a reason, which would enable him to save a human life. But my duty, as I understand it, is to act in accordance with the law and the traditions of my office.

I have investigated [the story of Freddy Mike] to its very foundation. I have traced the family history of the man who calls himself Freddy Mike, and I find beyond question, and I may say even on his own admission, that there is not a shred or shadow of foundation for his story from beginning to end. He said that he had a twin brother. He had no twin brother. He said that the twin brother or a friend of the twin brother was in Eastbourne that night. There were no such people, and the whole story is an invention because, having known John Williams in the past, he did not like to think of his being hanged."

McKenna concluded by saying that the law must take its course, and refused to grant a pardon.

Williams applied to Home Secretary McKenna for permission to marry Florence Seymour; McKenna denied Williams's request, and did so again when Williams petitioned a second time. Williams was executed on 30 January 1913.



</doc>
<doc id="22254234" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22254234" title="Silent Hill: Shattered Memories">
Silent Hill: Shattered Memories

Silent Hill: Shattered Memories is a survival horror video game developed by Climax Studios and published by Konami Digital Entertainment for the Wii in December 2009. It was ported to the PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable platforms, and these versions were released in January 2010. In April 2014, it appeared on the PlayStation Network in Europe. The game serves as a remake of the first installment.

"Shattered Memories" retains the premise of the original game—Harry Mason's quest to find his missing daughter in the fictitious American town of Silent Hill—but is set in a different fictional universe, has a different plot, and altered characters, alongside new ones. Five endings are available. Gameplay takes place in two parts: a framing, first-person psychotherapy session, and an over-the-shoulder perspective of Harry's journey through Silent Hill, which is periodically interrupted by the occurrence of a shift to an alternate dimension. Answers given to the psychological tests in the therapy session affect various gameplay elements in Harry's journey.

After designing the (2007), which intentionally replicated elements of the first installment, Climax Studios wanted to try a different approach to creating a title in the series. Among the changes made was the removal of combat and the constant presence of monsters. Akira Yamaoka composed the soundtrack of the game, which was the first in the series to prominently feature dynamic music. The game received generally positive reviews, and its graphics, storyline, voice acting, soundtrack, and use of the Wii Remote were praised by reviewers. Some reviewers criticized "Shattered Memories" chase sequences and duration, which they deemed potentially frustrating and short.

"Silent Hill: Shattered Memories" is a remake of the first installment of the series, " Silent Hill". It keeps the premise of writer Harry Mason's quest for his missing daughter after a car crash, although it leads into a different plot. The personalities and roles of characters from the first game have also been changed, and "Shattered Memories" introduces new characters as well.

"Silent Hill: Shattered Memories" divides its gameplay between two different settings. The first section is set in a psychotherapist's office and the second in a town called Silent Hill. In the first section, the player interacts with Dr. Michael Kaufmann, a therapist who is a non-player character, from a first-person perspective. The player responds to Kaufmann's questions and completes a psychological test, fills in a questionnaire or colors pictures. The player's responses to these tests alters aspects of gameplay in the second setting, including the available areas, the physical appearance and behavior of characters encountered, and the physical appearance of the monsters. "Shattered Memories" returns to Kaufmann's office periodically throughout the game.

In the second setting, the player guides Harry Mason in an over-the-shoulder view as he searches for his missing daughter Cheryl in the snowy town of Silent Hill. Harry is equipped with a smartphone and flashlight: he can use the phone to check his location on a Global Positioning System map, take photographs, and make telephone calls. Moving to certain spots with high interference, represented by a lot of radio noise, or by taking pictures of spots where shadowy figures can be seen, unlock various text and voicemail messages that expand the story and occasionally provide clues. To view the details of various documents, the player can zoom in on objects. The game also alters details of gameplay based on what the player views. Throughout his journey, Harry encounters puzzles such as mechanisms, which reward either a key required to progress or a bonus memento. In the Wii version, the Wii Remote is used for puzzle solving and to control the flashlight and cell phone.

The game occasionally shifts to an icy alternate dimension called "Nightmare", where hostile monsters exist. To escape from this dimension, Harry must find a predetermined exit while avoiding the wandering creatures which chase him upon detection. Unlike previous installments in the series, there is no combat element to the gameplay: Harry is weaponless for the entire duration of the game and can only run, hide, slow down the monsters by knocking down objects to block their path, throw off the creatures if they latch onto him, and temporarily ward them off by picking up and using flares found lying on the ground. His running speed and "health" (the amount of damage that he can endure before dying) decrease every time the monsters grab him. In contrast to the previous installments of the series, which featured various types of monsters, "Shattered Memories" features only one type of humanoid monster, whose physical appearance changes in response to the player's actions inside and outside the Nightmare realm, including their responses to Kaufmann's psychological tests.

The game begins with a psychotherapy session conducted by Dr. Kaufmann, which acts as a frame story for Harry's quest. Suffering from issues with his memory, Harry travels home to search for his seven-year-old daughter Cheryl, hoping that she is already there. His consciousness moves between the in-game real world and "Nightmare"—a frozen version of the town in which monsters chase him—and finds that another family lives in his house. Police officer Cybil Bennett arrives and decides to take him to the police station, but they become caught in a blizzard, and Harry eventually leaves her car to continue his search. Eventually, Harry finds his way to the local high school, where he learns from a woman named Michelle Valdez that a Cheryl Mason attended school there previously, but then moved. She offers to drive Harry to Cheryl's new address, but after briefly stepping away, he returns to find Michelle has been replaced by Dahlia Mason, who claims to be Harry's lover and acts as if she has been with him the whole time. He accepts the ride, although during another shift to the Nightmare, the car falls into a river. Harry escapes but loses consciousness.

He awakens in a wheelchair pushed by Cybil in the town's hospital. Before Cybil can tell him about his file at the station, the town transitions to the Nightmare. Harry escapes and meets Lisa Garland, a nurse injured in a crash, and escorts her to her home. At her request, Harry gives Lisa pills for her headache, and returns to find her either dead or dying, depending on in-game actions taken by the player. Finding him next to Lisa's corpse, Cybil attempts to arrest him, but is frozen as the Nightmare emerges around them. Harry escapes to Cheryl's home, where he finds an older Dahlia who claims to be his wife and tells him that Cheryl is at the lighthouse. Harry enters the Nightmare, escapes it, and eventually gets a ride from Michelle. Harry finds a young-again Dahlia aboard a boat at a lakeside harbour, who sets the course for the lighthouse and seduces him. Harry wakes, finds an aged Dahlia and the environment covered in ice, and crosses the now-frozen lake but falls into the water and passes out. Harry is dragged ashore near the lighthouse by Cybil, who confronts him with the news that Harry Mason died eighteen years ago in a car accident. As Harry proceeds, he finds "the lighthouse" is the name of Dr. Kaufmann's counseling clinic: the patient in the therapy session is an adult Cheryl, who is in denial over her father's death. Harry enters the office and Cheryl either reconciles herself to his death or continues to cling to her fantasy father.

At the end of the game, an old video clip from Cheryl's camcorder is played. Four variations of this clip are available depending upon the player's actions as Harry. In "Love Lost", Harry packs his luggage in a car and tells Cheryl not to blame herself for her parents' separation. In "Drunk Dad", a drunken Harry yells at Cheryl, demands a beer and blames his drinking on his family. In "Sleaze and Sirens", Harry flirts on his bed with Lisa and Michelle. In "Wicked and Weak", Dahlia verbally abuses Harry and slaps him. In the "UFO" joke ending, Cheryl tells Dr. Kaufmann that she believes Harry was kidnapped by aliens and that Silent Hill is a spaceship. After James Sunderland interrupts, the therapy session continues, revealing Cheryl to be a dog and Dr. Kaufmann to be an alien. Regardless of the ending, the final scene shows Cheryl packing away mementos that the player can collect throughout the game. An additional scene the player can obtain shows her reconciling with Dahlia outside the clinic.

Plans for a "Silent Hill" remake, and speculation about a possible remake based on the "Silent Hill" film, were circulating as early as 2006. The idea of a remake was also considered early in the development of the prequel game "" (2007). Rumours persisted into 2009, and were seemingly confirmed in February when the British Board of Film Classification (BBFC) re-rated the original game. The game was officially announced in the May 2009 issue of "Nintendo Power".

Climax Studios, the developer of "Silent Hill: Origins", developed "Shattered Memories" with a development team made up of more than 55 members and a supporting network of more than 90 artists. With the completion of "Origins"—for which they had attempted to closely replicate the atmosphere and gameplay elements of the first "Silent Hill" game (1999)—Climax Studios wanted to create a different horror game. Because of the tenth anniversary of the first "Silent Hill" installment, Konami thought the time was ideal "to revisit" the game. Climax Studios saw the then-newly introduced Wii platform as a way to reach a wider range of gamers, especially as outside Japan, no "Silent Hill" title had been exclusively released on a Nintendo platform. Development costs for the Xbox 360 or PlayStation 3 and their gamers' "mindset" factored into the decision for the gaming platform. Additionally, the developers wanted to use the Wii Remote to incorporate the gameplay elements of the flashlight and radio static. Climax felt that the first game would be a good starting point, instead of continuing any existing storylines or adding onto the mythology of the town. To please fans of the series and bring in new ones, they decided to reimagine the setting and characters, such as Dahlia, who was changed from "a haggard old woman" who led the town's cult into a physically attractive young woman.

Climax Studios began with the game's plot, which the development team considered the main appeal of the series. Early in the game's development, some team members visited a psychiatrist for research. The use of ice as a visual theme originated partly because the developers wanted to create an Otherworld for the game, as previous games in the series had featured the same theme as "Silent Hill", and because snowfall is common in the northeastern or midwestern United States, where the fictional town is located. Falling snow was added to limit the player's visibility and build an atmosphere of dread. The developers included a system of psychological profiling that adjusted gameplay elements based on the player's interaction with the game. Writer Sam Barlow explained the system: "ultimately every little thing you do in the game or piece of content you can interact with can be assigned a little personality score. This is all added into a very classical psychometric profile of your personality that can then be mapped onto research." The opening questionnaire has little significance in the player's profile. Capturing the multiple variations of gameplay elements for submission to the Entertainment Software Rating Board proved to be difficult, according to the game's producer, Tomm Hulett. Loading times were eliminated from the game to maintain a sense of immersion for the player.

The developers felt that creating another game in the series with the same style of gameplay had limited potential. In an attempt to imbue the game with the feel of a horror film where the protagonist is a regular person and the antagonist is powerful, they avoided the common survival horror gameplay feature of a player character who is skilled in the use of weapons. Instead they generated an unarmed player character; and examined the survival horror gameplay staple of difficult combat and sluggish opponents, inspired by zombie films and modelled after the video games "Alone in the Dark" (1992) and "Resident Evil" (1996). They also analyzed around 50 chase sequences from various films, including horror films, and the structure of slasher films, in which a powerful and intelligent antagonist pursues the protagonists. The developers drew inspiration from common childhood nightmares about running away from an unknown threat, and decided to incorporate an intelligent enemy capable of trailing and outrunning the protagonist. The chase sequences were designed to evoke a brief sense of tension and fright for the player, although the developers did not want to prolong the tension with the constant presence of monsters, and were concerned that this would become overwhelming and spoil the player's immersion in the game and interest in the story. The constant presence of monsters was also thought to be irrelevant to "Shattered Memories"; director Mark Simmons said, "this Harry Mason is not a guy who is constantly under attack from monsters. It's not a story of surviving a zombie apocalypse." Additionally, to make information-gathering in the game realistic and corresponding to modern life standards, the developers substituted text in scattered documents, a common element in survival horror games, for the player's interaction with the in-game environment and use of the cell phone.

"Silent Hill" series composer Akira Yamaoka scored the soundtrack of "Shattered Memories". It was his final contribution to the "Silent Hill" series before he resigned from Konami after 16 years with the company. Voice actress Mary Elizabeth McGlynn provided vocals for four musical pieces included in the game and co-directed "Shattered Memories" voice acting, and musician Joe Romersa wrote lyrics for three of the pieces. The game is the first in the series to make prominent use of dynamic music; a composition is introduced and subsequently retracted, based on the player's actions, in every major area of the game. Widely varying compositions, ranging from undertones to rock music, were produced for the game.

A playable demo of "Shattered Memories" was made available in June 2009 at the annual trade fair Electronic Entertainment Expo 2009 (E3) and received favorable reviews from video game journalists. A group of editors of the IGN website gave the game three "Best of E3" awards in the Wii category for best overall game, best adventure game, and best video game graphics technology. The game was also given a "Best Wii Game" award by editors of the GameSpot website in an article on their preferred games featured at the E3 show.

"Shattered Memories" was published by Konami for the Wii in North America on 8 December 2009; in Europe on 26 February 2010; and in Japan on 25 March 2010. The Australian release was delayed until 22 June 2010, due to European supply problems caused by the economic effects of the 2010 eruptions of Eyjafjallajökull. Major Australian retailers struggled to confirm available copies of the game for several months after the delayed release, potentially damaging initial sales of the game. The PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable versions were published in North America on 19 January 2010; in Europe on 26 February 2010; in Japan on 25 March 2010; and in Australia on 22 April 2010. It also became available on the PlayStation Network for Europe and the United Kingdom on 28 April 2014. Compatibility with PS Vita was planned but cancelled; the games are currently only available for the PSP.
According to producer Tomm Hulett, the number of pre-ordered copies of "Silent Hill: Shattered Memories" "looked very good". In March 2010, the game placed fifth on the list of the top forty bestselling PS2 videogames in the United Kingdom and eleventh on the corresponding list for Wii games. However, NintendoWorldReport stated that sales of the game were low. The game eventually broke even with the help of the PS2 port, selling an estimated 440,000 copies.

Review aggregator website Metacritic displays an averaged score for "Silent Hill: Shattered Memories" of 79/100, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Wesley Yin-Poole of VideoGamer.com ranked "Shattered Memories" in seventh place on his list of "top ten nerve-shredding video games", and wrote: "Dark, dank and dangerous, Silent Hill grabs you by the scruff of the neck, shakes you till you throw up, then headbutts you right between the eyes." Gamasutra's Brandon Sheffield, ranked the game in fifth place on his top ten list of overlooked games of 2009, and wrote that despite the absence of horror elements, the game was a nice experience. Matt Wales of IGN also included the game in a list of overlooked Wii games, and wrote that the combination of various elements which he regarded as positive delivered "a meticulously-constructed, expertly-paced experience quite unlike anything the series has seen before."

Chris Schilling of "The Daily Telegraph" described it as "one of the most innovative and enjoyable survival horrors for many a year." Eurogamer's Kristan Reed wrote, "Packed with inventive ideas and one engaging sequence after another, it's a spirited, poignant and unsettling game that not only delivers a long-overdue return to form, but reinvigorates horror adventures in the process." According to Lark Anderson of GameSpot, ""Shattered Memories" is a fantastic return to the core concept of personal fear, and though its developers made some unorthodox decisions—such as removing combat entirely—those decisions have paid off handsomely." "Nintendo Power" called it audacious and compelling. In a retrospective feature, Nintendo World Report's Jonathan Metts generally agreed with Gamespot, stating that the installment "is a noble and arguably successful attempt to revive and reform the survival horror genre. While perhaps not scary, it is genuinely disturbing, shocking, and always interesting." According to Leigh Alexander of The A.V. Club, the innovation and uniqueness of the installment made it capable of standing alone from the "Silent Hill" series, without having to use the series' reputation or name to attract players. Conversely, "Game Informer"s Tim Turi considered the frustrating controls and dull pacing to be major flaws, and wrote, "If you’re a "Silent Hill" fan interested in a fresh take on the stale formula, this Wii entry may be the Cheryl you’ve been searching for—but it comes at a cost."

The division of gameplay into puzzle-based exploration, weaponless chase sequences, and therapy scenes drew mixed comments from reviewers. About.com's Charles Herold wrote that the fast-paced action of the nightmare sequences and the therapy scenes undercut the "trapped in a nightmare" feeling of previous "Silent Hill" games. Matt Casamassina of IGN wrote that "the separation between safe exploration and puzzling and run-for-your-life monster scenarios is too transparent and as a result you will inevitably come to fear the ice and few things else." PALGN's Michael Kontoudis said that the chase sequences severely detracted from the rest of the game. Eurogamer wrote that they created a welcome mix with no gameplay element overemphasized. Reviewers were also divided on whether the chase sequences were potentially frustrating, or quickly grew repetitive. GamesRadar's Henry Gilbert expressed frustration over the similar enemies and repetitive use of a stock scream. Neon Kelly of VideoGamer.com was concerned by the absence of a possible death of the player character which would result in a "game over", because he esteemed the fear potentially caused to the player by player character death as a major element of the survival horror genre. The use of the Wii Remote was praised by reviewers as natural-seeming, and well-suited to the movement-based puzzles and scenes.

"Shattered Memories" reimagined plot received praise from reviewers, some of whom found it easier to follow than the plot of the first game. "Game Informer" drew comparisons with film director M. Night Shyamalan's style. GamesRadar wrote that the storyline and characterizations were mature, its puzzles clear yet challenging and that the atmospheric scares contributed to the game's appeal. Justin Haywald of 1UP.com said that the text messages about minor characters not introduced in the game detracted from the overall narrative. The game's duration, considered relatively short by reviewers, was seen as a drawback, although some reviewers said that the psychological elements and multiple endings increased the replay value of the game. The psychological elements were also criticized. About.com wrote that they were far less subtle than those in "Silent Hill 2", and GamePro's Will Herring said that while the player-profiling element was ambitious, he did not think it went far enough, as it changed only cosmetic details and character dialogue. Reviewers praised the graphics, and called them detailed and well-done. Chris McMahon of "Play" placed the game tenth on his list of the "ten best-looking PSP games". GameTrailers praised the variety of objects, many of which can be manipulated by the player, and the detailed textures which lent the game's environments authenticity. The soundtrack was favorably received, and reviewers described it as moody, atmospheric, and helping to create tension. The voice acting was similarly well-received as believable. Additionally, the soundtrack won an award for its audio design at the Milthon European Games Awards, an event held in Paris, France, at the Paris Game Festival; the awards were handed out by an eight-person jury and the French Minister of Culture and Communication.

Metacritic shows an averaged score of 77/100 for the PlayStation 2 port, indicating generally favorable reviews. Casamassina gave the PS2 port a score of 8.0/10, and wrote that while the graphics and control system in the Wii version were better, the port held up well. For the PlayStation Portable port, Metacritic displays an averaged score of 73/100, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Casamassina gave it a score of 7.0, and commented upon the "obvious visual downgrades", "sluggish controls", and "the inability to directly control and point his flashlight". In his review of both ports, Haywald said that the control systems of both ports worked well, and described them as "a technical triumph".<ref name="1UP PS2/PSP"></ref>




</doc>
<doc id="22302237" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22302237" title="Phumdi">
Phumdi

Phumdis () are a series of floating islands, exclusive to the Loktak Lake in Manipur state, in northeastern India. They cover a substantial part of the lake area and are heterogeneous masses of vegetation, soil and organic matter, in different stages of decay. The largest single mass of phumdi is in the southeastern part of the lake, covering an area of . This mass constitutes the world’s largest floating park, named Keibul Lamjao National Park. The park was formed to preserve the endangered Eld's deer subspecies, called sangai in the Meitei language, indigenous to this area.

Phumdis are used by the local people for constructing their huts for fishing and other livelihood uses, and are inhabited by about 4000 people. "Athapums" are artificial circular phumdis, built by the villagers as enclosures for fish farming; aquaculture has caused proliferation of the phumdis in the lake.

Although phumdi vegetation has existed for centuries, it was not until 1886 that the Manipur Gazetteer recorded that wetlands with floating islands were used by inhabitants for fishing. Before the Itahi barrage was constructed in 1986, 207 "khangpoks" (huts or sheds) were reported on the phumdis, but after the dam was completed in 1999, the Loktak Development Authority (LDA) reported 800 such structures. Many of the huts are reported to have been converted into permanent dwellings and about 4,000 people live in these floating huts, earning their living as fishermen. The huts are constructed using plastic ropes, heavy rocks, wood, bamboo, zinc plates and iron rods. "Athapums", artificial circular phumdis, which were built by the villagers as enclosures for fish farming, are present on the lake, and this aquaculture has caused further proliferation of the phumdis. A tourist lodge has been built on one of the phumdis in Sandra Island.

The floating mass of matted vegetation, organic debris, and soil that constitutes a phumdi has a thickness that varies from a few centimetres to two metres. Its humus is black in colour and porous, with a spongy texture. Only 20% of a phumdi's thickness floats above the water surface; the other 80% remains submerged. Before the construction of the Loktak Hydroelectric Project, the park area containing phumdis was merely marshy land, but since the commissioning of the project, two ecosystems have emerged. One, the body of open water, covers one-third of the area and the other, the phumdi, covers the remaining two-thirds. 

The life-cycle of the phumdis has generally been subject to seasonal variation. During the monsoon season when the water level is high, the phumdis float, but during the dry season, as the water level falls, the phumdis touch the lake bed and absorb nutrients from it. When the wet season returns, they again float, and the biomass, which has enough nutrients stored in the plants' roots, survives. However, the contemporary situation, with high water levels in the lake throughout the year, has meant that the process of 'feeding' on lake–bottom nutrients has been seriously disturbed, resulting in a loss of biomass and a thinning of the islands each year. In January 1999, it was reported that a large section of phumdi in the north of the park had shattered into pieces and drifted away from the park area, threatening the habitat of the sangai.

Changes in the water regime due to the construction of the Ithai barrage across the Manipur River have caused changes in the vegetation composition of the phumdis. A study was instituted, from October 2005 to July 2006, to record the vegetation composition and productivity of phumdis in areas of ranging thickness, water depth and soil pH, accumulating data in both summer and winter. The study recorded 83 plant species of 21 families ("Poaceae" and "Cyperaceae" formed the dominant families); 81 species were recorded in summer and 48 in winter.
The Diversity indices of the plant species were recorded; they were a richness of 48, diversity of 0.29 and evenness of 0.47 in summer. In winter, the respective figures were 81, 0.17 and 0.52. Species richness was found to be different in 48 samples of thin phumdis, 53 samples of thick phumdis and 14 samples on hard ground. The eight plant communities identified during winter and summer were "Capillipedium", "Leersia hexandra", "Oenanthe javanica", "Phragmites karka", "Kyllinga triceps", "Pteridium aquilinum", "Zizania latifolia" and "Persicaria perfoliata". "Zizania latifolia" recorded the highest productivity with (13.90 ± 5.01) g/m for winter and (102.96 ± 26.03) g/m for summer. Greater productivity was recorded in summer (65.96 g/m) than winter (15.76 g/m). Variation of productivity of annuals and perennials were noted according to seasons and type of phumdis.

The largest of all the phumdis in the lake is situated in the southeastern region of the Loktak Lake, which forms the Keibul Lamjao National Park. This park is the last natural refuge of the endangered Manipur brow-antlered deer ("Cervus eldi eldi"), locally known as the sangai, one of the three sub species of the Eld's deer listed as an endangered species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

Apart from the brow-antlered deer, which is the flagship species of the park, other fauna found in the park are mammals, reptiles, and migratory and resident avifauna species.

Mammal species consist of hog deer ("C. porcinus"), wild boar ("Sus scrota"), large Indian civets ("Viverra civetta", "Viverricula indica"), common otter ("Lutra lutra"), fox, jungle cat, Asian golden cat, bay bamboo rat, musk shrew, common shrew, flying fox, and sambar ("Cervus unicolor").

Reptile species found in the park are the keel back tortoise, viper, krait, cobra, water cobra, banded krait ("Bungarus fasciatus"), Asian rat snake (beauty rat snake), Russels’ viper ("Daboia"), checkered garter snake, python and common lizard (viviparous lizard). "Python molurus" is an endangered species found in the park.

Prominent bird species seen in the park are both migratory and resident avifauna species. Some of the avifauna are the East Himalayan pied kingfisher, black kite, lesser sky-lark, northern hill myna, Burmese pied myna, North Indian black drongos, lesser eastern jungle crow, yellow headed wagtail, spotbill duck, blue-winged teal, ruddy shell duck, hooded crane, Burmese sarus crane, Indian white-breasted waterhen and crimson-breasted pied woodpecker.

The proliferation of phumdis, coupled with severe infestation of the lake by water hyacinth, has substantially impeded water circulation and caused an increase in siltation and deposit of pollutants in the lake ecosystem. The building materials used to build huts on the phumdi blocks sunlight from reaching the lower depths of the lake water, which has resulted in formation of vertical profiles of the lake water body and decomposition. Further, pesticides and insecticides are used for catching fish or as insect repellent. Degradation is in the form of benthal, which, as it decays, releases toxic gases such as methane, hydrogen sulfide, and reduces dissolved oxygen (DO). This causes the lake water to degenerate into a eutrophic condition, creating a dead water zone called the hypolimnion. Above the hypolimnion is a thin layer, known as epilimnion, where fish survive to some degree. The benthal is becoming increasingly thick, causing not only pollution of the lake water, but an increase in the shallow part of the lake.

It has been reported that the construction of Ithai Barrage has altered the Loktak Lake and its ecosystem. Siltation has reduced the water holding capacity and has consequently had a negative impact on the power generation capacity at the Loktak Hydro Electric Power Project. Thinning of the phumdi in the Keibul Lamjao area has affected the habitat of the sangai, and other aquafauna, avifauna and flora are on the decline; the 35 species (5 mammals, 3 birds, 9 reptiles, 3 amphibians, 12 fishes, 2 molluscs and 1 annelid) are reported to be disappearing gradually.

It is also reported that the soil of the park formed by the phumdis is highly acidic, with unsuitable pH conditions for many species of plants to grow and flourish. Further, the acidity of the soil has also adversely affected the fish breeding farms. Recent reports indicate that locals are slicing the phumdis into sizeable pieces and towing them with canoes to sell to fish culture owners.

A scientific study of the water quality parameters of physico-chemical and microbiological characteristics and role of phumdis in the Loktak Lake has been conducted by collecting surface water samples on monthly basis from 15 stations, representing 5 zones; northern, western, eastern, middle and southern. The test results indicated that water quality in the phumdi area was poor in the northern and southern zones of the lake; test results indicated low dissolved oxygen, low pH (normal range for pH in surface water systems is 6.5 to 8.5) high CO and high Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) but the water quality was good in the open water area. Assessment of the total nitrogen content of the macrophyte species of phumdis indicated that the following were present in descending order: "Salvinia natans" (1.8%), "Zizania latifolia" (1.6%), "Capillipedium" sp. (1.3%), "Brachiaria mutica" (1.2%), "Cyperus brevifolius" (1.2%), "Echinochloa stagnina" (1.0%), "Phragmites karka" (1.0%) and "Hedychium coranarium" (0.94%). The test results confirmed the fact that the phumdis were efficient in absorbing nutrients from the lake water. However, they deteriorated water quality due to reduced light penetration and accumulation of organic matter in the lake ecosystem.

A detailed study has been conducted by the Loktak Development Authority (LDA) in collaboration with Wetlands International–South Asia, supported by the India–Canada Environment Facility, implementing a project on Sustainable Development and Water Resources Management of the Loktak Lake. The project addresses the issues relating to water management, sustainable fisheries development, community participation and development, catchment area treatment and conservation of wildlife. The Planning Commission of the Government of India, decided in September 2008 that these policies would be implemented over a period of 5–6 years at an estimated cost of over Rs500 crores (US$100 million), and extended the area under management to also incorporate the water of Nambul and other rivers and their tributaries, which are primarily responsible for polluting the Loktak Lake.

In order to resolve the problem of the excessive growth of phumdis that affects the lake ecosystem and local community, a study sponsored by the India–Canada Environment Facility was undertaken by the Tata Energy Research Institute (TERI) to examine efficient ways of converting phumdis into briquettes as fodder and fuel pellets, which could be used to meet both energy demands within the region. Two options for the biomass conversion were studied. The first involved making briquettes of vegetative part of phumdis for use as fodder while the second proposed to pelletise the lower part of phumdis for use as fuel. The study observed that phumdis have nutritional potential as feed material due to its higher crude fibre and crude protein content, but the inorganic content in the root and mat zone was found to be unsuitable for the purpose. The second option of making briquettes from the upper vegetative portion of the phumdis by mixing 12% de-oiled rice bran was found to be feasible for using them as fodder. The lower portion, which was densified to make fuel pellets, was found to be suitable for use as fuel. Such pellets were found to have an average calorific value of 3,400 calories per kilogram (14,200 kJ/kg) with ash content of 27%. Cost economics were worked out and the study had found it to be "an economically viable and an attractive proposition for the benefit of local population." The study concluded that extraction of phumdi from the lake could also generate income for the local people who are dependent on the lake for their livelihood. Such a step would protect the lake from the adverse effects of proliferation of phumdis and maintain the ecological balance of the lake, thus converting the waste into wealth. The Planning Commission has also concurred with project proposals to engage interested individuals and private enterprises to begin the commercial venture of manufacturing compost from the phumdis and thus improve the environment of the Keibul Lamjao National Park. The project also envisages removal of 3630 artificial phumdis and compensation to their owners; this is reported to have been implemented.

Another method adopted in the past to tackle the phumdis was by way of diverting them towards the Khordak River. However, as this approach had not been very successful, the State Government planned to construct a canal at Tera Khunou Khong Ahanbi to divert the phumdis to Manipur River. Other methods adopted by the Loktak Development Authority (LDA) to control phumdis and water hyacinth include introducing weevils for the biological control of water hyacinth, which was carried out in collaboration with the Horticulture Institute of Bangalore. Reports have shown this to be an effective method in controlling water hyacinth.

A lake restoration plan based on a decentralised bioreactor system to eliminate the organic load that enters the lake in the form of non-point and point source pollutants has also been mooted. Phumdis could be harvested in a sustainable manner by conversion into fuel and compost by installing ‘Plug Flow Bioreactors’ in a modular manner around the lake perimeter. Laboratory tests of key species of phumdis have proved its potential to produce biogas. The bioreactors could also be used to treat sewage and thus arrest flow of organic matter into the lake.

In a recent workshop organized by the LDA on "Management of Phumdis" in the Loktak Lake, which involved presentations by locals, the emphasis was on the need to open the barrage for eight months per year (January, April and June–September) to clear the phumdis, control floods and wash away the silt and waste that had accumulated over time. The LDA is also implementing action plans that are economically viable and technically feasible which would result in livelihood enhancement such as evolving an attractive resettlement plan for the phumdi dwellers backed by remunerative livelihood programs and examine the introduction of fishing nets instead of Athapum, the circular shaped Phumdis floating in the lake, planted or cultured artificially for catching fish.


</doc>
<doc id="22349942" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22349942" title="NTA Film Network">
NTA Film Network

The NTA Film Network was an early American television network founded by Ely Landau in 1956. The network was not a full-time television network like CBS, NBC, or ABC. Rather, it operated on a part-time basis, broadcasting films and several first-run television programs from major Hollywood studios. Despite attracting over 100 affiliate stations and the financial support of Twentieth Century-Fox (which purchased a 50% share of NTA in November 1956) the network proved unprofitable, and was discontinued by 1961. The NTA Film Network's flagship station, WNTA-TV, is now WNET, one of the flagship stations of the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS).

Parent company National Telefilm Associates was founded by producers Ely Landau and Oliver A. Unger in 1954 when Landau's film and television production company, Ely Landau, Inc., was reorganized in partnership with Unger and screenwriter and producer Harold Goldman. NTA was the successor company to U.M. & M. TV Corporation, having purchased U.M. & M. in 1956.

In October 1956, NTA launched the NTA Film Network, a syndication service which distributed both films and television programs to independent television stations and stations affiliated with NBC, CBS, or ABC (DuMont had recently gone out of the network business). The ad-hoc network's flagship station was WNTA-TV, channel 13 in New York. The NTA Network was launched as a "fourth TV network", and trade papers of the time referred to it as a new television network.

Unlike the Big Three television networks, the local stations in the NTA Film Network were not connected via coaxial cable or microwave relay. Instead, NTA Film Network programs were filmed and then mailed to each station in the network, a method used by television syndicators in the 1950s and 1960s. However, many local stations agreed to broadcast NTA Film Network programs in pattern (simultaneously). Landau's claim to network status was based on the simultaneous airing of the programs.

The NTA Film Network launched on October 15, 1956, with over 100 affiliate stations. In November 1956, it was announced that 50% of the network had been purchased by Twentieth Century-Fox, which would also produce original content for the network. The film network grew to 128 stations. In September 1957, the network purchased KMGM-TV (now Fox O&O KMSP-TV) in Minneapolis.

The following is a list of NTA Film Network affiliate stations in November 1956.

Later affiliates included KOOK-TV in Billings, Montana (c. 1958-1959), KONO-TV in San Antonio (c. 1958–1959), WISH-TV in Indianapolis (c. 1958–1959), and KTVU in San Francisco (c. 1959–1960). The network purchased KMGM-TV in Minneapolis, in September 1957.

The NTA Film Network aired both films and television series. Among its 1956–1957 offerings were 52 Twentieth Century-Fox films. "Premiere Performance", a prime time block of Twentieth Century-Fox films, aired from 1957–1959. Other film blocks included "TV Hour of Stars" and "The Big Night" (both 1958–1959).

The network's television programs included:

"How to Marry a Millionaire", which aired from 1957 to 1959, was based on the popular 1953 film of the same name. The series starred Barbara Eden, Merry Anders, Lori Nelson (1957–1958), and Lisa Gaye (1958–1959). The final episode aired in August 1959.

"Man Without a Gun", a western series starring Rex Reason and Mort Mills, aired from 1957 to 1959. The series portrayed Reason as a newspaper editor who brought criminals to justice without the use of guns.

"This is Alice", which aired from 1958 to 1959, starred nine-year-old Patty Ann Gerrity as Alice Holliday, a girl who lived in the fictional town of River Glen, Georgia. The series was directed and produced by Sidney Salkow for NTA and Desilu Productions.

"The Play of the Week", which aired from 1959 to 1961, was a series of 67 televised plays. The program was well received by critics, and received a Peabody Award. The series ended its run on May 1, 1961.

Other, lesser-known NTA series included "The Bill Corum Sports Show", "Man's Heritage", and "The Passerby" (all c. 1957), "Official Detective" (1957–1958), "Open End" (1958–1961), "William Tell" (1958–1959), "" (1959–1960), "Q. T. Hush" (1960–1961), "Sheriff of Cochise"/"U.S. Marshall" (1956–1958), "Alex in Wonderland" (1959), "Newsbeat" (1959–1961) "Juke Box Jury" (1958–1959), "The Best of Bishop Sheen" (1958–1963), "Danger Is My Business" (1958), "Divorce Court" (1958–1961), "Glencannon" (1959), "Grand Jury" (1959), "Mantovani" (1959), "Henry Morgan and Company" (1959), "George Jessel's Show Business" (1959), "The Mike Wallace Interview" (1959–1961), "The Third Man" (1960–1961), "The Oscar Levant Show" (1960), "Confidential Portrait", "Crime Reporter", and "Probe" (1962).

In October 1956, the NTA Film Network also announced provisional plans to telecast live sporting and special events (using network relays) by the 1959–1960 television season.

Below is a timeline showing the airdates of the NTA Film Network's programs and later NTA offerings. The number of episodes that each series aired is given in parentheses. Some dates are tentative, as accurate records for filmed television series were not always kept. 
Friday 1958–1959

In January 1959, Ely Landau was succeeded by Charles C. Barry, who took over as president of network operations. Landau continued to chair National Telefilm Associates. Despite the 50% ownership of Twentieth Century-Fox, the film network never developed into a major commercial television network on a par with the "Big Three" television networks; several modern TV historians regard the NTA Film Network as a syndication service rather than a major television network.

By 1961, WNTA-TV was losing money, and the network's flagship station was sold to the Educational Broadcasting Corporation that November. WNTA-TV became WNDT (later WNET), flagship station of the National Educational Television network, a forerunner of PBS. NTA network operations did not continue without a flagship station, although parent company National Telefilm Associates continued syndication services; four television series ("Probe", "Tintin", "The Fair Adventure", and "A Day With Doodles") were syndicated by NTA between 1962 and 1966.

The Los Angeles NTA Film Network station, KTTV, went on to become a founding owned and operated station of the Fox television network, which is co-owned with Twentieth Century-Fox and a part of 21st Century Fox.

Other early failed American TV networks:




</doc>
<doc id="22454909" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22454909" title="Ed Blake">
Ed Blake

Edward James Blake (December 23, 1925 – April 15, 2009) was an American right-handed pitcher in Major League Baseball who played four seasons with the Cincinnati Reds and the Kansas City Athletics. In eight career games, Blake pitched 8⅔ innings and had an 8.31 earned run average (ERA).

After graduating high school in East St. Louis, Blake played in the farm system of the nearby St. Louis Cardinals before enlisting in the army. He returned to baseball after being wounded in the military service, pitching in the minors for five years before making his major league debut for the Cincinnati Reds. He pitched for them on and off for three years, then spent the next six years pitching for the Toronto Maple Leafs. His last major league appearance was a stint with the Athletics in 1957, and two years later his professional baseball career ended. After retirement he became a plumber, and died in 2009.

Born in St. Louis, Missouri to Edward and Katherine Blake, he attended Central Catholic High School in East St. Louis, where he was a baseball teammate of Hank Bauer, and graduated in 1943. Blake pitched batting practice for the St. Louis Cardinals during the 1943 World Series after his high school graduation, in what he considered to be the highlight of his professional career. He signed with the Cardinals in 1944 and spent the season with three different minor league teams: the Columbus Red Birds of the American Association, the Allentown Cardinals of the Interstate League and the Mobile Bears of the Southern Association.

After the 1944 season ended, Blake enlisted in the Army and fought with the 40th Infantry Division in the Pacific Theater of Operations. While in the Philippines, Blake was wounded, and was out of action for nine months as he recovered. As the 1946 season began, he rejoined the Cardinals, now fully recovered, and spent the season with the Columbus Cardinals. Blake started the season losing his first three starts, but then won 13 straight and finished the season with a 16 wins, eight losses, and a 3.51 earned run average. In February 1947, Blake was among a group of 92 Cardinals players invited to a dinner for Cardinals minor leaguers, where accusations in regards to Cardinals players being paid poorly were brought up and discussed. He spent the following season playing for both Columbus teams, playing 29 games in total and finishing the season with a combined 4.46 ERA. Before the 1948 season began, Blake was promoted to the Rochester Red Wings of the International League. He had a 7–6 record and a 3.88 ERA in 34 games, seven of them starts. In 1949, Blake spent most of the season playing for Rochester. On August 9, 1949 he was traded by the Cardinals to the Cincinnati Reds in exchange for Mike Schultz, ending his career with the Cardinals. Blake finished the season with the Syracuse Chiefs and finished the season with a combined 5–4 record and a 4.78 ERA.

Blake began the 1950 season with Syracuse Chiefs and spent most of the season as a starting pitcher instead of a reliever. He started in 23 games and finished the season with a 12–8 record and an ERA of 3.51. In 1951, Blake was considered to have a small chance to make the major league roster. Nonetheless, Blake got his first taste of the major leagues that season. He made his major league debut on May 1, 1951 against the Philadelphia Phillies. Blake played three games during his time on the Reds in 1951, and finished two of those games. He pitched four innings, allowing five runs and three home runs, finishing the season with an ERA of 11.25. While on the Reds in 1951, he was part of a Reds "bullpen union" led by Jim Blackburn, which drew up a series of humorous requests including a smoking lounge and sandwiches between double headers. He spent most of the 1951 season with the Columbus Red Birds, playing in 27 games for them. In 27 pitching appearances, 23 of them starts, Blake went 7–15 with a 5.91 ERA. Despite the record, Blake led the Red Birds in innings pitched and finished tied for second in wins, though he did also lead the team, which went 53–101, in losses.

Blake spent most of 1952 with the Milwaukee Brewers of the American Association, but he also pitched a few games for the Reds during the 1952 Cincinnati Reds season. He pitched in two games for the Reds in 1952, coming in to finish both games for the Reds. He pitched three shutout innings, allowing three hits in these two games. During his time with the Brewers, he pitched in 21 games. He started 19 of the 21 games, won ten and lost three, and had a 3.96 ERA. As the 1953 season began, Blake again had a stint with Cincinnati, but spent most of the season with the Indianapolis Indians. He pitched in one game for the Reds on April 17, 1953 against the Milwaukee Brewers, allowing two earned runs on a hit and a walk without getting a batter out. During his time with the Indianapolis Indians, he pitched in 29 games, and was the workhorse of the Indians' squad. He finished the season with a 14–7 record, a 3.76 ERA, and 208 innings pitched, and led the team in wins, innings pitched, and starting appearances.

The 1953 season marked Blake's last appearance with the Reds. On February 1, 1954, Blake was purchased from the Reds by the Toronto Maple Leafs, an unaffiliated team of the American Association. He played for the Maple Leafs for a total of six seasons, where he had some of his best professional career seasons. In 1954, he teamed with Connie Johnson to lead the Maple Leafs to a 97-57 record. He finished the 1954 season with a 15–9 record, a 3.92 ERA, 30 games started, and 209 innings pitched, leading the team in the latter two categories. The following season, he combined with Johnson and Jack Crimian to help Toronto win 94 games. On July 10, Blake was the first pitcher in the International League to win 13 games when he beat the Columbus squad 7–4. He finished the season with 17 wins, 13 losses, and a 3.94 ERA. In 1956, Blake was a member of the "big three" for the Maple Leafs, along with Don Johnson and International League Most Valuable Player Lynn Lovenguth. The three combined for 750 innings pitched and 57 complete games while often working on two days' rest. He finished the season with 17 wins, 11 losses, and a 2.61 ERA. He also led the team in shutouts with six.

Blake was drafted at the end of the 1956 season by the Kansas City Athletics in the rule 5 draft. The day after being drafted, the Athletics planned to include him in an eight-player deal with the Detroit Tigers involving Virgil Trucks and others, but his inclusion in the trade was vetoed by Commissioner Ford Frick, claiming his inclusion was "against the spirit of the draft." Blake was replaced in the trade by former Toronto teammate Jack Crimian. While he spent most of the 1957 season with Toronto, he had one final major league stint with the Athletics, pitching in two games in April. His 1957 stint in Toronto was not as successful as previous seasons, as he finished with eight wins, nine losses, and a 5.54 ERA. He spent five weeks of the 1958 season unable to play due to injury. Despite this, he was still able to pitch in 23 games, winning nine and bringing his ERA down to 3.54. In 1959, Blake split time between Toronto and the Houston Buffs, winning three games and losing ten in his final professional season of baseball.

After his playing career ended, Blake went on to become a plumber. He spent nearly 50 years in the plumbing business and was formerly the president of Plumbers Local 360. Blake was married to his wife, Carol Jean, for 47 years before her death. With Carol, he had a son, Ed, and a daughter, Peggy. His son, also named Ed Blake, was a former pitcher who played in the Baltimore Orioles' farm system from 1970 to 1973, playing for the AA affiliate Asheville Orioles at the peak of his career. His grandson, Ed Blake III, has continued in the footsteps of his father and grandfather as a pitcher in high school. Blake died in Swansea, Illinois at the age of 83 after a long illness, and is interred at Mount Carmel Cemetery in Belleville, Illinois.


</doc>
<doc id="22546492" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22546492" title="Hurricane Cora">
Hurricane Cora

Hurricane Cora was the first tropical cyclone of the 1978 Atlantic hurricane season to reach hurricane strength. Forming from a disturbance that exited the African coast on August 7, the storm moved at an unusually high forward speed for a cyclone in the Atlantic Ocean in August. The storm later reached hurricane strength and formed a well-defined eye that lasted only 12 hours before the eye rapidly lost organization for unknown reasons, though the post-season report on the storm mentions the possibility that its high speed caused the eye to dissipate. The storm moved west-southwestward, weakening before making landfall on the island of Grenada. The storm lost its circulation and became a tropical wave on August 12. The remnant crossed over Central America into the Pacific Ocean, where it reintensified, becoming Hurricane Kristy.

Cora was an unusual cyclone, maintaining an unusually low latitude for the Atlantic in August at high speeds, similar to the tracks of Tropical Storm Alma in 1974 and Tropical Storm Fran in 1990. The hurricane was also upgraded into a hurricane based solely on satellite photography, the second time this occurred. Although it passed through the Windward Islands and the Lesser Antilles, only minor effects were reported. Cora was also responsible for altering weather conditions allowing for a takeoff of the historical flight of the Double Eagle II hot air balloon.

In early August, a disturbance was observed in satellite images moving off the coast of Africa on August 4. Moving westward along the Intertropical Convergence Zone at a forward speed of roughly , the disturbance showed no signs of development until a cloud mass broke away from the ITCZ on August 6. The separated mass began rapidly organizing, becoming Tropical Depression Three late on August 7. The tropical depression continued to gain organization and was upgraded to a tropical storm on August 8, receiving the name "Cora".

The newly named tropical storm continued to grow, reaching hurricane strength later that day after developing a well-defined eye, peaking early on August 9 with winds, a minimum pressure of 980 mbar, and gale–force winds extending from the center. The hurricane began to shift into a west-southwest track while moving at . The hurricane would continue in this direction throughout its lifespan. Only 12 hours after forming, the eye rapidly dissipated on satellite imagery for unknown reasons, although the hurricane's high forward speed may have played a part. After becoming disorganized, a Hurricane Hunter aircraft—the first one to fly in the storm—reported that the cyclone had winds of only , the highest winds recorded in the storm. After the report, Cora was downgraded into a tropical storm early on August 10. The dissipating storm continued on, striking the island of Grenada on August 11 as it weakened into a tropical depression. On August 12, the depression weakened into a tropical wave near Aruba due to continental influence despite atmospheric conditions being favorable for development. The wave was notable in that it was almost completely devoid of any cloudiness or convection. The remnants of Cora crossed Central America and uneventfully continued westward until August 18, when its remains contributed to the formation of Hurricane Kristy.

While passing through the Lesser Antilles, reports of squalls with wind speeds of were received from St. Lucia and Barbados. Rain was also reported, but totals were not large due to the storm's quick passage. One death was attributed to Cora on St. Lucia when a 22–year old stepped on a high tension power line that was downed by the winds from the storm in Castries. In addition, an industry on the island reported tree losses of two to four percent from the storm. No reports of damage were received from the other Windward Islands and damage on Grenada, if any, is unknown. Although it remained far to the south, Hurricane Cora affected weather conditions that reached as far north as Presque Isle, Maine, where balloonists Ben Abruzzo, Maxie Anderson, and Larry Newman were preparing to make the first ever transatlantic balloon flight on the Double Eagle II. The winds created by Cora's influence would give the hot air balloon the northerly push required for takeoff according to Anderson. After six days, the Double Eagle II completed the flight, landing near Miserey, France. Cora also affected another record attempt when swimmer Diana Nyad was delayed due to the hurricane's influence. The planned marathon swimming record attempt was for her to swim from Cuba to Florida, a total of . The record attempt ultimately failed after 42 hours.

According to the preliminary report on the hurricane, neither track forecasts or intensity forecasts panned out for the storm. The track forecasts called for a path more northward than the actual track whereas following the development of the eye, intensity forecasts called for further strengthening until it became clear the cyclone was weakening. When it was upgraded to a hurricane on August 8, Cora became the second hurricane to have been upgraded to that intensity based solely on satellite presentation after 1975's Hurricane Doris. The hurricane was also the second of three storms in the season to reform or be reclassified as East Pacific storms. The other two were Tropical Storm Bess (which became Hurricane Iva), and Hurricane Greta-Olivia. Of these, only Greta maintained its circulation over land. This was the only time an Atlantic hurricane was named "Cora".



</doc>
<doc id="22555940" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22555940" title="2009 flu pandemic">
2009 flu pandemic

The 2009 flu pandemic or "swine flu" was an influenza pandemic that lasted from early 2009 to late 2010, and the second of the two pandemics involving H1N1 influenza virus (the first of them being the 1918 flu pandemic), albeit in a new version. First described in April 2009, the virus appeared to be a new strain of H1N1 which resulted when a previous triple reassortment of bird, swine and human flu viruses further combined with a Eurasian pig flu virus, leading to the term "swine flu".

Unlike most strains of influenza, H1N1 does not disproportionately infect adults older than 60 years; this was an unusual and characteristic feature of the H1N1 pandemic. Even in the case of previously very healthy people, a small percentage will develop pneumonia or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). This manifests itself as increased breathing difficulty and typically occurs 3–6 days after initial onset of flu symptoms. The pneumonia caused by flu can be either direct viral pneumonia or a secondary bacterial pneumonia. In fact, a November 2009 "New England Journal of Medicine" article recommended that flu patients whose chest X-ray indicates pneumonia receive both antivirals and antibiotics. In particular, it is a warning sign if a child (and presumably an adult) seems to be getting better and then relapses with high fever, as this relapse may be bacterial pneumonia.

Initially called an "outbreak", widespread H1N1 infection was first recognized in the state of Veracruz, Mexico, with evidence that the virus had been present for months before it was officially called an "epidemic". The Mexican government closed most of Mexico City's public and private facilities in an attempt to contain the spread of the virus; however, it continued to spread globally, and clinics in some areas were overwhelmed by infected people. In late April the World Health Organization (WHO) declared its first ever "public health emergency of international concern," or PHEIC, and in June, the WHO and the U.S. CDC stopped counting cases and declared the outbreak a pandemic.

Despite being informally called "swine flu", the H1N1 flu virus cannot be spread by eating pork or pork products; similar to other influenza viruses, it is typically contracted by person to person transmission through respiratory droplets. Symptoms usually last 4–6 days. Antivirals (oseltamivir or zanamivir) were recommended for those with more severe symptoms or those in an at-risk group.

The pandemic began to taper off in November 2009, and by May 2010, the number of cases was in steep decline. On 10 August 2010, the Director-General of the WHO, Margaret Chan, announced the end of the H1N1 pandemic, and announced that the H1N1 influenza event has moved into the post-pandemic period. According to the latest WHO statistics (as of July 2010), the virus has killed more than 18,000 people since it appeared in April 2009, however they state that the total mortality (including deaths unconfirmed or unreported) from the H1N1 strain is "unquestionably higher". Critics claimed the WHO had exaggerated the danger, spreading "fear and confusion" rather than "immediate information". The WHO began an investigation to determine whether it had "frightened people unnecessarily". A flu follow-up study done in September 2010, found that "the risk of most serious complications was not elevated in adults or children." In a 5 August 2011 "PLoS ONE" article, researchers estimated that the 2009 H1N1 global infection rate was 11% to 21%, lower than what was previously expected. However, by 2012, research showed that as many as 579,000 people could have been killed by the disease, as only those fatalities confirmed by laboratory testing were included in the original number, and meant that many of those without access to health facilities went uncounted. The majority of these deaths occurred in Africa and Southeast Asia. Experts, including the WHO, have agreed that an estimated 284,500 people were killed by the disease, much higher than the initial death toll.

The initial outbreak was called the "H1N1 influenza", or "Swine Flu" by American media. It is called the pandemic H1N1/09 virus by the WHO, while the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention refer to it as "novel influenza A (H1N1)" or "2009 H1N1 flu". In the Netherlands, it was originally called "Pig Flu", but is now called "New Influenza A (H1N1)" by the national health institute, although the media and general population use the name "Mexican Flu". South Korea and Israel briefly considered calling it the "Mexican virus". Later, the South Korean press used "SI", short for "swine influenza". Taiwan suggested the names "H1N1 flu" or "new flu", which most local media adopted. The World Organization for Animal Health proposed the name "North American influenza". The European Commission adopted the term "novel flu virus".

The symptoms of H1N1 flu are similar to those of other influenzas, and may include fever, cough (typically a "dry cough"), headache, muscle or joint pain, sore throat, chills, fatigue, and runny nose. Diarrhea, vomiting, and neurological problems have also been reported in some cases. People at higher risk of serious complications include those aged over 65, children younger than 5, children with neurodevelopmental conditions, pregnant women (especially during the third trimester), and those of any age with underlying medical conditions, such as asthma, diabetes, obesity, heart disease, or a weakened immune system (e.g., taking immunosuppressive medications or infected with HIV). More than 70% of hospitalizations in the U.S. have been people with such underlying conditions, according to the CDC.

In September 2009, the CDC reported that the H1N1 flu "seems to be taking a heavier toll among chronically ill children than the seasonal flu usually does." Through 8 August 2009, the CDC had received 36 reports of paediatric deaths with associated influenza symptoms and laboratory-confirmed pandemic H1N1 from state and local health authorities within the United States, with 22 of these children having neurodevelopmental conditions such as cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, or developmental delays. "Children with nerve and muscle problems may be at especially high risk for complications because they cannot cough hard enough to clear their airways". From 26 April 2009, to 13 February 2010, the CDC had received reports of the deaths of 277 children with laboratory-confirmed 2009 influenza A (H1N1) within the United States.

The World Health Organization reports that the clinical picture in severe cases is strikingly different from the disease pattern seen during epidemics of seasonal influenza. While people with certain underlying medical conditions are known to be at increased risk, many severe cases occur in previously healthy people. In severe cases, patients generally begin to deteriorate around three to five days after symptom onset. Deterioration is rapid, with many patients progressing to respiratory failure within 24 hours, requiring immediate admission to an intensive care unit. Upon admission, most patients need immediate respiratory support with mechanical ventilation.

Most complications have occurred among previously healthy individuals, with obesity and respiratory disease as the strongest risk factors. Pulmonary complications are common. Primary influenza pneumonia occurs most commonly in adults and may progress rapidly to acute lung injury requiring mechanical ventilation. Secondary bacterial infection is more common in children. "Staphylococcus aureus", including methicillin-resistant strains, is an important cause of secondary bacterial pneumonia with a high mortality rate; "streptococcus pneumoniae" is the second most important cause of secondary bacterial pneumonia for children and primary for adults. Neuromuscular and cardiac complications are unusual but may occur.

A United Kingdom investigation of risk factors for hospitalisation and poor outcome with pandemic A/H1N1 influenza looked at 631 patients from 55 hospitals admitted with confirmed infection from May through September 2009. 13% were admitted to a high dependency or intensive care unit and 5% died; 36% were aged <16 years and 5% were aged ≥65 years. Non-white and pregnant patients were over-represented. 45% of patients had at least one underlying condition, mainly asthma, and 13% received antiviral drugs before admission. Of 349 with documented chest x-rays on admission, 29% had evidence of pneumonia, but bacterial co-infection was uncommon. Multivariate analyses showed that physician-recorded obesity on admission and pulmonary conditions other than asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were associated with a severe outcome, as were radiologically confirmed pneumonia and a raised C-reactive protein (CRP) level (≥. 59% of all in-hospital deaths occurred in previously healthy people.

Fulminant (sudden-onset) myocarditis has been linked to infection with H1N1, with at least four cases of myocarditis confirmed in patients also infected with A/H1N1. Three out of the four cases of H1N1-associated myocarditis were classified as fulminant, and one of the patients died.
Also, there appears to be a link between severe A/H1N1 influenza infection and pulmonary embolism. In one report, five out of 14 patients admitted to the intensive care unit with severe A/H1N1 infection were found to have pulmonary emboli.

An article published in "JAMA" in September 2010 challenged previous reports and stated that children infected in the 2009 flu pandemic were no more likely to be hospitalised with complications or get pneumonia than those who catch seasonal strains. Researchers found that about 1.5% of children with the H1N1 swine flu strain were hospitalised within 30 days, compared with 3.7% of those sick with a seasonal strain of H1N1 and 3.1% with an H3N2 virus.

Confirmed diagnosis of pandemic H1N1 flu requires testing of a nasopharyngeal, nasal or oropharyngeal tissue swab from the patient. Real-time RT-PCR is the recommended test as others are unable to differentiate between pandemic H1N1 and regular seasonal flu. However, most people with flu symptoms do not need a test for pandemic H1N1 flu specifically, because the test results usually do not affect the recommended course of treatment. The U.S. CDC recommend testing only for people who are hospitalized with suspected flu, pregnant women and people with weakened immune systems. For the mere diagnosis of influenza and not pandemic H1N1 flu specifically, more widely available tests include rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDT), which yield results in about 30 minutes, and direct and indirect immunofluorescence assays (DFA and IFA), which take 2–4 hours. Due to the high rate of RIDT false negatives, the CDC advises that patients with illnesses compatible with novel influenza A (H1N1) virus infection but with negative RIDT results should be treated empirically based on the level of clinical suspicion, underlying medical conditions, severity of illness and risk for complications, and if a more definitive determination of infection with influenza virus is required, testing with rRT-PCR or virus isolation should be performed. Rhonda Medows of the Georgia Department of Community Health states that the rapid tests are incorrect anywhere from 30% to 90% of the time and warns doctors in her state not to use them because they are wrong so often. The use of RIDTs has also been questioned by researcher Paul Schreckenberger of the Loyola University Health System, who suggests that rapid tests may actually pose a dangerous public health risk. Nikki Shindo of the WHO has expressed regret at reports of treatment being delayed by waiting for H1N1 test results and suggests, "[D]octors should not wait for the laboratory confirmation but make diagnosis based on clinical and epidemiological backgrounds and start treatment early".

On 22 June 2010, the CDC announced a new test called the "CDC Influenza 2009 A (H1N1)pdm Real-Time RT-PCR Panel (IVD)". It uses a molecular biology technique to detect influenza A viruses and specifically the 2009 H1N1 virus. The new test will replace the previous real-time RT-PCR diagnostic test used during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, which received an emergency use authorization from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in April 2009. Tests results are available in four hours and are 96% accurate.

The virus was found to be a novel strain of influenza for which extant vaccines against seasonal flu provided little protection. A study at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention published in May 2009 found that children had no preexisting immunity to the new strain but that adults, particularly those older than 60, had some degree of immunity. Children showed no cross-reactive antibody reaction to the new strain, adults aged 18 to 60 had 6–9%, and older adults 33%. While it has been thought that these findings suggest the partial immunity in older adults may be due to previous exposure to similar seasonal influenza viruses, a November 2009 study of a rural unvaccinated population in China found only a 0.3% cross-reactive antibody reaction to the H1N1 strain, suggesting that previous vaccinations for seasonal flu and not exposure may have resulted in the immunity found in the older U.S. population.

Analyses of the genetic sequences of the first isolates, promptly shared on the GISAID database according to Nature and WHO, soon determined that the strain contains genes from five different flu viruses: North American swine influenza, North American avian influenza, human influenza and two swine influenza viruses typically found in Asia and Europe. Further analysis has shown that several proteins of the virus are most similar to strains that cause mild symptoms in humans, leading virologist Wendy Barclay to suggest on 1 May 2009, that the initial indications are that the virus was unlikely to cause severe symptoms for most people.

The virus is currently less lethal than previous pandemic strains and kills about 0.01–0.03% of those infected; the 1918 influenza was about one hundred times more lethal and had a case fatality rate of 2–3%. By 14 November 2009, the virus had infected one in six Americans with 200,000 hospitalisations and 10,000 deaths – as many hospitalizations and fewer deaths than in an average flu season overall, but with much higher risk for those under 50. With deaths of 1,100 children and 7,500 adults 18 to 64, these figures "are much higher than in a usual flu season".

In June 2010, scientists from Hong Kong reported discovery of a new swine flu virus which is a hybrid of the pandemic H1N1 virus and viruses previously found in pigs. It is the first report of a reassortment of the pandemic virus, which in humans has been slow to evolve. Nancy Cox, head of the influenza division at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, has said, "This particular paper is extremely interesting because it demonstrates for the first time what we had worried about at the very onset of the pandemic, and that is that this particular virus, when introduced into pigs, could reassort with the resident viruses in pigs and we would have new gene constellations. And bingo, here we are." Pigs have been termed the mixing vessel of flu because they can be infected both by avian flu viruses, which rarely directly infect people, and by human viruses. When pigs become simultaneously infected with more than one virus, the viruses can swap genes, producing new variants which can pass to humans and sometimes spread amongst them. "Unlike the situation with birds and humans, we have a situation with pigs and humans where there's a two-way street of exchange of viruses. With pigs it's very much a two-way street".

Spread of the H1N1 virus is thought to occur in the same way that seasonal flu spreads. Flu viruses are spread mainly from person to person through coughing or sneezing by people with influenza. Sometimes people may become infected by touching something – such as a surface or object – with flu viruses on it and then touching their face. "Avoid touching your eyes, nose or mouth. Germs spread this way".

The basic reproduction number (the average number of other individuals whom each infected individual will infect, in a population which has no immunity to the disease) for the 2009 novel H1N1 is estimated to be 1.75. A December 2009 study found that the transmissibility of the H1N1 influenza virus in households is lower than that seen in past pandemics. Most transmissions occur soon before or after the onset of symptoms.

The H1N1 virus has been transmitted to animals, including swine, turkeys, ferrets, household cats, at least one dog and a cheetah.

The H1N1 vaccine was initially in short supply and in the U.S., the CDC recommended that initial doses should go to priority groups such as pregnant women, people who live with or care for babies under six months old, children six months to four years old and health-care workers. In the UK, the NHS recommended vaccine priority go to people over six months old who were clinically at risk for seasonal flu, pregnant women and households of people with compromised immunity.

Although it was initially thought that two injections would be required, clinical trials showed that the new vaccine protected adults "with only one dose instead of two", and so the limited vaccine supplies would go twice as far as had been predicted. Health officials worldwide were also concerned because the virus was new and could easily mutate and become more virulent, even though most flu symptoms were mild and lasted only a few days without treatment. Officials also urged communities, businesses and individuals to make contingency plans for possible school closures, multiple employee absences for illness, surges of patients in hospitals and other effects of potentially widespread outbreaks.

In February 2010, the CDC's Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices voted for "universal" flu vaccination in the U.S. to include all people over six months of age. The 2010–2011 vaccine will protect against the 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus and two other flu viruses.

On 27 April 2009, the European Union health commissioner advised Europeans to postpone nonessential travel to the United States or Mexico. This followed the discovery of the first confirmed case in Spain.<ref name="Guardian 27/4"></ref> On 6 May 2009, the Public Health Agency of Canada announced that their National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) had mapped the genetic code of the swine flu virus, the first time that had been done. In the U.K., the National Health Service launched a website, the National Pandemic Flu Service, allowing patients to self-assess and get an authorisation number for antiviral medication. The system was expected to reduce the burden on general practitioners.

U.S. officials observed that six years of concern about H5N1 avian flu did much to prepare for the current H1N1 flu outbreak, noting that after H5N1 emerged in Asia, ultimately killing about 60% of the few hundred people infected by it over the years, many countries took steps to try to prevent any similar crisis from spreading further. The CDC and other U.S. governmental agencies used the summer lull to take stock of the United States' response to H1N1 flu and attempt to patch any gaps in the public health safety net before flu season started in early autumn. Preparations included planning a second influenza vaccination program in addition to that for seasonal influenza, and improving coordination between federal, state and local governments and private health providers. On 24 October 2009, U.S. President Obama declared swine flu a national emergency, giving Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius authority to grant waivers to requesting hospitals from usual federal requirements.

By 19 November 2009, doses of vaccine had been administered in over 16 countries. A 2009 review by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) concluded that the 2009 H1N1 vaccine has a safety profile similar to that of seasonal vaccine.

In 2011, a study from the US Flu Vaccine Effectiveness Network estimated the overall effectiveness of all pandemic H1N1 vaccines at 56%. A CDC study released 28 Jan 2013, estimated that the Pandemic H1N1 vaccine saved roughly 300 lives and prevented about 1 million illnesses in the US. The study concluded that had the vaccination program started 2 weeks earlier, close to 60% more cases could have been prevented. The study was based on an effectiveness in preventing cases, hospitalizations, and deaths of 62% for all subgroups except people over 65, for whom the effectiveness was estimated at 43%. The effectiveness was based on European and Asian studies and expert opinion.[3] The delay in vaccine administration demonstrated the shortcomings of the world's capacity for vaccine-production, as well as problems with international distribution. Some manufacturers and wealthy countries had concerns regarding liability and regulations, as well as the logistics of transporting, storing, and administering vaccines to be donated to poorer countries.

In January 2010, Wolfgang Wodarg, a German deputy who trained as a physician and now chairs the health committee at the Council of Europe, claimed major firms had organised a "campaign of panic" to put pressure on the World Health Organization (WHO) to declare a "false pandemic" to sell vaccines. Wodarg said the WHO's "false pandemic" flu campaign is "one of the greatest medicine scandals of the century". He said that the "false pandemic" campaign began in May 2009 in Mexico City, when a hundred or so "normal" reported influenza cases were declared to be the beginning of a threatening new pandemic, although he said there was little scientific evidence for this. Nevertheless, he argued that the WHO, "in cooperation with some big pharmaceutical companies and their scientists, re-defined pandemics", removing the statement that "an enormous amount of people have contracted the illness or died" from its existing definition and replacing it by stating simply that there has to be a virus, spreading beyond borders and to which people have no immunity.

The WHO responded by stating that they take their duty to provide independent advice seriously and guarded against interference from outside interests. Announcing a review of the WHO's actions, spokeswoman Fadela Chaib stated: "Criticism is part of an outbreak cycle. We expect and indeed welcome criticism and the chance to discuss it". In March 2010, the Council of Europe launched an enquiry into "the influence of the pharmaceutical companies on the global swine flu campaign", and a preliminary report is in preparation.

On 12 April 2010, Keiji Fukuda, the WHO's top influenza expert, stated that the system leading to the declaration of a pandemic led to confusion about H1N1 circulating around the world, and he expressed concern that there was a failure to communicate in regard to uncertainties about the new virus, which turned out to be not as deadly as feared. WHO Director-General Margaret Chan has appointed 29 flu experts from outside the organization to conduct a review of WHO's handling of the H1N1 flu pandemic. She has told them, "We want a frank, critical, transparent, credible and independent review of our performance".

In June 2010, Fiona Godlee, editor-in-chief of the "BMJ", published an editorial which criticised the WHO, saying that an investigation had disclosed that some of the experts advising WHO on the pandemic had financial ties with drug companies which were producing antivirals and vaccines. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the WHO, replied stating, "Without question, the "BMJ" feature and editorial will leave many readers with the impression that WHO's decision to declare a pandemic was at least partially influenced by a desire to boost the profits of the pharmaceutical industry. The bottom line, however, is that decisions to raise the level of pandemic alert were based on clearly defined virological and epidemiological criteria. It is hard to bend these criteria, no matter what the motive".

On 7 May 2009, the WHO stated that containment was not feasible and that countries should focus on mitigating the effect of the virus. They did not recommend closing borders or restricting travel. On 26 April 2009, the Chinese government announced that visitors returning from flu-affected areas who experienced flu-like symptoms within two weeks would be quarantined.

U.S. airlines had made no major changes as of the beginning of June 2009, but continued standing practices which include looking for passengers with symptoms of flu, measles or other infections, and relying on in-flight air filters to ensure that aircraft were sanitised. Masks were not generally provided by airlines and the CDC did not recommend that airline crews wear them. Some non-U.S. airlines, mostly Asian, including Singapore Airlines, China Eastern Airlines, China Southern Airlines, Cathay Pacific and Aeromexico, took measures such as stepping up cabin cleaning, installing state-of-the-art air filters and allowing in-flight staff to wear face masks.

According to studies conducted in Australia and Japan, screening individuals for influenza symptoms at airports during the 2009 H1N1 outbreak was not an effective method of infection control.

U.S. government officials have been especially concerned about schools because the H1N1 flu virus appears to disproportionately affect young and school-age people, between six months and 24 years of age.
The H1N1 outbreak led to numerous precautionary school closures in some areas. Rather than closing schools, the CDC recommended that students and school workers with flu symptoms should stay home for either seven days total, or until 24 hours after symptoms subsided, whichever was longer. The CDC also recommended that colleges should consider suspending fall 2009 classes if the virus began to cause severe illness in a significantly larger share of students than the previous spring. They also urged schools to suspend rules, such as penalties for late papers or missed classes or requirements for a doctor's note, to enforce "self-isolation" and prevent students from venturing out while ill; schools were advised to set aside a room for people developing flu-like symptoms while they waited to go home and to have ill students or staff and those caring for them use face masks.

In California, school districts and universities were on alert and worked with health officials to launch education campaigns. Many planned to stockpile medical supplies and discuss worst-case scenarios, including plans to provide lessons and meals for low-income children in case elementary and secondary schools closed. University of California campuses stockpiled supplies, from paper masks and hand sanitizer to food and water. To help prepare for contingencies, University of Maryland School of Medicine professor of pediatrics James C. King Jr. suggested that every county should create an "influenza action team" to be run by the local health department, parents and school administrators. By 28 October 2009, about 600 schools in the United States had been temporarily closed, affecting over 126,000 students in 19 states.

Fearing a worst-case scenario, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) developed updated guidance and a video for employers to use as they developed plans to respond to the H1N1 outbreak. The guidance suggested that employers consider and communicate their objectives, such as reducing transmission among staff, protecting people who are at increased risk of influenza-related complications from becoming infected, maintaining business operations, and minimising adverse effects on other entities in their supply chains.

The CDC estimated that as much as 40% of the workforce might be unable to work at the peak of the pandemic due to the need for many healthy adults to stay home and care for an ill family member, and advised that individuals should have steps in place should a workplace close down or a situation arise that requires working from home. The CDC further advised that persons in the workplace should stay home sick for seven days after getting the flu, or 24 hours after symptoms end, whichever is longer.

In the UK, the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) also issued general guidance for employers.

The U.S. CDC does not recommend use of face masks or respirators in non-health care settings, such as schools, workplaces, or public places, with a few exceptions: people who are ill with the virus when around other people, and people who are at risk for severe illness while caring for someone with the flu. There has been some disagreement about the value of wearing facial masks, some experts fearing that masks may give people a false sense of security and should not replace other standard precautions. Masks may benefit people in close contact with infected persons, but it is unknown whether they prevent H1N1 flu infection. Yukihiro Nishiyama, professor of virology at Nagoya University's School of Medicine, commented that the masks are "better than nothing, but it's hard to completely block out an airborne virus since it can easily slip through the gaps".
According to mask manufacturer 3M, masks will filter out particles in industrial settings, but "there are no established exposure limits for biological agents such as swine flu virus". However, despite the lack of evidence of effectiveness, the use of such masks is common in Asia. They are particularly popular in Japan, where cleanliness and hygiene are highly valued and where etiquette obligates those who are sick to wear masks to avoid spreading disease.

During the height of the fear of a pandemic, some countries initiated or threatened to initiate quarantines of foreign visitors suspected of having or being in contact with others who may have been infected. In May 2009, the Chinese government confined 21 U.S. students and three teachers to their hotel rooms. As a result, the US State Department issued a travel alert about China's anti-flu measures and warned travellers against travelling to China if ill. In Hong Kong, an entire hotel was quarantined with 240 guests; Australia ordered a cruise ship with 2,000 passengers to stay at sea because of a swine flu threat. Egyptian Muslims who went on the annual pilgrimage to Mecca risked being quarantined upon their return. Russia and Taiwan said they would quarantine visitors with fevers who come from areas where the flu was present. Japan quarantined 47 airline passengers in a hotel for a week in mid-May, then in mid-June India suggested pre-screening "outbound" passengers from countries thought to have a high rate of infection.

The pandemic virus is a type of swine influenza, derived originally from a strain which lived in pigs, and this origin gave rise to the common name of "swine flu". This term is widely used by mass media. The virus has been found in American hogs, and Canadian as well as in hogs in Northern Ireland, Argentina, and Norway. Leading health agencies and the United States Secretary of Agriculture have stressed that eating properly cooked pork or other food products derived from pigs will not cause flu. Nevertheless, on 27 April, Azerbaijan imposed a ban on the importation of animal husbandry products from the entire Americas. The Indonesian government also halted the importation of pigs and initiated the examination of pigs in Indonesia. The Egyptian government ordered the slaughter of all pigs in Egypt on 29 April 2009.

A number of methods have been recommended to help ease symptoms, including adequate liquid intake and rest. Over-the-counter pain medications such as acetaminophen and ibuprofen do not kill the virus; however, they may be useful to reduce symptoms. Aspirin and other salicylate products should not be used by people under 16 with any flu-type symptoms because of the risk of developing Reye's Syndrome.

If the fever is mild and there are no other complications, fever medication is not recommended. Most people recover without medical attention, although those with pre-existing or underlying medical conditions are more prone to complications and may benefit from further treatments.

People in at-risk groups should be treated with antivirals (oseltamivir or zanamivir) as soon as possible when they first experience flu symptoms. The at-risk groups include pregnant and post partum women, children under two years old, and people with underlying conditions such as respiratory problems. People who are not in an at-risk group who have persistent or rapidly worsening symptoms should also be treated with antivirals. People who have developed pneumonia should be given both antivirals and antibiotics, as in many severe cases of H1N1-caused illness, bacterial infection develops. Antivirals are most useful if given within 48 hours of the start of symptoms and may improve outcomes in hospitalised patients. In those beyond 48 hours who are moderately or severely ill, antivirals may still be beneficial. If oseltamivir (Tamiflu) is unavailable or cannot be used, zanamivir (Relenza) is recommended as a substitute. Peramivir is an experimental antiviral drug approved for hospitalised patients in cases where the other available methods of treatment are ineffective or unavailable.

To help avoid shortages of these drugs, the U.S. CDC recommended oseltamivir treatment primarily for people hospitalised with pandemic flu; people at risk of serious flu complications due to underlying medical conditions; and patients at risk of serious flu complications. The CDC warned that the indiscriminate use of antiviral medications to prevent and treat influenza could ease the way for drug-resistant strains to emerge, which would make the fight against the pandemic that much harder. In addition, a British report found that people often failed to complete a full course of the drug or took the medication when not needed.

Both medications have known side effects, including lightheadedness, chills, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite and trouble breathing. Children were reported to be at increased risk of self-injury and confusion after taking oseltamivir. The WHO warn against buying antiviral medications from online sources, and estimate that half the drugs sold by online pharmacies without a physical address are counterfeit.

In December 2012, 2010, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported 314 samples of the 2009 pandemic H1N1 flu tested worldwide have shown resistance to oseltamivir (Tamiflu). This is not totally unexpected as 99.6% of the seasonal H1N1 flu strains tested have developed resistance to oseltamivir. No circulating flu has yet shown any resistance to zanamivir (Relenza), the other available anti-viral.

On 8 December 2009, the Cochrane Collaboration, which reviews medical evidence, announced in a review published in "BMJ" that it had reversed its previous findings that the antiviral drugs oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and zanamivir (Relenza) can ward off pneumonia and other serious conditions linked to influenza. They reported that an analysis of 20 studies showed oseltamivir offered mild benefits for healthy adults if taken within 24 hours of onset of symptoms, but found no clear evidence it prevented lower respiratory tract infections or other complications of influenza. Their published finding relates only to its use in healthy adults with influenza; they say nothing about its use in patients judged to be at high risk of complications (pregnant women, children under five and those with underlying medical conditions), and uncertainty over its role in reducing complications in healthy adults may still leave it as a useful drug for reducing the duration of symptoms. The drugs might eventually be demonstrated to be effective against flu-related complications; in general, the Cochrane Collaboration concluded "Paucity of good data".

Some specific results from the "BMJ" article include: "The efficacy of oral oseltamivir against symptomatic laboratory confirmed influenza was 61% (risk ratio 0.39, 95% confidence interval 0.18 to 0.85) at daily ... The remaining evidence suggests oseltamivir did not reduce influenza related lower respiratory tract complications (risk ratio 0.55, 95% confidence interval 0.22 to 1.35)". Notice especially the wide range for this second result.

While it is not known precisely where or when the virus originated, analyses in scientific journals have suggested that the H1N1 strain responsible for the 2009 outbreak first evolved in September 2008 and circulated amongst humans for several months before being formally recognised and identified as a novel strain of influenza.

The virus was first reported in two U.S. children in March 2009, but health officials have reported that it apparently infected people as early as January 2009 in Mexico. The outbreak was first detected in Mexico City on 18 March 2009; immediately after the outbreak was officially announced, Mexico notified the U.S. and World Health Organization, and within days of the outbreak Mexico City was "effectively shut down". Some countries cancelled flights to Mexico while others halted trade. Calls to close the border to contain the spread were rejected. Mexico already had hundreds of non-lethal cases before the outbreak was officially discovered, and was therefore in the midst of a "silent epidemic". As a result, Mexico was reporting only the most serious cases which showed more severe signs different from those of normal flu, possibly leading to a skewed initial estimate of the case fatality rate.

The new strain was first identified by the CDC in two children, neither of whom had been in contact with pigs. The first case, from San Diego County, California, was confirmed from clinical specimens (nasopharyngeal swab) examined by the CDC on 14 April 2009. A second case, from nearby Imperial County, California, was confirmed on 17 April. The patient in the first confirmed case had flu symptoms including fever and cough on clinical examination on 30 March, and the second on 28 March.

The first confirmed H1N1/09 pandemic flu death, which occurred at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston, Texas, was of a toddler from Mexico City who was visiting family in Brownsville, Texas, before being air-lifted to Houston for treatment.

Influenza surveillance information "answers the questions of where, when, and what influenza viruses are circulating. Sharing of such information is especially crucial during an emergent pandemic as in April 2009, when the genetic sequences of the initial viruses were rapidly and openly shared via the GISAID Initiative within days of identification, playing a key role in facilitating an early response to the evolving pandemic. Surveillance is used to determine if influenza activity is increasing or decreasing, but cannot be used to ascertain how many people have become ill with influenza". For example, as of late June 2009, influenza surveillance information showed the U.S. had nearly 28,000 laboratory-confirmed cases including 3,065 hospitalisations and 127 deaths; but mathematical modelling showed an estimated Americans currently had the 2009 pandemic flu, according to Lyn Finelli, a flu surveillance official with the CDC. Estimating deaths from influenza is also a complicated process. In 2005, influenza only appeared on the death certificates of 1,812 people in the US. The average annual US death toll from flu is, however, estimated to be 36,000. The CDC explains: "[I]nfluenza is infrequently listed on death certificates of people who die from flu-related complications" and hence, "Only counting deaths where influenza was included on a death certificate would be a gross underestimation of influenza's true impact".

Influenza surveillance information on the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic is available, but almost no studies attempted to estimate the total number of deaths attributable to H1N1 flu. Two studies were carried out by the CDC; the later of them estimated that between 7,070 and 13,930 deaths were attributable to H1N1 flu from April to 14 November 2009. During the same period, 1642 deaths were officially confirmed as caused by H1N1 flu. The WHO state that total mortality (including deaths unconfirmed or unreported) from H1N1 flu is "unquestionably higher" than their own confirmed death statistics.

The initial outbreak received a week of near-constant media attention. Epidemiologists cautioned that the number of cases reported in the early days of an outbreak can be very inaccurate and deceptive, due to several causes, among them selection bias, media bias and incorrect reporting by governments. Inaccuracies could also be caused by authorities in different countries looking at differing population groups. Furthermore, countries with poor health care systems and older laboratory facilities may take longer to identify or report cases. "[E]ven in developed countries the [numbers of flu deaths] are uncertain, because medical authorities don't usually verify who actually died of influenza and who died of a flu-like illness". Joseph S. Bresee (the CDC flu division's epidemiology chief) and Michael Osterholm (director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy) have pointed out that millions of people have had H1N1 flu, usually in a mild form, so the numbers of laboratory-confirmed cases were actually meaningless, and in July 2009, the WHO stopped keeping count of individual cases and focused more on major outbreaks.

A Wisconsin study published in the "Journal of the American Medical Association" in September 2010, reported that findings showed that the 2009 H1N1 flu was no more severe than the seasonal flu. "The risk of most serious complications was not elevated in adults or children", the study's authors wrote. "Children were disproportionately affected by 2009 H1N1 infection, but the perceived severity of symptoms and risk of serious outcomes were not increased." Children infected in the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic were no more likely to be hospitalized with complications or get pneumonia than those who catch seasonal strains. About 1.5% of children with the H1N1 swine flu strain were hospitalized within 30 days, compared with 3.7% of those sick with a seasonal strain of H1N1 and 3.1% with an H3N2 virus.

CDC illness and death estimates from April 2009 to April 2010, in the US are as follows:

It is often stated that about 36,000 die from the seasonal flu in the U.S. each year, and this is frequently understood as an indication that the H1N1 strain was not as severe as seasonal influenza. The 36,000 estimate was presented in a 2003 study by CDC scientists published in the "Journal of the American Medical Association" but only refers to a period from 1990–91 through 1998–99. During those years, the number of estimated deaths ranged from 17,000 to 52,000, with an average of about 36,000. The "JAMA" study also looked at seasonal influenza-associated deaths over a 23-year period, from 1976–77 and 1998–99. During that period, estimates of respiratory and circulatory influenza-associated deaths ranged from about 5,000 to about 52,000, with an average of about 25,000. While the 36,000 number is often cited, it's important to note that during that decade, influenza A (H3N2) was the predominant virus during most of the seasons, and H3N2 influenza viruses are typically associated with higher death rates. CDC believes that the range of deaths over the past 31 years (~3,000 to ~49,000) is a more accurate representation of the unpredictability and variability of flu-associated deaths. The annual toll from seasonal influenza in the US is more accurately estimated at 3000–49,000 deaths per year. So the H1N1 pandemic estimated mortality of 8,870 to 18,300, places it in the mid-range of estimates.

The 2009 pandemic caused hospitals around the country to make significant preparations in terms of hospital surge capacities, especially within the emergency department and among vulnerable populations. In many cases, hospitals were relatively successful in making sure that those patients most severely affected by the influenza strain were able to be seen, treated, and discharged in an efficient manner. A proper case-study of the preparation, planning, mitigation, and response efforts during the Fall of 2009 is that of the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP). For example, CHOP took several steps to increase the emergency department (ED) surge capacity response abilities through careful planning and mitigation efforts. To increase ED capacity and response, CHOP used portions of the main lobby area as an ED waiting room; several of the region's hospital-based outpatient facilities were in use during evening and weekend hours for non-emergency cases; the ED's 24-hour short-stay unit was utilized to care for ED patients in a longer-term capacity; non-board certified physicians (in pediatric emergency medicine) and inpatient-unit medical nurses were utilized for ED patient care; hospital units normally utilized for other medical or therapeutic purposes were transformed into ED patient rooms; and rooms normally used for only one patient were expanded to at least a capacity of 2

Annual influenza epidemics are estimated to affect 5–15% of the global population. Although most cases are mild, these epidemics still cause severe illness in people and 250,000–500,000 deaths worldwide. On average 41,400 people die of influenza-related illnesses each year in the United States, based on data collected between 1979 and 2001. In industrialised countries, severe illness and deaths occur mainly in the high-risk populations of infants, the elderly and chronically ill patients, although the H1N1 flu outbreak (like the 1918 Spanish flu) differs in its tendency to affect younger, healthier people.

In addition to these annual epidemics, Influenza A virus strains caused three global pandemics during the 20th century: the Spanish flu in 1918, Asian flu in 1957, and Hong Kong flu in 1968–69. These virus strains had undergone major genetic changes for which the population did not possess significant immunity. Recent genetic analysis has revealed that three-quarters, or six out of the eight genetic segments, of the 2009 flu pandemic strain arose from the North American swine flu strains circulating since 1998, when a new strain was first identified on a factory farm in North Carolina, and which was the first-ever reported triple-hybrid flu virus.

The 1918 flu epidemic began with a wave of mild cases in the spring, followed by more deadly waves in the autumn, eventually killing hundreds of thousands in the United States and 50–100 million worldwide. The great majority of deaths in the 1918 flu pandemic were the result of secondary bacterial pneumonia. The influenza virus damaged the lining of the bronchial tubes and lungs of victims, allowing common bacteria from the nose and throat to infect their lungs. Subsequent pandemics have had many fewer fatalities due to the development of antibiotic medicines which can treat pneumonia.

The influenza virus has also caused several pandemic threats over the past century, including the pseudo-pandemic of 1947 (thought of as mild because although globally distributed, it caused relatively few deaths), the 1976 swine flu outbreak and the 1977 Russian flu, all caused by the H1N1 subtype. The world has been at an increased level of alert since the SARS epidemic in Southeast Asia (caused by the SARS coronavirus). The level of preparedness was further increased and sustained with the advent of the H5N1 bird flu outbreaks because of H5N1's high fatality rate, although the strains currently prevalent have limited human-to-human transmission (anthroponotic) capability, or epidemicity.

People who contracted flu before 1957 appeared to have some immunity to H1N1 flu. Daniel Jernigan, head of flu epidemiology for the U.S. CDC, has stated: "Tests on blood serum from older people showed that they had antibodies that attacked the new virus ... That does not mean that everyone over 52 is immune, since Americans and Mexicans older than that have died of the new flu".

In June 2012, a model based study was published finding that the number of deaths related to the H1N1 influenza may have been fifteen times higher than the reported laboratory confirmed deaths. According to their findings, 80% of the respiratory and cardiovascular deaths were in people younger than 65 years and 51% occurred in southeast Asia and Africa. The researchers believe that a disproportionate number of pandemic deaths might have occurred in these regions and that their research suggests that efforts to prevent future influenza pandemics needs to effectively target these regions.

A WHO supported 2013 study estimated that the 2009 global pandemic respiratory mortality was ~10-fold higher than the World Health Organization's laboratory-confirmed mortality count (18.631). Although the pandemic mortality estimate was similar in magnitude to that of seasonal influenza, a marked shift toward mortality among persons <65 y of age occurred, so that many more life-years were lost. Between 123,000 and 203,000 pandemic respiratory deaths were estimated globally for the last 9 mo of 2009. The majority (62%–85%) were attributed to persons under 65 y of age. The burden varied greatly among countries. There was an almost 20-fold higher mortality in some countries in the Americas than in Europe. The model attributed 148,000–249,000 respiratory deaths to influenza in an average pre-pandemic season, with only 19% in persons <65 y.





</doc>
<doc id="22581282" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22581282" title="Geologic map of Georgia (U.S. state)">
Geologic map of Georgia (U.S. state)

The geologic map of Georgia (a state within the United States) is a special-purpose map made to show geological features. Rock units or geologic strata are shown by colors or symbols to indicate where they are exposed at the surface. Structural features such as faults and shear zones are also shown. Since the first national geological map, in 1809, there have been numerous maps which included the geology of Georgia. The first Georgia specific geologic map was created in 1825. The most recent state-produced geologic map of Georgia, by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources is 1:500,000 scale, and was created in 1976 by the department's Georgia Geological Survey. It was generated from a base map produced by the United States Geological Survey. The state geologist and Director of the Geological Survey of Georgia was Sam M. Pickering, Jr. Since 1976, several geological maps of Georgia, featuring the state's five distinct geologic regions, have been produced by the federal government.

The first statewide geologic map of Georgia was published in 1825. It was a 1:1,000,000 scale map of Georgia and Alabama published by Henry Schenck Tanner. In 1849 W.T. Williams published the geological features for the state on a 1:120,000 scale map within George White's (1849) Statistics of the State of Georgia report. Then in 1871, Dr. Matthew Fleming Stephenson published a 1:1,200,000 scale map of the "Geology and mineralogy of Georgia" through the Globe Publishing Company of Atlanta. This map was part of a report with the same name. Another statewide map of the geology of Georgia was published in 1876 by G. Little in the Handbook of the State of Georgia by T.P. Janes. In 1885 Georgia Commissioner of Agriculture J.T. Henderson produced a 1:2,500,000 scale map of the geology of Georgia. In 1895 R. T. Nesbitt produced a small-scale geological map of Georgia that was included in a statistical review of the state. The review was described as a Chamber of commerce styled work, that presented the economic mineral resources and geology of the state in a promotional and exaggerated manner. This was the last statewide geological map published in the 19th Century.

Within the 20th Century there were three statewide geological maps produced prior to the 1976 map. The first was a 1-inch to 15 mile map produced by S.W. McCallie in 1908. In 1939, George Willis Stose et al. produced a 1:500,000 scale map that was published by the Georgia Geologic Survey and the United States Geological Survey. This map was reprinted in 1960 by the U.S. Geological Survey. The third map was published in 1968 by the Geological Survey of Georgia. This map was produced by J.W. Smith and M.S. Green, a 1:2,500,000 scale map.

From the beginning of the United States, Georgia geology has been included in maps produced for the entire country. The first geological map of the U.S. was produced in 1809 by William Maclure. In 1807, Maclure undertook the self-imposed task of making a geological survey of the United States. He traversed and mapped nearly every state in the Union. During the rigorous two-year period of his survey, he crossed and recrossed the Allegheny Mountains some 50 times. The results of his unaided endeavor were submitted to the American Philosophical Society in a memoir entitled "Observations on the Geology of the United States explanatory of a Geological Map", together with the nation's first geological map, which were published in the Society's journal "Transactions", This precedes William Smith's geological map of England by six years, although Smith's map was constructed using a different classification of rocks. Several reports used Maclure's geological map to accompany their description of the geology of the U.S. (Beaujour, 1814 and Marcou, 1858). In 1816, within an elementary treatise of mineralogy and geology, Parker Cleaveland produced a geological map of the U.S. In 1843, Charles Moxon produced a small-scale geologic map of the U.S., where Ami Boué produced a geological structure map of the globe. In 1853, Marcou produced a geological map of the U.S. and the British provinces of North America. In 1856, Henry Darwin Rogers created a similar map of the geology of the U.S. and British North America. There was a short description of the geologic map of the U.S. by Charles Henry Hitchcock in 1872, which had small-scale geological maps included. Hitchcock and William P. Blake published a general geologic map of the U.S. in R.W. Raymond's Statistics of mines and mining. In 1874, they published a geological map of the U.S. and territories in the U.S. Census 9th Statistical Atlas. Hitchcock and Blake published a summary of this map in the Geological Magazine in 1873. Gray's geological map of the U.S. was published in the National Atlas special edition at a scale of about 1 inch to 300 miles in 1876 and reprinted in 1886 by the American Institute of Mining Engineers. A geological map of the U.S. east of the Rocky Mountains was produced at the scale of 1 inch to 105.5 miles by Frank H. Bradley. In the 1880s several geological maps of the U.S. were produced. William John McGee offered a detailed description for the U.S. Geological Survey in 1884. In 1887, Hitchcock produced a geological map of the U.S. and parts of Canada that was at the scale of 1 inch to 200 miles, with a review of the various maps of the U.S. that accompanied the geological map of the U.S. In 1895, McGee and J.B. Tolbert produced a 1:15,000,000 scale map of the geology of the U.S.

There have been a host of geological maps of the U.S. produced in the 20th century. Bailey Willis produced a geological map of the U.S. in 1906. George W. Stose produced a 1:2,500,000 scale map in 1932, and a 1:500,000 scale map together with R.W. Smith in 1939. A.K. Lobeck produced a Geologic map of the United States (with text on the reverse side) in 1941 Those are just a few that have been produced. The most recent map being produced is the National Map that is a cooperative project.

The current geologic map of Georgia was produced in 1976. It was put together mainly in two parts from two teams representing the northern and southern portion of the state.

The map of Georgia is actually a compilation of numerous geological studies and mapping projects that occurred throughout the state and over an extended time period. The major studies that are cited for contribution to the state geologic map fall under three main categories: New mapping by the Georgia Geological Survey, new mapping by the Georgia Geological Survey combined with revised published maps, and published maps with compilation revision only. The majority of the rock units shown on the 1976 map were mapped in 1973 by reconnaissance methods. For some areas, previous authors provided more detailed work than the reconnaissance conducted by the geological survey staff. In those areas, the original author's work was used in compiling the state map.

More recently, geologic mapping has been undertaken by the Georgia Geological Survey through the STATEMAP project. This project was funded from the National Geologic Mapping Act of 1992. This federal act was for the purpose of producing geologic maps that for 2 decades had been drastically curtailed. It was recognized that "geologic maps are the primary data base for virtually all applied and basic earth-science applications". This act provided 50% of the funds needed, whereas each state that wanted to participate supplied the other 50% of the funding to complete these various mapping projects. Ultimately this project was to be a part of the National Map and the subsequent databases generated by the various state and national mapping projects.

The geology of Georgia consists of five distinct geologic regions, beginning in the northwest corner of the state and moving through the state to the southeast: the Ridge and Valley region also known as the Appalachian Plateau, the Blue Ridge, the Piedmont, the Fall Line and the Coastal Plain.

The Appalachian Plateau geologic region only passes through the extreme northwest corner of Georgia. During the middle Ordovician Period (about 440 - 480 million years ago), the tectonic plate carrying this area collided with another plate, leading to the creation of a new subduction zone and the beginning of the Appalachians As a result of this and later orogenies, alternating beds of hard and soft Paleozoic sedimentary rocks were folded, looking much like the wrinkles one would find in a kicked floor rug. In Georgia, the Ridge and Valley includes limestone, sandstone, shale and other sedimentary rocks, which have yielded construction-grade limestone, barite, ochre and small amounts of coal. The extent of the Ridge and Valley is bound by the Carters Dam Fault in the east and the Emerson Fault in the south.
The Blue Ridge geologic region forms the North Georgia mountains. In this region, the highest points in Georgia are found, including Brasstown Bald. The Blue Ridge consists of metamorphic rocks, either metamorphosed equivalents of sedimentary rocks or igneous rocks, and the region includes the metavolcanic rocks of the Georgia Gold Belt. The region also includes igneous intrusions of granite and diabase. From the discovery of gold in the Georgia Gold Belt in 1828, enough gold was mined in the area to cause a branch mint of the United States Mint to be located in Dahlonega, Georgia. Marble and talc are other resources produced in the Blue Ridge in Georgia.

The Piedmont geologic region is composed of igneous and metamorphic rocks resulting from ancient (300 to 600 million year old) sediments that were subjected to high temperatures and pressures and re-exposed about 250 to 300 million years ago. Rocks typical of the region include schist, amphibolite, gneiss, migmatite, and granite. This region is more hilly than mountainous and is marked by lower elevations than the Blue Ridge. Nevertheless, the Piedmont is home to prominent features like Stone Mountain and the Brevard Fault line which runs parallel to the Chattahoochee River and bisects cities like Suwanee, Atlanta, and Buford.

The Fall Line is the geomorphologic break between the upland region of relatively hard crystalline basement rock and the coastal plain of softer sedimentary rock. The Fall Line is most prominent when crossed by a river. It is at this point that cities developed, because riverboats could not typically travel any farther inland without portaging. In some locations, the rapid change in elevation of the water, and the resulting energy release, made the Fall Line a good location for water mills, grist mills, and sawmills. Because of the need for a river port leading to the ocean, and a ready supply of water power, settlements developed where rivers crossed the Fall Line. In Georgia, the Fall Line extends from Augusta, through Macon, and on to Columbus.
The Coastal Plain in Georgia is part of a geologic region that extends from New Jersey to Texas and consists of sedimentary rocks deposited in the Late Cretaceous to Holocene periods. It is divided from the Piedmont by the Fall Line, which passes through Georgia from Augusta in the east, then southwestward to Macon, then to Columbus and finally westward to Montgomery, Alabama. The rocks in this region are from the Late Cretaceous to Holocene periods, with some marine and terrestrial fossils and rare fragments of dinosaurs. The main mineral resource of the Coastal Plain in Georgia is kaolin.




</doc>
<doc id="22601036" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22601036" title="Mmm Papi">
Mmm Papi

"Mmm Papi" is a song by American singer-songwriter Britney Spears. The song was written by Spears and Nicole Morier, while additional writing and song production were done by Canadian band Let's Go to War, whose members are Henry Walter, Adrien Gough and Peter-John Kerr, for Spears' sixth studio album, "Circus" (2008). "Mmm Papi" is noted for having a Latin pop influence, similar to Madonna's "La Isla Bonita" (1987). The lyrics of the song tell about a woman who has an attraction to a man, longing for him to come and take her away.

"Mmm Papi" received generally unfavorable reviews from contemporary critics. Many said the song represents Spears' trouble with men, and speculated that its lyrics deal to either her father James Spears or paparazzi . The speculations were later denied by co-writer Morier. The song was also compared to Rosemary Clooney's "Come On-a My House" (1951). Despite not being released as a single, "Mmm Papi" managed to peak at number ninety-four on "Billboard" Pop 100, due to moderate airplay on mainstream top 40 radio stations, singles sales, and digital downloads.

It was confirmed in 2008 that Spears was in the process of recording her sixth studio album. Spears manager Larry Rudolph confirmed the singer would spend "her summer in the recording studio" to work on it. Despite no official album confirmation at the time, Rudolph revealed they were happy with her progress and that she had been working with a range of producers, such as Sean Garrett, Guy Sigsworth, Danja and Bloodshy & Avant. "Mmm Papi" was written by Spears and Nicole Morier during Summer and Spring of 2008. Among the songs they worked on were "Mmm Papi", "Rock Me In" and "Whiplash". Both wanted to do something that Spears had not done before. "Mmm Papi" and "Rock Me In" were included in Spears' sixth studio album, "Circus" (2008); however, "Whiplash" failed to make the cut. Morier explained, "There’s a couple songs we started that were great ideas but just incomplete. Maybe we’ll hear them with fresh ears someday and put them out, but I usually just like to start anew."

Additional writing and song production were done by Canadian band Let's Go to War, whose members are Henry Walter, Adrien Gough and Peter-John Kerr. In an interview with The Canadian Press, Walter revealed they first sent several demos to Jive Records for "Circus". After selecting it, Spears' management required several changes to the song, making "Mmm Papi" "substantially different from what was submitted." Walter revealed they had no contact with the singer for the song production, and considered "Mmm Papi" as "something different for Britney" and "a fun track and is not trying to be anything it's not." Spears recorded her vocals for the song in 2008 at Train Tracks Studios and Conway Recording Studios in Los Angeles, California, with Walter and Eric Eylands. Guitar was provided by Chris Worthy, and audio mixing was done by Tony Maserati.

"Mmm Papi" is a latin pop song that lasts for three minutes and twenty-two seconds. The song has dancehall elements and a 1960s go-go vibe, and incorporates into its melody handclaps and a rock guitar. Anna Dimond of "TV Guide" perceived influences of Madonna's "La Isla Bonita" (1987) in the song, and called it an "ode to the tropical life (and perhaps its masculine fruits)". It has been suggested that its lyrics deal with either her father Jamie Spears or paparazzi . However, this was denied by Morier, who said "the song is definitely not about Adnan and in the whole time I worked with [Spears] last spring and summer I never once saw that guy." Morier described "Mmm Papi" as a fun upbeat song, while saying the title "came out of [the line] Mmm Papa Luv U." "Entertainment Weekly"s Dylan Kickham described the song as a "bizarre attempt at combining Latin pop with ’60s psychedelic soul".

"Mmm Papi" received generally unfavorable reviews from contemporary critics. Alexis Petridis of "The Guardian" said the track was fun, but panned for appearing on "Circus" to "revisit the Lolita persona of "...Baby One More Time"". Chris Willman of "Entertainment Weekly" said the song "giddily sets [Spears] littlest-girl voice against a guitar right out of 1960s go-go rock." John Murphy of musicOMH said that "any indication of her chat-up lines [in "Mmm Papi"] may explain her recent trouble with men," while Caryn Ganz of "Rolling Stone" said the singer "shows she has psychodrama to spare on [the song]," and considered it "a go-go romp with daddy issues." Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine commented, "the jaw-dropping "Mmm Papi" is the nexus of cock-hungriness." Chris Richards of "The Washington Post" said the song "tries to replicate the strutting come-ons of "Toxic", but quickly goes rancid as Spears indulges in some of the most cloying singing of her career," while Ann Powers of the "Los Angeles Times" compared its style to Rosemary Clooney's "Come On-a My House" (1951). Powers also said Spears have "a fairly horrific pan-Latin accent" in the song.

Jim DeRogatis of the "Chicago Sun-Times" criticized "Mmm Papi" as the "most disturbing [song] of ["Circus"]." Cameron Adams of the "Herald Sun" called "Mmm Papi" "an attempt at Gwen Stefani's new wave sound that doesn't work." Ben Rayner of the "Toronto Star" called it "awful," along with "My Baby", and a "baby-talk horror." Poppy Cosyns of "The Sun" criticized the song's lyrics, deeming it as "bizarre lyrics which reference [Spears] love/hate father-daughter turmoil." Pete Paphides of "The Times" said "Mmm Papi" "couldn't be less sexy if Christine Hamilton were singing them," while a review by "The Independent" said the song portrays "the former Mouseketeer as some kind of robotic nymphomaniac doll – groaning and grunting "let's make out" with the chilly distance of a future-sex cyborg unit." Darryl Sterdan of Jam! gave "Mmm Papi" a positive review, saying, "between the hip-swivelling groove, the twangy guitar, the surfy organ lines and the silly vocals, this might be the most enjoyable cut on the disc. Pure fun." Despite not being released as a single, "Mmm Papi" did manage to peak at number ninety-four on "Billboard" Pop 100, on the week of December 10, 2008, due to moderate airplay on mainstream top 40 radio stations, singles sales, and digital downloads.

Credits for "Mmm Papi" are adapted from "Circus" liner notes.

Technical

Personnel


</doc>
<doc id="22662474" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22662474" title="Varagavank">
Varagavank

Varagavank (, "Monastery of Varag"; , "Seven Churches") was an Armenian monastery on the slopes of Mount Erek, southeast of the city of Van, in eastern Turkey.

The monastery was founded in the early 11th century by Senekerim-Hovhannes Artsruni, the Armenian King of Vaspurakan, on a preexisting religious site. Initially serving as the necropolis of the Artsruni kings, it eventually became the seat of the archbishop of the Armenian Church in Van. The monastery has been described as one of the great monastic centers of the Armenian church by Ara Sarafian and the richest and most celebrated monastery of the Lake Van area by Robert H. Hewsen.

During the Armenian Genocide, in April–May 1915, the Turkish army attacked, burned, and destroyed much of the monastery. More of it was destroyed in the 1960s, although some sections are still extant.

According to tradition, in the late third century, Hripsime hid the remnant of the True Cross she wore on her neck at the site of the monastery. In 653, when the location was discovered, Catholicos Nerses III the Builder built the Church of Surb Nshan (Holy Sign). It is described by Robert H. Hewsen as "a simple hermitage". Catholicos Nerses also established the Feast of the Holy Cross of Varag (Վարագա սուրբ խաչի տոն), celebrated by the Armenian Apostolic Church on the Sunday nearest to September 28, always two weeks after the Feast of the Cross.

Queen Khushush, the daughter of King Gagik I of Armenia and spouse of Senekerim-Hovhannes Artsruni, the future Artsruni King of Vaspurakan, built a church at the site in 981 dedicated to the Holy Wisdom ("Surb Sopi"). In the late medieval period, it was converted into a castle and was known as "Berdavor" ("berd" means "fortress" in Armenian). The Church of Surb Hovhannes (Saint John) was built to the north in the 10th century.

The monastery itself was founded by Senekerim-Hovhannes early in his reign (1003–24) to house a relic of the True Cross that had been kept on the site since Hripsime. In 1021, when Vaspurakan fell to Byzantine rule, Senekerim-Hovhannes took the relic to Sebastia, where the following year his son Atom founded the Surb Nshan Monastery. In 1025, following his death, Senekerim-Hovhannes was buried at Varagavank and the True Cross was returned to the monastery. Fearing an attack by Muslims, Varagavank Father Ghukas took the True Cross in 1237 to the Tavush region of northeastern Armenia. There he settled in the Anapat monastery, which was renamed Nor Varagavank. In 1318, the Mongols invaded the region and ransacked the monastery. All the churches were destroyed except St. Hovhannes, which had an iron door and was where the monks hid. Between 1320 and the 1350s, the monastery was completely restored.

The Safavid emperor Tahmasp I ransacked the monastery in 1534. In 1648, along with other buildings in the region, Varagavank was destroyed by an earthquake. Its restoration began immediately thereafter by monastery father Kirakos who found financial support among the wealthy merchants in Van. According to the 17th-century historian Arakel of Tabriz, four churches were restored and renovated.

The architect Tiratur built a square-planned gavit (narthex) west of Church of Surb Astvatsatsin (Holy Mother of God) in 1648. It functioned as a church during the 19th century, called Surb Gevorg. To the west of the narthex was a 17th-century three-arched open-air porch; to the north was Church of Surb Khach (Holy Cross); while to the south was the 17th-century Church of Surb Sion. Urartian cuneiform inscriptions were used as lintels on their western entrances.

Suleyman, the prince of Hoşap Castle, invaded the monastery in 1651, looting it of its Holy Cross, manuscripts, and treasures. The cross was later repurchased and it was added to the Tiramayr Church of Van in 1655. The monastery declined in the late 17th century and, in 1679, many of its treasures were sold due to economic difficulties. Archbishop Bardughimeos Shushanetsi renovated the monastery in 1724.

In 1779, father Baghdasar "vardapet" decorated the narthex walls with frescoes of King Abgar V, Theodosius I, Saint Gayane, Hripsime, Khosrovidukht, and Gabriel. According to Murad Hasratyan, the unknown painter had fused together the styles of Armenian, Persian, and Western European art.

A wall was built around the monastery in 1803 and, fourteen years later, the Church of Surb Khach (Holy Cross) was completely renovated and converted into a depository of manuscripts by archbishop Galust. In 1832, Tamur pasha of Van robbed the monastery's treasures and strangled the father Mktrich "vardapet" Gaghatatsi to death. In 1849, Gabriel "vardapet" Shiroyan restored the Church of Sion, which had been destroyed by an earthquake, and converted it into a wheat warehouse.

Mkrtich Khrimian, the future head of the Armenian Church, became father of Varagavank in 1857 and made the monastery effectively independent and subordinate only to the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople. He founded a printing house and began publishing "Artsvi Vaspurakan" ("The Eagle of Vaspurakan"), the first newspaper in historical Armenia, which was published between 1858 and 1864. He also established a modern school. The school taught subjects such as theology, music, grammar, geography, Armenian studies and history; the prominent novelist Raffi was briefly one of the teachers. The school produced its first graduates in 1862.

During the Hamidian massacres of 1896, the monastery was sacked and robbed. Some teachers and students were killed. According to a contemporary report by an American at Van, "Varak, the most famous and historic monastery in all this [Van] region, which has weathered the storms of centuries is almost certain to go [on fire]."

On 20th April 1915 some 30 gendarmes arrived at Varagavank and murdered the monastery's two monks together with four of their servants. The monastery remained under their occupation until the 30th April, when, for unknown reasons, the gendarmes withdrew and returned to Van city. This withdrawal coincided with the arrival on Varag mountain of some 3000 Armenian refugees from the Hayatzor valley who had escaped the massacres that had taken place there several days earlier. They were soon joined by some 3000 survivors of massacres elsewhere, and together they found a temporary refuge in the Armenian villages and monasteries on the mountain, including Varagavank. Self-defense units were also set up in an attempt to protect the villages - about 250 men, almost half the force, was stationed at Varag, with most of the remainder based at nearby Shushants monastery. On the order of Van's Governor Djevdet Bey, Turkish forces returned in strength, with a force of 300 calvarymen, 1000 militia, and three batteries of artillery. According to Kevorkian this was on the 8th May. Shushants quickly fell after putting up a feeble defense and was burnt down. Varagavank fell shortly afterwards and was also burnt. The majority of the villagers and the refugees managed to escape to Van at night. The Turkish forces made no attempt to stop them entering the Armenian-controlled sectors of the city; it is speculated that they were deliberately allowed in so that they would use up the limited food supplies of the defenders. 

The exact date of the burning of the monastery is not known for certain. On April 27 1915, a message sent "To Americans, or any Foreign Consul" by Clarence Ussher and Ernest Yarrow, American missionaries in Van, said that "From our window we could plainly see Shushantz afire on its mountain-side and Varak Monastery, with its priceless store of ancient manuscripts, going up in smoke." However, a fellow missionary, Elizabeth Barrows Ussher, Clarence Ussher's wife, wrote in her diary that the monastery was attacked by 200 cavalry and foot soldiers on April 30, but they were repulsed. She gave May 4 as the day the monastery was burned. Another missionary teacher Grace H. Knapp recounted, however, that "On the 8th May we saw the place in flames, and Varak Monastery near by, with its priceless ancient manuscripts, also went up in smoke."

A significant number of the structures surviving the 1915 destruction were destroyed in the 1960s. As of 2006, the monastery's remains were used a barn. According to historian Ara Sarafian, as of 2012, "good sections have just barely survived until our days." Dr. Jenny B. White, a scholar on Turkey, wrote in 2013 that, on her visit, the remains of the monastery "consisted of nothing more than a few brick vaults used to house goats amid a clutch of tumbledown Kurdish homes." The best-preserved section of the monastery is the church of Surb Gevorg (St. George), which is now looked after by a caretaker. The dome is partly collapsed and contains some traces of surviving frescoes. The dome of the church of Surb Nshan is entirely gone.

In February 2010, following the renovation of the Holy Cross Cathedral at Akdamar Island in Lake Van, Halil Berk, the Deputy Governor of Van Province, announced that the Governor's Office sought to restore Varagavank and the Ktuts monastery at Çarpanak Island. In June of that year, the governor also stated that the monastery at Çarpanak Island and Varagavank would be renovated "in the near future." In October 2010 "Radikal" reported that a nearby mosque, built in 1997, would be demolished to make room for the restoration of Varagavank.

The monastery was damaged as a result of the 2011 Van earthquake. According to Ara Sarafian, "parts of the main church collapsed, while other parts were significantly weakened. Old cracks got bigger, new ones appeared." Turkish engineers reportedly inspected it and announced that they would commence restoration work in the spring of 2012. Sarafian wrote that "such promises have been made in the past and one needs to be a little skeptical. The current state of the church makes such work much harder than at any time in the past." He noted in a 2012 article that the local and provincial governments supported the preservation and restoration of the monastery. In October 2012, the artist Raffi Bedrosyan, who contributed to the restoration of the St. Giragos Church in Diyarbakır, stated that he had hoped to restore Varagavank and added that "Both Ankara and Van agreed to launch the restoration project, but social and natural obstacles delayed the process.". In 2017 it was documented that the remaining stones of the monastery are regularly taken off by the local authorities to build a local mosque and other developments with them.

"Taraf" reported in September 2012 that the monastery is owned by the Turkish journalist and media executive Fatih Altaylı. In an interview, Altaylı told the newspaper that the monastery belonged to his grandfather and he inherited it from his father. The monastery was confiscated during the Armenian Genocide. A group of Armenians in Turkey, led by the activist Nadya Uygun, started a petition asking him to "Apply to the Armenian Patriarchate of Turkey and transfer the title deed of the church to the concerned [Armenian community] foundation." Altayli told "Agos" that he is ready to give it to the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople, but no government authority has approached him to respond to his offer to give back the church to its owners, and that they displayed no interest in cooperating. Revolutionary Socialist Workers' Party (DSİP) activists demonstrated in early October 2012 before the Habertürk headquarters in Beyoğlu, Istanbul demanding the return of the monastery land to the Armenians. As of September 2014, there was no progress. In 2017 it was documented that the Turkish government actively tried to tear the stones of what remains from the monastery to construct a mosque, houses and other developments in the area.

The monastery was composed of six churches, gavit, narthex, (nakhasrah), and other structures. The main church of Varagavank was called Surb Astvatsatsin (Holy Mother of God). It dated to the 11th century and was similar in plan to the prominent Saint Hripsime Church in Vagharshapat. The earliest structure was on the southern part of the ensemble and was known as Surb Sopia (10th century). Queen Khushush left an inscription (dated 981) on its western wall.

In the 10th century, Queen Mlke, the wife of Gagik I, presented the monastery the "Gospel of Queen Mlke" (), one of the best known Armenian illuminated manuscripts. In the 14th–16th centuries the monastery became a major center of manuscript production. A number of Varagavank manuscripts are now kept at the Matenadaran in Yerevan.

Raffi mentions the monastery in volume two of the novel "Sparks" («Կայծեր», 1883–87). The prominent poet Hovhannes Tumanyan wrote an article about the monastery in 1910, on the fiftieth anniversary of Mkrtich Khrimian becoming father of Varag and the monastery's subsequent revival as a great center of education and culture.


Notes



</doc>
<doc id="22672628" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22672628" title="The Natural Order">
The Natural Order

"The Natural Order" is the twentieth episode of the third season of the American television comedy show "30 Rock". It was written by series creator Tina Fey with co-executive producer John Riggi and directed by Scott Ellis. The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) network in the United States on April 30, 2009. Guest stars in "The Natural Order" include actors Elaine Stritch and Steve Buscemi.

The plot of the episode centers around a conflict between Tracy Jordan (Tracy Morgan) and Liz Lemon (Fey) over favorable treatment. Meanwhile, Jenna Maroney (Jane Krakowski) adopts a gibbon and treats it like her child. Finally, Jack Donaghy's (Alec Baldwin) mother Colleen (Stritch) visits him on the 35th anniversary of the day that Jack's father left the family.

"The Natural Order" received mixed reception from television critics. According to the Nielsen ratings system, it was watched by 6 million households during its original broadcast, and received a 2.7 rating/7 share among viewers in the 18–49 demographic.

Liz (Tina Fey), Kenneth Parcell (Jack McBrayer), and Pete Hornberger (Scott Adsit) all attempt to trick Tracy into arriving at a rehearsal on time. Tracy arrives not knowing what time it is and announces that Liz is racist and treating him like a child. Liz challenges Tracy to behave better so he can be treated as an adult, but he responds by sending a gibbon to replace himself at rehearsal. Liz tells Tracy to arrive on time with his lines memorized the next day if he wants to be treated equally. Tracy retaliates by acting professionally but convincing everyone to treat Liz equally too, by making her lift heavy water jugs, passing gas near her, and inviting her to a strip club along with the other writers. Liz in turn stops Tracy from going to the strip club, noting that because he is acting so professionally he has to write notes for the upcoming script. Liz is uncomfortable at the strip club and Tracy hates writing all night so they agree to return to the "natural order" of things with both receiving preferential treatment.

Meanwhile, Jenna adopts the gibbon Tracy sends to rehearsal and treats it as her child. She dresses it in several costumes including a mariachi outfit, a tuxedo, and a sailor suit. In addition she buys the gibbon a baby doll, referring to herself as a "grandmother." At the end of the episode Jenna accidentally shakes the head off of the baby doll and the gibbon attacks her.

Jack is concerned for his mother, Colleen (Elaine Stritch). He tells Liz that the anniversary of his father, Jimmy Donaghy, abandoning their family is coming up and he is afraid of the effect it will have on Colleen. When Jack arrives at Colleen's hotel room to take her to dinner, however, he discovers she is staying with a man, Paul. Jack, worried she has been taken in by a con man in her time of grief, asks his private investigator Lenny Wosniak (Steve Buscemi) to look into Paul. Wosniak cannot find anything distasteful in Paul's background, but tells Jack that he is married. Jack reveals this to his mother, but she says she knew and did not care. Colleen is also surprised that Jack thought the anniversary of Jimmy leaving would hurt her, noting that he had once left from the spring of 1957 until he came back and invited her to see "Some Like It Hot". Jack talks this over with Liz and comes to realize that as "Some Like It Hot" was released in 1959, Jimmy Donaghy cannot have been his biological father because Jack was conceived in 1958, during the period Jimmy had been absent.

"The Natural Order" was written by series' creator, executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey, and co-executive producer John Riggi. The director of this episode was Scott Ellis. This was Fey and Riggi's second script collaboration, having co-written season one episode "The Head and the Hair" that aired on January 18, 2007. "The Natural Order" originally aired on April 30, 2009, on NBC in the United States as the twentieth episode of the show's third season.

This episode was actress Elaine Stritch's fifth appearance on "30 Rock" as Collen Donaghy, the mother of Jack Donaghy, played by Alec Baldwin. Actor Steve Buscemi reprised his role as private investigator Lenny Wosniak. Buscemi first appeared in the October 18, 2007, episode "The Collection", and went on to direct the third season episode "Retreat to Move Forward", broadcast on January 22, 2009.

"The Natural Order" is one of several "30 Rock" episodes to deal with race. In this episode, when Tracy leaves the first rehearsal accusing Liz of racism he shouts "race card!" and hands Liz a card with "race card" written on it ("playing the race card" is an expression that means introducing the issue of race into an argument in order to gain the upper hand). During their disagreement Tracy also says that "we have a black president now", referring to Barack Obama, but Liz says that he voted for Ralph Nader. According to J. Jeremy Wisnewski in "Race At The Rock: Race Cards, White Myths, And Postracial America", this plotline is an example of people "want[ing] to have race and do away with it too." Tracy wants to be treated equally but also wants to continue behaving the way he is used to. Wisnewski says that by the end of the episode, Liz and Tracy, in reverting to "the natural order", have come to understand the concept of equality; rather than forcing people "to be "equivalent" to one another ... considering the "different" interests of people equally."

Jack tells Liz that by protecting his mother this time, as opposed to when his father left, he can "put right what once went wrong" which Liz notes is part of the introduction to the television series "Quantum Leap". Jack had written a speech to confront Jimmy Donaghy decades ago and attempts to update it for his confrontation with Paul. He asks Liz who is "today's Nikita Khrushchev" and she suggests Simon Cowell, which Jack agrees with. Jack is also suspicious of Paul because he met his mother in Florida, which Jack calls "America's Australia," referring to Australia's history as a penal colony. Kenneth also shows an NBC tour the spot where "Gracie Allen took Jack Paar's virginity" and Jack reveals that he once slept with Kathy Hilton.

In its original American broadcast, "The Natural Order" was watched by 6 million viewers, according to the Nielsen ratings system. It also earned a 2.7 rating/7 share amongst 18- to 49-year-old demographic, meaning it was seen by 2.7% of all 18- to 49-year-olds and 7% of 18- to 49-year-olds watching television at the time of the broadcast. It was the tenth highest-rated show on NBC that week. This was a decrease from the previous episode, "The Ones", which was watched by 6.3 million American viewers.

Aly Semigran for "Entertainment Weekly" said the episode "was nowhere near as good" as other recent episodes as it was "too dependent on obvious physical comedy." IGN writer Robert Canning took no strong position on the episode, saying it had "jokes enough to make it funny, but nothing over the top to make it classic," rating the episode 8.2 out of 10. "The A.V. Club"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Nathan Rabin was more clearly positive about the episode, calling it a "glorious return to form" and grading the episode an A-. Bob Sassone of AOL's TV Squad opined he was not thrilled with Jenna's plot, observing that it was "kinda ridiculous (and unfunny, which is the worse sin)." Sassone, however, said that Liz and Tracy feuding and Jack and his mother battling "are plots that are always good for some laughs." Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for "The Star-Ledger" wrote that while "The Natural Order" was not a "classic episode" it was still "solid enough, in the end." Sepinwall enjoyed Jack and his mother's story, but commented that the Liz and Tracy rivalry was a "hit-or-miss." "TV Guide"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Bruce Fretts said this episode "is easily the show's most grounded episode ever, even if it does feature a gibbon in a mariachi suit. The script [...] dares to deal with issues of race and gender from a typically irreverent perspective." Fretts noted that Elaine Stritch and Alec Baldwin "share a surprisingly tender scene as Colleen tells her son, 'You're my good boy [...] I just love you to death.'"




</doc>
<doc id="22700278" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22700278" title="Boys' Club (Parks and Recreation)">
Boys' Club (Parks and Recreation)

"Boys' Club" is the fourth episode of the first season of the American comedy television series "Parks and Recreation". It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 30, 2009. It was written by Alan Yang and directed by Michael McCullers. In the episode, Leslie tries to integrate herself into the local "boys club" by drinking wine from an illegal gift basket, and gets into trouble as she tries to accept responsibility for her supposed mistake. In a B story, Andy cleans his apartment while Ann is at work.

The episode included beer and props from Upland Brewing Company, a real-life company based in Bloomington, Indiana, in an attempt to give Pawnee an authentic Indiana atmosphere. "Boys' Club" received positive to fair reviews, with some commentators praising the episode for better developing the show's supporting characters.

According to Nielsen Media Research, it was watched by 5.28 million households in its original airing, which was consistent with the previous week. "Boys' Club" and the rest of the first season of "Parks and Recreation" was released on DVD in the United States on September 8, 2009.

The episode opens with Leslie (Amy Poehler) and Tom (Aziz Ansari) responding to an incident at a park trail, where teenage boys are picking up plastic baggies of dog droppings and throwing them at each other. Leslie tries to stop them but ends up playing along with the boys and admitting that it is fun. Later, at the Pawnee town hall, a construction company has sent a gift basket with wine and cheese to the parks department, but Leslie locks it away because they are not allowed to accept gifts over $25. Later, she and the others in the department look at a new social-networking site that April (Aubrey Plaza) has set up for the pit construction project. The site already has seven friends, including city planner Mark (Paul Schneider), who Leslie is disappointed to see is friends with many scantily clad young women. Leslie and Ann (Rashida Jones) see Mark and other city planners drinking beer in the town hall courtyard. Leslie describes it as the exclusive "boys' club" and proposes that she and Ann crash it.

When they come outside, Mark and the others welcome them warmly. Leslie enjoys herself at the party and, when the beer runs out and the party is about to end, she keeps it going by retrieving the wine and cheese from the gift basket. The next morning, she feels guilty and, despite her boss Ron's (Nick Offerman) assurance that "[i]t's not that big a deal," Leslie issues a public apology to every government official in Pawnee, including a link to the new pit website. Later, however, she learns April has placed a drunken video of herself drinking the rest of the wine on the site, even though she is only 19. Ron tells Leslie an ethics board has called for a disciplinary hearing with Leslie. Leslie apologizes to the board and defends April, accepting responsibility for the video. As the questions from the board continue, Ron angrily defends Leslie, insisting, "Leslie has never broken a rule in her life, to the point that it's annoying." He abruptly ends the meeting and insists they will have to go through him to give Leslie anything more than a slap on the wrist.

Later, Leslie learns she will receive a letter in her file, which disappoints her strongly until Mark tells her he has seven in his file, and that most of the guys have at least one. Mark welcomes Leslie "to the team", which makes her proud.

In a B story, Ann's normally lazy boyfriend Andy (Chris Pratt) decides to surprise her by cleaning up their messy house while she is gone. He cleans up the house (although he throws their garbage into the pit). After cleaning it, he bathes himself in a children's pool in the backyard and plays music on his boombox. Angry neighbor Lawrence steals his boombox, prompting Andy (who has two broken legs) to chase the neighbor naked through the streets on his crutches. Later, Ann arrives home and is pleased with Andy's housework, with Andy telling the documentary crew he expects to get "gently laid" later.

"Boys' Club" was written by Alan Yang and directed by Michael McCullers. McCullers co-wrote two of the "Austin Powers" films and directed Poehler in the comedy film "Baby Mama". The cold open scene, with kids throwing bags of dog feces at Leslie, was added to the episode after the rest had already been filmed, and was directed personally by series co-creator Greg Daniels. The bags were actually filled with mashed potatoes. Daniels said of the opening, "There were a lot of people who felt this was not in good taste, but to me, this was one of the most fun things about the show." The restriction prohibiting Pawnee employees from accepting gifts over $25 was based on real-life municipal regulations the "Parks and Recreation" producers encountered during their research. The scenes filmed in the town hall outside courtyard were filmed on a studio sound stage, and the ethics board review scene was filmed inside the city hall building of Pasadena, California.

Like most episodes of "Parks and Recreation", a great deal of the scenes in "Boys' Club" were improvised by the actors. For example, Nick Offerman improvised the line "Put it in an e-mail?", which he said when Leslie told him she had a very long story to tell him. Schur thought the line was "my favorite thing in the show", and they made him say in it every subsequent take during filming. Aziz Ansari also improvised a majority of the scene in which he helped Leslie prepare for her ethics board review. Dean Holland, "Parks and Recreation"'s editor, said it was his favorite scene from the entire first season. Amy Poehler improvised the line at the courtyard gathering, after she accidentally spilled several beer bottles, "I feel like I'm already in the boys' club. Look at those bitches cleanin' up after me." Schur said the line helped develop Leslie's character in future episodes because "we realized that Leslie can be a little bit cooler than we had originally thought". The scene with Ron describing his ideal government was written for a different episode, but was moved to "Boys' Club" when the producers decided it fit better there. Schur said it was his favorite moment in the episode. "Boys' Club" ends with Leslie and Mark toasting a beer to each other because Schur said, "It's a running joke in the writer's room that every episode should end with clinking beers."

Photos of "Parks and Recreation" producers were included among the photos of past city council members on the town hall walls. The photo of Norm Hiscock is the one Leslie said she believes, "No matter what direction I move, he's always staring at my chest. Mark's social networking site featured in "Boys' Club" included the character with a wide range of promiscuous women. The pictures were shot during a photo session during which, according to series co-creator Michael Schur, "We brought in a lot of women and basically said, you're really trashy. You're trashy women, and we're going to take your picture now." During the courtyard party scenes, a brief clip shows Poehler, Jones and Schneider dancing together. The clip was actually the three actors out-of-character playing around between takes, but the "Parks" producers decided to add it to the episode.

Michael Schur, co-creator of "Parks and Recreation", said "Boys' Club" marked an attempt to better develop Andy Dwyer. Schur said, "We definitely wanted to dimensionalize his character and not make him just a one-dimensional douchebag." In the episode, Andy plays a tape of himself singing a song called "Ann", which he wrote as a romantic ballad for her. Chris Pratt actually wrote and performed the song himself for the show, although he said in an interview, "it really wasn't much". Pratt actually appeared on set naked while filming the scene in which he chases Lawrence through the streets without clothes on. Schur said the scene was written because Pratt "loves taking his clothes off". It proved difficult to film the scenes with Pratt bathing in the children's pool because the bubbles disappeared so quickly that multiple takes were required. The scenes with Andy running naked through the streets with his crutches to get his boombox back were inspired by a real-life experience from the set. During filming, an announcement was made that specialty coffees were available for the cast and crew, and Pratt ran quickly after them with the crutches. Greg Daniels added it to "Boys' Club" because he found the experience extremely funny.

In an attempt to lend authenticity to the fictional Pawnee, Indiana setting, "Parks and Recreation" producers contacted the Bloomington, Indiana-based Upland Brewing Company and asked them to provide empty beer bottles and labels for the scene with the characters drinking in the town hall courtyard. The company provided props for their beer brand Dragonfly IPA, and Upland officials said their prominent appearances in the episode generated positive publicity for the company: Scott Johnson, marketing operations manager for the brewing company, said, "As soon as it went off, everyone starts calling me and e-mailing me." They also drink Vernors ginger ale, a soft drink very popular in Indiana. Windell Middlebrooks makes a guest appearance as Brian, one of the men attending the during the courtyard party. Middlebrooks was cast simply based on his work on Miller High Life commercials, in which he steals beer from bars that he deems unworthy of it.

On the day of the episode's original American broadcast on April 30, 2009, the official NBC "Parks and Recreation" website launched a duplicate of the Sullivan Street Pit social networking site which was featured in the episode, complete with photos of the pit, the list of "friends" from the show and a link to Mark's page and his photos with scantily clad women. The pit page, as well as the regular NBC website, also included the actual video of Aubrey Plaza pretending to drink wine and get drunk, as it was featured on the episode. Schur said for those scenes, "We just gave Aubrey a camera and told her to just drink wine and talk to the camera."

The social networking site developed for the pit project is inspired by sites like MySpace and Facebook, which were extremely popular when the episode was first broadcast. Leslie makes a public apology to all female government officials in alphabetical order, starting with Minnesota Republican Rep. Michele Bachmann, Wisconsin Democratic Rep. Tammy Baldwin (Democrat, Wisconsin) and Illinois Democratic Rep. Melissa Bean. On her desk, Leslie has framed photos of U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and former Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor. The apology scene was filmed with the camera on a tripod, something seldom done in the documentary-style series. In one scene, Andy is seen playing Mario Kart Wii with the Wii wheel accessory. An online game of Scrabble is visible on the computer screen in Ron's office during one scene. It is exactly the same Scrabble game he had been playing with Tom in the previous episode, "The Reporter". While preparing Leslie for her ethics board review, Tom asks if she has ever fantasized about Ron "covered in Powerade". This is a reference to commercials for the sports drink, in which athletes sweat the multi-colored liquid while working out.

In its original American broadcast on April 30, 2009, "Boys' Club" was watched by 5.28 million households, according to Nielsen Media Research. This rating was consistent with the previous week even as other NBC shows, like the new "Southland", saw a drop in ratings. "Boys' Club" received a 2.3 rating/8 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34, and a 2.3 rating/7 share among viewers between 18 and 49.

The episode received positive to fair reviews. Alan Sepinwall, television journalist for "The Star-Ledger", said "Boys' Club" was funnier that previous episode and included scenes with good physical comedy involving Leslie, particularly when she spilled the beer bottles; he also praised Andy's "naked crutch chase". Matt Fowler of IGN said the episode gave a little more insight into Leslie's "aspirations about wanting to be a "woman" who succeeds in government, which is a step in the right direction", but Fowler said her constant mistakes and wrong decisions bog down the story. Fowler said the best part of the episode was Andy's subplot, particularly the scene in which he hops down the street naked on his crutches. Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B- grade, and said the Amy Poehler character needs to be more fully formed in future episodes. Phipps said most of the show's laughs came from supporting characters Andy, Tom and Ron; he also particularly praised Ron's shutdown of Leslie's hearing and his monologues of the ideal government: "One guy, who sits in a small room at a desk. And the only thing he’s allowed to decide is who to nuke." Jeremy Medina of "Entertainment Weekly" liked that the episode included a moral crisis of sorts for Leslie, who he described as "a realized character instead of a caricature".

"Boys' Club", along with the five other first season episodes of "Parks and Recreation", was released on a one-disc DVD set in the United States on September 8, 2009. The DVD included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episode, as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes. The deleted scenes included on the DVD were originally featured on the official "Parks and Recreation" website after the episode aired. In one of the scenes, Leslie bought a gift basket and returned it to the business that provided the original one, in an attempt at what she called "ethical restitution". In another scene, Leslie apologized to April for introducing her to alcohol, prompting April to later tell the camera she has had fake IDs in Indiana, North Dakota and Delaware since she was 14 years old.



</doc>
<doc id="22718087" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22718087" title="Elephant endotheliotropic herpesvirus">
Elephant endotheliotropic herpesvirus

Elephant endotheliotropic herpesviruses (EEHV) or Elephantid herpesvirus 1' is a type of herpesvirus, which can cause a highly fatal hemorrhagic disease when transmitted to young Asian elephants. In African elephants, related forms of these viruses, which have been identified in wild populations, are generally benign, occasionally surfacing to cause small growths or lesions. However, some types of EEHV can cause a highly fatal disease in Asian elephants, which kills up to 80% of severely affected individuals. The disease can be treated with the rapid application of antiviral drugs, but this has only been effective in around a third of cases.

The first case of a fatal form of the disease was documented in 1995, though tissue samples from as early as the 1980s have since tested positive for the virus, and localized skin lesions in wild African elephants were recorded in the 1970s. Since 1995, there have been over fifty documented disease cases in North America and Europe, of which only nine have been successfully cured. Those affected are mostly young animals born in captivity, though a small number of older wild-born adults held in zoos have died, and a number of cases caused by the same pathogenic type of EEHV have been identified in both orphan and wild calves in Asian elephant populations.

The EEHVs are members of the Proboscivirus genus, a novel clade most closely related to the mammalian betaherpesviruses that have been responsible for as many as 70 deaths of both zoo and wild Asian elephants worldwide, especially in young calves. There are currently six known species/types of the probosciviruses, and the most commonly encountered and most pathogenic form EEHV1 also has two chimeric subtypes, 1A and 1B., as well as numerous distinct strains.

EEHV1A (originally just known as EEHV1) was the first species/type identified, which causes an acute hemorrhagic disease with a very high mortality rate in Asian elephants. This form of the virus was originally believed to occur naturally in African elephants (occasionally producing skin nodules), and to be transmitted to Asian elephants within captivity, but more extensive studies have since largely disproved this concept because several other species/types of EEHV (e.g. EEHV2, EEHV3 and EEHV6) instead have been identified in African elephants. A second lethal subtype, EEHV1B, was identified in Asian elephants in 2001. EEHV3, EEHV4 and EEHV5 have also each been responsible for the deaths of at least one Asian elephant calf.

EEHV2 has caused hemorrhagic disease in several African elephants as reported by. Along with EEHV3 and EEHV6 it has also been found in pulmonary lymph nodes of several autopsied wild and zoo African elephants.

There are a further five or six species/types and varieties of elephant gammaherpesvirus (EGHVs) found in eye and genital secretions of many healthy Asian and African zoo elephants - e.g. EGHV1, EGHV2, EGHV3A, EGHV3B, EGHV4 and EGHV5 (also called Elephantid herpesviruses EIHV3, EIHV4, EIHV5, EIHV6, ElHV9 and ElHV10 - which are gamma herpesviruses. But these are neither closely related to the EEHVs, nor the known cause of any disease symptoms.

Studies have also detected both EEHV1A and EEHV1B as being shed in trunk wash secretions by healthy asymptomatic Asian zoo elephant herdmates of calves that previously had disease. and similarly for EEHV5. Thus, similar to saliva for most human and animal herpesviruses, the trunk secretions may be a source of transmission for EEHVs. Because of concerns about the origins of EEHV1 and evidence of cross-species transmission for EEHV3, long-term contact between Asian and African elephants has been discouraged, along with avoiding new contacts between young captive-born Asian elephants and wild-born Asian elephants, as the latter may be carriers of the disease. An analysis of a number of North American cases, which ruled out the direct transmission of the virus between any of the affected facilities studied, strongly supported the idea of a significant Asian carrier population. This is supported by the fact that some of the deceased calves had no possible contact with any African elephants. Artificial insemination is not believed to be a transmission factor, notes that when multiple calves of a single bull or cow elephant died at different times (even at the same facility) they nearly all had distinct strains of the virus, yet when two calves died or became infected at the same time at the same facility the pairs have always had identical virus strains. A program of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay testing began in 2005, aiming to test blood samples from around a thousand elephants for antibodies to the virus in order to help identify carriers and possible transmission patterns.

In benign infections found in some wild and captive African elephants, these viruses can affect either the skin or the pulmonary system. In the former case, it produces small pinkish nodules on the head and trunk in juveniles, which appear for a few weeks and then regress, suggesting an intermittently reactivated localized infection that mostly remains dormant. In the second case, it has been found in small white pulmonary nodules on necropsy of many asymptomatic adults. These are both characteristic of EEHV2, EEHV3 and EEHV6.

In a fatal attack, however, it manifests very quickly. In a number of cases, death has occurred within 24 hours of the onset of the infection, while other cases do not last longer than around five days. The virus attacks endothelial cells, rupturing capillaries and causing blood loss and haemorrhaging; once this reaches the heart, the haemorrhage kills quickly through shock. Symptoms include lethargy and an unwillingness to eat, a rapid heartbeat, and decreased blood-cell count, as well as cyanosis of the tongue, mouth ulcers, and oedema of the head and trunk.

Rapid treatment with famciclovir, sustained for around a month, has appeared to cure eight calves infected with EEHV1; however, this treatment is very expensive, only partially effective, and relies on early identification of the infection.

A polymerase chain reaction test on a blood sample from affected animals will confirm a suspected case by identifying the viral DNA, though it is now common to start famciclovir treatment at the earliest possible moment rather than waiting for confirmation of the case. Prior to the development of the test, or in circumstances where it is not available, the disease may be misdiagnosed as any of a number of other conditions which have a quick onset leading to rapid death, including encephalomyocarditis and salmonellosis.

The virus has been identified in the pulmonary nodules of African elephants as far back as the 1970s. The first recognised fatal case of EEHV in an Asian elephant was identified at the National Zoo in Washington, D.C., in 1995; testing on stored tissue samples was able to identify a number of earlier deaths as being due to the same virus. These cases have so far been identified as early as 1983. Since this date, there have been a total of 54 more cases in North America and Europe, nine of which were successfully treated. The May 2009 deaths of two calves at Whipsnade Zoo were not included in this calculation. This gives a fatality rate of over 80% among known symptomatic disease cases. In cases where antiviral medication was applied, treatment was effective in about one in three cases. As of 2005, there were twelve cases where famciclovir had been used, eight of which were fatal. As a fraction of the overall population, it has been calculated that of the 78 Asian elephants born in captivity in North America between 1978 and 2007, 19 are known to have died of EEHV, and five more were successfully treated with antiviral medication.

The affected animals are mostly young Asian elephants that had been born in captivity, with half the cases in North America being between the ages of one and four years (and three-quarters between one and eight years old). Some cases have affected newborns or adult elephants born in the wild (oldest aged 40 years), and three recorded cases have affected African elephants. The first documented fatal case for African elephants was Kijana, an eleven-month-old male in 1996. Since 2008, a number of cases have been attributed to EEHV1 among wild Asian elephants.

The first suspected case in Asia was in 1997, though it was not until the fifth suspected case that the presence of the virus could be confirmed. This case was reported in 2006, with the death of a young wild-born female calf at an elephant sanctuary in Cambodia. The virus was identified as part of the EEHV1 group, the same as previously identified in the North American and European captive populations. In 2013, nine lethal cases from India were extensively characterized and found to consist of a wide variety of genetically diverged strains of EEHV1A and EEHV1B matching the subtypes and genetic range of nearly all those found previously in Europe and North America. Cases attributed to EEHV1A and EEHV4 have also been reported in Thailand and there is both confirmed and anecdotal evidence for similar hemorrhagic disease deaths of between 16 and 30 more calves in Asian countries including Thailand, India, Nepal, Myanmar and Indonesia within the past five years. Thus, this is not just a disease of captive elephants, but is endogenous to and possibly rampant in Asian elephants in the wild also. Further research has been noted as "urgently required" to study the situation in regions with wild Asian elephant populations.



</doc>
<doc id="22736181" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22736181" title="The Banquet (Parks and Recreation)">
The Banquet (Parks and Recreation)

"The Banquet" is the fifth episode of the first season of the American comedy television series "Parks and Recreation". It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 8, 2009. It was written by Tucker Cawley and directed by Beth McCarthy-Miller. In the episode, Leslie attends an award banquet for her mother, a veteran of local government politics, who encourages Leslie to resort to blackmail in order to get her way with a zoning board official.

The episode received positive reviews, with "Entertainment Weekly" claiming the series appears to have grown more "settled and focused" after this episode. According to Nielsen Media Research, it was watched by 4.64 million households in its original airing, continuing a downward trend in ratings since the pilot episode, although NBC had already committed to renewing the show for a second season. "The Banquet" and the rest of the first season of "Parks and Recreation" was released on DVD in the United States on September 8, 2009.

Leslie (Amy Poehler) is proud that her mother, school system employee Marlene Knope (Pamela Reed), is to receive a public service award during an upcoming banquet. Ann (Rashida Jones), excited to go to a social event after spending so much time taking care of her injured, freeloading boyfriend Andy (Chris Pratt), is told by Leslie to dress very formally. Leslie visits an old-fashioned barber, who unbeknownst to her only gives men's haircuts; she is given a very short, mannish hairstyle, which she is very proud of. Leslie and Ann, who is extremely overdressed in an expensive pink dress, arrive together at the banquet, where they are mistaken for a lesbian couple by many of the attendees. Tom (Aziz Ansari) sucks up to Marlene during his banquet speech, while Ron (Nick Offerman) sticks to a "fact-based" speech ("It is true that you have won this award.")

Leslie sees Jeanine Restrepo (Loretta Fox), an influential zoning board member who could help Leslie with her plans to turn the Sullivan Street pit into a park. Leslie is too nervous to approach her, so she practices with Mark (Paul Schneider), who teasingly pinches her nose because he says as Jeanine, "I can do whatever I want"; Ann pinches Mark's nose and Leslie pinches Ann's, and Mark summarizes, "It's fun to pretend to be zoning board members." Marlene suggests Leslie try sucking up to Jeanine in her speech, but it comes across awkwardly when Leslie claims to "love" Jeanine. When Leslie tries to approach her later, Jeanine suggests Leslie make an appointment with her secretary. Marlene says this means Jeanine is blowing them off, and tells Leslie to blackmail Jeanine with the knowledge that her husband has a DUI offense in Illinois. Leslie shares the advice with Ann, who says she believes it is unethical and wrong; offended, Leslie accuses Ann of pampering Andy. ("He's got three crutches, and one of them is you. And the other two are crutches.") Ann storms off.

Tom wants to go bar-hopping with Mark, who leaves even though he is enjoying hanging out with Leslie and Ann. Tom wears a goofy orange hat at the bar, which he calls "peacocking", or standing out in a public setting like a peacock. The two talk to women at the bar, but Mark finds them boring and he leaves Tom alone. Ron enjoys the banquet's bacon-wrapped shrimp, "my number one favorite food, wrapped around my number three favorite food". Leslie confronts Jeanine about her husband's DUI, but when Jeanine grows angry, Leslie is unable to go through with the blackmail; Jeanine splashes water in Leslie's face, and she leaves ashamed. Leslie visits Ann and apologizes, and Ann acknowledges Leslie was partially right about Andy. The two hug and Andy gets angry because he thought Leslie was "a dude" due to her haircut. Mark comes back to the banquet hall to find Ann and Leslie, but is disappointed to see the banquet is over.

"The Banquet" was written by Tucker Cawley and directed by Beth McCarthy-Miller, a long-time television director who worked with Poehler on the sketch comedy show "Saturday Night Live". The "Modern Barber Shop" featured in the episode is an actual barber shop in Burbank, California. The interior is very similar to the inside of the actual barber shop. Every time McCarthy-Miller visited the real Modern Barber Shop, the barber's wife was always eating sunflower seeds next to the shop door. As a result, McCarthy-Miller added an elderly woman with sunflower seeds into the episode's barber scenes.

The "peacocking" element was not included into the script, but added to the episode during filming after actor Aziz Ansari mentioned to show co-creator Greg Daniels that he believed the character would be interested in pickup artist tactics like those outlined in Neil Strauss' book "". Ansari and Daniels asked the wardrobe for something silly for Ansari to wear in the bar, and they tried about a half-dozen items before Ansari himself settled on the orange hat, which is actually a woman's hat. The two women Mark and Tom talk to at the bar were meant to mirror Leslie and Ann from the banquet. Although they do not resemble Poehler and Jones, the two women had the same color hair (brown and blond) and were seated at the table in the same spots in relation to Mark that Leslie and Ann were seated around him at the banquet.

The scene in which water is splashed in Leslie's face was only shot twice, because McCarthy-Miller said Poehler would start anticipating it in more takes and it would not have appeared spontaneous. The first time the scene was acted, the cameras were accidentally not turned on, so only one take was usable for the episode. During the banquet for the Tellenson Awards, a video is shown of an ill Tony Tellenson (for whom the award was named) in his hospital room. McCarthy-Miller shot the scene with minimal staff on a separate set. Multiple takes were filmed, and the severity of illness differed in each one. The final clip used in the episode shows Tellenson wearing a mask attached to an oxygen tank, which is one of the healthiest versions they filmed. The Jeanine Restrepo character was originally named Janet Restrepo, but was changed at the last moment. Poehler and the rest of the cast had already memorized the lines with the name Janet, and the actors had difficulty filming the scenes correctly as a result.

In an opening statement about the history of Pawnee, Indiana, Leslie says a pilgrim traded a baby to the Native Americans in exchange "for what is now Indianapolis", the state capital. She said the pilgrim's face was made into a dreamcatcher, a handmade Native American object with a willow hoop and loose web. The barber who gave Leslie her haircut also previously cut the hair of former-U.S. Vice President Dan Quayle. Ron said he likes shrimp hors d'œuvres wrapped in bacon so much, he would attend an event honoring pirates in Somalia to get them.

In its original American broadcast on May 7, 2009, "The Banquet" was watched by 4.64 million households, according to Nielsen Media Research, continuing a downward trend in ratings since the pilot episode, although NBC had already committed to renewing the show for a second season. The episode received a 2.3 rating/8 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34, and a 2.0 rating/6 share among viewers between 18 and 49. The poor rating for "Parks and Recreation" and "Southland", another then-new NBC series, contributed in bringing the network down to fourth place in the ratings for the evening, behind CBS, ABC and Fox. "The Banquet", however, received generally positive reviews. Most reviewers particularly praised the opening scene with Leslie describing the murder of Pawnee pilgrim Nathanliel Bixby Mark at the hands of Native Americans, who used his body parts for various purposes because, "They used every part of the pioneer".

Jeremy Medina of "Entertainment Weekly" said he believed although the show initially needed improvement, that it had arrived at a "settled and focused" series with "The Banquet". He praised the episode as a whole, as well as individual small moments, like Leslie's haircut, April calling her "sir", Ron's affinity for bacon-wrapped shrimp, Tom's coining of the phrase "peacockin" to mean standing out in bars. Alan Sepinwall of "The Star-Ledger" said "The Banquet" was funnier than other recent "Parks and Recreation" episodes, although he said the Leslie character continues to too closely resemble a female Michael Scott, the protagonist of "The Office". Sepinwall said of the show, "I know a lot of people have already given up, but I really feel like the show is a summer's worth of tweaking away from being good. It's not there yet, but I see glimmers."

Matt Fowler of IGN said the episode "was able to rise a few notches above the last one" and that he enjoyed Leslie's antics and many of Tom's antics, including his suggestions for Leslie's introduction for her mom. He also liked the scene in which Mark pinched Leslie's nose, which he described as "a nice, playful scene that brought some much needed humanity to her cartoonish character". Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised the episode, particularly the characters Tom and Ann. He said of the episode, "The little things like (Leslie's haircut and Ann overdressing) are what's making this show work a little more with each episode. Finding humor in the small things of small government." Brian Howard of "The Journal News" said the series is not great yet, but that "The Banquet" included glimpses of possible greatness in the future, particularly in the performances by Poehler, Jones, Ansari and Schneider. Keith Phipps of "The A.V. Club" said the laughs in the episode, particularly involving Leslie's haircut and her perceived romantic relationship with Ann, were "a bit thin". Phipps also said he found himself disliking Leslie, of whom he said, "Here she seems more stupid than pleasantly naïve."

"The Banquet", along with the five other first season episodes of "Parks and Recreation", was released on a one-disc DVD set in the United States on September 8, 2009. The DVD included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episode, as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes. The deleted scenes included on the DVD were originally featured on the official "Parks and Recreation" website after the episode aired.

In the first, an 80-second clip, Leslie gives everyone in the department tickets to the banquet. She tries to invite Andy, and when Ann says he cannot put on pants due to his cast, Leslie asks, "Does he have a formal kilt or something?" The second clip features 100 seconds of extended banquet sequences, including Ann's reaction to Leslie's haircut, Ann's awkward attempts to make small talk with April and more of Tom's speech to Marlene. In the third, a 30-second clip, set at the bar, Tom describes to Mark his strategy in picking up a girl: he asked her what she did for a living, then, "I just yawned, gave her the middle finger and left. Pretty risky but I feel good about it." In the final clip, which was 15 seconds long, an amused Tom shows a newspaper photo caption of Leslie and Ann from the banquet, with the caption, "Mr. Leslie Knope and wife Ann."



</doc>
<doc id="22774527" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22774527" title="Egmont Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld">
Egmont Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld

Egmont Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld (14 July 1918 – 12 March 1944) was a Luftwaffe night fighter flying ace of royal descent during World War II. A flying ace or fighter ace is a military aviator credited with shooting down five or more enemy aircraft during aerial combat. Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld was credited with 51 aerial victories, all of them claimed in nocturnal combat missions.

Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld was born on 14 July 1918 in Salzburg, Austria and joined the infantry of the Austrian "Bundesheer" in 1936. He transferred to the emerging Luftwaffe, initially serving as a reconnaissance pilot in the "Zerstörergeschwader" 76 (ZG 76), before he transferred to the night fighter force. He claimed his first aerial victory on the night of 16 to 17 November 1940. By the end of March, he had accumulated 21 aerial victories for which he was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross on 16 April 1942. He received the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 2 August 1943, for 45 aerial victories. He was promoted to "Major" and tasked with leading "Nachtjagdgeschwader" 5 (NJG 5) in January 1944, before he and his crew were killed in a flight accident on 12 March 1944.

Egmont Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld was born on 14 July 1918 in Salzburg, Austria as a member of a cadet branch of the ruling House of Lippe. His father was Prince Alfred of Lippe-Weißenfeld and his mother was born Countess Anna von Goëß. Egmont was the only son of four children. His sisters Carola, Sophie and Dora were all younger than Egmont. The family lived in an old castle in Upper Austria called "Alt Wartenburg". At birth he had a remote chance of succeeding to the throne of the Principality of Lippe, a small state within the German Empire. However, only months after his birth, Germany became a republic and all the German royal houses were forced to abdicate.

Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld in his younger years was very enthusiastic about the mountains and wildlife. From his fourteenth year he participated in hunting. At the same time he was also very much interested in music and sports and discovered his love for flying at the Gaisberg near Salzburg. Here he attended the glider flying school of the Austrian Aëro Club. He attended a basic flying course with the second air regiment in Graz and Wiener Neustadt even before he joined the military service.

Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld never married or had children. In January 1941 he became acquainted with Hannelore Ide, nicknamed "Idelein". She was a secretary for a Luftgau. The two shared a close relationship and spent as much time together as the war permitted, listening to music and sailing on the IJsselmeer until his death in 1944.

Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld joined the Austrian Bundesheer in 1936 at the age of 18, initially serving in the infantry. In the aftermaths of the 1938 "Anschluss", the incorporation of Austria into Greater Germany by Nazi Germany, he transferred to the German Luftwaffe and was promoted to "Leutnant" in 1939. He had earned his Luftwaffe Pilots Badge on 5 October 1938 and underwent further training at Fürstenfeldbruck, Schleißheim and Vienna-Aspern. His Luftwaffe career started with the II. "Gruppe" (2nd group) of the "Zerstörergeschwader" 76 (ZG 76) before he was transferred to the night fighter wing "Nachtjagdgeschwader" 1 (NJG 1) on 4 August 1940. The unit was based at Gütersloh where he familiarised himself with the methods of the night fighters.

Following the 1939 aerial Battle of the Heligoland Bight, Royal Air Force (RAF) attacks shifted to the cover of darkness, initiating the Defence of the Reich campaign. By mid-1940, "Generalmajor" (Brigadier General) Josef Kammhuber had established a night air defense system dubbed the Kammhuber Line. It consisted of a series of control sectors equipped with radars and searchlights and an associated night fighter. Each sector named a "Himmelbett" (canopy bed) would direct the night fighter into visual range with target bombers. In 1941, the Luftwaffe started equipping night fighters with airborne radar such as the "Lichtenstein" radar. This airborne radar did not come into general use until early 1942.
By the summer of 1940, the first night fighters were transferred to Leeuwarden in the Netherlands. Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld was one of the pilots included in this small detachment. As early as 20 October 1940, he had taken over command of an independent night fighter commando at Schiphol and later at Bergen. On his first encounter with the Royal Air Force (RAF) bomber, in the night of 16 to 17 November 1940, he claimed a Vickers Wellington bomber from No. 115 Squadron RAF shot down at 02:05 hours. His second victory was claimed on the night of 15 January 1941, when he shot down an Armstrong Whitworth Whitley "N1521" of the Linton-on-Ouse based No. 58 Squadron RAF over the northern Netherlands, near the Dutch coast in the Zwanenwater at a nature reserve at Callantsoog. He was wounded in action on 13 March 1941, while flying Bf 110 D-2 ("Werknummer" 3376 – factory number) of the 4./NJG 1 with his radio operator Josef Renette when he made an emergency landing at Bergen after their aircraft was hit by the defence fire, wounding them both. Shortly after midnight on 10 April 1941, Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld claimed a No. 12 Squadron RAF Wellington over the IJsselmeer, raising NJG 1's victory score to 100. This achievement was celebrated at the Amstel Hotel in Amsterdam with General Kammhuber, Wolfgang Falck, Werner Streib, Helmut Lent and others attending. On 30 June 1941 while flying Bf 110 C-4 ("Werknummer" 3273) on a practice intercept mission over Noord Holland, he collided with Bf 110 C-7 ("Werknummer" 2075) piloted by "Leutnant" Rudolf Schoenert of the 4./NJG 1 and crashed near Bergen aan Zee. On 19 June 1941 he earned his first of four references in the daily "Wehrmachtbericht", a daily bulletin from the "Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" (High Command of the Armed Forces). By July 1941 his number of aerial victory claims stood at 10. Promoted to "Oberleutnant" he became "Staffelkapitän" of the 5th "Staffel" of "Nachtjagdgeschwader" 2 (NJG 2) on 15 November 1941. By the end of 1941 he had claimed a total of 15 aerial victories.

He was awarded the German Cross in Gold () on 25 January 1942 and the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross () on 16 April 1942 after he had shot down 4 RAF bombers in the night of 26 to 27 March 1942, his score standing at 21 aerial victories. This feat earned him his third reference in the "Wehrmachtbericht" on 27 March 1942. In July 1942, he was one of the leading German night fighter aces with 34 aerial victories. This feat earned him his third reference in the "Wehrmachtbericht" on 27 March 1942. In July 1942, he was one of the leading German night fighter aces with 34 aerial victories.

Promoted to "Hauptmann", Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld was made "Gruppenkommandeur" of the "I. Gruppe" (1st group) of "Nachtjagdgeschwader" 3 on 1 October 1942, where he claimed two further aerial victories. He was transferred again, taking command of the "III. Gruppe" (3rd group) of NJG 1 on 31 May 1943. One month later he claimed his 45th aerial victory for which he was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves () on 2 August 1943. The presentation was made by Adolf Hitler at the Wolf's Lair, Hitler's headquarters in Rastenburg, present-day Kętrzyn in Poland. Five other Luftwaffe officers were presented with awards that day by Hitler, "Hauptmann" Heinrich Ehrler, "Oberleutnant" Joachim Kirschner, "Hauptmann" Manfred Meurer, "Hauptmann" Werner Schröer, "Oberleutnant" Theodor Weissenberger were also awarded the Oak Leaves, and "Major" Helmut Lent received the Swords to his Knight's Cross with Oak Leaves.

After a one-month hospital stay, Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld was promoted to "Major" and made "Geschwaderkommodore" of "Nachtjagdgeschwader" 5 (NJG 5) on 20 February 1944. He and his crew, "Oberfeldwebel" Josef Renette and "Unteroffizier" Kurt Röber, were killed in a flying accident on 12 March 1944 on a routine flight from Parchim to Athies-sous-Laon. Above Belgium, they seem to have encountered a bad weather zone with low clouds and a dense snowstorm and it was assumed that the aircraft hit the high Ardennes ground after being forced to fly lower because of ice forming on the wings. The exact circumstances of this flight may never be known, the Bf 110 G-4 C9+CD ("Werknummer" 720 010—factory number) crashed into the Ardennes mountains near St. Hubert where the completely burned-out wreck was found the following day. The funeral service was held in the city church of Linz on 15 March 1944. Prinz Egmont zur Lippe-Weißenfeld and Prinz Heinrich zu Sayn-Wittgenstein are buried side by side at Ysselsteyn in the Netherlands.

According to Obermaier, Prinz zur Lippe-Weißenfeld was credited with 51 nocturnal aerial victories. Foreman, Matthews and Parry, authors of "Luftwaffe Night Fighter Claims 1939 – 1945", list 50 nocturnal victory claims, numerically ranging from 1 to 50. His 49th claim is numerically labeled as his 59th victory.



</doc>
<doc id="22816726" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22816726" title="Rock Show (Parks and Recreation)">
Rock Show (Parks and Recreation)

"Rock Show" is the sixth episode and season finale of the first season of the American comedy television series "Parks and Recreation". It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 14, 2009. It was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by Michael Schur. In the episode, Andy gets the casts removed from his legs, and Ann starts reevaluating their relationship when she learns he kept them on longer than necessary so she would keep pampering him. An intoxicated Mark flirts with Leslie, who feels conflicted about whether she wants to move forward when he is drunk.

The episode generated positive reviews. Several commentators claimed "Rock Show" represented a turning point in the series, in which the show found its own tone and broke away from similarities to "The Office". According to Nielsen Media Research, it was watched by 4.25 million viewers in its original airing, the lowest viewership for the season. "Rock Show", along with an "Extended Producer's Cut" of the episode, was included on the "Parks and Recreation" Season One DVD, which was released in the United States on September 8, 2009.

The parks and recreation department have cake to celebrate Andy (Chris Pratt) having his leg casts removed, and Ann (Rashida Jones) invites everybody to a local bar to hear Andy's first rock concert since he broke his leg. Leslie (Amy Poehler) is disappointed she cannot go, because her mother (Pamela Reed) has set up a business meeting with a local town manager. Later at the hospital, Ann learns from Dr. Harris (Cooper Thornton) that Andy could have had his casts removed two weeks earlier, but that he postponed it because he wanted Ann to keep pampering him. Angry, Ann begins reevaluating her relationship with Andy. Later that evening, Leslie realizes the dinner with 62-year-old George Gernway (Ron Perkins) is actually a blind date set up by her mother. George, who tells the documentary camera crew he is getting "very positive signals", agrees to go with Leslie to the rock show.

Mark (Paul Schneider) feels lonely because he is the only one at the concert without a date: Tom (Aziz Ansari) is with his attractive surgeon wife Wendy Haverford (Jama Williamson), Ron (Nick Offerman) is dating his ex-wife's sister Beth (Stephanie Erb) and April (Aubrey Plaza) is with, "like the gayest person I've ever met, but I make out with him when I'm drunk sometimes." Noticing Ann is angry with Andy, Mark makes a pass at her, but Ann angrily rejects him. Leslie and George show up and are mocked by Tom. After the concert ends, Andy tries to stay as long as possible to avoid a fight with Ann, but she insists they leave. George goes home because he was falling asleep and Leslie starts to leave, but an intoxicated Mark asks her to stay and have a beer with him.

When Leslie notes to the camera crew that they seem to be getting along just like when they made love five years earlier, she realizes he was drunk then too. When the bar closes, the two decide to keep drinking alongside the pit outside Ann's house, which Leslie plans to turn into a park. When Leslie asks whether he thinks the park will ever be made, a pragmatic Mark says it will be a difficult process with a lot of red tape, but she remains optimistic. During a fight, Andy admits to Ann that he postponed having the casts removed, but explains it was because, "I really, really like it when you serve me food." Ann throws him out, and Andy sees Mark kiss Leslie. Leslie stops his advances because she does not want to move forward when he is drunk. As Mark starts to leave, he falls into the pit. An amused Andy tells Ann, who rushes out to help him while Andy goes back inside and watches television.

"Rock Show", the first season finale of "Parks and Recreation" was written by Norm Hiscock and directed by series co-founder Michael Schur. Schur said he felt "Rock Show" marked a change in tone for the series and struck a better balance between personal and professional stories than any of the other episodes from the season. Schur said: "We treated that whole six-episode season like a pilot. If you go back and watch those episodes now, you can see us making changes. The sixth episode is different in tone than the first. And we made some character tweaks, like every show ever does". Amy Poehler said she believed "Rock Show" would end what she described as the inevitable comparisons between "Parks and Recreation" and "The Office", which is also produced by "Parks" creators Schur and Greg Daniels. Poehler said, "I think it was something we had to work through in the beginning, and I’m kind of hoping we’re on the other side of that and people will start to judge the show on its own, for what it is and realize it’s just a completely different world in a similar style.” Schur made his directorial debut with "Rock Show", and had only one day of preparation before directing the episode. While preparing to direct the episode, Schur was asked to make an appearance on "The Office" as Mose Schrute, the cousin of Dwight Schrute and a popular minor character, in the fifth season finale episode, "Company Picnic". Schur regretfully declined because he needed the time to work on "Rock Show", leading "Office" episode writers Paul Lieberstein and Jennifer Celotta to create the character Rolf, Dwight's friend played by James Urbaniak, as an alternative.

Andy's bandmates during the rock show scene were played by Mark Rivers (drums), Andrew Burlinson (guitar) and Alan Yang (bass). All four actors performed their own instruments live during the filming. Originally, they planned to pre-record the songs and pantomime them for the episode, but after practicing a few times around the extras, they decided to shoot it live. The band performed each song twice, and Schur said he tried to shoot and direct it as if it were a music video. Yang is a writer with "Parks and Recreation", and wrote the previous first season episode, "Boys' Club". Rivers is a composer who has worked on the sketch comedy show "Human Giant", which starred "Parks" star Aziz Ansari. Rivers wrote the songs performed in "Rock Show", which Pratt said took him only "about fifteen minutes". Hiscock wrote the lyrics for "The Pit" in the initial outline for the episode and they were handed to Rivers who then fleshed them out. The songs were designed to resemble the music of the American rock band "Hootie & the Blowfish". The only song not written by Rivers was "Ann", a romantic ballad Andy played for Ann, which was written by Pratt himself. "Ann" first appeared in "Boys' Club".

Like most episodes of "Parks and Recreation", a great deal of the scenes in "Rock Show" were improvised by the actors. Paul Schneider made up his own dialogue during the scene in which he and Poehler sit next to the pit and he talks about it as if it is already a park. Poehler's laughter at his jokes in this scene is her genuine reaction. Pratt also improvised much of his own dialogue, including his rationale to Ann for why he lied about his leg casts: "I really, really like it when you serve me food." Pratt also changed the reaction his character had to Mark falling into the pit. The script originally called for Andy to be serious and concerned, but Pratt changed it so his character thought the fall was funny. Pratt also improvised the songs he sang during an early scene in the episode, in which Andy makes up songs about random items in Ann's living room out of boredom from wearing the casts for so long. One of the songs he sings is about a lamp, and included the lyrics, "I wish you were a lamp that would light up when you get touched." Pratt thought of the song because he had recently gotten such a lamp as a gift from a friend.

During a scene when Andy describes his style of music, April responds that she completely understands him, although the other characters seemingly do not. That line was improvised by Aubrey Plaza, and later helped inspire the writing staff to place the April and Andy characters into a romantic relationship. Schur said of this, "At the time, it was this little nothing, throwaway thing, but when we watched it, we thought there might be something there." The scene with Mark making a pass at Ann at the rock show, and Ann's angry reaction to the attempt, were a last-minute addition to the episode. Although Mark and Ann would develop a romantic relationship in the second season, the "Parks and Recreation" writers had not decided what would happen between the developing romantic plotlines between Leslie and Mark, or Leslie and Ann, at time "Rock Show" aired. In the original pilot script, Mark helped Leslie solely because he was attracted to Ann and felt that green-lighting Leslie's project would give him an excuse to spend more time with her; the shooting version was retooled to make Leslie less pathetic and Mark less unlikable, by having him won over by Leslie's determination to fight against the odds. Immediately after "Rock Show" was originally broadcast, NBC set up an official website for "Scarecrow Boat", Andy's band featured in the episode. The site, at scarecrowboat.com, included ringtones, band posters, songs for download and photos.

George Gernway was played by Ron Perkins, the husband of "Parks and Recreation" casting director Nancy Perkins. Aubrey Plaza conceived the idea of her character dating a gay man who she occasionally makes out with. Her "gay boyfriend" would become a major part of April's character in the second season. The scenes about Mark's efforts to have a speed bump lowered were inspired by Scott Albright, a California city planner who works as a consultant on the show. Albright said it would only be realistic for a city planner to lower a speed bump if a large number of residents complained about it. The hospital scenes in "Rock Show" were filmed on-location in an actual California hospital.

Andy describes the style of his band's music as a mix between Matchbox Twenty and The Fray. George says his favorite rock band is The Everly Brothers, a country-influenced rock band from the 1950s and 60s. Andy finds Ann's lost iPod, a portable music player by Apple Inc., inside his leg cast after it is removed. When Andy starts watching television while Ann rushes off to help Mark at the end of the episode, he is watching the reality series "The Real Housewives of Atlanta".

The scene between Mark and Leslie at the pit was mirrored in the second season finale "Freddy Spaghetti", which aired in May 2010 and was Mark's final appearance as a regular cast member. During that scene, the two overlook what was once the pit, but was now a filled-in lot, and Mark gives her construction plans for a park before kissing her goodbye on the cheek and leaving. Schur said of the scene, "It's great because Leslie and Mark, it was such a disastrous moment last time (at the pit) and he didn't really respect her, and a lot's happened in a year." Goor said of using that setting, "I liked the symmetry of having it play a critical, and opposite role in this finale. Last year, they sat on the bench and kissed, and it seemed like they might be getting back together. This year, they sat on the bench and Mark kissed Leslie goodbye."

During one scene, Andy goes through a list of previous names his band has had. Pratt said about half the band names featured in the episode came directly from the script, but after he made up one on the spot, the directors encouraged him to keep improvising. Pratt said he went through about 200 fake band names during the take. The various names of Andy's rock band include:

In its original American broadcast on May 14, 2009, "Rock Show" was watched by 4.25 million viewers, according to Nielsen Media Research, marking the lowest viewership for the season. Although the rating was almost the same as the previous week's episode, "The Banquet", Bill Gorman of "TV By the Numbers" still called the rating "pitiful." The episode received a 1.9 rating/7 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34, and a 2.0 rating/6 share among viewers between 18 and 49.
"Rock Show" received generally positive reviews, with many critics claiming it to be the best episode of the series up to that point. The scene in which Leslie rejects Mark's kiss in the pit was considered by some reviewers to be a critical turning point both for the show and for the development of Leslie Knope's character. Kona Gallagher of TV Squad wrote in a 2010 article, "Leslie finally realized that she can move on from Mark and the show realized that it could actually make her a real character".

Alan Sepinwall of "The Star-Ledger" said after six episodes, he felt "Rock Show" was the episode where the "Parks and Recreation" found the right tone for the series and Leslie Knope character. Sepinwall said all the characters were very likable, the jokes seemed natural and the awkwardness of the show was turned down enough to work properly. "The Hollywood Reporter" writer Tim Goodman said while the first five episodes of the season had been disappointing, "Rock Show" marked an improvement in which "the characters were more defined, their quirks and rhythms understood". Matt Fowler of IGN said he did not find the episode especially funny but that it did a good job of fleshing out the characters. He said Chris Pratt was especially funny, and that his band's song "The Pit" was stuck in his head after the episode. "The A.V. Club" writer Keith Phipps, who had mixed feelings about "Parks and Recreation" throughout the season, said "Rock Show" was very funny and restored his faith in the potential of the series. Phipps said he believed the show would become very popular in the second season, and that people would later claim to like the first season more than they did the first time they saw it. In October 2009, while reviewing the second season episode "Sister City", "A.V. Club" writer Leonard Pierce said he believed "Parks and Recreation" showed a streak of vast improvement that started with "Rock Show" and continued into the second season.

Jeremy Medina of "Entertainment Weekly" said the episode was "solid all-around" and especially liked Leslie's blind date with the elderly man and Chris Pratt, especially his listing of all his previous band names. Medina said, "Parks and Recreation is only six episodes in, and it's already better than I anticipated. It has its own tone, a talented cast, and a plot that's advancing toward something, at least as fast as governmental red tape will allow it to." Richard Lawson of Gawker said the episode was the best of the season and that he liked the wistful pacing and Poehler's performance. Lawson said, "Anyone who dismissed this show after its first sorta underwhelming episode made a mistake. The show has only gotten tighter and sharper, culminating in last night's funny/sad finale." "Time" television reviewer James Poniewozik said the episode was the best yet for developing Poehler into a "more multi-facted, less risible character". He also said the supporting staff played "flawlessly" off each other in the rock show scene, and thinks there is "huge potential" in the dynamic between Leslie and her undermining mother. Not all reviews of the episode were positive. Maureen Ryan of the "Chicago Tribune" said the Leslie Knope character was unappealing in "Rock Show" and throughout the first season, which she said surpassed the "Friends" spin-off "Joey" as "the worst example of NBC's tendency to extend its franchises well beyond what is desirable or logical."

"Rock Show", along with the five other first season episodes of "Parks and Recreation", was released on a one-disc DVD set in the United States on September 8, 2009. The DVD included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episode, as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes. The disc also included an "Producer's Extended Cut" of "Rock Show", which incorporated scenes that were cut from the originally broadcast episode. Many of the deleted scenes were improvised dialogue from the actors in brief extensions of episodes already included in the originally broadcast episode. In one of the cut scenes, Marlene Knope tells the audience that Leslie's business meeting is actually a date. The producers decided to cut the moment, so the audience would find out at the same time Leslie learns it. In another cut scene, Andy tries to convince Ann that the doctor lied to her about Andy requesting more time with the leg casts because the doctor wanted more money. One of the longest cut scenes from the extended edition was a conversation between Leslie and Mark at the bar, in which Mark explains his ideals about city planning when he attended college are much different than the practical, technical aspects of his job. Although the scene was cut, Michael Schur said the monologue did a great deal to help develop Mark's character.



</doc>
<doc id="22821606" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22821606" title="2009 Football League Two play-off Final">
2009 Football League Two play-off Final

The 2009 Football League Two play-off Final was a football match played at Wembley Stadium on 23 May 2009, at the end of the 2008–09 season. The match determined the fourth and final team to gain promotion from League Two, the fourth tier of the English football league system, and featured Gillingham, who finished fifth during the league season, and Shrewsbury Town, who finished seventh.

The match was Gillingham's first appearance at the new Wembley Stadium and Shrewsbury's second. The teams reached the final by defeating Rochdale and Bury respectively in the semi-finals. The match remained scoreless until the last minute, when Simeon Jackson headed in Josh Wright's corner kick to give Gillingham the lead with seconds remaining. The Kent-based club thus won promotion back to League One one year after being relegated.

Gillingham had finished the 2008–09 season in fifth place in League Two with 75 points, two places and six points above Shrewsbury. In the play-off semi-finals, the "Gills" faced Rochdale, who had finished in sixth position. The first leg at Rochdale's Spotland Stadium on 7 May 2009 finished in a 0–0 draw. In the second match at Priestfield Stadium three days later, Simeon Jackson scored from an Andy Barcham cross to give Gillingham the lead in the 13th minute, only for Chris Dagnall to equalise in the 36th minute. Jackson scored a second goal with a penalty kick in the 58th minute after John Nutter had been fouled by Rory McArdle. Gillingham thus won the match 2–1 and won their semi-final on aggregate by the same score.

Shrewsbury, who had only qualified for the play-offs by defeating Dagenham & Redbridge in the final match of the regular season, played fourth placed Bury in their semi-final. The first match at Shrewsbury's home ground, New Meadow, was decided by a late own goal from Shrewsbury's Neil Ashton, who accidentally lobbed the ball over his own goalkeeper Luke Daniels to give Bury a 1–0 win. In the second leg at Gigg Lane, Daniels saved Phil Jevons' penalty kick and Shrewsbury's Kevin McIntyre scored a goal in the 88th minute to level the tie. With no further score, a penalty shoot-out was required to decide which team would advance to the final. Daniels saved penalty kicks from Andy Bishop and Danny Racchi and Shrewsbury won the shoot-out and thus reached the final.

The two teams were competing for promotion to League One, the third tier of the English football league system. The match was Gillingham's first appearance at the new Wembley Stadium, although the club had played at the original Wembley in 1999 and 2000. Shrewsbury had previously played at the new Wembley in the 2007 League Two play-off final and at the original in the final of the 1996 Football League Trophy. The attendance of 53,706 was significantly higher than the 35,715 registered at the previous year's League Two play-off final. A specific revenue figure for the match was not made public, but half of the gate receipts went to The Football League to distribute amongst its member clubs, with Gillingham and Shrewsbury each receiving twenty-five per cent and no additional television broadcast fee. Gillingham manager Mark Stimson named the same eleven players who had started the second leg of the semi-final against Rochdale, while his opposite number Paul Simpson made two changes from the team which contested the second leg of the semi-final against Bury, replacing David Worrall and Omer Riza with Chris Humphrey and Nick Chadwick.

Shortly before kick-off, sports betting organisation Sky Bet gave identical odds of 6/4 on both teams to win, with 9/4 on a draw. The match referee was Clive Oliver, whose son Michael took charge of the League One play-off Final the following day. This was the first time that a father and son had refereed in Football League play-off finals. Pre-match entertainment included teams from Killamarsh Junior School and Thurlby Community Primary School contesting the final of the Football Association Community Cup, a parade by members of the British armed forces, and a performance of the National Anthem led by operatic vocalist Will Martin.

The early part of the game was largely uneventful, with both teams' defenses looking unsettled. In the first minute Gillingham's captain Barry Fuller was forced to hack the ball clear of his goal area after confusion among his teammates. Gillingham began to take control of the game, but the first serious goalscoring opportunity did not come until the 31st minute when John Nutter shot for goal after a corner kick, only to be denied by Shrewsbury goalkeeper Luke Daniels. Josh Wright and Dennis Oli both had goalscoring chances blocked by Shrewsbury's defenders and Daniels also saved a shot from Wright. Shrewsbury struggled to keep possession of the ball and had few attempts on goal before the half-time break.

The second half began with Gillingham dominating play, and Andy Barcham had a goalbound shot tipped away by goalkeeper Daniels. Soon afterwards, Gillingham goalkeeper Simon Royce made his first significant save of the match, stopping a shot from Shrewsbury's Ben Davies, which marked the start of a spell of pressure from the "Shrews". Kelvin Langmead's shot was saved by Royce and Kevin McIntyre headed wide of the target when presented with what Sky Sports' Richard Bailey considered the best opportunity of the game.

In the final minute of the game, Barcham tussled with a Shrewsbury defender and the referee awarded a corner kick to Gillingham. Josh Wright took the corner and Simeon Jackson headed the ball into the goal to give Gillingham the lead. Defender Neil Ashton, standing on the goal line, attempted to keep the ball out but was unsuccessful. Shrewsbury launched a last-ditch attack in a bid to equalise, but captain Graham Coughlan's header went over the crossbar and Gillingham held on to claim victory and gain promotion back to League One one year after being relegated from that division.

Post-match analysis showed that referee Oliver had erroneously awarded the corner kick from which Gillingham's goal had been scored, as the ball had in fact come off Barcham and therefore a goal kick should instead have been awarded to Shrewsbury. Paul Simpson referred to this in his post-match comments, but said that "if we look at things like that we will be clutching at straws". Mark Stimson highlighted the financial benefits of his team's promotion, noting that large crowds would be expected for matches in League One against Leeds United, Norwich City and Southampton.

After the match, Gillingham captain Barry Fuller received the winners' trophy from the presentation party, which consisted of Lord Mawhinney, the chairman of The Football League, and Mark Osikoya, Head of Marketing Assets for the League's sponsors, Coca-Cola. Two days later, the club staged a celebratory open-top bus parade from Rochester Castle to Priestfield Stadium.




</doc>
<doc id="22828456" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22828456" title="Albanian–Venetian War">
Albanian–Venetian War

The Albanian–Venetian War of 1447–48 was waged between Venetian and Ottoman forces against the Albanians under George Kastrioti Skanderbeg. The war was the result of a dispute between the Republic and the Dukagjini family over the possession of the Dagnum fortress. Skanderbeg, then ally of the Dukagjini family, moved against several Venetian held towns along the Albanian coastline, in order to pressure the Venetians into restoring Dagnum. In response, the Republic sent a local force to relieve the besieged fortress of Dagnum, and urged the Ottoman Empire to send an expeditionary force into Albania. At that time the Ottomans were already besieging the fortress of Svetigrad, stretching Skanderbeg's efforts thin.

However, the League of Lezhë defeated both the Venetian forces and the Ottoman expedition. The League won over the Venetian forces on 23 July 1448 at the gates of Scutari, and over the Ottomans three weeks later, on 14 August 1448, at the Battle of Oronichea. The Republic was, thereafter, left with few soldiers to defend Venetian Albania. As a result, the League soon signed peace with the Republic of Venice, while continuing the war against the Ottoman Empire. After the Albanian–Venetian War of 1447–1448, Venice did not seriously challenge Skanderbeg or the League, allowing Skanderbeg to focus his campaigns against the Ottoman Empire.

In 1444, Skanderbeg had managed to unite the major Albanian princes under his leadership at the League of Lezhë, where a confederation of all the Albanian Principalities was created. Stresses within the alliance were felt, when Nicholas Dukagjini, a member of the Dukagjini family, a powerful family in northern Albania, ambushed and killed Lekë Zaharia Altisferi, prince of Dagnum and also League member. Since Zaharia had no children, he organized the killing to more easily gain Dagnum. The year in which Zaharia was killed is not recorded. A Venetian document dated to 4 January 1445, mentions Zaharia as the once lord of Dagnum which was given to Boxia, Zaharia's mother. The Venetian chronicler Stefano Magno says that Zaharia was killed close to the advent of the year 1445.

The two princes had been in dispute over who should marry Irene Dushmani, the only daughter of Lekë Dushmani, prince of Zadrima. In 1445, the Albanian princes had been invited to the wedding of Skanderbeg's younger sister, Mamica, who was being married to Muzaka Thopia. Irene entered the wedding and hostilities began. Dukagjini asked Irene to marry him, but Zaharia, who was drunk, saw this, and assaulted Dukagjini. Some princes attempted to stop the fight, but only more people became involved. Several people died or got injured before peace was established. Neither of the two antagonists had suffered any physical damage, but after the event Dukagjini was morally humiliated.

The death of Zaharia left his princedom with no successor. As a result, his mother handed the fortress over to Venetian Albania, a stretch of possessions of the Republic of Venice. Skanderbeg urged the Venetian legates that Dagnum (along with Sati, Gladri and Dushmani which had been taken by Venice) should be restored to the League since it guarded an important trade route, but Venice refused and, consequently, Skanderbeg prepared for war against the Republic itself.

The League soon sent envoys to its neighbors, Stefan I Crnojević and Đurađ Branković. Branković, a lord of Serbian Despotate, who was also in dispute with Venice over the Principality of Zeta, expressed his willingness to help Skanderbeg against the Republic but not against the Ottoman Empire. The Venetians sent an ambassador to Skanderbeg offering him 1,000 ducats to lay aside all claims to Dagnum in return that the Albanians would protect the country and keep the roads free from violence. Skanderbeg, however, refused to accept the offer and hostilities continued. Alongside the Spani family, the Dushmani family was against the war with Venice and did not participate in it.

In December 1447, after leaving a protective force of three to four thousand men under Vrana Konti to guard the frontier in the event of an Ottoman incursion, Skanderbeg turned towards Dagnum with a force of 14,000 men. Initially offering the garrison at Dagnum the opportunity to surrender, he promptly besieged the fortress upon rejection. In order to pressure the Venetians, Skanderbeg also turned towards Durazzo, then another possession of Venetian Albania, and cut the city off from their local resources and trade. This move forced Venice to redirect to Durazzo two galleys, which initially were bound for Crete, in order to watch over the events there.

By then Venice treated Skanderbeg as a rebellious Ottoman vassal, so on 4 March 1448 a life pension of 100 gold ducats per month was offered to anyone who would assassinate Skanderbeg. In May, Ottoman forces besieged Svetigrad, putting great strain on Skanderbeg's campaigns. On 27 June 1448 Venice sent Andrea Venier, then provveditore at Scutari's Rozafa Castle, to attempt to persuade the Ottomans to invade Albania. After, Venice also sent Venier to meet with Skanderbeg in order to convince him to break off hostilities, and also attempted to push the Dukagjini clan away from their alliance with Skanderbeg. Despite measures taken by the Venetians, Skanderbeg marched towards Scutari unabated. He also dared the Venetians to send out a force to defeat him. The siege of Dagnum continued, however, with a force of 4,000 that Skanderbeg had left behind.

On 23 July 1448 Skanderbeg crossed the Drin River with 10,000 men, meeting a Venetian force of 15,000 men under the command of Daniele Iurichi, governor of Scutari. Venetian forces were composed largely of local mercenaries, forming the center of Iurichi's line. They included forces under Koja and Andreas Humoj, Simeon Vulkata, Vasilije Ugrin, Zapa family (Jovan and his brother), Pedantari family (seven Pedantari brothers and many other), Moneta family (three sons of Rajko Moneta), Malonši family (Petar with his two sons), and Buša Sornja who were pronoiars. Iurichi positioned himself on the left wing with his Dalmatian forces, while the right was composed of Italian natives. Skanderbeg positioned himself and his personal bodyguard on the right wing, opposite Iurichi. The center of Skanderbeg's army was commanded by Tanush Thopia, and the right by Moses of Dibra.

Skanderbeg instructed his troops on what to expect and opened battle by ordering a force of archers to open fire on the Venetian line. Soon, the Albanian right wing advanced to engage first and managed to push the Venetian left wing back, while the center and the right engaged the Venetian center and left. The breakthrough was soon accomplished by attacking the gaps in the Venetian lines, causing disorder among their ranks. The battle continued for hours until large groups of Venetian troops began to flee. Skanderbeg, seeing his fleeing adversaries, ordered a full-scale offensive, routing the entire Venetian army. The Republic's soldiers were chased right to the gates of Scutari, and Venetian prisoners were thereafter paraded outside the fortress.

The Albanians managed to inflict 2,500 casualties on the Venetian force, capturing 1,000. Skanderbeg's army suffered 400 casualties, most on the right wing. The Venetian presence in Albania was weakened and the garrisons in the cities were stretched thin.

Skanderbeg retreated from the area to fight off an Ottoman invasion. Before leaving, he garrisoned the fort of Baleč (Balsha) near Dagnum, under the command of Marin Spani. Andrea Venier ordered the capture of Baleci after Skanderbeg had left, forcing Marin Spani to evacuate it. Venier then burned it to the ground. In retaliation, Hamza Kastrioti, one of Spani's colleagues, attacked a nearby Venetian fortress with what little men he had, but was defeated.

Despite the setbacks while he was away, Skanderbeg continued to focus on campaigning against the Venetian-requested Ottoman incursion at the Battle of Oronichea in August 1448. The Ottoman expeditionary force was crushed on 14 August, with Ottoman commander Mustafa Pasha captured. The loss of Balsha to the Venetians, however, forced Skanderbeg to continue raiding Venetian territory.

With Durazzo, Scutari, and Dagnum on the point of surrender and seeing a victorious Albanian army after the Battle of Oronichea, the Venetians sent Andrea Venier to open peace negotiations with the Albanians. The conference was held in Alessio and peace was signed by Skanderbeg and George Arianiti who represented the other princes on 4 October 1448. The signatories agreed that Venice would keep Dagnum. In return, the Venetians agreed that Skanderbeg would receive an annual pension of 1,400 ducats and an annual tax exemption for 200 horse loads of salt from Durazzo. An agreement was also made to establish trading privileges between Arianiti, Skanderbeg's ally, and Venice. Furthermore, a refuge in Venice would be offered in case Skanderbeg was driven out of Albania and two scarlet garments would be given to Skanderbeg in exchange for two altered falcons from the Albanian. However, threats were still exchanged between both sides and unofficial skirmishing continued.

Wary of Skanderbeg, Venice no longer openly challenged him. Another treaty was signed in 1463, when Venice went to war with the Turks. However, no peace was made between the Ottomans and Skanderbeg until 1463, before the Ottoman-Venetian war was of the same year, who retreated to Macedonia and prepared for another invasion of Albania after their defeat at Oronichea. During the Albanian-Venetian war, they had taken Svetigrad after several months of siege. Thence, they could cross into Albania uninhibited.



</doc>
<doc id="22868439" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22868439" title="Tropical Storm Cristobal (2008)">
Tropical Storm Cristobal (2008)

Tropical Storm Cristobal was the third named storm of the 2008 Atlantic hurricane season. It formed on July 19 from a trough of low pressure off the Southeast U.S. Coast. In a marginally favorable environment, it attained minimal tropical storm status later that day. The storm remained offshore, and peaked as a strong tropical storm on July 21 while it passed east of Cape Hatteras. It accelerated northeast parallel to the East Coast and became extratropical on July 23 near Nova Scotia. Because it was a weak storm and never made landfall, Cristobal's effects were mostly limited to moderate rainfall. The storm dropped 3.43 in (87 mm) of rain in Wilmington, North Carolina, where minor flooding was reported. Additionally, the extratropical remnants contributed to rainfall on Nova Scotia which caused some street and basement flooding.

On July 14, 2008 a weakening surface trough extended across northern Florida, producing thunderstorms across the state. A weak low pressure area developed on July 15 near Tallahassee, which moved southeastward into the Gulf of Mexico. Late on July 16 it crossed onshore near Tampa, and development was not anticipated due to land interaction. Late on July 17, however, convection increased in association with the low, and the system quickly became better organized. Late on July 18, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) remarked that a tropical depression was developing, with its convection becoming more concentrated around a circulation; at 11 p.m. EST on July 18 (0300 UTC July 19), it was classified as Tropical Depression Three, about 65 miles (105 km) southeast of Charleston, South Carolina.

Located between a ridge to its southeast and northwest, the depression moved slowly northeastward, and with a marginally favorable upper-level environment, it attained minimal tropical storm status during the early afternoon of July 19. Initially fairly disorganized with little deep convection, dry air in the mid- to-upper-levels of the atmosphere prevented immediate intensification. However, late on July 20 thunderstorm activity increased. Cristobal remained a fairly weak tropical storm as it tracked adjacent to the Carolina coast, and the storm never made landfall. It reached peak intensity as a strong tropical storm on July 21 while it passed east of Cape Hatteras, and remained such over the warm Gulf Stream waters as convection became strong over the southern portion of the circulation. Beginning to enter cooler waters, the cyclone accelerated east-northeastward on July 21 and July 22. On the afternoon of July 22, Cristobal began to weaken south of Nova Scotia. In the evening hours, satellite imagery indicated that the mid-level center became separated from the low-level center. The storm's cloud pattern became disorganized, and by July 23 it had completed an extratropical transition. The National Hurricane Center issued its last advisory on the system at 5:00 am EDT (0900 UTC) on July 23.

In anticipation of Tropical Storm Cristobal, a tropical storm warning was issued for coastal areas from the South Santee River in South Carolina to the North Carolina–Virginia Border. The advisory was discontinued on July 20 as Cristobal pulled away from land. Flood advisories were declared for parts of North Carolina. National Weather Service forecasters advised against swimming due to high seas and potential rip currents. Environment Canada issued rain warnings throughout portions of Nova Scotia.

Prior to forming, the precursor low dropped light to moderate rainfall across the state of Florida. In Lake Wales, 6 inches (150 mm) of precipitation was reported, most of which fell within the period of two hours. The sudden, heavy rainfall clogged storm drains, causing some street flooding. Up to 40 cars were pulled from flooded streets, some being submerged with 2 ft (0.6 m) of water. Damages from the flooding was estimated at $10,000. In Georgia, the storm produced of rain, while in South Carolina, was recorded.

On July 20, Cristobal skirted eastern North Carolina, resulting in minimal damage. Along the coast, water levels rose above normal; rough surf was also reported. Rainfall averaged , though the NEXRAD weather radar estimates indicated that isolated amounts exceeded . The storm dropped in Wilmington, North Carolina, where minor flooding occurred. Because the bulk of the storm remained over open waters, winds along the coast ran about .

While the center of Cristobal was more than a day away from the Canadian Maritimes, moisture extended ahead of the cyclone and became enhanced by a stalled frontal system. As a result, heavy rainfall fell along the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia. At Baccaro Point, 224 mm (8.8 in) of rain was reported, while 145 mm (5.8 in) fell at Sambro, near Halifax. The rain flooded basements and streets in the Cape Sable area. A sailor from Connecticut was rescued to the southeast of Halifax when his ship capsized in stormy seas. The highest winds remained offshore, though a buoy recorded gusts to .




</doc>
<doc id="22869155" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22869155" title="The Official Razzie Movie Guide">
The Official Razzie Movie Guide

The Official Razzie Movie Guide: Enjoying the Best of Hollywood's Worst is a book about the Golden Raspberry Awards (Razzies), written by John Wilson, founder of the awards ceremony. The book was published in 2005 by Warner Books, the same year as the 25th Golden Raspberry Awards.

The book includes an introduction by "Rolling Stone" film critic Peter Travers, a brief history of the Golden Raspberry Awards, and entries on films organized thematically which include plot summaries and reviews by Wilson. Wilson comments on and discusses his picks for the worst films of all time. "The Official Razzie Movie Guide" received a positive review in "Library Journal", where it was compared to "Golden Turkey Awards" and "The Fifty Worst Films of All Time". The book also received positive reception in "Wilmington Star-News" the Associated Press and the "Long Beach Press-Telegram", but a more critical review in "The Evening Standard".

The introduction is by "Rolling Stone" film critic Peter Travers, a voting member of the Golden Raspberry Awards Foundation. The book begins with selected quotes from the reviewers of such films as "The Blue Lagoon", "From Justin to Kelly", and "Color of Night". The book also includes a brief history of the Golden Raspberry Awards. Wilson lists and discusses his picks of the 100 worst films of Hollywood.

The chapters all deal with bad movies, and are organized thematically with titles such as "Disasters ... In Every Sense." and "Can't Stop the Musicals". Each movie entry includes credits of the cast and crew, excerpts of dialogue from the movie, and a plot summary and review by Wilson. Wilson's picks of the ten worst films include "The Adventurers" (1970), "Battlefield Earth" (2000), "Body of Evidence" (1993), "" (1977), "Glen or Glenda" (1953), "The Lonely Lady" (1983), "Mommie Dearest" (1981), "The Oscar" (1966), "Showgirls" (1995) and "Xanadu" (1980).

Pat Nason of United Press International (UPI) wrote that marketing of the book "may have been somewhat complicated by the cover art", which shows an actor in a gorilla costume with his middle finger raised, taken from the 1976 film "A*P*E". Wilson had originally wanted the gorilla picture to appear on the back cover of the book; however, Warner Books stated it must appear on the book's front cover. "It might stand as an apt emblem of the Razzies themselves," commented Nason. "We are not PC. We do not pull punches. We do not pay attention to the basic rules of decorum. Hopefully the humor with which it is packaged takes a little of the sting out of it", said Wilson to UPI. Christopher Borrelli of "The Toledo Blade" described the book as "a merchandising tie-in" to the Golden Raspberry Awards. Wilson announced the nominees for the 25th Golden Raspberry Awards at a book signing for "The Official Razzie Movie Guide" at Brentano's in Century City, Los Angeles, California.

"The Official Razzie Movie Guide" received generally positive reviews from critics.

Barry X. Miller reviewed the book for "Library Journal", and wrote "Wilson's text is a surfeit of saccharine Goobers and gooey Ju Ju Bees, empty calories but fun to eat." Miller compared to the book to "Golden Turkey Awards" and "The Fifty Worst Films of All Time". Miller commented that Wilson provides "a wonderfully droll review" for each film entry in the book. Ben Steelman of the "Wilmington Star-News" called the book a "handy volume", and commented "in loving detail, Mr. Wilson describes his 100 favorites among the Worst Movies Ever Made", David Germain of the Associated Press wrote that Wilson discusses "his take on the 100 most awful—yet perversely fun—movies to watch". Jenny Marder of the "Long Beach Press-Telegram" noted "Wilson, creator of the Golden Raspberry Awards, or Razzies, has become the authority for all movies so dreadful, they're laughable, so excruciating, they're, well, award-winning."

Catherine Shoard of "The Evening Standard" took a less enthusiastic approach to the book, describing it as "a companion book to the annual Golden Raspberry awards", and saying that "it's a shame elderly duds get more space than recent winners, and Wilson's style, though amusing, is never really more than descriptive. Still, that's all some films require ..."



</doc>
<doc id="22916804" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22916804" title="Glanville Davies affair">
Glanville Davies affair

The Glanville Davies affair was a scandal in the English legal profession which resulted in greater reform of the regulatory processes for solicitors and was one of the justifications for the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990. Glanville Davies was a well-respected solicitor and a member of the Council of the Law Society of England and Wales who massively overcharged his client, Leslie Persons, sending him a bill for £197,000 that was reduced on taxation to £67,000. Davies was not punished by the Law Society's internal regulatory committees, which allowed him to resign from the council on the grounds of ill-health with his reputation intact. Following litigation and public criticism, the Law Society commissioned an internal report that found "administrative failures, wrong decisions, mistakes, errors of judgement, failures in communication and insensitivity". A private member's bill reformed the way in which the Law Society investigated disciplinary complaints, although not to the extent initially proposed, and paved the way for the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 that created an independent disciplinary body.

In 1982, Leslie Parsons filed a complaint against Glanville Davies, a respected solicitor and member of the Council of the Law Society of England and Wales, the solicitors' professional body. Davies had charged Parsons £197,000 for legal services, a "grossly inflated and inaccurate legal bill". Parsons complained to the Law Society repeatedly from 1976 to 1982; despite this, the Law Society took no disciplinary action, allowing Davies to resign from the Council on grounds of ill-health with his reputation intact. Parsons finally brought legal action against Davies in 1982, and on 18 November, Anthony McCowan of the High Court of Justice reduced the bill to £67,000. McCowan also said that Davies was "guilty of at least gross and persistent misconduct" and recommended that he be struck off. On 24 October 1983, Vinelott J struck Davies from the roll of solicitors.

Following the start of litigation, an investigation by the Lay Observer and the Law Society itself (which became known as the Ely Report) highlighted "an appalling catalogue of errors, insensitivity and poor judgment" in the handling of the Davies Affair by the Law Society internal disciplinary organisation. The report found "administrative failures, wrong decisions, mistakes, errors of judgement, failures in communication and insensitivity... the whole affair was a disgrace to the Society". The Society paid compensation to Parsons for their mishandling of the situation and said that they would compensate victims of similar cases where they had failed to investigate complaints with reasonable care.

The Law Society asked Coopers & Lybrand to produce a report on the Law Society, which included its disciplinary topics among the areas to be reported on. The draft report, published in 1984, recommended that the Law Society should transfer its disciplinary processes to an independent Solicitor's Complaints Board, which would be made up of both solicitors and lay people (although with a majority of its members being solicitors). In 1985 the National Consumer Council published a survey showing that only 15% of respondents felt that the Law Society should be investigating complaints, and only 5% felt that if an independent body was created it should contain a solicitor majority, with 36% wanting equal representation of solicitors and lay people and 55% preferring a majority of lay people.

As a result of this and similar controversies, Alf Dubs introduced a private member's bill named the Solicitors (Independent Complaints Procedure) Bill on 12 February 1985, which would move the responsibility of regulating the solicitors profession to a body outside the Law Society. Professional opinion was split on this – the National Consumer Council, Legal Action Group and many of the smaller law societies supported the proposal, while larger law societies and the Law Society of England and Wales opposed it.

The Law Society of England and Wales persuaded Coopers & Lybrand to include an alternate reform proposal in their report, and after pressure from the Law Society, and several of the larger regional societies, the alternate proposal was used. This was far weaker than the original proposal, and kept the responsibility of regulating the solicitors' profession within the Law Society but increased the separation of functions within the Society and required that the majority of the people on regulatory committees be lay people (not solicitors). The events surrounding this scandal have been directly linked to the reforms pushed through in the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, which created an independent disciplinary body for solicitors.



</doc>
<doc id="22969858" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22969858" title="The Woman's Bible">
The Woman's Bible

The Woman's Bible is a two-part non-fiction book, written by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and a committee of 26 women, published in 1895 and 1898 to challenge the traditional position of religious orthodoxy that woman should be subservient to man. By producing the book, Stanton wished to promote a radical liberating theology, one that stressed self-development. The book attracted a great deal of controversy and antagonism at its introduction.

Many women's rights activists who worked with Stanton were opposed to the publication of "The Woman's Bible"; they felt it would harm the drive for women's suffrage. Although it was never accepted by Bible scholars as a major work, it became a popular best-seller, much to the dismay of suffragists who worked alongside Stanton within the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA). Susan B. Anthony tried to calm the younger suffragists, but they issued a formal denunciation of the book, and worked to distance the suffrage movement from Stanton's broader scope which included attacks on traditional religion. Because of the widespread negative reaction, including that of suffragists who had been close to her, publication of the book effectively ended Stanton's influence in the suffrage movement.

In the early 19th century advocates of women's rights began to accumulate rebuttals to arguments used against them founded on traditional interpretations of Bible scriptures. Lucretia Mott countered those who would put her in her place by quoting other Bible passages, or by challenging the original interpretation of the scripture. In 1849, Mott wrote "Discourse on Woman" which discussed Adam and Eve, the activities of various women who appear in the Bible, and argued that the Bible supported woman's right to speak aloud her spiritual beliefs. Independently from Mott, Lucy Stone determined for herself that the male-dominant interpretations of the Bible must be faulty—she worked to learn Greek and Hebrew and thereby gain insight into the earlier Bible translations which she believed would contain wording more favorable to women's equality. In New York, aided by Mott, Elizabeth Cady Stanton helped draft the Declaration of Sentiments in 1848 and included two Resolutions which protested against man's usurpation of rights relating to her position in church and to her role under God. By the 1850s, Mott had become expert at disarming men who used Scripture against her. At the National Women's Rights Convention in 1852, and again in 1854, she stood up to debate men who came prepared with Scripture in hand. Reverend Henry Grew told the 1854 convention audience that the Bible proved men were naturally superior to women. He was countered point-by-point by Hannah Tracy Cutler, then in broad societal and political terms by Mott who began by saying: "It is not Christianity, but priestcraft that has subjected woman as we find her. The Church and State have been united, and it is well for us to see it so."

In 1881, 1885 and 1894, the Church of England published a Revised Version of the Bible, the first new English version in over two centuries. Stanton was dissatisfied with the Revised Version's failure to incorporate recent scholarship from Bible translator Julia Evelina Smith. She wrote: 

Stanton assembled a "Revising Committee" to draft commentary on the new Bible version. Many of those she approached in person and by letter refused to take part, especially scholars who would be risking their professional reputations. Some 26 people agreed to help. Sharing Stanton's determination, the committee wished to correct biblical interpretation which they viewed as being biased against women, and to bring attention to the small fraction of the Bible which discussed women. They intended to demonstrate that it was not divine will that humiliated women, but human desire for domination. The committee was made up of women who were not Bible scholars, but who were interested in biblical interpretation and were active in women's rights. Among the notable members of the international committee were Augusta Jane Chapin, Lillie Devereux Blake, Matilda Joslyn Gage, Olympia Brown, Alexandra Gripenberg, Ursula Mellor Bright, Phebe Ann Coffin Hanaford, Clara Bewick Colby, and .

In 1890 at the formation of the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), Stanton was elected president. She left such duties to Susan B. Anthony and instead traveled to Europe for two years. While there she met with women who shared her views, and she gathered critical observations about the place of woman in the Bible. In Greenbank, Bristol, Stanton met with English suffragist Helen Bright Clark, and spoke to a group about the Bible position of woman. Clark questioned whether Stanton's liberal views had shocked some in attendance, and Stanton replied: "Well, if we who do see the absurdities of the old superstitions never unveil them to others, how is the world to make any progress in the theologies? I am in the sunset of life, and I feel it to be my special mission to tell people what they are not prepared to hear ..."
In 1893, Matilda Joslyn Gage took time out from her participation in the Revising Committee to write "Woman, Church and State", a book which challenged traditional Judeo-Christian teaching that women were the source of sin, and that sex was sinful. Gage wrote that the double standard for morality hurt both sexes. Gage differed from most of the women on the Revising Committee in that she did not feel that the Bible, once interpreted in a more true, original form, would support women's rights. Gage determined that the Church had acted against women's interests in important ways: from Roman Catholic canon law, to Scripture, to its advocacy of celibacy and more. Especially troubling to Gage was the story of Adam and Eve.

In November 1895, "The Woman's Bible - Part I" was published, covering the Pentateuch (the first five books of the Bible): Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. It was a best seller. News sources reported the initial printing of the first edition Part I, consisting of 50,000 copies, sold out within three months and by May 2 1896, a Second Edition was selling rapidly. In April 1898, the second part was published, covering the rest of the Old Testament as well as all of the New Testament. It included a Preface written by Stanton in which she acknowledged that "Both friend and foe object to the title." Nevertheless, she praised the Revising Committee for showing "a more worshipful reverence for the great Spirit of All Good than does the Church." Stanton wrote: "We have made a fetich of the Bible long enough. The time has come to read it as we do all other books, accepting the good and rejecting the evil it teaches."

At its introduction, "The Woman's Bible" was widely criticized in editorials and from the pulpit. Stanton wrote that "the clergy denounced it as the work of "Satan" ..." Some were put off just by its prejudicial, sacrilegious title, especially those who did not take the time to read the book. Others countered the book's more extreme conclusions one by one in public fora such as letters to the editor. One female reader of "The New York Times" wrote to decry "The Woman's Bible" for its radical statements that the Trinity was composed of "a Heavenly Mother, Father, and Son", and that prayers should be addressed to an "ideal Heavenly Mother". Mary Seymour Howell, a member of the Revising Committee, wrote to "The New York Times" in defense of the book, saying that its title could be better understood as "The Woman's Commentary on the Women of the Bible". Stanton countered attacks by women readers, writing "the only difference between us is, we say that these degrading ideas of woman emanated from the brain of man, while the church says that they came from God."

Susan B. Anthony, Stanton's best and most faithful collaborator, concluded after years of working for women's rights that the concentration on one issue—votes for women—was the key to bringing success to the movement. The women's organizations had too varied a membership to agree on anything more complex. Stanton insisted, however, that the women's rights conventions were too narrowly focused; she brought forward a variety of challenging concepts in the form of essays for Anthony to read to the audiences. When Stanton made known her interest in completing "The Woman's Bible", Anthony was unhappy at the futility of the effort, a harmful digression from the focused path which led to woman suffrage. Anthony wrote to Clara Bewick Colby to say of Stanton "of all her great speeches, I am always proud—but of her Bible commentaries, I am not proud—either of their spirit or letter ... But I shall love and honor her to the end—whether her "Bible" please me or not. So I hope she will do for me."
At the NAWSA convention January 23–28, 1896, Corresponding Secretary Rachel Foster Avery led the battle to distance the organization from "The Woman's Bible". After Susan B. Anthony opened the convention on January 23, Avery surprised Anthony by stating to the more than 100 members of the audience: Avery called for a resolution: "That this Association is non-sectarian, being composed of persons of all shades of religious opinion, and that it has no connection with the so-called 'Woman's Bible', or any theological publication." The motion was tabled until later, and motions were made to strike Avery's comments from the official record. A complete account of Avery's remarks were reported the next day in "The New York Times".

The opinion of NAWSA delegate Laura Clay, expressed in her Southern Committee report on January 27 that "the South is ready for woman suffrage, but it must be woman suffrage and nothing else," was typical of responses to "The Woman's Bible" conflict. Most suffragists wanted only to work on the right to vote, "without attaching it to dress reform, or bicycling, or anything else ..."

On the afternoon of January 28, a list of Resolutions was put to a vote. The first seven were passed without comment. The eighth was Avery's proposed dissociation with "The Woman's Bible", and its presence caused an active debate. Anna Howard Shaw, Alice Stone Blackwell, Henry Browne Blackwell, Carrie Chapman Catt and others spoke in favor, while Colby, Lillie Devereux Blake, and more spoke against it. Anthony left her chair to join the debate against the resolution, and spoke at length, saying "Lucretia Mott at first thought Mrs. Stanton had injured the cause of woman's rights by insisting on the demand for woman suffrage, but she had sense enough not to pass a resolution about it ..." A majority of 53 to 41 delegates approved the resolution, an action which was seen as a censure of Stanton, and one which was never repealed. Avery's opening report of January 23 was adopted with the part about "The Woman's Bible" expunged.

Stanton did not attend the 1896 convention; she was 80 years old, obese, and bedridden. She acknowledged the controversy stirred by the publication of the first part, but continued writing the second part of the book, and she worked on her autobiography "Eighty Years & More: Reminiscences 1815–1897". She wrote to her longtime friend Reverend Antoinette Brown Blackwell in April, 1896 to observe: "Our politicians are calm and complacent under our fire but the clergy jump round the moment you aim a pop gun at them 'like parched peas on a hot skillet'".

Stanton wished for a greater degree of scholarship in "The Woman's Bible", but was unable to convince Bible scholars of her day to take part in what was expected to be a controversial project. Scholars continued to avoid addressing the subject of sexism in the Bible until 1964 when Margaret Brackenbury Crook published "Women and Religion", a study of the status of women in Judaism and Christianity. In her 1973 book "Beyond God the Father", Mary Daly discussed "The Woman's Bible", and subsequent works by Letty Russell and Phyllis Trible furthered the connection between feminism and the Bible. Today, biblical scholarship by women has come into maturity, with women posing new questions about the Bible, and challenging the very basis of biblical studies.

Stanton herself was marginalized in the women's suffrage movement after publication of "The Woman's Bible". From that time forward, Susan B. Anthony took the place of honor among the majority of suffragettes. Stanton was never again invited to sit in a place of honor on stage at the NAWSA convention.





</doc>
<doc id="22973775" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22973775" title="Tropical Storm Isidore (1984)">
Tropical Storm Isidore (1984)

Tropical Storm Isidore was the 15th tropical cyclone and 9th named storm of the 1984 Atlantic hurricane season. Isidore formed as a tropical depression on September 25, while situated off the southeastern Bahamas. The depression headed west, and was upgraded to a tropical storm in the central Bahamas the next day. It made landfall near Jupiter, Florida, and retaining tropical storm strength, Isidore curved to the northeast, emerging over water near Jacksonville, Florida. Isidore continued northeast until it was absorbed by a frontal system on October 1. Though damage was generally light, the storm affected several regions from the Bahamas to the U.S. East Coast. One death was reported in Florida, and total damage is estimated at $1 million (1984 USD).

The storm system that would become Isidore originated in a nearly stationary frontal boundary situated near the Bahamas. On September 24, a ship reported winds of about in association with the disturbance. However, satellite imagery indicated that convection was just beginning to organize. Satellite imagery and Air Force reconnaissance reports documented the formation of a tropical depression early on September 25; a special statement was later issued by the National Hurricane Center (NHC) confirming the existence of the depression, and tropical cyclone advisories were initiated at 12 pm EDT. The depression moved west-northwest while tracking through the Bahamas. As it did so, it moved across Cat Island and passed near several others. The cyclone attained tropical storm status on September 26, receiving the name "Isidore".

While located near the northern tip of Andros Island, Isidore reached its peak intensity. The barometric pressure fell to 999 mb, with sustained winds of 60 mph (95 km/h). The storm continued moving northwest, though it failed to strengthen significantly over the Florida Current. The cyclone made landfall near Jupiter, Florida with sustained winds of about and subsequently moved inland. Previously, a large high pressure area over the eastern United States had prevented the cyclone from moving northward. The high moved away, allowing for Isidore to curve to the northeast, emerging over water near Jacksonville, Florida. The storm continued towards the northeast, passing about off of the Carolina coast. Isidore downgraded to a tropical depression on October 1, and was absorbed in a frontal zone later that day. Isidore was one of many storms during the 1984 season that formed in relatively cool baroclinic environments.

Due to its mild nature, Isidore was described as a "safety test". Gale warnings were issued from as far south as Key West, Florida, to as far north as Virginia, including parts of Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina. A private meteorological service stated that Isidore was to intensify to hurricane status, leading to some confusion regarding preparations. Along the Treasure Coast of Florida, citrus farmers burned seedlings potentially infected with canker to prevent heavy rains from spreading the disease. Red Cross volunteers readied a shelter with supplies such as cots and sheets, though it remained unused. In Martin County, hundreds of firefighters were on standby. In Miami, rain from the storm led to the cancellation of horse races at the Calder Race Course. State parks in Monroe County were temporarily closed.

In Indian River, Martin, and St. Lucie counties, students were sent home early, and after-school actives were canceled. The South Beach Jetty Park in Fort Pierce was closed. In southern portions of the state, residents prepared their boats for the storm, and 50 F-4 Phantom fighter jets were evacuated from the Homestead Air Force Base and moved to bases in South Carolina. Lumber yards, groceries stores, and hardware stores reported unusually high demand for emergency supplies, though certain smaller businesses closed early. Gasoline stations in the region "were doing bumper-to-bumper business". Farther to the south, in the Florida Keys, an emergency operations center was opened in response to the storm.

In Nassau, Bahamas, Isidore produced flooding rains and gales. There, the storm forced the closure of schools and banks. Heavy precipitation fell throughout the island chain, but no serious damage was reported.

Winds from Isidore gusted to in the St. Augustine, Florida area. Elsewhere, winds were recorded. At Mayport, winds were sustained at . In northern portions of the state, peak rainfall totals ranged from , much of which was associated with an intense convective band to the north and east of the cyclone's center. One tornado, ranked F1 on the Fujita scale, touched down near Savannah, Georgia. Power outages were mostly minor and scattered. Tides generally ran under above normal; combined with high winds, the tides contributed to severe and widespread beach erosion along the eastern coast of central Florida, threatening structures at times. A large, $500,000 beach restoration fill was washed away. Additionally, segments of State Road A1A were damaged. On Hutchinson Island, many eggs and nests of "Caretta caretta" and "Chelonia mydas", respectively, were destroyed. One man was electrocuted as a result of the storm near Orlando. Another man was injured while attempting to land his plane in high winds. Throughout the state, overall damage was generally insignificant.

The storm also dropped heavy precipitation along the coasts of Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina, with sporadic showers in parts of Virginia. Offshore, swells of extensively damaged a wooden ship, the "Phoenix". The vessel "barely escaped destruction", though a crew member suffered a cracked rib. Across its path, Isidore was estimated to have inflicted $1 million in damage.




</doc>
<doc id="22986579" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22986579" title="Great Southern Group">
Great Southern Group

Great Southern Group was a group of Australian companies that was notable as the country's largest agribusiness managed investment scheme (MIS) business.

The company was founded in 1987 and became a public company in 1999. It expanded its MIS business rapidly in the 2000s, supported by favourable tax regulations for these types of investments. Most of the Group's business was in plantation forestry to supply woodchips for the pulp and paper industry, but in the 2000s it diversified into high-value timbers, beef cattle, olives, viticulture, and almond production. The company's after-tax profit peaked at A$132 million in 2006, but by 2008 had deteriorated to a A$63 million loss.

The Great Southern companies attracted debate and criticism associated with the operation of managed investment schemes generally, and the environmental performance of their Tiwi Islands operation in particular. On 16 May 2009, as a result of worsening economic conditions and regulatory issues, the GSL, GSMAL, GSF and other subsidiaries of GSL entered into voluntary administration. Ferrier Hodgson was assigned as liquidator of Great Southern Group. The collapse of Great Southern Group, in conjunction with the failure of another high-profile agribusiness company, Timbercorp, led to three separate Australian parliamentary committee inquiries into the MIS industry.

The Great Southern Group in 2008 formed Australia's largest managed agribusiness investment scheme operation. The company comprised a parent entity, Great Southern Plantations Limited (from 2007 renamed Great Southern Limited), and over forty subsidiaries, almost all wholly owned. Those subsidiaries held or operated Great Southern's businesses, including providing management services.

At the centre of Great Southern's operations were management investment schemes (referred to as MIS schemes). MIS schemes are a mechanism by which investors' funds are pooled to invest in a common business enterprise. A "responsible entity" (such as Great Southern) controls the routine administration of the investments. In primary production schemes such as those managed by Great Southern, investors are the growers of products (such as forestry plantations), with an agreement with the company to manage the investment "to plant, establish and maintain the trees until they are harvested at maturity". Investors in Great Southern generally purchased lots (typically of 1 hectare) on land owned or leased by Great Southern. Thus investors owned the plantations, but the land assets belonged to the company. While investors owned individual woodlots, risks and returns were distributed across all investors in individual projects, with growers sharing "the average yield at harvest for the entire Project...rather than the return from their individual woodlot". These were not high rates of return for the length of investment involved. Some of the schemes relied upon the rationale that investors would retire and therefore receive income from the scheme when their marginal tax rate was lower than at the time of initial investment. Based on this premise some schemes were claiming a rate of return after tax of eight to nine percent. Others suggested the schemes were a poor investment likely to achieve only six percent return.

Returns to investors comprised a tax deduction in the year in which they bought the products, and returns from the sale of produce over the life of the project, which was typically at the point of harvest 10–12 years later for plantations, "and up to 23 years for horticultural projects such as almonds". Great Southern would deduct management fees from the final sale value. A typical forestry investment in the early 2000s involved an initial payment of $3000 for one-third of a hectare woodlot, yielding a $2900 tax deduction at that time. Returns on harvesting depended on many variables; Great Southern forecast that investors would recoup their original investment and a further return of between $1923 and $4569 per woodlot, however early schemes did not achieve these figures on the basis of the timber sales, with some resulting in woodchip sales of only around A$1500, half the value of what was originally invested. Investors received their returns when the product (usually woodchip) was harvested and sold.

While the majority of Great Southern's activity was in the sale of managed investment schemes, in 2007 it diversified into funds management through the purchase of Rural Funds Management Ltd, retaining its diversified agricultural assets fund and offering a new share fund and a blended property fund. In addition to retailing MIS products to investors, Great Southern also provided loans to investors wanting to borrow to invest. By 2009 its loan book comprised 14,500 loans with an average value of approximately A$50,000.

The Great Southern Group began as the company Great Southern, co-founded in 1987 by accountant John Carlton Young, and microbiologist Helen Sewell. It began by managing South-east Australian plantations of "Pinus radiata", but in 1992 shifted to Eucalytus plantations for woodchip production, dealing in blue gum woodlot investments. Through the 1990s it developed its plantation business in south western Western Australia including the Great Southern region (after which the company is named), leasing woodlots to investors on land owned by Great Southern. A related entity, Templegate Finance Pty Ltd, would also lend finance to investors.

Young was Great Southern's Executive Chairman when it listed on the Australian Stock Exchange in 1999, and co-founder Sewell remained in a full-time role until her retirement in February 2001. When the ASX200, a new stock exchange index comprising the top 200 Australian companies by market capitalisation and liquidity, was instituted in March 2000, Great Southern was one of the stocks included.

By 2001, the Group had 66 000 hectares of forestry plantations in New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia. Its performance on the share market was strong enough that it was "Shares" magazine's number one ranked stock in its table of top 50 stocks by yield in January 2002. However the business faced some turbulent times, with profits in 2001 and 2002 down on the levels of 2000. The company was delisted from the ASX200 for a period (from October 2002 to August 2003), although it was relisted and remained in the index until December 2008.

In 2004, the Group diversified into viticulture, planting vines in Western Australia. The company reported that it had been the ASX200's fourth-best performer in 2004, and second-best performer over the preceding two years. In November 2004, Young indicated to the company's annual meeting that harvesting of the first plantations had now commenced, and forecast further MIS sales growth. The shares in Great Southern peaked at A$4.76 at this time, and Young sold a significant proportion of his shareholding, netting him A$32.6 million.

In 2005 Great Southern expanded into organic olives, acquired some existing beef cattle MIS businesses, and bought forest products company Sylvatech, including its A$700 million of assets. The purchase of Sylvatech meant the company now also had forestry plantations in the Northern Territory, on the Tiwi Islands.

Great Southern's cattle properties included the 660,000-hectare Moola Bulla property in WA's East Kimberley region, the similar sized Wrotham Park, 300 kilometres west of Cairns, and the 196,000-hectare blue-ribbon station of Chudleigh Park near Townsville", as well as a further 2.4 million hectares of pastoral leasehold. In 2007, the company also diversified its MIS offerings to high value timbers, such as mahogany, the uses for which included furniture and flooring. The following table outlines the expansion of the Great Southern Group's operations.

In the mid-2000s, Great Southern's business was growing rapidly, with sales and market capitalisation increasing at more than 100 per cent per annum. However, in its 2005 Annual Report, the company disclosed that it was subsidising the returns to its 1994 forestry scheme by approximately A$3 million, and that it expected to have to similarly subsidise the 1995 and 1996 schemes by up to A$12 million in future years. Board Chairman Peter Patrikeos and non-executive director Jeffry Mews both expressed concern about the way in which Great Southern was funding shortfalls on the sales of timber products, with the issue leading directly to Mews' resignation. Although the company continued to sell over A$800 million of MIS products in the two financial years after incurring losses on its early offerings, it was not meeting sales targets, and its share price was falling.

Underpinning Great Southern's decision to subsidise returns to its early investors was a looming problem: its forestry plantations were not performing to expectations. Timber yields were poorer than had been projected. Great Southern's baseline projection had been 250 tonnes of woodchips per hectare, but an assessment in 2003 suggested that in most plantations yield would be reduced: in some cases to less than half the planned figure. The company itself considered that yields were proving to be "disappointing", with actual yields for the woodlots planted in the period between 1994 and 1997 (and thus harvested by 2008) being between 120 and 200 tonnes per hectare. Plantation growth had been limited by drought conditions and issues with the site and seedling quality of early plantings.

The company's sales of MIS schemes, and its profits, both peaked in 2006, with over A$450 million in sales, and a net profit after tax of A$133 million. However, the 2006 harvest (of 1996 plantations) yielded a return of only A$1500 and $1750 for the woodlots that investors had bought for A$3000. These plantations had not been productive enough to yield a profit for investors, so Great Southern inflated the returns to A$4100 using its own funds.

In December 2007 Young announced he would step down as managing director, remaining as both non-executive director and major shareholder. Saying that he wanted someone younger to implement the company's five-year business plans, he handed over to Cameron Rhodes, one of Great Southern's existing senior management team.

In 2008, Great Southern had over 430 employees managing investment schemes on behalf of over 47 000 investors. Industry sectors in which investment occurred included beef cattle, forestry, wine grapes, almonds, and poultry production. Its plantation estate had grown to 179 000 hectares, the vast majority of which was for wood pulp production.

As MIS sales declined from their 2006 peak, the Group's debt levels rose. By October 2008, business analysts Austock Securities were describing the company as "excessively geared". The Group developed a proposal, known as Project Transform, to restructure the business, in particular through seeking the agreement of investors to swap their MIS investments for shares in Great Southern Limited. The intention was to free up capital to reduce debt, and make the business more attractive to investors. Analysts such as Austock Securities and Macquarie Research Equities supported the strategy.

The company reported a A$64 million loss in its 2008 financial year. By 2009, the global economic downturn, and regulatory uncertainty associated with MIS schemes, was putting the company under financial pressure, and it was seeking to improve its situation both through asset sales and refinancing of debt. Its debt levels had risen significantly: it had extended its debt financing with its banks from A$245 million to A$350 million in 2007. By September 2008 its total debt had ballooned to A$820 million, of which A$376 million was owed to its lead bankers, ANZ, Commonwealth Bank, BankWest and Mizuho. Great Southern had also been hoping to see a rise in the price obtained for its woodchips, but was unsuccessful in its 2009 negotiations with Japanese customers.

By early 2009, business analysts Lonsec Agribusiness Research considered Great Southern to be financially stressed, and that it was "hard to envisage a rapid turnaround in the outlook" for the company. They gave Great Southern as managers the second-lowest rating on their assessment scale, just short of stating that the investment would be "detrimental to an investor's...portfolio". Great Southern's banks refused a request in 2009 for a further $35 million loan. Great Southern's attempts to extract itself from financial trouble were unsuccessful and by May 2009, when a trading halt was called, the company's shares were worth just 12 cents. On 16 May 2009 administrators were appointed under the Corporations Act 2001, with the companies' assets passing into control of receivers McGrathNicol on 18 May 2009. The assets of the group were primarily its land holdings. By the time it went into administration, they were valued at A$1.8 billion, however, despite company expansion plans, its net assets had not grown for four years.

In July 2009 the receivers determined that the company was insolvent. With a complex business structure to unravel, some commentators expect it may take years for the company's collapse to be fully resolved. By April 2010, timber company Gunns had taken over as the responsible entity running most of Great Southern's pulpwood schemes, but the land on which they were being grown was yet to be sold.

Following its collapse, there was some speculation about whether Great Southern had disclosed to the market issues with the rate of return it was going to achieve on some of its timber investments. During parliamentary committee inquiries, these allegations were extended to the possibility that the auditors had been misled. It was also noted that, at the time that difficulties were emerging for Great Southern, its CEO sold some of his shares at the top of the companies' fortunes for $32.6 million.

One of Australia's other leading managed investment scheme companies, Timbercorp, had also gone into administration the previous month. The two corporate collapses prompted examination by three separate Parliamentary committee inquiries: the first by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, into Agribusiness Managed Investment Schemes, which reported in September 2009; the second by the Senate Select Committee on Agricultural and Related Industries; and the third by the Senate Economics References Committee, " Agribusiness managed investment schemes - Bitter harvest"; published in 11 March 2016.

In 2012, over 22,000 of Great Southern's investors commenced civil action suing for damages, claiming they had been misled by the company.

Great Southern and its nearest industry rival Timbercorp were estimated as having 43 per cent of all managed investment schemes (MIS) business in Australia. In contrast to other MIS industry participants, for which MIS activity is only a small part of their operations, managed investment schemes were 100 per cent of Great Southern Group and Timbercorp's business.
Agribusiness MISs offer certain advantages to investors, dispersing investment risks across a large pool of investors and, through tax concessions, sharing those risks between the private investor and the taxpayer. The schemes were intended to overcome failures in the market for risk, and in the area of forestry reflect the fact that Australia has always subsidised plantation development.

MIS schemes however have a long history of criticism. Reports from the Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation (RIRDC) in 2000 and 2004 were reported to have found the schemes performed relatively poorly, in one case relating an analysis "of schemes offered to the public in 2002–03 [that] found that less than 10 per cent were sufficiently sound investments to warrant their recommendation". In 2006, another RIRDC report in 2006 observed:
Along with other studies, our analysis suggests that the MIS sector (but not all MIS) continues to
perform poorly with respect to realistic or actual rates of return versus marketed rates. There are
limited rights for investors. Issues arising from the large number and small economic size of the retail
investor population and those arising from asymmetric information dominate the economics of MIS.
The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) was also reported to have identified issues with inadequate disclosure of information to potential investors, poor performance of the investments, and high management fees for agricultural MIS schemes. In 2003, the commission commented that it "has deployed a disproportionate percentage of its resources to the regulation of this sector, which represents only a minority of funds under management". In 2010 it commenced revision of disclosure rules, prompted by "recent turmoil in the agribusiness scheme sector".

The Great Southern Group relied significantly on financial planners and accountants recommending their MIS products to investors. The company was paying commissions of ten percent – high by industry standards, and similar to those paid by other failed investment businesses including Westpoint Corporation and Storm Financial. It was also spending a lot of money on recruiting financial advisers to sell its products. One report indicated that A$137 million was spent on "commissions, marketing and promotion in two years to 2008". Some accountants, with Great Southern's support, were recommending the agribusiness investment schemes, though they did not have a financial services licence; one report suggested over half of Great Southern's MIS sales were coming through accountants, often tax specialists from small practices. These practices had been questioned for several years by the corporate regulator ASIC and some market analysts, and were widely criticised following Great Southern's collapse. Some experts were critical of the lack of knowledge and expertise of the investment advisers recommending agroforestry MIS schemes.

Crucial to the attractiveness to investors of all MIS schemes is their taxation treatment. The Australian government had for many years been encouraging agricultural and forestry investment schemes by allowing investors to claim up-front tax deductions of the costs of investment. Investors paid Great Southern a fee to lease plantation woodlots. Great Southern managed the woodlot, and the investor could deduct the cost of the lease from the income they declared that year for tax assessment purposes. The tax deductible status of the investment was widely regarded as the main attraction of MIS schemes to investors.

The tax-driven nature of investment in the sector made it vulnerable to policy changes and court rulings interpreting tax law. Tax law reforms in the late 1990s resulting from a major review of tax policy (called the Ralph review) altered the way in which deductions could be claimed. These changes, together with company profit warnings, caused a decline in Great Southern's share price and its business prospects in 2000 and 2001. Although Great Southern survived the reforms, another company, Australian Plantation Timber, was driven into administration. In June 2001 a Senate committee report was critical of Australian Taxation Office (ATO) advice on forestry investments, and the ATO released a statement reassuring forest product investors that they had investment certainty. MIS schemes recovered in 2002, despite a further Senate Committee report critical of mass-marketed investment schemes, that recommended "that the government seek advice from both ASIC and the ACCC on the question of the adequacy of the current measures for monitoring the schemes market, with particular reference to agribusiness and franchise schemes".

Throughout the mid-2000s, MIS schemes, including those of Great Southern, attracted increasing investment, driven by tax advantages. Tax benefits for investors that had been due to expire in June 2006 were extended in the Howard government's 2005 budget to June 2008, and Great Southern was one of the beneficiaries of the decision.
Nevertheless, although Great Southern's business had continued to grow, the sector was unhappy about taxation uncertainty. The government moved to address this in 2007, through the Tax Laws Amendment (2007 Measures No.3) Bill 2007. Forest industry peak bodies, the National Association of Forest Industries, Tree Plantations Australia, Treefarm Investment Managers Australia and the Australian Plantation Products and Paper Industry Council jointly supported the legislation, saying it would end "ten years of instability and uncertainty about the future ongoing taxation arrangements for retail forestry projects". Nevertheless, the bill attracted heated debate in the Parliament, and did not end taxation issues in the sector.

In 2007, the ATO moved to end the up-front tax deductions for non-forestry MIS investments. This announcement was a disappointment to Great Southern, although only 30 per cent of its business at that stage was non-forestry MIS that would be affected by the ATO ruling. The ATO's ruling was overturned in 2008, however it had created significant investor and lender uncertainty.

Because Great Southern was involved in a controversial industry, it figured in policy debates throughout its life as a publicly listed company. At the centre of Great Southern's business was the development of new forest estates for commercial harvest. Australia's state and federal governments had agreed in 1992 to a National Forest Policy Statement, which included the goal of expanding Australia's plantation forests. On this foundation, in July 1996, the federal forests minister and his state and territory counterparts met and "endorsed the plantation industry's target of trebling the plantation estate from 1.1 million hectares to 3 million hectares by the year 2020". In October 1997 governments, the Australian Plantation Products and Paper Industry Council, the Australian Forest Growers, and the National Association of Forest Industries, jointly released "Plantations for Australia: The 2020 Vision", known as "Plantations 2020".

The federal minister for forests from 1998 to 2001, Wilson Tuckey, was a strong advocate of Plantations 2020. He also held the federal seat of O'Connor in Western Australia, which included much of the Great Southern region and significant areas of plantation forests. Tuckey and the forest industry had a close relationship, to the extent that the industry paid for newspaper advertisements that reproduced a letter from Tuckey, following critical coverage of forestry MIS schemes in the media. Great Southern also reproduced Tuckey's letter in their 2000 Annual Report.

During the 2004 election year, Great Southern gave A$20,000 to each of the governing Liberal and National Parties, as well as to the Labor opposition. In the lead up to the 2007 federal election, Great Southern made A$40,000 of donations to the Labor opposition, including A$10,000 two days after the release of the party's primary industries policy. After Labor won the election, Great Southern's managing director John Young spoke positively of the change in government and of Labor's willingness to review policy toward managed investment schemes.

In acquiring the "Acacia mangium" plantations of Sylvatech on the Tiwi Islands, Great Southern Group had taken on responsibility for an investment that, while supported by the local Tiwi Land Council, was opposed by environmental non-government organisations (NGOs) and some individuals on the Tiwi Islands. The concerns expressed by NGOs related to loss of biodiversity and to greenhouse gas emissions.

Complaints were made that Great Southern Group's 2005 acquisition, Sylvatech, was conducting clearing and plantation activities in breach of environmental conditions set by the Commonwealth Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts. These complaints led to a departmental investigation and an agreement between the company and the government that recognised there had been inadvertent breaches of environmental conditions by the company, where forestry operations had intruded into zones designed to protect sensitive rainforests and wetland areas. The company was required to "fix all incursions into the rainforest and wetland buffers", post a $1 million bond to ensure the works were completed, and provide $1.35 million over three years toward the Tiwi Land Council's Indigenous Rangers Program, a group of Indigenous land management staff funded by the Tiwi Land Council and Great Southern to conduct environmental works, including weed management and monitoring threatened species.

There had been criticism of MIS companies generally, and Great Southern Group (as the largest company in the sector) in particular, suggesting that their appetite for land for plantations and agribusiness was driving up land prices in some regions, and distorting some commodity markets. In 2004, Great Southern's leading competitor Timbercorp reported a rise in plantation land prices from around A$3,000 to around A$6,000 per hectare in just five years. The high demand for forestry MIS schemes led to plantations being expanded on to less suitable land, with timber growth and yield then falling below projections that were based on better quality plantations. Some farmers claimed that MIS were driving up prices in agricultural water markets. Opinion was also divided about whether the expansion of MIS properties in a region was causing shrinkage of towns or was, conversely, stimulating employment.

Analysis of the MIS failures of Great Southern Group and Timbercorp focused on several factors. First, critics argued that some MIS investments resembled Ponzi schemes, where securing financial returns for existing investors relied on attracting new investors rather than on successful economic activity. Second, Great Southern Group's rapid expansion had been underpinned by high levels of debt, and in difficult economic circumstances in which new investment was diminishing and new borrowings were hard to obtain, that debt could not successfully be serviced. Third, some experts and Great Southern Group itself expressed concern that investor uncertainty caused by ATO rulings, and fueled by reporting of taxation policy issues, had scared investors away from their MIS. This was a view that the Australian Taxation Office rejected, arguing that the administrators of both Timbercorp and Great Southern had not identified taxation uncertainty as an issue. Finally, a range of commentators considered that the MIS tax concessions were encouraging unsustainable business models, with companies focusing on selling the tax benefits of investments rather than focussing on profitable commodity production. This, it was argued, led them to underestimate business risks, overinflate land prices, and sell products at lower-than-optimal prices. The failure of MIS schemes for these reasons was predicted in 2008 by Ajani, who argued that "we know that investment driven by the demand for tax minimisation, and not market realities, is associated with collapse".

The "Australian Financial Review" (AFR) had for years carried stories critical of managed investment schemes. An AFR story had prompted the letter, supporting the forest industries, from federal government minister Wilson Tuckey in 2000. When Great Southern collapsed, Tuckey was asked for comment by the "Sydney Morning Herald". He said "Everyone thought [a plantation strategy] was a good idea at the time". He argued investors would probably not lose their money, but "shareholders and lenders could be in a bit of trouble". With both Great Southern Group and Timbercorp under administration, the AFR continued its editorial attack on government MIS policy. An AFR journalist wrote, "as a general rule, MIS industries are inherently doomed to fail both from an investment and a social good perspective ... Taxpayers should ... not be surprised that they continue to fall over".

In May, 2011 more than 2,000 of the estimated 8,000 investors who lost money in the collapse of GSL took legal action seeking damages from Great Southern. They said the company did not disclose the risks associated with managed investment schemes and the company's poor financial performance. The action also sought to question Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, Javelin Asset Management and Great Southern Finance as to why they issued loans to investors in Great Southern.

The $23 million settlement, flagged in July, resolves a class action by 2000 investors led by Macpherson and Kelley Lawyers and targeting Bendigo and Adelaide Bank's involvement in Great Southern's schemes.

The class action had sought to void more than $300 million of loans taken out with Bendigo and Javelin Asset Management to fund the schemes on the basis that investors were misled by Great Southern, which collapsed five years ago.

The deed of settlement, however, confirms the loans are valid and enforceable, while waiving accrued penalty interest on overdue borrowings.

About $20 million of the $23 million will be paid to Macpherson and Kelley Lawyers to cover its costs, with just $3 million to be distributed among tens of thousands of investors who sunk nearly $2 billion into Great Southern.



</doc>
<doc id="22988148" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22988148" title="Angel Beats!">
Angel Beats!

Key worked in collaboration with ASCII Media Works' "Dengeki G's Magazine" to produce the project into a media franchise. Four manga series are serialized in "Dengeki G's Magazine" and "Dengeki G's Comic": two illustrated by Haruka Komowata and two drawn by Yuriko Asami. A series of illustrated short stories written by Maeda and illustrated by GotoP were also serialized in "Dengeki G's Magazine" between the November 2009 and May 2010 issues. Two Internet radio shows were produced to promote "Angel Beats!". The first volume in a six-part episodic visual novel adaptation produced by Key was released for Windows on June 26, 2015.

"Angel Beats!" received generally positive reviews by critics. The integration of various individual elements together, such as musical performances, humor and action, was commended in one review but panned in another, saying that the story was overloaded with too many elements. P.A.Works was praised for the animation of the action sequences and attention to detail with the weapons used. A major flaw noted by critics, however, is that the anime is too short, which leaves many of the characters with untold back-stories. The anime was selected as a recommended work by the awards jury of the 14th Japan Media Arts Festival in 2010.

"Angel Beats!" is set in the environment of a high school in the afterlife, a type of limbo where people have experienced trauma or hardships in life and must overcome them before passing on and being reincarnated. The story follows Yuzuru Otonashi, a boy with amnesia who ends up in the afterlife. He meets Yuri Nakamura, a girl who invites him to join the , or SSS, an organization she founded and leads which rebels against an unseen God for their unfair circumstances in life. Their enemy is Angel, the student council president, who has supernatural powers and is believed to be God's associate. After joining the SSS, Otonashi meets others members, including Hideki Hinata, the co-founder; Masami Iwasawa, the lead vocalist of a four-girl rock band, Girls Dead Monster (GDM); and Yui, an underclassman and fan of GDM. Other than the SSS members, the afterlife is populated by fabricated students and teachers, whom Yuri refers to as "non-player characters" (NPCs).

Otonashi participates in several SSS operations and missions, despite still questioning the morality of their actions. During one of GDM's diversion concerts, Iwasawa passes on from the afterlife after achieving satisfaction through her music. After the SSS manages to demote Angel from her position, Otonashi partially regains his memories with the aid of deputy president Ayato Naoi's hypnosis. He later befriends Angel, whose real name is Kanade Tachibana, and remembers the rest of his past while in her presence. Otonashi helps her make peace with the SSS and learns of the afterlife's true purpose. He subsequently offers to aid Kanade in helping other SSS members to pass on, and Kanade is reinstated as student council president in accordance with their plan. They are joined by Hinata and Naoi, with the former helping Yui move on by fulfilling her desire of marriage. 

When mysterious shadow-like entities begin appearing, they attacking the residents of the afterlife by turning them into NPCs. Otonashi reasons with the other SSS members and many of them agree to pass on in lieu of becoming an NPC. Yuri destorys the source of the shadows, which were created by computers programmed to activate when love was detected in the afterlife to prevent it from becoming a paradise. Her affections for the members of the SSS allow her to finally overcome her regret, and by this time, the only other ones who have not passed on are Otonashi, Yuri, Kanade, Hinata and Naoi. The five remaining students hold a graduation ceremony before Naoi, Yuri and Hinata pass on leaving only Otonashi and Kanade. 

Otonashi confesses to Kanade that he has fallen in love with her and wants them to remain in the afterlife to help others move on. However, Kanade reveals that her regret was being unable to thank her heart’s donor, Otonashi, for extending her life. Otonashi is heartbroken after she thanks him and passes on, leaving him alone in the afterlife. Later, two people resembling Otonashi and Kanade encounter each other on the street in the real world. In an alternate epilogue, Otonashi becomes the high school's student council president and helps lost souls depart from the afterlife.

The original creators of "Angel Beats!", Jun Maeda and Na-Ga of Key, were interviewed in the July 2009 issue of ASCII Media Works' "Dengeki G's Magazine". Around the time Key completed the first release of their sixth visual novel "Little Busters!", Hironori Toba of Aniplex (himself a fan of Key's works) approached Maeda around October 2007 about collaborating to produce an original anime series. Maeda began meeting with Toba and Aniplex on a monthly basis and the story started to gradually progress. Aniplex wanted Maeda to write a screenplay that would be very "Key-like, with touching moments of laughter and tears," but initially Maeda found himself at a loss to write a story more amusing than "Little Busters!", because he thought that he had reached a limit with "Little Busters!" in regards to a "Key-like story". However, one day Maeda was struck by inspiration, where he thought up the initial idea of a story set in the afterlife. Furthermore, with everyone already dead, Maeda conceived of flashy battles where the combatants go all out without fear of death. According to Maeda, the theme of the series is "life", which in "Angel Beats!" is depicted as a precious and wonderful thing, despite the characters in "Angel Beats!" who fight against their fate.

Maeda nominated Na-Ga to begin work on the character designs near the beginning of 2008. Na-Ga was worried that other computer graphics (CG) work for Key would get delayed, but he took the position because of his accumulated experience in CG. Maeda nominated Na-Ga because of the popular characters he designed in "Little Busters!", and because of his frankness. Na-Ga designed Yuri based on her personality as a leader, though it was per Maeda's request that he added the black headband, taken from the character Yukiko Amagi from "Persona 4", who was Maeda's favorite heroine from that game. The length of Yuri's hair and the addition of a green ribbon were decided from production committee meetings. Angel's original concept began with the idea of a brave, fighting girl. Maeda cited that Angel's image had changed considerably over the development process and that originally she was similar to Shiki Ryōgi from "Kara no Kyōkai". Eventually, Angel's concept changed to being a "silent and mysterious girl". Before Na-Ga decided on Otonashi's design, Maeda told him that anything would be fine and to just draw something, and eventually drew up a prototype for Otonashi and Hinata, among others. Some of the characters had vague initial conditions given by Maeda, such as asking Na-Ga to draw an "all female band bass guitarist" in the case of Girls Dead Monster member Sekine and particularly the cryptic "character who speaks in puzzling English phrases" for TK.

The Aniplex producer of "Angel Beats!", Hironori Toba, was interviewed in the November 2009 issue of "Dengeki G's Magazine", where he commented that a 13-episode anime with about 21 minutes per episode was not enough to tell the whole story of "Angel Beats!" Maeda had envisioned. Therefore, the various additional media, such as the illustrated short stories and manga, contain some of the story that was unable to make it into the anime because of time constraints. Toba wanted fans of the series to be able to enjoy it to the fullest by exploring all of the media types. Maeda found it tiring to go back and forth between Osaka and Tokyo for business meetings when he was in the process of writing the script, and found it difficult to write an entire script by himself, since he had never done that before with any of the games he produced as a member of Key. It was only after the script was done that Maeda was able to work on the music, which he greatly enjoyed and never tired of it. Maeda composed about 15 songs for Girls Dead Monster and spent about two days each composing each song. He made sure to create songs for Girls Dead Monster that high school girls would compose, including the lyrics. Due to this, Maeda pointed out that the opening and ending theme songs for "Angel Beats!", which Maeda also composed, sound like they were composed by a different person compared to the Girls Dead Monster songs.

In regards to bringing in P.A.Works as the animation studio, Toba had taken notice of the company from back when they provided in-between animation and production assistance for "Fullmetal Alchemist" (2003–4) and "Darker than Black" (2007), respectively; Aniplex helped produce both series. After watching just the first three episodes of P.A.Works' "True Tears" (2008), however, he was shocked at the high quality and immediately went to P.A.Works' studio in Toyama Prefecture to meet with the production staff in the hope that one day Aniplex could collaborate with them on a project together. The following week, Maeda brought up the subject of deciding on an animation studio for "Angel Beats!" and mentioned that he too had seen "True Tears" and had become interested in P.A.Works. Shortly after that, Toba formally made the proposal to P.A.Works to animate the project.

Maeda focused on making jokes an important part of "Angel Beats!", leading Toba to seek out Seiji Kishi to be the director, because of his experience in directing and his pulling power influence on the staff of P.A.Works, where there are many that are still young. Kishi was ultimately approached by P.A.Works representative director Kenji Horikawa about working on a "school comedy written by a game scenario writer" and was shocked after taking the director's position to discover Maeda was the screenwriter. Kishi commented how, far from just being a comedy, the series contains many different aspects, including flashy action scenes, live musical performances, and drama. Kishi stated that normally he would be hard pressed to cover this range of aspects, but was motivated by Maeda's uncompromising attitude in regards to the script. The decision to add in the all female band Girls Dead Monster was due to Maeda's intent to add in many different and interesting elements into the series.

Kishi specifically requested that sound and music director Satoki Iida work on the project, who also helped with the proofreading of the script due to Maeda's fixation on the music production. Iida was interviewed in the April 2010 issue of "Dengeki G's Magazine", where it was stated that Maeda and the group Anant-Garde Eyes received Iida's approval to employ a minimalist approach to the background music (BGM) used throughout the anime. Iida admitted that it was uncustomary to use this music genre in anime and that he had to go through various trials and errors with Maeda and Anant-Garde Eyes to get the music right. Maeda and Anant-Garde Eyes strove to create individual quality music tracks, while Iida pursued the goal of having music that would be useful as BGM tracks, which caused problems during the creation process. Iida realized that it was important for the music and the visuals to combine together to create a synchronization between the two. Toba first took notice of "Angel Beats!" character designer and chief animator Katsuzō Hirata during the production of "Gurren Lagann" (2007) with his skill as an artist and ability to finish work quickly, but thoroughly. It was after Toba saw Hirata's work as chief animator of "Strike Witches" (2008), however, that he pursued Hirata to join the "Angel Beats!" staff; Maeda also gave his seal of approval for Hirata.

The 13-episode "Angel Beats!" anime television series is directed by Seiji Kishi and produced by P.A.Works and Aniplex. It aired in Japan between April 3 and June 26, 2010 on the CBC television network. The first episode was previewed on March 22, 2010 to a selected number of people who participated in a lottery held earlier that month. The screenplay was written by Jun Maeda, who originally conceived the series. Chief animator Katsuzō Hirata based the character design used in the anime on Na-Ga's original designs. Sound and music direction was headed by Satoki Iida.

The series was released on seven BD/DVD compilation volumes between June 23 and December 22, 2010 in limited and regular editions. Three drama CDs, written by Maeda and performed by the anime's cast, were released with the first, fourth and sixth limited edition BD/DVD volumes. The seventh BD/DVD volume featured an original video animation (OVA) episode, as well as a bonus short which serves as another epilogue to the series. Each of the BD/DVD volumes contained commentaries by the characters performed by the voice cast and written by Maeda. A BD box set was released in Japan on June 24, 2015 and also included another OVA episode. Sentai Filmworks licensed the anime, and along with distributor Section23 Films, released the series on BD/DVD on July 26, 2011. Siren Visual licensed the anime for Australia and New Zealand. The series has also been licensed in the United Kingdom by Manga Entertainment and released the series on BD/DVD on June 25, 2012. On November 3, 2017, Sentai Filmworks announced their release of the series will go out-of-print, and the series was later removed from their catalogue and from online streaming service Hidive.

The anime's music is composed by Maeda and the group Anant-Garde Eyes, who also provided the musical arrangement. The music is released on Key's record label Key Sounds Label. The opening theme is "My Soul, Your Beats!" sung by Lia and the ending theme is "Brave Song" sung by Aoi Tada. The single containing both songs titled "My Soul, Your Beats! / Brave Song" was released on May 26, 2010 in limited (CD+DVD) and regular (CD) editions; the limited edition's DVD contains the opening and ending videos without the credits. The in-story band Girls Dead Monster is made up of the real-life singers Marina and LiSA. Five singles for Girls Dead Monster were released in 2010. The first, "Crow Song", was released on April 23 featuring songs sung by Marina. The second and third singles, "Thousand Enemies" and "Little Braver", followed on May 12 and June 9, respectively, with songs sung by LiSA. The fourth single was "Last Song" by Marina and the fifth single was by LiSA; both singles were released on December 8. A Girls Dead Monster album titled "Keep The Beats!" was released on June 30, 2010. A version of "Keep The Beats!" containing instrumental tracks was released on July 28, 2010 bundled with a 256-page band score book. The anime's original soundtrack was released on July 28, 2010 as a two-CD set. A Girls Dead Monster mini-album titled "Rare Tracks" was released on December 28, 2014.

There were several live performance events to promote the music from "Angel Beats!". The first was on April 24, 2010 at the Tower Records in Shibuya, Tokyo where Marina and LiSA performed four songs. The first two, "Crow Song" and "Alchemy", were duets, while the third song "My Song" was sung by Marina, and LiSA sang "My Soul, Your Beats!". On June 5, 2010 at the same venue, Lia and Aoi Tada sang their songs from "My Soul, Your Beats! / Brave Song", Tada and LiSA sang "Crow Song" as a duet, and Lia and LiSA also sang "My Soul, Your Beats!" as a duet for the encore. An event titled "Angel Beats! Fes.: Thousand Bravers" was held on August 1, 2010 at Studio Coast in Shingiba, Koto, Tokyo featuring singers Lia, Tada, Marina, LiSA and Karuta, as well as several voice actors from the anime.

A national concert tour featuring LiSA titled "Girls Dead Monster starring LiSA Tour 2010: Keep The Angel Beats!" was held across Japan August 3 and September 2, 2010; all of the venues ultimately sold out. A BD/DVD video album box set titled "Girls Dead Monster starring LiSA Tour 2010 Final: Keep The Angel Beats!" of the tour's final performance was released on June 1, 2011 by Key Sounds Label bearing the catalog numbers "KSLV-0001–0003". The last concert of Girls Dead Monster was held on December 27, 2010 at an event called "Girls Dead Monster Last Live: Final Operation" featuring Marina and LiSA at the Tokyo International Forum.

A four-episode Internet radio show to promote "Angel Beats!" called aired between May 30, 2009 and March 31, 2010. The show was hosted by Jun Maeda, though guests did make appearances, such as Hironori Towa, the producer for "Angel Beats!", and Na-Ga. One month after each regular broadcast, an additional shorter broadcast called was released. Another Internet radio show to promote the series titled "Angel Beats! SSS Radio" had a pre-broadcast on March 18, 2010, and had 51 regular weekly broadcasts between April 1, 2010 and March 31, 2011. Produced by Hibiki Radio Station, the show was hosted by Harumi Sakurai (the voice of Yuri), Kana Hanazawa (the voice of Angel) and Eri Kitamura (the voice of Yui). Seven CD compilation volumes containing all 51 episodes were released between June 23, 2010 and July 29, 2011.

A series of seven illustrated short stories written by Jun Maeda and drawn by GotoP titled "Angel Beats! Track Zero" were serialized between the November 2009 and May 2010 issues of ASCII Media Works's "Dengeki G's Magazine". "Track Zero" is a prequel to "Angel Beats!" featuring Hinata as the main character and tells the story of how the SSS was formed. A special extra chapter focusing on Girls Dead Monster was published in the sixth volume of "Dengeki G's Festival! Deluxe" on March 29, 2010. The short stories were collected into a bound volume released on June 23, 2010 and included an additional chapter along with the other eight chapters. The chapter titles for the stories are taken from song titles from various musical artists. The first chapter was posted online with illustrations by ASCII Media Works. ASCII Media Works published the "Angel Beats! Official Guidebook" on December 22, 2010. The guidebook contains story summaries of the anime episodes including the OVA, information on the cast of characters, interviews from the voice acting cast and production staff, and illustrations featuring art from the anime.

A four-panel comic strip manga, illustrated by Haruka Komowata and titled , was serialized between the December 2009 and October 2013 issues of ASCII Media Works' "Dengeki G's Magazine". Komowata was also in charge of illustrating a manga which showcased the progress of the "Angel Beats!" project and was serialized between the September 2009 and July 2010 issues of "Dengeki G's Magazine". Four "tankōbon" volumes for "Angel Beats! The 4-koma" were released between December 18, 2010 and November 27, 2013 under ASCII Media Works' Dengeki Comics EX imprint. Komowata also illustrated the four-panel comic strip manga, which was serialized between the December 2013 and January 2016 issues of "Dengeki G's Magazine". Two volumes were released between October 24, 2014 and April 26, 2016.

A manga illustrated by Yuriko Asami, titled "Angel Beats! Heaven's Door", began serialization in "Dengeki G's Magazine" in the May 2010 issue. The manga ended serialization in the magazine's May 2014 issue and continued serialization in "Dengeki G's Comic" between the June 2014 and December 2016 issues. "Heaven's Door" is based on the "Angel Beats! Track Zero" short stories. ASCII Media Works published 11 volumes for "Angel Beats! Heaven's Door" between December 18, 2010 and December 17, 2016. "Heaven's Door" is available in English on Kadokawa Corporation's ComicWalker website and app, and is licensed in North America by Seven Seas Entertainment. Asami also illustrates the "Angel Beats! The Last Operation" manga, which began serialization in the October 2017 issue of "Dengeki G's Comic". "Dengeki G's Comic" ceased publication with the May 2019 issue sold on March 30, 2019, but "The Last Operation" will continue on ComicWalker and Niconico Seiga in April 2019. An anthology titled "Angel Beats! Comic Anthology" was published by ASCII Media Works on December 18, 2010.





It was reported in 2010 that Jun Maeda was writing the scenario for a video game adaptation of "Angel Beats!", and the game was officially announced in September 2013. Developed by Key, Maeda leads the production team as the designer and one of the scenario writers. Two additional writers include Kai, who previously contributed on the scenario of "Clannad", and Leo Kashida, who had worked on the scenario of "" and "Little Busters!". The art director and character designer is Na-Ga. Rated for all ages and split into six volumes, the first visual novel volume, titled "Angel Beats! 1st Beat", was released on June 26, 2015 for Windows PCs. The first volume covers up to the tenth episode of the anime as well as Iwasawa's, Matsushita's and Yui's routes with Otonashi as the main protagonist. The subsequent volumes will cover the rest of the character routes.

"Angel Beats!" received generally positive reviews. In a review by Anime News Network, reviewer Theron Martin praised the series for integrating individual elements together, including the Girls Dead Monster musical performance scenes, scenes where humor dominates, and action scenes. A common theme in supernatural anime, according to Martin, are souls discontent with their former lives, but the concept of "Angel Beats!" is described as "quite unusual" because it features all the main characters as such souls and gathers them in one place. In the series, "maintaining distinctiveness is essential for survival as an individual," which Martin calls a "sly condemnation of the rigorous conformity impressed upon students by Japanese schooling." Overall, "Angel Beats!" was lauded for "requir[ing] no great familiarity with anime to enjoy."

On the DVD Talk website, reviewer John Sinnott praised the plot for advancing and changing in unexpected ways: "The plot evolves quickly and by the end of the series it's quite a different show than what it was at the beginning." Both Martin and Sinnott agree that a major flaw in the anime is that it is too short, and does not go into detail for a large number of characters. Stig Høgset at THEM Anime Reviews, however, panned the series in part because it "overloads the story with too many elements in an attempt to please as many people as possible." Høgset went on to describe "Angel Beats" as not having "any compelling characters" and the series' humor is largely thought to be annoying. However, Høgset praised P.A.Works for the animation of the action sequences, as did Martin, who added that there is "great detail work on the weapons and instruments used."

The sixth episode of "Angel Beats!", which aired on May 8, 2010 on Osaka's MBS station in Japan, achieved a record 4.9% rating for an anime series broadcast during the late-night "Anime Shower" timeslot in the past three years. The "Angel Beats!" anime was selected as a recommended work by the awards jury of the 14th Japan Media Arts Festival in 2010.

Each of the "Angel Beats!" Blu-ray Disc (BD) compilation volumes ranked in the top three on Japan's Oricon weekly BD sales chart. Volumes one and four ranked at No. 1, volumes two and five ranked at No. 2, and volumes three, six and seven ranked at No. 3. The DVD volumes, however, ranked lower than the BDs on Oricon. Volume one ranked at No. 5, volume two at No. 10, volume three at No. 13, volume four at No. 11, volume five at No. 8, volume six at No. 12, and volume seven at No. 15.

The opening and ending theme song single "My Soul, Your Beats! / Brave Song" debuted at No. 3 on Japan's Oricon weekly singles chart, selling about 80,000 copies in its first week of sales. "My Soul, Your Beats! / Brave Song" was awarded a Gold disc by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) in May 2010 for shipping over 100,000 copies. Girls Dead Monster's single "Crow Song" debuted at No. 7 on the Oricon singles chart, selling approximately 16,400 copies in about four days. "Crow Song" sold over 25,000 more copies over the next three weeks after its release. "Crow Song" was awarded a Gold disc by the RIAJ in November 2011 for shipping over 100,000 copies. The Girls Dead Monster single "Thousand Enemies" debuted at No. 4 on the Oricon singles chart, selling about 28,000 copies in its first week of sales. "Thousand Enemies" sold over 18,000 more copies over the next two weeks after its release.

Girls Dead Monster's third single "Little Braver" debuted at No. 2 on the Oricon singles chart, selling about 38,800 copies in its first week of sales. Girls Dead Monster's fourth and fifth singles, "Last Song" and "Ichiban no Takaramono (Yui final ver.)", ranked at No. 2 and No. 3 on the Oricon singles chart, respectively, both selling about 35,000 copies in their first week of sales. The Girls Dead Monster album "Keep The Beats!" ranked at No. 6 on the Oricon albums chart, selling about 51,000 copies in its first week of sales. "Keep The Beats!" was awarded a Gold disc by the RIAJ in September 2010 for shipping over 100,000 copies. The version of "Keep The Beats!" with instrumental tracks and a band score book ranked at No. 14 on the Oricon albums chart, selling just under 9,000 copies in its first week. The "Angel Beats! Original Soundtrack" ranked at No. 9 on the Oricon albums chart, selling about 13,300 copies in its first week.




</doc>
<doc id="23005105" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23005105" title="3 Splash">
3 Splash

3 Splash (stylized as 3 SPLASH) is an EP by Japanese recording artist and songwriter Kumi Koda. It was released on 8 July 2009, by Kumi's record label, Rhythm Zone. Her fourth extended play consists of three recordings; "Lick Me" (stylized as "Lick me♥"), "Ecstasy" (capitalized as "ECSTASY") and "Hashire!", with three additional interludes. It was released in two different formats: stand-alone CD, and a CD+DVD bundle - the latter bundle was re-released with a pink-transparent CD holder. The three artworks for the EP depicts Kumi posing with the title of the work superimposed over her. The CD+DVD bundle artwork features her holding a basketball, this artwork was also used for the digital release of the EP.

"3 Splash" contains predominantly pop rock and dance music. Kumi contributed by writing the lyrics to "Lick Me" and "Hashire!", while Japanese songwriter and producer Hum created "Ecstasy". Hiroto Suzuki and Shinjiro Inoue were credited as the EP's producers. "3 Splash" received favourable reviews from music critics who commended the EP's production and commercial appeal. "3 Splash" reached number two on the Oricon Singles Chart, and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) for shipments of 100,000 units. "Lick Me", "Ecstasy", and "Hashire!" served as promotional singles, while "Lick Me" was certified platinum for 250,000 digital shipments and nominated for a Japan Record Award at the 51st Japan Record Awards.

In 2009, Kumi released two compilation albums: "Out Works & Collaboration Best" and "Koda Kumi Driving Hit's". Following this, along with the release of a collaborative single with her younger sister, misono, Kumi announced plans of releasing a double album. The double album was to promote both her third greatest hits album, and a new studio album that consisted of unreleased material from recording sessions for her 2008 album, "Trick". "It's All Love!" was later served as the studio album's lead single. Kumi announced that she would release a new extended play, marketed as a single, entitled "3 Splash", which would consist of three recordings: "Lick Me", "Ecstasy" and "Hashire!" with three additional interludes.

"3 Splash" opens with the first interlude, "09:00AM", which is an instrumental piece with "groovy" DJ spins and scratches. "Lick Me", the first tracks to include vocals, is an uptempo "cute summer number" with suggestive lyrics. "Ecstasy" is an electronic song with Kumi's "cool husky" vocals being heavily processed with autotune and vocoder effects. According to Adam Greenberg from AllMusic, "Ecstasy" "share[s] some ideation with Lady Gaga concepts, mixing sultriness with oddity and playing with the instrumentation and voicing along the way." The album's second interlude, "12:35PM", is another instrumental piece with "slow-paced" handclaps, and subtle urban undertones. "Hashire!" is a "distorted" midtempo dance song with influences of rock and pop music, and the EP is closed with a final instrumental interlude, "12:00AM".

"3 Splash" was released on July 8, 2003, through Rhythm Zone. There are three official versions: a stand-alone CD version, a CD+DVD version and a CD+DVD version which features an accessory pouch for the physical single. Each version featured a different cover sleeve, all with Kumi standing in front of a grey background: the CD version features Kumi in a black outfit (which she wore in her "Ecstasy" music video), the CD+DVD and digital EP version features Kumi in urban street gear (which she wore in the video for "Hashire!") and the CD+DVD version, which includes a pink-transparent CD holder, features Kher in a 60s-influence dress (which was worn in her "Lick Me" video). The CD+DVD bundle artwork features Kumi holding a basketball. This artwork was also used for the digital release of the EP. All three recorded songs were promoted through advertisement deals in Japan. "Ecstasy" was used for Music.Jp, "Lick Me" was used for the televised commercial of her Fever Live in Hall II concert, and "Hashire!" was used for the NTT communications advert Musico.

All three tracks served as the EP's promotional singles, released on July 8, 2009. "Lick Me" reached #2 on the Japan Hot 100 chart on the week end of July 20, 2009, which is her highest chart entry to date. "Lick Me" was certified platinum for 250,000 downloads in January 2014. "Ecstasy" and "Hashire!" did not chart in any Japanese music charts, but were marketed as promotional singles by Rhythm Zone. All three songs featured an accompanying music video, which were included on the DVD version of "3 Splash". An alternate version of the music video for "Lick me♥" was later placed on the DVD for her second pachinko game, "Fever Live in Hall II." 

All three songs have appeared on several live albums and compilations released by Kumi respectively. "Lick Me" and "Ecstasy" were performed during her , her 2009 Taiwan Live, , , and . "Hashire!" has only been performed on her . "Lick Me" and "Ecstasy" both appeared on her 2013 digital compilation, "Summer Single Collection 2013", while "Lick Me" was included on both Kumi's concept compilations: "Happy Love Song Collection" (2014) and "Summer of Love" (2015).

"3 Splash" received favourable reviews from music critics. Chris True from AllMusic highlighted "Hashire!" as a career stand out track from Kumi's discography. Ian Martin from the same publication reviewed "Lick Me" and "Ecstasy" from the "Universe" album and was divided. For "Lick Me", he said, "She wears her sexuality on her sleeve, with song titles like "Lick Me" laying their erotic playing cards on the table from the get-go, and her lack of any recognizable singing ability compensated for by an awful lot of gumption." For "Ecstasy", he commended her "hard working ethic" in many songs, highlighting the song and concluded that, "All of this reveals a desperate need to achieve success no matter what, but also the humanity of the effort underpinning it." Greenberg commended the production of "Ecstasy", and said that "Lick Me" was "slightly off-tempo" that "brings Kumi back to more standard territory." A reviewer from "CD Journal" complimented the production of each song, and described the EP as "catchy" and "danceable". Hiraga Tetsuo from "Hot Express" was positive, who commended Kumi's song writing and the "summer" theme throughout the EP.

On the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart, "3 Splash" debuted at #2, Kumi's third consecutive EP to have peaked at this position. The EP lasted twelve weeks in the top 100, selling 93,000 units, and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) for shipments of 100,000 units; this became her fourth consecutive EP to have shipped over 100,000 units, after "Love & Honey" (2004), "4 Hot Wave" (2006), and "Moon" (2008). "3 Splash" reached number eight on the Taiwanese East Asian chart. "Lick Me" reached #2 on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart, and reached #8 and #15 on the Japan Billboard Adult Contemporary and Radio Songs chart, respectively. "Lick Me" was nominated for the Japan Record Award at the 51st Japan Record Awards, but lost to Exile's "Someday".


Credits adapted from the EP's liner notes.





</doc>
<doc id="23025182" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23025182" title="SMS Gazelle">
SMS Gazelle

SMS "Gazelle" was the lead ship of the ten-vessel light cruiser , built by the Imperial German Navy. She was built by the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel, laid down in 1897, launched in March 1898, and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in June 1901. Armed with a main battery of ten guns and two torpedo tubes, "Gazelle" was capable of a top speed of . 

Initially assigned to overseas service, "Gazelle" participated in the Venezuelan crisis of 1902–03. She returned to German waters in 1904, and served with the fleet until 1914. She was employed as a coastal defense ship after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914. She served in this role until the night of 25–26 January 1916, when she struck a mine off Cape Arkona. The Navy deemed "Gazelle" not worth repairing and reduced her to a mine storage hulk, a role she retained through the end of the war. In August 1920, she was stricken from the naval register and sold for scrap.

"Gazelle" was long overall and had a beam of and a draft of forward. She displaced at full combat load. Her propulsion system consisted of two triple-expansion engines manufactured by AG-Germania. They were designed to give , for a top speed of . The engines were powered by eight coal-fired Niclausse boilers. "Gazelle" carried of coal, which gave her a range of at . She had a crew of 14 officers and 243 enlisted men.

"Gazelle"s armament consisted of ten 10.5 cm SK L/40 guns in single mounts. Two were placed side-by-side forward on the forecastle, six were located amidships, three on either side, and two were placed side-by-side aft. The guns could engage targets out to . They were supplied with 1,000 rounds of ammunition, for 100 shells per gun. She was also equipped with three torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes. One was submerged in the hull in the bow and two were mounted in deck launchers on the broadside. 

The ship was protected by an armored deck that was thick. The conning tower had thick sides, and the guns were protected by thick shields.

"Gazelle" was ordered under the contract name "G" and was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in 1897. She was launched on 31 March 1898, after which fitting-out work commenced. She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 15 June 1901.

After her commissioning, "Gazelle" was sent overseas from 1902 to 1904, assigned to the American Squadron. Together with the unprotected cruiser she proceeded to La Guaira and Carúpano in Venezuela to protect German nationals from expected fighting in June 1902, and the following weeks evacuated German and French nationals from the two cities to Saint Thomas. Starting in December 1902, "Gazelle" participated in the Venezuelan crisis of 1902–03. An Anglo-German naval force instituted a blockade of the Venezuelan coast to secure payment of foreign debts. "Gazelle" and the "Falke" were the German contribution to the blockading squadron; they joined four British cruisers and three smaller vessels in enforcing the blockade. The Venezuelan gunboat was seized during the blockade. The Germans took her into service as SMS "Restaurador" and put a crew from "Gazelle" on board under the command of "Kapitänleutnant" (Captain Lieutenant) Titus Türk. In February 1903 the Venezuelan government reached an agreement to pay its debts, concluding the confrontation. In January 1904, "Gazelle" conducted a goodwill visit to the port of New Orleans, along with "Vineta" and two other warships. During this period she was commanded by then "Korvettenkapitän" Reinhard Scheer, the later commander of the High Seas Fleet. 

After returning to Germany, she served with the High Seas Fleet until 1914, when she was reduced to a coastal defense vessel. She served in the Baltic Sea in the first two years after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914. On 17 November, while patrolling in the Baltic, "Gazelle" was attacked by the British submarine . The submarine fired a pair of torpedoes at the cruiser, but both missed. On the night of 25–26 January 1916, she struck Russian mines to the north of Cape Arkona. The mine explosion tore off both of her screws and she had to be towed back to port. On 22 February, the German Navy decided the old cruiser was not worth repairing, and so she was placed out of service. She was converted into a hulk for minelayers, first at Danzig and then at Cuxhaven. In 1918, she was moved to Wilhelmshaven. After the end of the war, "Gazelle" was formally stricken from the naval register on 28 August 1920 and broken up for scrap in Wilhelmshaven.



</doc>
<doc id="23031540" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23031540" title="Thank Me Later">
Thank Me Later

Thank Me Later is the debut studio album by Canadian rapper Drake. It was released on June 15, 2010, by Aspire Music Group, Young Money Entertainment, Cash Money Records, and Universal Motown Records. Production for the album took place at various recording studios during 2009 to 2010 and was mostly produced by longtime collaborators 40 and Boi-1da. It also featured contributions from Timbaland, Swizz Beatz, Nicki Minaj, Lil Wayne, The-Dream, and Kanye West, among others.

"Thank Me Later" has a languorous, ambient production that incorporates moody synthesizers, sparse beats, obscured keyboards, minor keys, and subtle arrangements. Thematically, the album focuses on Drake's introduction to fame and his romances over the course of confessional, club-oriented, and sexual songs. Drake's emotionally transparent, self-deprecating lyrics are delivered in both rapped and subtly sung verses, and explore feelings of doubt, insecurity, and heartbreak.

The album received generally positive reviews from critics, who complimented Drake's personal themes and drew musical comparisons to the works of hip hop artists Kanye West and Kid Cudi. Following an anticipated release, it debuted at number one on the US "Billboard" 200 on first-week sales of 447,000 copies, and attained platinum certification in Canada within its debut week. All four of the album's singles became hits on the "Billboard" Hot 100, including the top-10 hit "Find Your Love". "Thank Me Later" was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America and, as of August 2015, has sold 1,800,000 copies in the US.

Released in February 2009, Drake's mixtape "So Far Gone" proceeded his series of early mixtapes and achieved unexpected critical and commercial success, earning him two Grammy Award-nominations and producing the hit single "Best I Ever Had". The single reappeared on his debut EP, which was released after a bidding competition among labels and his signing with Universal Motown Records amid support from high-profile hip hop artists such as Kanye West, Jay-Z, and Lil Wayne. Drake followed-up on "So Far Gone"s success with several guest appearances on other rappers' works, adding to the hype surrounding him at the time.

In an interview for "Complex", Drake stated that his debut album will be "a solid hip hop album" and musically distinct from his "So Far Gone" mixtape, which received negative comparisons to Kanye West's "808s & Heartbreak" (2008). He expressed a desire to work with André 3000, Kid Cudi, and Sade for the album. In an interview for MTV, Drake cited Nas and André 3000 as influences for parts of "Thank Me Later", stating "Nas was somebody that I used to listen to his raps and never understood how he did it. I always wanted to understand how he painted those pictures and his bar structure. I went back and really studied Nas and André 3000 and then came back with this album". In comparing the album to his previous work, he stated "It's gonna be bigger, it's gonna sound happier. More victorious, 'cause that's where I'm at in my life". He told "Entertainment Weekly" that, "I didn't make this album for commercial purposes. A lot of the verses are extremely long. I just made it to share with people. I hope they can enjoy".

Drake resumed work on the album in October 2009, following an onstage injury from a July 2009 concert. Recording sessions for the album took place at several recording studios, including Metalworks Studios, BLD&DSTY, and Cherry Beach Studios in Toronto, NightBird Recording Studios in West Hollywood, Gee Jam Studios in Portland, Jamaica, The Setai Hotel Recording Studio and The Hit Factory in Miami, Blast Off Studios and Rock the Mic in New York, Glenwood Studios in Los Angeles, Triangle Sounds Studios in Atlanta, Takeover Studios in Houston, and Avex Recording Studio in Honolulu. The track "Up All Night" was recorded on a bus "somewhere in Lexington", and "Unforgettable" was recorded on a bus "somewhere in New Orleans". The album was mixed at Tree Sound Studios, Blast Off Studios, Gee Jam Studios, Cherry Beach Studios, The Setai Hotel Recording Studio, Metalworks Studios, Stadium Red in New York, and Studio 306 in Toronto. Lil Wayne, Cortez Bryant, Gee Robinson, Ronald "Slim" Williams, and Bryan "Birdman" Williams served as executive producers for the album.

Producers 40 and Boi-1da handled most of the tracks' programming and instrumentation. Besides his Toronto-based producer team, Drake also collaborated with European producer Crada, who previously worked on Kid Cudi's 2009 debut album "". Drake told "Entertainment Weekly" that he collaborated with an Indie pop band named Francis and the Lights. Kevin Rudolf also participated in the album's recording, contributing with keyboards on "Show Me a Good Time" and "Find Your Love". R&B singer Mary J. Blige contributed additional vocals to the track "Fancy". In March 2010, Drake confirmed that he had recorded a track with Eminem and Dr. Dre. In early November 2009, Lil Wayne released an official statement explaining that "Thank Me Later" had been completed, though Drake later commented that he was still working on the album. On April 26, 2010, Drake announced to a crowd during a show that he had finished recording and had turned in a final copy of the album.

"Thank Me Later" has a languorous, ambient production and is characterized by subtle arrangements, obscured keyboards, skittering snare drums, reverbed percussion, sparse beats, moody synthesizers, and minor keys. Lyrically, "Thank Me Later" has moody, introspective subject matter, and mainly centers around Drake's introduction to fame and his romances. The "Toronto Star" describes the content as "about the sorts of doubts, excesses, betrayals and creeping paranoid suspicions that arrive hand-in-hand with celebrity." Music journalist Greg Kot describes the album as "personal and eccentric, the journal of a flawed, self-doubting regular guy rather than a strutting icon-in-waiting."

The album's first-half generally discusses fame directly with confessional songs about unrequited love, money, and women, followed by club-oriented and sexual songs. Drake's lyrics explore feelings of doubt, insecurity, and heartbreak, while exhibiting both emotional and grammatical malapropisms. Araba Appiagyei-Dankah of "The Harvard Crimson" characterizes Drake as "self-deprecating, privileged, [and] lovesick". He raps in a nasal voice and sings subtly, with a flow generally in A-B-AB form. Music journalist Jody Rosen observes "emotionally transparent" rapping that eschews the "thuggy" style previously popular in hip hop, finding Drake's style to be "subtle and rueful rather than loud and lively".

Music writers liken "Thank Me Later" to Kanye West's "808s & Heartbreak". Nathan Rabin writes that, "musically, Drake favors warm washes of synthesizers that create a melancholy, fragile mood redolent of "808s & Heartbreak"." Comparisons are also drawn to "Man on the Moon: The End of Day" by Kid Cudi, a protégé of West. By contrast, Joshua Ostroff of "The Globe and Mail" feels that "Thank Me Later"s "emotional navel-gazing lacks West's often-suffocating self-pity and offers a proper synthesis of rap and R&B." Jeff Weiss of the "Los Angeles Times" views that the album ignores West's celebratory side "in search of anthems for the easily alienated."
"Fireworks" references the divorce of Drake's parents and alludes to his brief fling with Rihanna. "Karaoke" features background keyboards that add to the song's 1980s musical influence, with lyrics about the difficulty of relationships. In "The Resistance", Drake worries about fame changing him, with lyrics veering from his ailing grandmother to a one-night stand that resulted in an abortion. "Over" incorporates an orchestral backdrop, and according to Michael Cragg of "musicOMH", contains three hooks. The artful song is about the elation and confusion that accompanies fame. "Show Me a Good Time" opens and closes with a squeaky yelling sound. On the song, Drake talks addresses hip hop listeners who find him inauthentic. "Up All Night" has menacing strings, and Drake boastfully rapping about his nightlife, while trading lines with Nicki Minaj. The club song "Fancy" has a predominant hook, looped samples, and backwards strings. It is an ode to women who spend hours primping in preparation for the nightlife. The song features vocals by producer Swizz Beatz and T.I., with additional harmonies by Mary J. Blige at the song's conclusion. "Shut It Down" is a piano ballad and slow jam.

"Light Up" features loud synth drums and plaintive piano strings. The Jay-Z-collaboration is a critique on the hip hop industry, its detrimental effects, and the trappings of being an artist: "While all my closest friends out partyin'/ I'm just here makin' the music that they party to," while Jay-Z gives advice: "Drake, here's how they gonna come at you / with silly rap feuds, trying to distract you." Jay-Z expands on the album's overarching theme of self-doubt: "And since no good deed go unpunished / I'm not as cool with niggaz as I once was / I once was cool as the Fonz was / But these bright lights turned me to a monster." "Miss Me" has Lil Wayne rapping jokes, including a crude punch line about sucking "the brown" off his penis and subsequently groaning, "Ewwww, that's nasty." "Cece's Interlude" has a Prince-like LinnDrum and transparent lyrics addressing a girl: "I wish I / Wasn't famous / I wish I / Was still in school / So that I could have you in my dorm room / I would put it on you crazy." The pop song "Find Your Love" was produced by Kanye West and bears similarity to his 2008 song "Heartless".

"Thank Me Later" was one of the most anticipated hip hop releases of 2010. Universal Motown Records announced its release date as June 15, 2010, before it leaked on June 1 in its entirety. Drake responded on Twitter: "I gave away free music for years so we're good over here... just allow it to be the soundtrack to your summer and Enjoy! June 15th!" The album was released June 15, 2010 by Aspire Music Group, with Young Money Entertainment under a joint venture with Cash Money Records and distribution by Universal Motown. When "Thank Me Later" was released, it debuted at number one on the "Billboard" 200 in the United States and sold 447,000 copies in its first week. It also debuted at number one in Canada with first-week sales of 31,000 copies. By August 2015, the album has sold 1,800,000 copies in the United States.

In promotion of "Thank Me Later", Drake performed at the in Washington, D.C. on June 13, 2010. On June 15, Drake made an in-store appearance at a Best Buy-outlet in New York City's Union Square in promotion of the album's release, interacting with fans and signing copies of the album. On the day of its release, Drake also made interviews for several radio stations through the phone. A planned free concert by Drake at South Street Seaport's Pier 17 that day was cancelled by concert organizers and authorities after unruly behavior within crowds and unsafe overcrowding. Following the cancellation, Drake appeared at Manhattan nightspot Amnesia for an album-release party sponsored by radio station Hot 97.

Four singles were released from the album—"Over" on March 8, 2010, "Find Your Love" on May 5, "Miss Me" on June 1, and "Fancy" on August 3. All four singles reached the top 40 of the "Billboard" Hot 100, including "Miss Me" at number 15 and "Over" at number 14. "Find Your Love" charted at number five on the Hot 100 and also reached number 10 in Canada. "Shut It Down" was originally planned for release as the first single in late 2009 and "Show Me a Good Time" was planned to be the fifth single, but both releases failed to materialize.

"Thank Me Later" received generally positive reviews from critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 75, based on 26 reviews. Tim Sendra of AllMusic complimented its "rich and nuanced production and Drake's thoughtful, playful, and intense lyrics", writing that his "willingness to be introspective and honest ... makes [him] unique and helps make "Thank Me Later" special." "Pitchfork" critic Ryan Dombal said "Drake vies for superstardom while embracing his non-drug-dealing, non-violent, non-dire history-- one that connects with most rap fans in a completely reasonable way." In "The A.V. Club", Rabin wrote that "on his cohesive, bittersweet, assured debut, he proves himself worthy of the sometimes-blinding spotlight." Rosen, writing for "Rolling Stone", found Drake to be "in total command of a style that would have been hard to imagine dominating hip-hop a few years ago". In the opinion of Ben Detrick from "Spin", "Thank Me Later" had "dynamics like few other hip-hop albums before it", and while "Drake's personal anecdotes lack the bravado of bullet-wound boasts", they were "intimate and lyrically detailed enough to draw blood." "Prefix" critic Wilson McBee deemed it one of the few pop-rap records "that comes close to being a classic".

In a less enthusiastic review, Daniel Roberts of "PopMatters" said none of the songs were better than "Best I Ever Had" and believed Drake was suffering from an "identity crisis", finding the record "good at parts, but never great". Josuha Errett of "Now" felt Drake "complains about fame way too much" while calling him "humorless". In "MSN Music", Robert Christgau deemed Drake "neither thug nor thug wannabe ... plenty talented, but pretty shallow and without much focus as a mack". He wrote of the record: "Pleasing and hookful though it be, [it] consistently bemoans the confusing emoluments and accoutrements of fame". Pete Cashmore from "NME" believed "it's those constant and predictable superstar interjections that prevent the album from standing out as much as it had potential to do." "Slant Magazine"s Jesse Cataldo viewed Drake's "insistent navel-gazing" as a flimsy "concept", but commended the album for "nail[ing] confused introspection in a genre famous for willful misrepresentation of self."

At the end of 2010, "Thank Me Later" appeared on several critics' top-ten lists of the year's best albums, including "Time", who ranked it fifth best, and "Rolling Stone", who named it the seventh best album of the year.

Notes

Sample credits

Credits are adapted from the album's liner notes.





</doc>
<doc id="23057508" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23057508" title="Backspacer">
Backspacer

Backspacer is the ninth studio album by the American rock band Pearl Jam, released on September 20, 2009. The band members started writing instrumental and demo tracks in 2007, and got together in 2008 to work on an album. It was recorded from February through April 2009 with producer Brendan O'Brien, who'd worked on every Pearl Jam album except their 1991 debut "Ten" and 2006's self-titled record—although this was his first production credit since 1998's "Yield". Material was recorded in Henson Recording Studios in Los Angeles, California and O'Brien's own Southern Tracks Recording in Atlanta, Georgia. The album—the shortest of the band's career—features lyrics with a more optimistic look than the politically infused predecessors "Riot Act" and "Pearl Jam", something frontman Eddie Vedder attributed to the election of Barack Obama.

The band released the album through its own label Monkeywrench Records with worldwide distribution by Universal Music Group via a licensing agreement with Island Records. Physical copies of the record were sold through Target in North America, and promotion included a deal with Verizon, a world tour, and moderately successful singles "The Fixer" and "Got Some"/"Just Breathe". Reviews for "Backspacer" were largely positive, praising the sound and composition, and the album became Pearl Jam's first chart topper in the U.S. "Billboard" 200 since 1996's "No Code", while also topping the charts in Canada, Australia and New Zealand.

In 2007, after Pearl Jam's 2006 tour had ended, the band members began recording demo material on their own while staying in occasional contact via e-mail. Guitarist Mike McCready revealed at the time that he'd tested out some ideas with guitarist Stone Gossard and drummer Matt Cameron in separate sessions as well. After the band was invited to record The Who's "Love, Reign o'er Me" for the "Reign Over Me" soundtrack, they opted to call long-time collaborator Brendan O'Brien to produce their cover. During the experience, O'Brien and Pearl Jam decided it was a good time for them to work again on a studio album. This ninth album would mark O'Brien's first production credit with Pearl Jam since 1998's "Yield". The band allowed O'Brien greater latitude in determining the sound of "Backspacer". "At this point, I think we're willing to let somebody cut the songs up a little bit," said lead vocalist Eddie Vedder. "In the past, Brendan would say, 'It's a great song, but I think you should do it in a different key,' and we'd say no. But now that we've heard Bruce <nowiki>[Springsteen]</nowiki> has listened to his suggestions, I think we will too." Bassist Jeff Ament said, "He brings a brutally honest approach to what he thinks is working and what isn't, and it really moves things along... We don't get weighted down with ideas that maybe aren't even that good. He's one of the few people outside of the band that we trust with our music, and we're really, really looking forward to making this record."

The band began working on the album in May 2008, making demos in Seattle, Washington before recording sessions at Henson Recording Studios in Los Angeles, California, where O'Brien usually works. Ament said it was "the first time since the first record that we've really rehearsed instead of just going to the studio with a handful of ideas." On May the band had "about five ideas that have been worked on," which were given some instrumental beds later in the summer. Additional demos were put to tape in December, following a trip by all bandmembers but Vedder to Ament's home in Montana. The singer later proceeded to put rough vocals on those tracks, and also brought in his own material for the band members to work on.

In February 2009, Pearl Jam went for a two-week session at Henson. It was the first time the band spent a considerable amount of time recording outside of Seattle since 1996's "No Code". McCready said, "[When] we got together with Ed and it really started getting more cohesive, we took that momentum down to Los Angeles with Brendan... It was a great idea to get us out of Seattle. You've got to get out [of] your comfort zone, and we've talked about doing that for the past 10 years and kind of haven't, so we trusted Brendan's judgment." In April 2009, the band went for a two-week session to finish the album with O'Brien at his mixing facility at Southern Tracks in Atlanta, Georgia. The album took a total of thirty days in the studio to get finished, and O'Brien stated "we had 90% of the record cut in the first nine days".

The album title was chosen in part because of nostalgia for the historical name of the backspace key on typewriters that went out of use in the 1950s and also as a reference to looking back on one's life. Vedder is known to use typewriters when writing lyrics and letters. Vedder said, ""Backspacer" [means] actually you kind of have to go back and look at your mistake." Gossard said, "There are some retrospective moods on this record, where Ed is looking at both his past and his future." The album title "Backspacer" was also used for the name of a leatherback turtle that was sponsored by Pearl Jam for Conservation International and National Geographic's Great Turtle Race.

McCready said, "I'd sum it up as kind of a tight, concise, rock 'n' roll record with kind of pop or maybe new wave elements to it... It's a really quick record, but I like that element to it. I like the sparseness of the songs and the way that Brendan pulled us together and made us play as good as we could." Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said that "prior to "Backspacer", Pearl Jam wouldn't or couldn't have made music this unfettered, unapologetically assured, casual, and, yes, fun." Vedder stated, "The new record feels good so far—really strong and uptempo, stuff we can sink our teeth into", and added that the band's live performances inspired the album's sound: "At one of our gigs, without flashpots and electricity, there's only so much room for those difficult listening songs. That's one reason we kept the arrangements lean." The singer cited Guided by Voices as a reference in creating the shorter and faster songs of "Backspacer". Gossard said that "Backspacer" is "what we could have done for the last five records, in terms of re-engaging with the roots of why this band works," and that "there are plenty of ballads, too... and there are some shifts in how Jeff and Matt and I are all relating—I think this record's got a chance to sound significantly different." Ament said, "There are a couple of great things that Ed brought in that could be real departures for us. Whatever wave Ed caught with [his soundtrack for] "Into the Wild" has taken him to different places."

Lyrically, "Backspacer" displays a more positive outlook than the band's last few albums. Vedder credited the election of President Barack Obama as inspiration for the optimistic lyrics. Regarding the lyrics, Vedder said, "I've tried, over the years, to be hopeful in the lyrics, and I think that's going to be easier now." Gossard stated, "We've made a couple of political and pointed records, the last two in particular, and just to move away from that is great, because it allows you to go back to that when you need to and it refreshes everybody, and it comes down to a beat and a melody and your friends and a lyric and a poem and something that's important to you." Vedder stated he did not spend "more than half hour" writing the lyrics to each song: "If it's not going to happen quick then I don't want to do it, because it means there's another one out there that is going to happen quick, and is going to hit you like a lightning bolt."

Vedder called "Gonna See My Friend" a "drug song," but elaborated that the song is about going to see a friend to stay off drugs, and he stated that "Got Some" is about a "drug dealer," but added what the drug the dealer is selling is actually a great rock song. The lyrics to "Johnny Guitar," described by Vedder as "almost an Elvis Costello homage," were inspired by a collage of album covers pasted on the bathroom wall of the band's rehearsal space. Vedder noticed the album cover for Johnny "Guitar" Watson's 1979 album, "What the Hell Is This?", and imagined a man who becomes attracted to one of the various women on the cover and then wonders why this woman would rather be one of Watson's many girlfriends instead of his only one. Vedder described "Just Breathe" as "as close to a love song as we've ever gotten," and said that the subject of the song is the happiest times of people's lives when they should just take in the moment and "breathe for a minute." He also said that "Unthought Known" concerns the human psyche, and "Supersonic" is about the love for music. According to Vedder, "Speed of Sound" is taken from the perspective of a man still sitting in a bar after everyone else has left, but he added that even though the song is sad it became more "confident" when played with the whole band. He said "Force of Nature" is "about the strength of one person in the relationship, when they can withstand some of the faults in another." "The End" has been described as an "aching love song."

The artwork for the album was handled by editorial cartoonist Dan Perkins, who goes by the pen name Tom Tomorrow. Perkins spent six months working on the artwork. In 2009, Village Voice Media, publishers of 16 alternative weeklies, suspended all syndicated cartoons across their entire chain, including Perkins' strip "This Modern World". Perkins lost twelve client papers in cities including Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York City and Seattle, prompting his friend Vedder to post an open letter on the Pearl Jam website in support of the cartoonist. Perkins referred to the artwork as "dreams and memories," while Gossard referred to the artwork as a "bizarro otherworldy dreamscape." The album's cover art features nine images created by Perkins, and was revealed through a contest on the band's official website. The nine images were hidden on various websites, and the contest asked Internet users to search for the websites containing the images, whereby the images would be placed on a grid on the Pearl Jam website after clicking on them. After finding all of the images, users were rewarded with a demo version of the song "Speed of Sound". On the cover and spine of the limited edition gatefold sleeve version, the "Backspacer" keys glow in the dark.

Pearl Jam did not re-sign its record deal with J Records, and the band released the album through its own label Monkeywrench Records in conjunction with Universal Music Group in the United States and through Universal's Island Records internationally. Pearl Jam reached a deal with Target to be the exclusive big-box store retailer for the album in the United States. The album also saw release through the band's official website, independent record stores, online retailers, and iTunes. Those who purchase the compact disc or iTunes version of the album can access a "virtual 'vault'" which features eleven concerts that span from 2005–2008, of which up to two can be chosen to download for free; the iTunes edition was also released as an iTunes LP. Tying in with the release of the album, the entire album has been made available as downloadable content for the "Rock Band" series of video games. A deal with Verizon made the songs from the album available as both ringtone and ringback.

Pearl Jam promoted the album with tours in North America and Oceania in 2009. On October 4, 2009, the band headlined the Austin City Limits Music Festival. The appearance took place amidst a fourteen-date North American leg of the tour. Afterward, the band continued to tour in Oceania. In November 2009, they appeared in Australia, with their first performance in Perth, and after, gigs in Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane. Their next concert performances followed in New Zealand. After their last date there, Pearl Jam returned to the United States for a final American leg in May 2010, and a European leg in June 2010.

The lead single "The Fixer" (backed with B-side "Supersonic," also from the album), was made available through the band's official website. "The Fixer" entered the "Billboard" Hot 100 at number 56 and reached number three on the Alternative Rock Tracks charts. A music video was made for "The Fixer." Footage from the video, directed by Cameron Crowe, was used for a commercial for Target advertising "Backspacer" which features "The Fixer." The song was also nominated for Best Rock Song at the 52nd Grammy Awards. The band also released the double a-side single "Got Some"/"Just Breathe" a month after "Backspacer" and "Amongst the Waves" the following summer.

"Backspacer" received mainly positive reviews from music critics, and is the band's best reviewed studio album of the 2000s according to Metacritic, where it received a score of 79 out of 100 based on reviews from 24 professional critics. AllMusic staff writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album four and a half out of five stars, saying that "it sounds as if they enjoy being in a band, intoxicated by the noise they make." Ann Powers of "The Los Angeles Times" gave the album four out of four stars, describing it as "11 breakneck rockers and candidly emotional ballads, adding up to barely more than a half hour of optimally toned catharsis" and praising the "lightness and dexterity of the playing" and "Vedder's hard-driving, often playful vocals", and called its music "Accessible without sacrificing sophistication, aggressive without flailing". "Rolling Stone" staff writer Rob Sheffield gave "Backspacer" four out of five stars, saying that it contains "the shortest, tightest, punkiest tunes they've ever banged out," and that "Eddie Vedder's heart-on-fire vocals are the main attraction, as always." He added, "After toughing out the Bush years, Pearl Jam aren't in the mood for brooding; at long last, surf's up." Dave Simpson of "The Guardian" also gave the album four out of five stars. In the review he stated that "the Seattle quartet have rarely sounded this energised." Simpson observed that "this is a record made by mature men with perspective: full of reflection and eclecticism, finding space for both U2 guitar motifs and Buzzcocks solos." He added that "the ninth Pearl Jam album may even be the best of the lot." Evan Sawdey of PopMatters gave the album a rating of 7/10 and wrote that Pearl Jam "have finally re-discovered who they are, and sound stronger than ever because of it".

Paul Brannigan of "Q" gave the album four out of five stars. He said the album is "largely characterised by joyous new wave-influenced rock'n'roll, and for the first time in their 19-year career, Pearl Jam actually sound—whisper it—fun. No, honestly." Josh Modell of "Spin" gave the album four out of five stars. He said, "For the first time in years, Pearl Jam are seizing the moment rather than wallowing in it." "Time" reviewer Josh Tyrangiel said, "The songs here are built on hooks, covered with guitar fuzz, and then trimmed back a bit so the melody abides." Tyrangiel added, "Nothing revolutionary, but "Backspacer" provides an adrenaline jolt that shouldn't be underestimated either." Leah Greenblatt of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the album a B, saying that "Backspacer" is "the sort of sweaty rock & roll that belongs in a bar with cracked-leather booths and $2 beers," and that it "grows same-y, but tracks like the surfing-as-life-metaphor anthem 'Amongst the Waves' do indeed make something old feel, if not new, good again." "The New York Times" said that "Pearl Jam... [refuses]—mostly—to equate maturity with slowing down," but added, "Pearl Jam's quandary is that with fewer outside targets or frustrations to rail against, it risks turning sanctimonious... Pearl Jam's music doesn't align well with satisfaction." Joshua Love of Pitchfork said that the album "seems to suggest in its tossed-off 37 minutes that Pearl Jam have no greater concern and regard for what they do than the rest of the world can muster," and he added that "with the spotlights long since extinguished, Pearl Jam seem content to do things by the book."

At the 53rd Grammy Awards, "Backspacer" was nominated for Grammy Award for Best Rock Album, losing to Muse's "The Resistance". Several year-end lists included the album amongst the best releases of 2009. AllMusic listed it on their Favorite Rock Albums of 2009, "Billboard" ranked it eighth on their Top 10 Albums of 2009, while "Rolling Stone" put "Backspacer" at 11th on their list, Popmatters had it as 31st, and "Q" on the 35th spot.

The album debuted at number one on the "Billboard" 200 with 189,000 copies sold in its first week of release, the only independent release to top the "Billboard" 200 that year. It is the first Pearl Jam album to reach number one in the United States since "No Code" debuted at number one in 1996. 7,000 of those copies were on vinyl, the highest first week total for LPs in 2009. On the "Billboard" 200 dated May 22, 2010, "Backspacer" logged its 32nd week on the chart, making the album Pearl Jam's longest-charting album since 1998's "Yield". "Backspacer" was certified Gold by the RIAA on January 28, 2010 and has sold 635,000 copies , according to Soundscan. It also topped the charts in Canada, where it was certified Platinum; Australia, also going Platinum; and New Zealand, being certified Gold.

The iTunes LP edition also features a video of a live performance of "The Fixer" as well as a short documentary on the making of the album.

Pearl Jam

Additional musicians

Production



</doc>
<doc id="23069002" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23069002" title="Abantiades latipennis">
Abantiades latipennis

Abantiades latipennis, known as the Pindi moth, is a species of moth in the family Hepialidae. It may also be referred to as a swift moth or a ghost moth, as this is a common name associated with Hepialidae. Endemic to Australia and identified in 1932, it is most populous in temperate rainforest where eucalypti are prevalent, as the larvae feed primarily on the roots of these trees. Females lay eggs during flight in a scattering fashion. The larvae live for over eighteen months underground, while adult moths survive for approximately one week, as they have no mouthparts with which to feed. The moths are preyed upon by a number of predators, including bats and owls. Brown in colour overall, males are paler and the identifying silver bars of the male's wings are more prominent than those of the female's, with dark margins. Male adults are generally smaller.

Established clearfelling practices have been shown to favour the Pindi moth, and could lead to it being considered a pest due to opportunistic proliferation of the species. The resulting damage caused to the trees on which it feeds may be considered significant.

"Abantiades latipennis" is one of fourteen species currently identified within the genus "Abantiades", all of which are found exclusively in Australia. The species was first described in 1932 by Norman Tindale, an Australian entomologist and anthropologist. Tindale described the species, under its current name, but provided no etymology for the specific epithet "latipennis". He based the species description on specimens from Lorne (including the holotype male and allotype female), Pomonal and Mount Mistake (in the Langi Ghiran State Park), Victoria, and from Zeehan, Eaglehawk Neck and Launceston, Tasmania.

Being a member of the Hepialiade family, "A. latipennis" is considered phylogenetically primitive, possessing several features that are indicative of earlier evolutionary development. The jugum on the forewings of the adult is an archaic wing coupling mechanism; further primitive characteristics include, as adults, the lack of mouthparts, large spacing between the fore- and hindwings, and the arrangement of the female genitalia.

"A. latipennis" is endemic to the Australasian region. More specifically, the moths inhabit New South Wales, Tasmania, Victoria, and Australian Capital Territory. As with other "Abantiades" species, the moth's habitat is temperate rainforest, both primary and secondary. During its larval stage, the moth feeds on the roots of trees, and its prospering is thought to have an economic impact on the timber industry.

Female moths "lay" their eggs by scattering them during flight; up to 10,000 eggs are released at once. Larvae then hatch from the eggs in the leaf litter on the forest floor and begin tunnelling, in search of suitable host roots. The number of instars and the period of the larval stage is yet unknown, with field observations suggesting a larval stage of more than eighteen months.

The phytophagous larvae of "A. latipennis" feed primarily on the root systems of two species of tree, "Eucalyptus obliqua" (messmate stringybark) and "Eucalyptus regnans" (mountain ash). Both of these species are present in old growth forests and dominant in regrowth forests, contributing to the moth's success in its own habitat. Forming simple and vertical tunnels, lined with silk, the caterpillars are subterranean before and during pupation, emerging for their metamorphosis. The tunnel entrances, 6 to 10 millimetres in diameter, are covered with silk webbing and leaf litter, and can be up to deep, although depth is more usually 12 to 35 cm.

By chewing the tap and lateral roots of trees, caterpillars feed on the cambium growth, produced by the tree at the site of the injury. The larvae may girdle a root, thereby causing its death, or the lesions may be only partial, allowing the root to continue functioning, albeit with some deformity.

The subterranean habitat of the larvae generally provides protection from predation, but the larvae are sometimes parasitised by tachina flies. The parasitoid larvae of the tachinid "Rutilotrixa diversa", usually hosted by scarab beetles, have been discovered infecting "A. latipennis".

Adult "A. latipennis" are crepuscular and males are strongly attracted to lights, forming leks at dusk, most notably after rains in autumn and late summer. Females use pheromones to attract males for mating. As a primitive species, they lack mouthparts as adults and are therefore unable to feed. Their lifespan as winged creatures is understandably short, lasting approximately a week, barring predation. Predation is commonly by bats, owls, and possums, though several other animals, from spiders to cats, occasionally consume them and contribute to the brief lifespan of the metamorphosed moths.

As part of a study measuring the impact that the practice of clearfelling has on biodiversity in the Weld Valley of Tasmania, it was found that "A. latipennis" was one of the few species that thrived in regrowth forests that were previously clearfelled. An earlier study, conducted in other regions of southern Tasmania, examined the relationship between the moth and "Eucalyptus regnans" and "E. obliqua" and reached the same conclusion. The tunnelling and feeding habit of "A. latipennis" larvae on the roots of these two eucalypt species is mostly responsible for its abundance in clearfelled forests, as the trees are the typical regrowth of logged areas. This success may also be due in part to the caterpillar's lack of dependence on decaying vegetation, a characteristic of the genus "Abantiades" and dissimilar to other Tasmanian genera—such as "Eudonia" and "Barea"—that have not fared as well in clearfelled forest.

The crowns of the eucalypts infected by "A. latipennis" have exhibited no consistent indication of root disturbance, with most trees studied appearing healthy and of average size for secondary forest. "E. regnans" and "E. obliqua" have demonstrated slow growth in regrowth stands, but this tendency has been attributed to significant root and crown competition. Some trees appeared chlorotic (a yellowing effect in plants, caused by a reduction in chlorophyll), but this was not a reliable indicator of root infestation, and may be the result of other influences. Well-established clearfelling practices in Tasmania could exacerbate the favouring of this species, and its proliferation could lead to extensive eucalypt damage and pest concerns, though the potential effect of this threat is as yet undetermined.

Lesions on the roots caused by the larval feeding provide ideal sites for the establishment of root rot-causing fungi, once the larvae depart the root system for pupation. Areas on the roots with past feeding damage were found to have "Armillaria" sp. flourishing in the lesions. In rarer cases, the pathogen "Perenniporia medulla-panis" was also found attacking the roots at the damaged locations. Other cases of decay and discolouration were noted, but attributed to unidentified microorganisms.

"A. latipennis" larvae vary in size and colour during growth, but can be grouped small and large. The small caterpillars are generally long and an overall milky grey, with a light brown head capsule that is about wide. Large caterpillars may be milky grey or a dark green-brown, long, with a wide brown head capsule.

Females are larger than males, with the wingspan of the male adult approximately . A female specimen collected in 1979 had a wingspan of , but Tindale recorded female wingspans at in 1932. The forewings of both males and females feature silvery-white bars, although the bars of the male moth's wings are more prominent and with dark margins. The female's body colour is usually a darker brown than the male's pale brown, as noted by Tindale, although a grey-brown female was collected in 1979.

Hepialidae have short, pectinate antennae and, unusually primitive for Lepidoptera, lack a functional proboscis or retinaculum and are therefore non-feeding. The moths possess several other morphological features that are considered phylogenetically primitive. The gap between the fore- and hindwing is distinct and the wings are covered in scale-like hairs. At the base of the forewing is a jugum, a small lobe that joins the fore- and hindwings during flight. In females, the configuration of the genitalia is exoporian, typified by an external groove along which spermatophores are transferred after mating, from the copulatory opening (the ostium bursae), to the ovipore for fertilisation.


</doc>
<doc id="23087373" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23087373" title="Jordan Schroeder">
Jordan Schroeder

Jordan John Schroeder (born September 29, 1990) is an American professional ice hockey center who currently plays for the Rockford IceHogs in the American Hockey League (AHL) while under contract to the Chicago Blackhawks of the National Hockey League (NHL).

Born and raised in Minnesota, Schroeder spent two seasons with the U.S. National Team Development Program before he joined the Minnesota Golden Gophers of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association (WCHA) for two seasons, being named WCHA Rookie of the Year in 2009. He has also played for the American national junior ice hockey team and appeared in three World Junior Championships, where he set records for most career assists and points by an American. Schroeder was ranked as the fifth best North American skater heading into the 2009 NHL Entry Draft, and was drafted 22nd overall by the Vancouver Canucks after concerns about his size led to several teams to pass on him. Schroeder then spent several years playing with the Canucks minor league affiliates in the American Hockey League (AHL) before joining the Canucks in 2013. He played parts of two seasons with the Canucks, who decided not to re-sign Schroeder in 2014; he then joined the Minnesota Wild.

Jordan grew up in Prior Lake, Minnesota, to John and Deb Schroeder, and moved to nearby Lakeville, a suburb of Minneapolis-Saint Paul, when he was thirteen. John played several sports, including basketball, football and baseball while Deb was a gymnast and a cross-country runner. Schroeder is the oldest of three siblings; brother Zach is two years younger and sister Elly is six years younger; both of them also play hockey. He first played hockey at the age of four; his first organized team was called the Lakeville Ponys which was intended as a learn to skate program but at the recommendation of his coach Scott Cummings, he was moved up to the Mite program because his skill level was far ahead of the other kids his age. Schroeder spent two years at St. Thomas Academy in suburban Mendota Heights, Minnesota, before graduating with high honors from Ann Arbor Pioneer High School in Ann Arbor, Michigan. He accelerated his high school education in order to play NCAA hockey a year early and took courses online from Brigham Young University to do so. Schroeder signed a letter of intent to join the University of Minnesota in November 2007. He enrolled at the school in the fall of 2008, majoring in business and marketing education. In 2010, his final year at the school, Schroeder was named to the WCHA All-Academic team, the result of a 3.0 grade average over the previous two semesters.

Schroeder played high school hockey for St. Thomas Academy, an all boys, Catholic, College Prep, Military / Leadership school in Mendota Heights, Minnesota, a Saint Paul suburb. He helped the St. Thomas Cadets reach the Minnesota Class 1A hockey tournament in both 2005 and 2006, winning the high school championship in 2006. In 2006, he joined the U.S. National Team Development Program (USNTDP), located in Ann Arbor, where he spent two seasons. In his final season with the USNTDP, Schroeder led the team in scoring with 21 goals and 53 points in 55 games. Schroeder joined the University of Minnesota Golden Gophers of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association (WCHA), a team he grew up wanting to play for, in 2008–09. Upon joining the Golden Gophers, Schroeder was the youngest player on the team. He scored 13 goals and 32 assists in 32 games in his freshman year, the second highest total on the team, and was named WCHA Rookie of the Year. Schroeder was one of the top-ranked prospects for the 2009 NHL Entry Draft, ranked fifth overall among North American skaters by NHL Central Scouting and was selected twenty-second overall by the Vancouver Canucks. His drop in the draft has been attributed to his small stature and his play at the end of the 2009 World Junior Championships.
Prior to the start of the 2009–10 season, it was reported that Schroeder intended to leave the University of Minnesota and join the Everett Silvertips, a team in the major junior Western Hockey League. This was denied by Schroeder, who wanted to spend at least another year with the Golden Gophers. The Golden Gophers finished the season with a losing record, the first time they had done so in more than 10 years, and lost in the first round of the playoffs, the second time in the past 33 years that had happened. Schroeder finished with 9 goals and 28 points in 37 games, tied for the team lead in points, the lowest for the team's leading scorer since 1962.

On March 17, 2010, Schroeder signed a contract with the Canucks and was assigned to their American Hockey League affiliate, the Manitoba Moose. Similar to other National Hockey League entry-level contracts, Schroeder's contract was for three years; he would make US$900,000 per year while in the NHL, or $65,000 to $70,000 per year to play in the minor leagues, with a signing bonus of $270,000. In his first professional game on March 21, 2010, against the Grand Rapids Griffins, Schroeder scored two goals, including the game-winning goal, as the Moose defeated the Griffins, 4–0. He played eleven games in the regular season for the Moose and scored four goals and five assists as the team advanced to the playoffs. In the third game of the opening-round playoff series against the Hamilton Bulldogs on April 19, 2010, Schroeder scored his first professional hat trick (three goals in a game), and the first hat trick by a Moose player during the season, as the Moose won their first game of the playoffs, 7–2. Schroeder played in all six of the Moose's playoff games and registered three goals and three assists. As he was signed after the NHL trade deadline, Schroeder was not eligible to join the Canucks for the NHL playoffs.

After attending his first professional training camp with the Canucks, he was reassigned to the Moose on September 27, 2011. Playing the first game of the season on October 8 against the Peoria Rivermen, Schroeder recorded three assists in a 4–3 win. Two months later, during a game against the Oklahoma City Barons on December 10, Schroeder was involved in a collision of several players and left the game with a high ankle sprain. Fourth on the team in scoring at the time of the injury, with five goals and eight assists, Schroeder missed 16 games and returned to the Moose on January 20, 2011 against the Abbotsford Heat. He finished his professional rookie season with 28 points (10 goals and 18 assists) over 61 games, while adding 6 points (1 goal and 5 assists) in 11 post-season games.

During the off-season, the Moose franchise was relocated to St. John's, Newfoundland due to the Winnipeg Jets' return to the NHL, forcing the team out of the Winnipeg market. As a result, the Canucks began a new AHL affiliation, moving Schroeder to the Chicago Wolves for the 2011–12 season. He scored his first goal with the Wolves on October 14, 2011, in a 4–2 loss to the Milwaukee Admirals. He finished the 2011-12 season third on the Wolves with 21 goals and 44 points.

The 2012–13 NHL lockout ensured that Schroeder started the 2012-13 season with the Wolves. Schroeder played in 30 games with the Wolves, scoring nine goals and ten assists. When the lockout ended in January 2013 he was initially sent back to Chicago, but after the Canucks played two games he was recalled to join the team. He made his NHL debut January 23, 2013 against the Calgary Flames. Schroeder recorded his first point, an assist, on January 25 against the Anaheim Ducks, his second NHL game. He then scored the winning shootout goal in his sixth game, the Canucks 2-1 victory over the Chicago Blackhawks on February 1. In his ninth game, February 9 against Calgary, Schroeder scored his first two goals in the NHL; both came against Leland Irving, with the first one being the game winning goal.

Schroeder spent the summer prior to the 2013–14 season recovering from shoulder surgery. He then fractured his left ankle in the Canucks first preseason game of the year. By mid-October Schroeder returned to the Canucks; however he only played three games before once again fracturing his left ankle; surgery was required after this injury, keeping him out until January 2014. Prior to rejoining the Canucks, Schroeder played two games with their AHL affiliate, the Utica Comets, recording one assist. He would ultimately play 25 games with Vancouver during the season, recording six points. As a result, the Canucks did not tender Schroeder a qualifying offer when the season ended, making him an unrestricted free agent. He was then signed to a two-year, two-way contract by the Minnesota Wild on July 11.

At the completion of his contract following the 2016–17 season, Schroeder as a restricted free agent was not to be tendered a new contract with the Wild. Approaching his free agent status, Schroeder was traded by the Wild to the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for Dante Salituro on June 23, 2017. He was later signed by the Blue Jackets to avoid free agency with a two-year contract on June 27, 2017. In the 2017–18 season, Schroeder appeared in 21 games with the Blue Jackets for 1 goal and 1 assist. In clearing waivers throughout the season, he was also assigned to add a veteran presence with AHL affiliate, the Cleveland Monsters, posting 36 points in 48 games.

On June 27, 2018, Schroeder was traded by the Blue Jackets to the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for goaltender Jean-Francois Berube.

Schroeder debuted with the American junior national team internationally at the 2007 IIHF World U18 Championships in Finland. He helped the United States to a silver medal as he finished third in tournament scoring with 11 points, behind American teammates Colin Wilson and James van Riemsdyk.

The following year, Schroeder was named to the under-20 team, the youngest on the team at 17, for the 2008 World Junior Championships in the Czech Republic. He finished second in team scoring and tied for fourth in the tournament behind van Riemsdyk with one goal and seven assists for eight points in seven games. Three months later, Schroeder made his second U18 tournament appearance. Named the player of the game in the American's match against Sweden, he recorded five points in seven games as the Americans earned a bronze medal.

At the 2009 World Junior Championships in Canada, Schroeder established the American record for most career assists at the tournament with 15. The youngest player on the team, Schroeder was named the player of the game in a match against the Czech Republic, and led the Americans in scoring with 11 points.

On December 23, 2009, Schroeder was named to the American team for the 2010 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships, his third straight appearance at the World Junior Championships. The only player on the American team to play in two previous World Junior tournaments, Schroeder was also the first player from the University of Minnesota to participate in three tournaments. In a quarter-final match against Finland Schroeder notched three assists, including his 26th career point in the tournament, which surpassed Jeremy Roenick for the highest career total for an American. His 20 career assists was the third highest total in the history of the tournament. In the gold-medal game against Canada, Schroeder led the American team in shots on goal with six, scoring a goal on one of them. He finished with three goals and five assists in seven games as the Americans won the gold medal.



</doc>
<doc id="23112340" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23112340" title="Typhoon Meranti (2004)">
Typhoon Meranti (2004)

Typhoon Meranti was the first of the record nine named storms to develop during August within the 2004 Pacific typhoon season. Forming from an area of low pressure on August 3, Meranti gradually strengthened. On August 5, the storm underwent a brief period of rapid intensification, attaining its peak intensity later that day. According to the Japan Meteorological Agency, the storm attained winds of 140 km/h (85 mph ) while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center reported that the storm attained winds of 165 km/h (105 mph ). The following day, the typhoon quickly weakened to a tropical storm due to unfavorable conditions. By August 9, the system completed an extratropical transition; the remnants of the storm persisted until August 13, at which time it was absorbed by a large, non-tropical low.

Typhoon Meranti originated out of an area of low pressure about 475 km (295 mi) south of Wake Island on August 2. Little deep convection accompanied the weak system despite being situated within an area of moderate diffluence and weak to moderate wind shear. Initially, the system was thought to have been much closer to Wake Island; however, following the development of deep convection, the location of the center of circulation was corrected. Around 0000 UTC on August 3, the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA), the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the western Pacific basin, designated the system as a tropical depression. Development continued as the depression moved into an area of divergence near a tropical upper-tropospheric trough cell. Several hours after the JMA issued their advisory on the depression, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert, stating that the system was likely to develop into a tropical storm within 24 hours.

Later on August 3, the JTWC issued their first advisory on the storm, classifying it as Tropical Depression 14W. Located to the west of a mid-level ridge, the depression was steered towards the north. Early the next day, the JTWC upgraded 14W to a tropical storm; the JMA later upgraded it to a tropical storm around 1200 UTC. At that time, the storm received the name "Meranti", a name that was contributed by Cambodia. Little intensification took place until August 5, at which time convection became increasingly organized and underwent a brief period of rapid intensification. By 1200 UTC, both the JMA and JTWC upgraded Meranti to a typhoon. Several hours later, the storm reached its peak intensity; the JMA assessed it to have had winds of 140 km/h (85 mph ) while the JTWC assessed it to have attained Category 2 status on the Saffir–Simpson Hurricane Scale with winds of 165 km/h (105 mph).

Upon attaining typhoon status, Meranti turned towards the northeast in response to a strengthening near-equatorial ridge south of the typhoon. Visible satellite images of the typhoon depicted a small, ragged eye within a well-developed cyclone. Gale-force winds extended 155 km (100 mi) at this time. Well-developed outflow allowed the storm to maintain its peak intensity for roughly 18 hours before dry air became entrained in the circulation. The combined effects of decreasing sea surface temperatures and increasing wind shear caused Meranti to quickly weaken. By 0600 UTC on August 6, the eye was no longer visible on satellite imagery and several hours later deep convection rapidly diminished, leading to both agencies downgrading the typhoon to a tropical storm.

Later on August 6, the weakening trend briefly halted as outflow significantly improved due to an area of low pressure north of Meranti. However, wind shear drastically increased, displacing convection to the northwest of the circulation center. By this time, the storm began to undergo an extratropical transition. Due to the influence of a major shortwave trough approaching from the west, Meranti took a sharp northward turn. The JTWC issued their final advisory on the weakening cyclone around 0600 UTC on August 8. The JMA continued to monitor Meranti as a tropical cyclone until August 9. Shortly after becoming extratropical, the remnants of the storm executed a slow, counter-clockwise loop until August 12. Shortly after crossing the International Date Line on August 13, the storm was absorbed by a large non-tropical low over the Bering Sea.

As Typhoon Meranti never threatened any land masses, no watches or warnings were issued in response to the storm. Although Meranti passed near Wake Island as a tropical depression, no effects were recorded.




</doc>
<doc id="23114076" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23114076" title="Imperial Airlines Flight 201/8">
Imperial Airlines Flight 201/8

Imperial Airlines Flight 201/8 was a Lockheed Constellation L-049 four-engine propliner, registration N2737A (c/n 1976), chartered by the United States Army to transport new recruits to Columbia, South Carolina, for training. On November 8, 1961, at 21:24 Eastern Time Zone (EST), the aircraft crashed as it attempted to land at Byrd Field, near Richmond, Virginia. While there were no apparent impact-related injuries, all seventy-four passengers and three crew members died as a result of carbon monoxide asphyxiation in the ensuing fire and smoke. Two crew members—the captain and flight engineer—survived after escaping the burning wreckage. This was the second deadliest accident in American history for a single civilian aircraft.

The accident was investigated by the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB), which attributed the cause to numerous errors committed by the flight crew, as well as poor management and improper maintenance by the airline. The CAB concluded that the "flight crew was not capable of performing the function or assuming the responsibility for the job they presumed to do."

The Lockheed Constellation L-049, like many airliners of its era, was normally crewed by three individuals: a captain (or pilot in command) in the left seat, a first officer (also known as copilot) in the right seat, and a flight engineer in the rear seat. The accident flight crewing was unusual in several respects.

First, its first officer was also a captain, who was more senior and had more total flying time and L-049 experience than the designated captain. According to later testimony, the two captains agreed between them prior to the flight that the more senior one would serve as copilot, sitting in the right seat, while the more junior one would serve as pilot in command, sitting in the left seat.

Second, the person who was actually sitting in the flight engineer's position was a trainee, a "student flight engineer", under supervision of the official flight engineer assigned to the flight, who was sitting next to him.

As would emerge in later testimony at the post-crash hearing, this crewing combination led to confusion in the cockpit during the final flight segment, as to who was making the decisions and giving the orders as pilot in command, and who was operating the engine and fuel controls as flight engineer.

The four-engined chartered propliner departed Columbia, South Carolina, at 15:24 EST, and landed in Newark, New Jersey, at 17:37, where it picked up its first group of 26 passengers. It departed at 18:22 for Wilkes Barre, Pennsylvania, where it picked up 31 additional passengers. At 19:12 it departed for Baltimore, Maryland, where it picked up a final group of 17 passengers and departed for South Carolina at 20:30. During these flight segments, as he would later testify at the CAB hearing, the flight engineer opened the cross feed valves between the number three and four engines, since he had seen a drop in fuel pressure on the number 3 fuel pressure gauge after the initial takeoff from Columbia.

During the final flight segment from Baltimore to Columbia, the crew experienced fuel flow disruptions to both right side engines, eventually leading both of them to shut down, after multiple unsuccessful attempts by the crew to restore proper fuel flow and engine operation. Flying with asymmetric thrust from the two left side engines (which were operating normally at that point), the captain decided to land at Byrd Field (now called Richmond International Airport), near Richmond, Virginia, as a precaution.

As the crew attempted to extend the gear for landing, they encountered difficulties, since hydraulic power to the landing gear in that aircraft was normally supplied by the two right side engines, now shut down. The crew initially selected runway 33 for landing, then decided on runway 02, and when they realized they were too high for landing on runway 02, they decided to climb and go around for runway 33 again. While climbing on the two operating engines, with asymmetric thrust, the number one engine (outboard on left side) failed due to over-boosting, leading to a rapid loss of airspeed and eventual stall. The aircraft crashed into trees, and a fire broke out which engulfed the entire aircraft in flames and smoke. The captain and flight engineer were able to escape, but all others were trapped inside the wreckage and were overcome by carbon monoxide poisoning before they could exit, as later autopsies would reveal.

The accident was investigated by the CAB and included two hearings where, among others, the surviving captain and flight engineer testified. Based on their investigation, the CAB concluded that the momentary fuel pressure fluctuations in the number 3 and 4 (right side) engines noticed by the flight engineer during takeoff, were most likely caused by a boost pump failure, and did not necessitate any action as long as the engines kept running normally. According to the CAB, by opening the cross-feed valves between the number 3 and 4 fuel tanks, and leaving them open with the boost pump on for much of the flight, the flight engineer most likely caused the number 4 tank to run dry, resulting in the failure of both right side engines due to fuel exhaustion or starvation during the final flight segment.
The CAB concluded that, had proper fuel management procedures been followed, all engines would have kept running normally, or even restarted once they shut down. The Constellation crew, however, mismanaged the fuel flow to the right side engines, causing them to shut down, and were unable to restart them. During the ensuing precautionary landing which resulted in the crash, additional flight crew mistakes were highlighted by the CAB investigators, who were highly critical of Imperial Airlines management, maintenance and flying procedures. The CAB's final report stated:

From a study of all the information available to the Board it is concluded that this flight crew was not capable of performing the function or assuming the responsibility for the job they presumed to do. The Board further concludes that the management personnel of Imperial Airlines should have been aware of the manner in which company operations were being accomplished. It is believed that the substandard maintenance practices of Imperial's employees were condoned by management. The manner in which maintenance and personnel records were kept by the company confirms this conclusion.

The CAB issued the following Probable Cause statement:The Board determines the probable cause of this accident was the lack of command coordination and decision, lack of judgment, and lack of knowledge of the equipment resulting in loss of power in three engines creating an emergency situation which the crew could not handle.

After the accident, it was revealed that Imperial Airlines had been fined in 1959 for "flying 30 marines in an 'unairworthy' C-46," and in 1953, under its previous name of "Regina Cargo Airlines", 19 soldiers had been killed in a crash near Centralia, Washington, while being transported in a Douglas DC-3 owned by the company.

"Time" news magazine reported that statistically the "nonskeds" in general were "more than 30 times as dangerous" in the number of fatalities per passenger mile as the scheduled airlines in 1961. According to "Time", the U.S. military had been effectively forced to rely on nonskeds such as Imperial Airlines to carry troops within the U.S. because of the combination of two laws. First, the Congress had mandated the use of civilian air carriers (for economic reasons); and second, the Pentagon was obligated to bid for such services and select the lowest bidder, which often turned out to be financially unsound companies with a poor safety record.

As a result of the accident, the Congress became concerned about the safety practices of the nonskeds, or "supplemental carriers." The chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee, A. S. Mike Monroney immediately sent a telegram to the CAB, urging a sweeping probe of the supplemental carrier industry. By 1962, Congress passed a law requiring all supplemental carriers to re-apply for certification by the CAB, to carry liability insurance and to maintain "a healthier financial status." The new rules caused some 20 nonskeds to go out of business, but within five years the industry was booming again, partly due to the troop and equipment carrying needs of the Vietnam War.




</doc>
<doc id="23132483" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23132483" title="Osvetnik-class submarine">
Osvetnik-class submarine

The "Osvetnik"-class consisted of two submarines built by Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire, Nantes, France, for the navy of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia). Launched in 1928–29, the vessels were named "Osvetnik" (Avenger) and "Smeli" (Daring) in Serbo-Croatian. They were built to a partial double hull Simonot design similar to the French . The "Osvetnik"-class was the second class of submarines to serve in the Royal Yugoslav Navy, and joined the two larger British-made "Hrabri"-class submarines to make up the pre-war Yugoslav submarine force. They were armed with six torpedo tubes, one gun, and one anti-aircraft gun, and could dive to .

Prior to World War II both submarines participated in cruises to Mediterranean ports. Both submarines were captured by Italian forces at the Bay of Kotor during the German-led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941. After refit, they saw service as experimental and training vessels with the Regia Marina as "Francesco Rismondo" and "Antonio Bajamonti" respectively. They were both scuttled in September 1943 following the Italian surrender, "Francesco Rismondo" by the Germans following her capture, and "Antonio Bajamonti" by the Italians themselves.

Yugoslav naval policy in the interwar period lacked direction until the mid-1920s, although it was generally accepted that the Adriatic coastline was effectively a sea frontier that the naval arm was responsible for securing with the limited resources made available to it. In 1926, a modest ten-year construction program was initiated to build up a force of submarines, coastal torpedo boats, torpedo bombers and conventional bomber aircraft to perform this role. The "Osvetnik"-class submarines were one of the acquisitions aimed at developing a naval force capable of meeting this challenge.

The "Osvetnik"-class was built for the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia) by the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire company (ACL) at Nantes, France. Their design was based on a partial double hull design developed by ACL's chief engineer, G. Simonot, which was similar to the French . Their Serbo-Croatian names of and translate as "Avenger" and "Daring" respectively. They had an overall length of , a beam of , and a surfaced draught of . Their surfaced displacement was , or submerged, and their crews consisted of 43 officers and enlisted men. They had an operational depth of .

They had two shafts driven by two MAN (Maschinenfabrik) diesel engines (when surfaced) or two Nancy electric motors (when submerged). The diesel engines were rated at and the electric motors at , and they were designed to reach a top speed of under diesel power while surfaced, and on their electric motors when submerged. They were armed with six torpedo tubes (four bow-mounted, two stern-mounted), one gun, and one anti-aircraft gun. They had a surfaced radius action of at , and at submerged.

"Smeli" was launched on 1 December 1928, and "Osvetnik" on 14 January 1929. They arrived in the Bay of Kotor on the southern Adriatic coast on 9 December 1929. In 1932, the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships engaged in few exercises, manoeuvres or gunnery training due to reduced budgets.

First of the class, "Osvetnik" was involved in a series of visits to Mediterranean ports during the interwar period. She was captured in port by the Italians during the German-led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia. She was refitted and modernised before being commissioned by the Italians as "Francesco Rismondo", but was only used for training and experimentation. After the Italian surrender, she was captured then scuttled by the Germans in September 1943.

"Smeli" was the second and last of her class. She also participated in several cruises in the Mediterranean during the interwar period. After capture by the Italians, "Smeli" was refitted and modernised before being commissioned as "Antonio Bajamonti", but was only used for training and experimentation. She was scuttled by the Italians in September 1943 after the Italian surrender.




</doc>
<doc id="23154566" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23154566" title="Operation Paula">
Operation Paula

Unternehmen Paula (Undertaking or Operation Paula) is the German codename given for the Second World War "Luftwaffe" offensive operation to destroy the remaining units of the "Armée de l'Air" (ALA), or French Air Force during the Battle of France in 1940. On 10 May the German armed forces ("Wehrmacht") began their invasion of Western Europe. By 3 June, the British Army had withdrawn from Dunkirk and the continent in Operation Dynamo, the Netherlands and Belgium had surrendered and most of the formations of the French Army were disbanded or destroyed. To complete the defeat of France, the Germans undertook a second phase operation, "Fall Rot" (Case Red), to conquer the remaining regions. In order to do this, air supremacy was required. The "Luftwaffe" was ordered to destroy the French Air Forces, while still providing support to the German Army.

For the operation, the Germans committed five Air Corps to the attack, comprising 1,100 aircraft. The operation was launched on 3 June 1940. British intelligence had warned the French of the impending attack, and the operation failed to achieve the strategic results desired by the "Oberkommando der Luftwaffe" (High Command of the Air Force). However, the plight of the French ground and air forces at this stage meant that the failure of the operation would not impede the defeat of France.

After the declaration of war on Nazi Germany by the United Kingdom and France, in the aftermath of the German invasion of Poland, nine months of stalemate took place along the Western Front named the Phoney War. The only military action was the French Army's Saar Offensive which was terminated in controversial circumstances. After the Polish Campaign, in October 1939, the planners of the "Oberkommando der Luftwaffe" (Luftwaffe High Command) and the "Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" (Supreme Command of the Armed Forces) turned their attentions to Western Europe.

The Western Allies had surrendered the initiative and the Germans would take the offensive in 1940. Several plans were toyed with by the German General Staff. General Franz Halder, the chief of staff of the Army, presented the first plan for "Fall Gelb" ("Case Yellow") on 19 October 1939. The plan's German code was "Aufmarschanweisung N°1, Fall Gelb", or "Deployment Instruction No. 1, Case Yellow". The operation was a limited operation in which Luxembourg and the Low Countries were to be conquered in order to provide a base for further operations against France at a later date and amounted to a less ambitious re-run of the infamous "Schlieffen Plan" which failed during the First World War in 1914. It was rejected by Adolf Hitler and at the turn of the year, Heinz Guderian's chief of staff, Erich von Manstein secured Hitler's attention with a modified version. An ambitious thrust through the Ardennes was suggested by von Manstein. This main attack would use up the majority of the motorised and tank divisions (Panzer Divisions) in a drive to the English Channel. A diversion operation in Belgium and the Netherlands would precede this thrust, to lure the Allied Armies, including the British Expeditionary Force, into a trap.

Launched on 10 May 1940, the revised version of "Unternehmen Gelb" (Operation Yellow), also known as the Manstein Plan, succeeded. However, the British Army escaped during the Battle of Dunkirk. Nevertheless, the Belgian Army, Dutch Army and most of the elite French forces were destroyed in the encirclement. This left just second rate French units to combat the entire German Army. The "Luftwaffe" had played an integral part in disrupting Allied operations in this early phase. The "Luftwaffe's" participation was particularly crucial during the Battle of Sedan which enabled the German Army to carry out Operation Yellow. By early June the Dunkirk siege was over, and on 3 June, the Germans began preparations for the conquest of the rest of France under the codename "Fall Rot" (Case Red). For this to be as successful, air superiority would be required first, as it had been during Operation Yellow.

Hugo Sperrle had long planned attacks upon Paris and on 22 May he ordered "Fliegerkorps II" (Air Corps II) and "Fliegerkorps V" (Air Corps V) with "Kampfgeschwader 77" (Bomber Wing 77) and "Generaloberst" (General Colonel) Ulrich Grauert's "I Fliegerdivision", III./"Kampfgeschwader 28" (Bomber Wing 28) to bomb Paris. Bad weather prevented the operation. Determined to continue with his plans, Sperrle ordered Otto Hoffmann von Waldau and Helmuth von Hoffman, "Gruppenkommandeur" (Group Commander) of III./KG 28, to plan an operation named "Paula" the following day, on 23 May 1940.

The operation was broad in its scope. As well as eliminating French airfields and aircraft factories around Paris, in von Waldau's words, the bombing was to "achieve a desirable influence on the morale of the capital". German reconnaissance aircraft reported 1,244 aircraft on airfields in and around Paris, including 550–650 single engine aircraft. This French air power was to be destroyed along with the aviation factories in the area. French anti aircraft artillery (AAA) defences were mapped from tactical to operational level, and intelligence of French ground defences was therefore good. The operation was due to be carried out on 30 May, but again, bad weather prevented it.

The operation was compromised by poor staff work and excessive confidence in the "invulnerable" "Enigma machine". The British intelligence, namely Ultra, who had been reading the German codes, forewarned the French. On 30 May they intercepted a message sent by Grauert discussing the arrangements he was making for his Corps. Adding to this leak, the units involved received incomplete orders for the assault. "Oberst" Johann-Volkmar Fisser, "Geschwaderkommodore" (Wing Commander) of KG 77 complained about this. He asked the Headquarters of "VIII Fliegerkorps", only to be told that the target was "Paris". Sperrle responded to his request by removing KG 77 from the order of battle. The British intercepted Frisser's request to "VIII Fliegerkorps", and passed it to the French. The French had intercepted similar messages and in response they doubled their aircraft strength to 120 fighters.

Units from both "Luftflotte 2" and "Luftflotte 3" (Air Fleet 1 and 2) were made available for the operation. "Kampfgeschwader" (Bomber Wings) and "Jagdgeschwader" (Fighter Wings) with aircraft from "Lehrgeschwader 1", (LG 1), "Kampfgeschwader 1" (KG 1), "Kampfgeschwader 2" (KG 2), "Kampfgeschwader 3" (KG 3), "Kampfgeschwader 4" (KG 4), "Kampfgeschwader 54" (KG 54), "Kampfgeschwader 55" (KG 55) and "Kampfgeschwader 76" (KG 76), escorted by fighter aircraft from "Jagdgeschwader 2" (JG 2), "Jagdgeschwader 26" (JG 26), "Jagdgeschwader 27" (JG 27), "Jagdgeschwader 53" (JG 53), "Zerstörergeschwader 2" (ZG 2) and "Zerstörergeschwader 76" (ZG 76) were to carry out the attack.

KG 1, ZG 76 and LG 1 were under the command of "I. Fliegerkorps". ZG 2, KG 3 and II./KG 2 were under the command of "II. Fliegerkorps". and III./KG 54 were under "IV. Fliegerkorps". served under "V. Fliegerkorps". and JG 26 were under the command of the "IX. Fliegerdivision". JG 2 and JG 27 were under the command of "VIII. Fliegerkorps". "Jagdfliegerführer 3" lent JG 53 for the operation.

Stab. and I./KG 2 moved to Trier-Euren for the attack. I./KG 2 operated from Wengerohr, and III./KG 2 was to operate from Kirchenburg. Stab. operated from Schwabisch. I., II., III./KG 55 operated from Reims, Heilbronn and Eutingen respectively. KG 3's, I., II., and III., Gruppe were based at Aschaffenburg, Schweinfurt and Würzburg. These units were based at unknown French bases by 3 June. KG 4 and its units were based at Gütersloh, Fassberg and Delmenhorst. It is likely that some of KG 3's units moved to bases near Lille for the attack. KG 1's I., II., III., Gruppe were based at Giessen, Kirtorf and Ettinghausen. It likely that some of these units also moved to captured French airfields by 3 June. It is possible they were based at Rosières-en-Santerre. Only I./KG 54 took part in the raid from the "Geschwader" (Wing). was probably located in somewhere in northern France on 3 June. It was originally based at Köln-Ostheim. The fighter units were based at the following airfields: Abbeville (ZG 76); Darmstadt, Neufchâteau, Freiburg (ZG 2); Le Touquet, La Capelle, Étaples (JG 26); Couvron, Oulchy-le-Château, (JG 2); Guise (JG 27); Épernay, Douzy, Charleville-Mézières, La Selve (JG 53).

KG 2 put up 99 bombers for the raid and KG 55 committed 66 bombers from their three "Gruppen". Altogether the "Luftwaffe" fielded 640 bombers and 460 fighters.

Tasked with the defence of the greater Paris area was the "Zone d'Opérations Aériennes Nord" or Z.O.A.N (Northern Zone of Air Operations). Groupe de Chasse I/145 (Polish) armed with Caudron C.714 fighters were based at Dreux. G.C. I/1 with Bloch MB.152s were based at Chantilly-Les Aigles. G.C. II/1 Bloch 152s were deployed to Brétigny-sur-Orge airfield. G.C. II/10 Bloch 152s were located at Bernay-en-Ponthieu, while G.C. III/10 Bloch 152s were based at Deauville. More fighter units operating the Dewoitine D.520 are also listed on the order of battle: G.C. I/3 at Meaux–Esbly, G.C. II/3 at La Ferté-sur-Chiers–Gaucher, G.C. III/3 with the D.520 and Morane-Saulnier M.S.406 at Illiers-l'Évêque. Further units were located along the line. G.C. I/4 with Curtiss H-75s at Évreux-Fauville, G.C. II/4 Curtiss H-75 at Orconte, G.C. I/6 Morane 406s at Lognes–Émerainville, G.C. III/7 (Morane 406s) at Coulommiers, G.C. I/8 Bloch 152s at Claye-Souilly, and G.C. II/9 Bloch 152s at Connantre. These units were supported by night fighter units, ("Groupement de Chasse de Nuit", Night Hunting Group), E.C.M.J. 1/16, E.C.N. 1/13, 2/13, 3/13 and 4/13 equipped with the Potez 631. All in all, these groups totalled 240 aircraft. Only 120 fighters were made available to counter German attacks.

On 3 June, the French units were warned an hour before the German bombers took off, but owing to equally poor staff work, few French squadrons heard the scramble signal when it was radioed from the Eiffel Tower and some were caught on the ground. In the end, only eighty took off to intercept the incoming German formations. German progress was monitored by shadowing Potez 631s, one of which was shot down. The Germans would copy this tactic when intercepting United States Army Air Force (USAAF) heavy bombers during the Defence of the Reich campaign. Along with French AAA defences, the fighters shot down ten German aircraft, including four bombers. One of these machines was piloted by "Jagdfliegerführer 3" ("Fighter Flying Leader 3") "Oberst" Gerd von Massow. He was replaced by "Oberst" Werner Junck, until the former's release by German forces on 12 June 1940. "Geschwaderkommodore" of KG 51, Josef Kammhuber, who was wounded in action and taken as a prisoner of war, was brought down on this date, although it is not clear if KG 51 was involved in "Paula". Kammhuber would be released after the French surrender. He was replaced as "Geschwaderkommodore" of KG 51 by Fisser, commander of KG 77. Fisser was killed two months later leading KG 51 during the Battle of Britain. At least one source does not place KG 51 on the order of battle. German formations attacked twenty-eight railways and marshalling yard centres. All damage inflicted was light. None were out of action for more than 24 hours.

Most of the German bombers had passed over and had an altitude advantage over French fighters trying to gain height to intercept. Skirmishes were few and far between, but some French units suffered heavy losses. For the attack, the Germans had used the new C-250 "Flammbombe" (Flame Bomb) which had only been cleared for use 24 hours earlier. The incendiary bomb did some damage to hangars and parked aircraft.

The Germans believed they had struck a mortal blow against the ALA. German post-operation analysis indicated a resounding success. It suggested a long list of wrecked French factories and destroyed aircraft on the ground and in the air. The Germans claimed to have destroyed 75 French aircraft in the air and 400 on the ground. Such was the perceived success, the "Luftwaffe" concentrated against ports on the northern French coast thereafter. The damage inflicted by the "Luftwaffe" was far less than the Germans thought. Only 20 French aircraft (16 of them fighters) were destroyed on the ground and 15 of their fighters were shot down in aerial combat, a loss rate of 19 percent, suggesting German over claiming of over 4:1 in the air and 16:1 on the ground. Six of the sixteen airfields hit reported serious damage, while fifteen factories reported slight damage. French casualties on the ground were heavy, including 254 dead and 652 injured. The French shot down 10 German aircraft, including four bombers. They claimed 16, suggesting mutual over claiming. A further 21 vehicles were destroyed. All the French airfields were back in operation 48 hours later.

Although the operation failed to achieve its goals, the first phase of the German invasion, Operation Yellow, had stripped the French Army of its finest formations. The French forces holding the Somme line were mostly reserve divisions of poorer quality and unsupported by heavy artillery, tanks or motorised infantry. The failure of the German air operation did not prevent the German Army from defeating the French in June 1940, or the "Luftwaffe" in gaining air supremacy at the beginning of "Fall Rot". The main reason for German superiority in the air was the poor state of French air units' operational readiness. The "Luftwaffe" had a smaller margin of numerical superiority over the ALA at the start of "Fall Rot" as the French aviation industry was starting to reach full potential in production. Some 2,000 French aircraft were available despite the loss of 787 aircraft (473 fighters, 120 bombers and 194 reconnaissance aircraft). The French had 2,086 machines available on 5 June 1940, the first day of "Fall Rot", but component production did not match the production of airframes. It was slow and poor, and as a result only 599 aircraft (340 fighters and 170 bombers) were serviceable; a rate of just 29 percent. After the opening of the offensive, the "Luftwaffe" "ran riot" over French air space. Such was the superiority of the "Luftwaffe" at that point, some units were sent home to Germany to refit. The French collapsed altogether just 22 days later, and on 25 June France capitulated.



</doc>
<doc id="23176482" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23176482" title="The History of British Political Parties">
The History of British Political Parties

The History of British Political Parties, also referred to as Politico's Guide to the History of British Political Parties, is a reference book about political parties in the United Kingdom. Written by David Boothroyd, it was published in 2001 by Politico's Publishing Ltd and distributed in the United States by International Specialized Book Services (ISBS). At the time of the book's publication, Boothroyd worked as a researcher with Parliamentary Monitoring Services. The book contains entries on over 250 UK political parties that have participated in parliamentary elections. It is structured alphabetically by entry, with the size of each entry relative to the history and influence of the individual political party. Boothroyd includes information about the history and election statistics of each party, as well as a brief narrative. He focuses on the Conservative, Liberal, and Labour parties; the parties with the most significant histories in British politics.

Boothroyd's work received positive reviews in book journals. The book was recommended by "The School Librarian" and ""; although the latter criticised it for not including bibliographical aids. The authors of the bibliographical work "Information Sources of Political Science" described it as a "handy guide", and it was used as a reference in "Third Force Politics: Liberal Democrats at the Grassroots".

"The History of British Political Parties" is a comprehensive work which lists and describes over 250 political parties in the United Kingdom that have participated in parliamentary elections since 1832. Entries are organised alphabetically, and most descriptions of the political parties span a few paragraphs or pages. Space is allotted to each entry based on the individual party's history and influence; 34 pages are devoted to the Conservative Party, whereas only two paragraphs are given to the Captain Beany's New Millennium Bean Party.

Each entry contains objective information on the party including its history, address, the number of registered members, election statistics, and their email address and website if these exist. The author provides a detailed, narrative description of each party. Boothroyd writes, "Only three parties out of the 250 ... have ever formed a government in the United Kingdom." He devotes the most discussion in the book to the Conservative, Liberal and Labour parties. The book includes cross-references to enable the reader to easily locate political parties that have had changes over time.

In a review of the book for "The School Librarian", Valerie Caless wrote, "Overall, this is a thorough historical guide to the political parties, and will serve as a very useful reference book for students of both history and politics at all levels. A glossary or 'concepts' guide would have been a bonus for the new or less patient student." N.W. Polsby of the University of California, Berkeley reviewed the book for "Choice: Current Reviews for Academic Libraries", and wrote, "The total absence of bibliographical aids is a weakness of this book. Its strengths are its plainly factual and accessible writing. This is a book to be consulted, not read straight through. Recommended at all levels." A review in "Reference & Research Book News" said, "The book is intended as an affordable reference book for the general reader interested in British politics". "The History of British Political Parties" was also reviewed in "Parliamentary Affairs".

In the 2003 book "The Times House of Commons Guide: 1929, 1931, 1935", Boothroyd is mentioned as the author of "The History of British Political Parties" and referred to as "an elections specialist". In the 2005 bibliographical work "Information Sources of Political Science", authors Stephen W. Green, Douglas Ernest, and Frederick L. Holler described Boothroyd's book as "a handy guide to approximately 250 British political parties," and wrote, "Even some of the more humorous and tongue-in-cheek political parties are included in this handbook, such as the Official Monster Raving Loony Party".

The book is used as a reference in the works "Third Force Politics: Liberal Democrats at the Grassroots" (2006) by Paul Whiteley, Patrick Seyd and Antony Billinghurst, published by Oxford University Press; "The Logic of Pre-Electoral Coalition Formation" (2006) by Sona Nadenichek Golder, published by Ohio State University Press; and in "Posters, Propaganda, and Persuasion in Election Campaigns Around the World and Through History" (2008) by Steven A. Seidman. Nicholas Whyte of the website Northern Ireland Access Research Knowledge (ARK) wrote, "For general information about political parties in Northern Ireland since 1922, the whole of Ireland 1801–1922, England, Scotland, and Wales, I urge you to get hold of Politico's Guide to the History of British Political Parties by David Boothroyd available from Politico's."





</doc>
<doc id="23180963" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23180963" title="Battle of Belgium">
Battle of Belgium

The Battle of Belgium or Belgian Campaign, often referred to within Belgium as the 18 Days' Campaign (, ), formed part of the greater Battle of France, an offensive campaign by Germany during the Second World War. It took place over 18 days in May 1940 and ended with the German occupation of Belgium following the surrender of the Belgian Army.

On 10 May 1940, Germany invaded Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Belgium under the operational plan "Fall Gelb" (Case Yellow). The Allied armies attempted to halt the German Army in Belgium, believing it to be the main German thrust. After the French had fully committed the best of the Allied armies to Belgium between 10 and 12 May, the Germans enacted the second phase of their operation, a break-through, or sickle cut, through the Ardennes, and advanced toward the English Channel. The German Army ("Heer") reached the Channel after five days, encircling the Allied armies. The Germans gradually reduced the pocket of Allied forces, forcing them back to the sea. The Belgian Army surrendered on 28 May 1940, ending the battle.

The Battle of Belgium included the first tank battle of the war, the Battle of Hannut. It was the largest tank battle in history at the time but was later surpassed by the battles of the North African Campaign and the Eastern Front. The battle also included the Battle of Fort Eben-Emael, the first strategic airborne operation using paratroopers ever attempted.

The German official history stated that in the 18 days of bitter fighting, the Belgian Army were tough opponents, and spoke of the "extraordinary bravery" of its soldiers. The Belgian collapse forced the Allied withdrawal from continental Europe. The British Royal Navy subsequently evacuated Belgian ports during Operation Dynamo, allowing the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), along with many Belgian and French soldiers, to escape capture and continue military operations. France reached its own armistice with Germany in June 1940. Belgium was occupied by the Germans until the autumn of 1944, when it was liberated by the Western Allies.

The Belgian strategy for a defence against German aggression faced political as well as military problems. In terms of military strategy, the Belgians were unwilling to stake everything on a linear defence of the Belgian–German border, in an extension of the Maginot Line. Such a move would leave the Belgians vulnerable to a German assault in their rear, through an attack on the Netherlands. Such a strategy would also rely on the French to move quickly into Belgium and support the garrison there.

Politically, the Belgians did not trust the French. Marshal Philippe Pétain had suggested a French strike at Germany's Ruhr area using Belgium as a spring-board in October 1930 and again in January 1933. Belgium feared it would be drawn into a war regardless, and sought to avoid that eventuality. The Belgians also feared being drawn into a war as a result of the French–Soviet pact of May 1935. The Franco-Belgian agreement stipulated Belgium was to mobilise if the Germans did, but what was not clear was whether Belgium would have to mobilise in the event of a German invasion of Poland.

The Belgians much preferred an alliance with the United Kingdom. The British had entered the First World War in response to the German violation of Belgian neutrality. The Belgian Channel ports had offered the German Imperial Navy valuable bases, and such an attack would offer the German "Kriegsmarine" and the "Luftwaffe" bases to engage in strategic offensive operations against the United Kingdom in the coming conflict. But the British government paid little attention to the concerns of the Belgians. The lack of this commitment ensured the Belgian withdrawal from the Western Alliance, the day before the remilitarisation of the Rhineland. The lack of opposition to the remilitarisation served to convince the Belgians that France and Britain were unwilling to fight for their own strategic interests, let alone Belgium's. The Belgian General Staff was determined to fight for its own interests, alone if necessary.

The French were infuriated at King Leopold III's open declaration of neutrality in October 1936. The French Army saw its strategic assumptions undermined; it could no longer expect closer cooperation with the Belgians in defending the latter's eastern borders, enabling a German attack to be checked well forward of the French border. The French were dependent on how much cooperation they could extract from the Belgians. Such a situation deprived the French any prepared defences in Belgium to forestall an attack, a situation which the French had wanted to avoid as it meant engaging the German Panzer Divisions in a mobile battle. The French considered invading Belgium immediately in response to a German attack on the country. The Belgians, recognising the danger posed by the Germans, secretly made their own defence policies, troop movement information, communications, fixed defence dispositions, intelligence and air reconnaissance arrangements available to the French military attaché in Brussels.

The Allied plan to aid Belgium was the Dyle Plan; the cream of the Allied forces, which included the French armoured divisions, would advance to the Dyle river in response to a German invasion. The choice of an established Allied line lay in either reinforcing the Belgians in the east of the country, at the Meuse–Albert Canal line, and holding the Scheldt Estuary, thus linking the French defences in the south with the Belgian forces protecting Ghent and Antwerp, seemed to be the soundest defensive strategy.
The weakness of the plan was that, politically at least, it abandoned most of eastern Belgium to the Germans. Militarily it would put the Allied rear at right angles to the French frontier defences; while for the British, their communications located at the Bay of Biscay ports, would be parallel to their front. Despite the risk of committing forces to central Belgium and an advance to the Scheldt or Dyle lines, which would be vulnerable to an outflanking move, Maurice Gamelin, the French commander, approved the plan and it remained the Allied strategy upon the outbreak of war.

The British, with no army in the field and behind in rearmament, was in no position to challenge French strategy, which had assumed the prominent role of the Western Alliance. Having little ability to oppose the French, the British strategy for military action came in the form of strategic bombing of the Ruhr industry.

Upon the official Belgian withdrawal from the Western Alliance, the Belgians refused to engage in any official staff meetings with the French or British military staff for fear of compromising its neutrality. The Belgians did not regard a German invasion as inevitable and were determined that if an invasion did take place it would be effectively resisted by new fortifications such as Eben Emael.
The Belgians had taken measures to reconstruct their defences along the border with the German state upon Adolf Hitler's rise to power in January 1933. The Belgian government had watched with increasing alarm the German withdrawal from the League of Nations, its repudiation of the Treaty of Versailles and its violation of the Locarno Treaties. The government increased expenditure on modernising the fortifications at Namur and Liège. New lines of defence were established along the Maastricht–Bois-le-Duc canal, joining the Meuse, Scheldt and the Albert Canal. The protection of the eastern frontier, based mainly on the destruction of a number of roads, was entrusted to new formations (frontier cyclist units and the newly formed "Chasseurs Ardennais"). By 1935, the Belgian defences had been completed. Even so, it was felt that the defences were no longer adequate. A significant mobile reserve was needed to guard the rear areas, and as a result it was considered that the protection against a sudden assault by German forces was not sufficient. Significant manpower reserves were also needed, but a bill made for the provision of longer military service and training for the army was rejected by the public on the basis that it would increase Belgium's military commitments as well as the request of the Allies to engage in conflicts far from home.

King Leopold III made a speech on 14 October 1936 in front of the Council of Ministers, in an attempt to persuade the people (and its Government) that the defences needed strengthening. He outlined three main military points for Belgium's increased rearmament:
a) German rearmament, following upon the complete re-militarisation of Italy and Russia (the Soviet Union), caused most other states, even those that were deliberately pacifistic, like Switzerland and the Netherlands, to take exceptional precautions.
b) There has been such a vast change in the methods of warfare as a result of technical progress, particularly in aviation and mechanization, that the initial operations of armed conflict could now be of such force, speed and magnitude as to be particularly alarming to small countries like Belgium.
c) Our anxieties have been increased by the lightning reoccupation of the Rhineland and the fact that bases for the start of a possible German invasion have been moved near to our frontier.

On 24 April 1937, the French and British delivered a public declaration that Belgium's security was paramount to the Western Allies and that they would defend their frontiers accordingly against aggression of any sort, whether this aggression was directed solely at Belgium, or as a means of obtaining bases from which to wage war against "other states". The British and French, under those circumstances, released Belgium from her Locarno obligations to render mutual assistance in the event of German aggression toward Poland, while the British and French maintained their military obligations to Belgium.

Militarily, the Belgians considered the "Wehrmacht" to be stronger than the Allies, particular the British Army and engaging in overtures to the Allies would result in Belgium becoming a battleground without adequate Allies.
The Belgians and French remained confused about what was expected of each other if or when, hostilities commenced. The Belgians were determined to hold the border fortifications along the Albert Canal and the Meuse, without withdrawing, until the French Army arrived to support them. Gamelin was not keen on pushing his Dyle plan that far. He was concerned that the Belgians would be driven out of their defences and would retreat to Antwerp, as in 1914. In fact, the Belgian divisions protecting the border were to withdraw and retreat southward to link up with French forces. This information was not given to Gamelin.
As far as the Belgians were concerned, the Dyle Plan had advantages. Instead of the limited Allied advance to the Scheldt, or meeting the Germans on the Franco-Belgian border, the move to the Dyle river would reduce the Allied front in central Belgium by , freeing more forces for use as a strategic reserve. It was felt it would save more Belgian territory, in particular the eastern industrial regions. It also had the advantage of absorbing Dutch and Belgian Army formations (including some 20 Belgian divisions). Gamelin was to justify the Dyle Plan after the defeat using these arguments.

On 10 January 1940, in an episode known as the Mechelen Incident, a German Army Major Hellmuth Reinberger crash-landed in a Messerschmitt Bf 108 near Mechelen-aan-de-Maas. Reinberger was carrying the first plans for the German invasion of western Europe which, as Gamelin had expected, entailed a repeat of the 1914 Schlieffen Plan and a German thrust through the Belgium (which was expanded by the "Wehrmacht" to include the Netherlands) and into France.

The Belgians suspected a ruse, but the plans were taken seriously. Belgian intelligence and the military attaché in Cologne correctly suggested the Germans would not commence the invasion with this plan. It suggested that the Germans would try an attack through the Belgian Ardennes and advance to Calais with the aim of encircling the Allied armies in Belgium. The Belgians had correctly predicted the Germans would attempt a "Kesselschlacht" (literally "Cauldron battle", meaning encirclement), to destroy its enemies. The Belgians had predicted the exact German plan as offered by Erich von Manstein.

The Belgian High Command warned the French and British of their concerns. They feared that the Dyle plan would put not just the Belgian strategic position in danger, but also the entire left wing of the Allied front. King Leopold and General Raoul Van Overstraeten, the King's "Aide de Camp", warned Gamelin and the French Army Command of their concerns on 8 March and 14 April. They were ignored.

The Belgian plan, "in the event of German aggression" [italics in original] provided for:
(a) A delaying position along the Albert Canal from Antwerp to Liège and the Meuse from Liège to Namur, which was to be held long enough to allow French and British troops to occupy the line Antwerp–Namur–Givet. It was anticipated that the forces of the guarantor Powers would be in action on the third day of an invasion.
(b) Withdrawal to the Antwerp–Namur position.
(c) The Belgian Army was to hold the sector–excluding Leuven, but including Antwerp–as part of the main Allied defensive position.

In an agreement with the British and French Armies, the French 7th Army under the command of Henri Giraud was to advance into Belgium, past the Scheldt Estuary in Zeeland if possible, to Breda, in the Netherlands. The British Army's British Expeditionary Force or BEF, commanded by General John Vereker, Lord Gort, was to occupy the central position in the Brussels–Ghent gap supporting the Belgian Army holding the main defensive positions some east of Brussels. The main defensive position ringing Antwerp would be protected by the Belgians, barely from the city. The French 7th Army was to reach the Zeeland or Breda, just inside the Dutch border. The French would then be in a position to protect the left flank of the Belgian Army forces protecting Antwerp and threaten the German northern flank.

Further east, delaying positions were constructed in the immediate tactical zones along the Albert Canal, which joined with the defences of the Meuse west of Maastricht. The line deviated southward, and continued to Liege. The Maastricht–Liège gap was heavily protected. Fort Eben-Emael guarded the city's northern flank, the tank country lying in the strategic depths of the Belgian forces occupying the city and the axis of advance into the west of the country. Further lines of defence ran south west, covering the Liege–Namur axis. The Belgian Army also had the added benefit of the French 1st Army, advancing toward Gembloux and Hannut, on the southern flank of the BEF and covering the Sambre sector. This covered the gap in the Belgian defences between the main Belgian positions on the Dyle line with Namur to the south. Further south still, the French 9th Army advanced to the Givet–Dinant axis on the Meuse river. The French 2nd Army was responsible for the last of front, covering Sedan, the lower Meuse, the Belgian–Luxembourg border and the northern flank of the Maginot line.

The German plan of attack required that Army Group B would advance and draw in the Allied First Army Group into central Belgium, while Army Group A conducted the surprise assault through the Ardennes. Belgium was to act as a secondary front with regard to importance. Army Group B was given only limited numbers of armoured and mobile units while the vast majority of the Army Group comprised infantry divisions. After the English Channel was reached, all Panzer division units and most motorised infantry were removed from Army Group B and given to Army Group A to strengthen the German lines of communication and to prevent an Allied breakout.

Such a plan would still fail if sufficient ground could not be taken quickly in Belgium to squeeze the allies against two fronts. Preventing this from happening were the defences of Fort Eben-Emael and the Albert Canal. The three bridges over the canal were the key to allowing Army Group B a high operational tempo. The bridges at Veldwezelt, Vroenhoven and Kanne in Belgium and Maastricht on the Dutch border were the target. Failure to capture the bridges would leave Reichenau's German 6th Army, the southern-most army of Group B, trapped in the Maastricht-Albert Canal enclave and subjected to the fire of Eben-Emael. The fort had to be captured or destroyed.

Adolf Hitler summoned Lieutenant-General Kurt Student of the "7. Flieger-Division" (7th Air Division) to discuss the assault. It was first suggested that a conventional parachute drop be made by airborne forces to seize and destroy the forts' guns before the land units approached. Such a suggestion was rejected as the Junkers Ju 52 transports were too slow and were likely to be vulnerable to Dutch and Belgian anti-aircraft guns. Other factors for its refusal were the weather conditions, which might blow the paratroopers away from the fort and disperse them too widely. A seven-second drop from a Ju 52 at minimum operational height led to a dispersion over 300 metres alone.

Hitler had noticed one potential flaw in the defences. The roofs were flat and unprotected; he demanded to know if a glider, such as the DFS 230, could land on them. Student replied that it could be done but only by 12 aircraft and in daylight; this would deliver 80–90 paratroopers onto the target.
Hitler then revealed the tactical weapon that would make this strategic operation work, introducing the "Hohlladungwaffe" (hollow-charge) – a explosive weapon which would destroy the Belgian gun emplacements. It was this tactical unit that would spearhead the first strategic airborne operation in history.

The Belgian Army could muster twenty-two divisions, which contained 1,338 artillery pieces but just 10 AMC 35 tanks. However, the Belgian combat vehicles included 200 T-13 tank destroyers. These had an excellent 47 mm antitank gun and a coaxial FN30 machine gun in a turret. The Belgians also possessed forty-two T-15s. They were described as armoured cars but were actually fully tracked tanks with a 13.2 mm turret machine gun. The standard Belgian anti-tank gun was the 47 mm FRC, towed either by trucks or by fully tracked armoured Utilitie B-tractors. One report states that a round from a 47 mm gun went straight through a Sd.Kfz. 231 and penetrated the armour of the Panzer IV behind it. These Belgian guns were better than the 25 mm and 37 mm guns of respectively the French and the Germans.

The Belgians began mobilisation on 25 August 1939 and by May 1940 mounted a field army of eighteen infantry divisions, two divisions of partly motorised "Chasseurs Ardennais" and two motorised cavalry divisions, totaling some 600,000 men. Belgian reserves may have been able to field 900,000 men. The army lacked armour and anti-aircraft guns.

After the completion of the mobilisation, the army could muster five regular army corps (including the I Corps) and two reserve corps consisting of twelve regular infantry divisions, two divisions of "Chasseurs Ardennais", six reserve infantry divisions, one brigade of Cyclist Frontier Guards, one Cavalry Corps of two divisions, and one brigade of motorised cavalry. The Army also had two anti-aircraft artillery, four artillery regiments, and an unknown number of fortress, engineer, and signals force personnel.

The Belgian Naval Corps ("Corps de Marine") was resurrected in 1939. Most of the Belgian merchant fleet, some 100 ships, evaded capture by the Germans. Under the terms of a Belgian–Royal Navy agreement, these ships and their 3,350 crewmen were placed under British control for the duration of hostilities. The General Headquarters of the Belgian Admiralty was at Ostend under the command of Major Henry Decarpentrie. The First Naval Division was based at Ostend, while the Second and Third divisions were based at Zeebrugge and Antwerp.
The "Aéronautique Militaire Belge" (Belgian Air Force - AéMI) had barely begun to modernise their aircraft technology. The AéMI had ordered Brewster Buffalo, Fiat CR.42, and Hawker Hurricane fighters, Koolhoven F.K.56 trainers, Fairey Battle and Caproni Ca.312 light bombers, and Caproni Ca.335 fighter-reconnaissance aircraft, but only the Fiats, Hurricanes, and Battles had been delivered. The shortage of modern types meant single-seat versions of the Fairey Fox light bomber were being used as fighters. The AéMI possessed 250 combat aircraft. At least 90 were fighters, 12 were bombers and 12 were reconnaissance aircraft. Only 50 were of a reasonably modern standard. When liaison and transport aircraft from all services are included, the total strength was 377; however only 118 of these were serviceable on 10 May 1940. Of this number around 78 were fighters and 40 were bombers.

The AéMI was commanded by Paul Hiernaux, who had received his pilot's license just before the outbreak of World War I, and had risen to the position of Commander-in-Chief in 1938. Hiernaux organised the service into three "Régiments d'Aéronautique" (air regiments): the "1er" with 60 aircraft, the "2ème" with 53 aircraft, and the "3ème" with 79 aircraft.

The Belgians were afforded substantial support by the French Army. The French 1st Army included General René Prioux's Cavalry Corps. The Corps was given the 2nd Light Mechanized Division (2 Division Légère Mécanique, or 2 DLM) and the 3rd Light Mechanized Division (3 DLM), which were allocated to defend the Gembloux gap. The armoured forces consisted of 176 of the formidable SOMUA S35s and 239 Hotchkiss H35 light tanks. Both of these types, in armour and firepower, were superior to most German types. The 3 DLM contained 90 S35s and some 140 H35s alone.

The French 7th Army was assigned to protect the northernmost part of the Allied front. It contained the 1st Light Mechanized Division (1 DLM), the 25th Motorised Infantry Division (25 Division d'Infanterie Motorisée, or 25 DIM) and the 9th Motorised Infantry Division (9 DIM). This force would advance to Breda in the Netherlands.

The third French army to see action on Belgian soil was the 9th. It was weaker than both the 7th and the 1st Armies. The 9th Army was allocated infantry divisions, with the exception of the 5th Motorised Infantry Division (5 DIM). Its mission was to protect the southern flank of the Allied armies, south of the Sambre river and just north of Sedan. Further south, in France, was the French 2nd Army, protecting the Franco-Belgian border between Sedan and Montmédy. The two weakest French armies were thus protecting the area of the main German thrust.

The British contributed the weakest force to Belgium. The BEF, under the command of General Lord Gort VC, consisted of just 152,000 men in two corps of two divisions each. It was hoped to field two armies of two Corps each, but this scale of mobilisation never took place. The I Corps was commanded by Lt-Gen. John Dill, later Lt-Gen. Michael Barker, who was in turn replaced by Major-General Harold Alexander. Lt-Gen. Alan Brooke commanded II Corps. Later the III Corps under Lt-Gen. Ronald Adam was added to the British order of battle. A further 9,392 Royal Air Force (RAF) personnel of the RAF Advanced Air Striking Force under the command of Air Vice-Marshal Patrick Playfair was to support operations in Belgium. By May 1940 the BEF had grown to 394,165 men, of whom more than 150,000 were part of the logistical rear area organisations and had little military training. On 10 May 1940, the BEF comprised just 10 divisions (not all at full strength), 1,280 artillery pieces and 310 tanks.

Army Group B was commanded by Fedor von Bock. It was allocated 26 infantry and three Panzer divisions for the invasion of the Netherlands and Belgium. Of the three Panzer Divisions, the 3rd and 4th were to operate in Belgium under the command of the 6th Army's XVI Corps. The 9th Panzer Division was attached to the 18th Army which, after the Battle of the Netherlands, would support the push into Belgium alongside the 18th Army and cover its northern flank.

Armour strength in Army Group B amounted to 808 tanks, of which 282 were Panzer Is, 288 were Panzer IIs, 123 were Panzer IIIs and 66 were Panzer IVs; 49 command tanks were also operational. The 3rd Panzer Division's armoured regiments consisted of 117 Panzer Is, 128 Panzer IIs, 42 Panzer IIIs, 26 Panzer IVs and 27 command tanks. The 4th Panzer Division had 136 Panzer Is, 105 Panzer IIs, 40 Panzer IIIs, 24 Panzer IVs and 10 command tanks. The 9th Panzer, scheduled initially for operations in the Netherlands, was the weakest division with only 30 Panzer Is, 54 Panzer IIs, 41 Panzer IIIs, 16 Panzer IVs and 12 command tanks
The elements drawn from the 7th Air Division and the 22nd Airlanding Division, that were to take part in the attack on Fort Eben-Emael, were named "Sturmabteilung Koch" (Assault Detachment Koch); named after the commanding officer of the group, Hauptmann Walter Koch. The force was assembled in November 1939. It was primarily composed of parachutists from the 1st Parachute Regiment and engineers from the 7th Air Division, as well as a small group of "Luftwaffe" pilots. The "Luftwaffe" allocated 1,815 combat, 487 transport aircraft and 50 gliders for the assault on the Low Countries.

The initial air strikes over Belgian air space were to be conducted by "IV. Fliegerkorps" under "General der Flieger" "Generaloberst" Alfred Keller. Keller's force consisted of "Lehrgeschwader 1" (Stab. I., II., III., IV.), "Kampfgeschwader 30" (Stab. I., II., III.) and "Kampfgeschwader 27" (III.). On 10 May Keller had 363 aircraft (224 serviceable) augmented by "Generalmajor" Wolfram von Richthofen's "VIII. Fliegerkorps" with 550 (420 serviceable) aircraft. They in turn were supported by "Oberst" Kurt-Bertram von Döring's "Jagdfliegerführer 2", with 462 fighters (313 serviceable).

Keller's "IV. Fliegerkorps" headquarters would operate from Düsseldorf, LG 1. "Kampfgeschwader" 30 which was based at Oldenburg and its III. Gruppe were based at Marx. Support for Döring and Von Richthofen came from present-day North Rhine-Westphalia and bases in Grevenbroich, Mönchengladbach, Dortmund and Essen.

During the evening of 9 May, the Belgian Military attaché in Berlin intimated that the Germans intended to attack the following day. Offensive movement of enemy forces were detected on the border.
At 00:10 on 10 May 1940, at General Headquarters an unspecified squadron in Brussels gave the alarm. A full state of alert was instigated at 01:30 am. Belgian forces took up their deployment positions. The Allied armies had enacted their Dyle plan on the morning of 10 May, and were approaching the Belgian rear. King Leopold had gone to his Headquarters near Briedgen, Antwerp.

The "Luftwaffe" was to spearhead the aerial battle in the low countries. Its first task was the elimination of the Belgian air contingent. Despite an overwhelming numerical superiority of 1,375 aircraft, 957 of which were serviceable, the air campaign in Belgium had limited success overall on the first day. At roughly 04:00, the first air raids were conducted against airfields and communication centres. It still had a tremendous impact on the AéMI, which had only 179 aircraft on 10 May.

Much of the success achieved was down to Richthofen's subordinates, particularly "Kampfgeschwader" 77 and its commander "Oberst" Dr. Johann-Volkmar Fisser whose attachment to "VIII. Fliegerkorps", was noted by "Generalmajor" Wilhelm Speidel. He commented that it "was the result of the well-known tendency of the commanding general to conduct his own private war". Fisser's KG 77 destroyed the AéMI main bases, with help from KG 54. Fighters from "Jagdgeschwader" 27 ("JG" 27) eliminated two Belgian squadrons at Neerhespen, and during the afternoon, I./St.G 2 destroyed nine of the 15 Fiat CR.42 fighters at Brusthem. At Schaffen-Diest, three Hawker Hurricanes of Escadrille 2/I/2 were destroyed and another six damaged when a wave of He 111s caught them as they were about to take off. A further two were lost in destroyed hangars. At Nivelles airfield, 13 CR42s were destroyed. The only other success was KG 27s destruction of eight aircraft at Belesle.

In aerial combat the battles were also one-sided. Two He 111s, two Do 17s and three Messerschmitt Bf 109s were shot down by Gloster Gladiators and Hurricanes. In return, eight Belgian Gladiators, five Fairey Foxs and one CR42 were shot down by JG 1, 21 and 27. No. 18 Squadron RAF sent two Bristol Blenheims on operations over the Belgian front, but lost both to Bf 109s. By the end of the 10 May, the official German figures indicate claims for 30 Belgian aircraft destroyed on the ground, and 14 (plus the two RAF bombers) in the air for 10 losses. The victory claims are likely an undercount. A total of 83 Belgian machines–mostly trainers and "squadron hacks", were destroyed. The AéMI flew only 146 sorties in the first six days. Between 16 May and 28 May, the AéMI flew just 77 operations. It spent most of its time and fuel withdrawing in the face of "Luftwaffe" attacks.

The German planners had recognised the need to eliminate Fort Eben-Emael if their army was to break into the interior of Belgium. It decided to deploy airborne forces ("Fallschirmjäger") to land inside the fortress perimeter using gliders.Using special explosives (and flamethrowers) to disable the defences, the "Fallschirmjäger" then entered the fortress. In the ensuing battle, German infantry overcame the defenders of the I Belgian Corps' 7th Infantry Division in 24 hours. The main Belgian defence line had been breached and German infantry of the 18th Army had passed through it rapidly. Moreover, German soldiers had established bridgeheads across the Albert Canal before the British were able to reach it some 48 hours later. The "Chasseurs Ardennais" further south, on the orders of their commander, withdrew behind the Meuse, destroying some bridges in their wake. The German airborne forces were assisted by Junkers Ju 87 "Stukas" of III./""Sturzkampfgeschwader" 2" ("StG" 2) and I./"Sturzkampfgeschwader 77" ("StG" 77) helped suppress the defences. Henschel Hs 123s of II.(S)./"Lehrgeschwader " 2 (LG 2) which assisted in the capture of the bridges at Vroenhoven and Veldwezelt in the immediate area.

Further successful German airborne offensive operations were carried out in Luxembourg which seized five crossings and communication routes leading into central Belgium. The offensive, carried out by 125 volunteers of the 34th Infantry Division under the command of Wenner Hedderich, achieved their missions by flying to their objectives using Fieseler Fi 156 "Störche". The cost was the loss of five aircraft and 30 dead. With the fort breached, the Belgian 4th and 7th Infantry Divisions were confronted by the prospect of fighting an enemy on relatively sound terrain (for armour operations). The 7th Division, with its 2nd and 18th Grenadier Regiments and 2nd Carabineers, struggled to hold their positions and contain the German infantry on the west bank. The Belgian tactical units engaged in several counterattacks. At one point, at Briegden, they succeeded in retaking the bridge and blowing it up. At the other points, Vroenhoven and Veldwezelt, the Germans had had time to establish strong bridgeheads and repulsed the attacks.
A little-known third airborne operation, Operation Niwi, was also conducted on 10 May in southern Belgium. The objective of this operation was to land two companies of the 3rd battalion Grossdeutschland Infantry Regiment by Fi 156 aircraft at Nives and in the south of the country, in order to clear a path for the 1st and 2nd Panzer divisions which were advancing through the Belgian–Luxembourg Ardennes. The original plan called for the use of Junkers Ju 52 transport aircraft, but the short-landing capability of the Fi 156 (27 metres) saw 200 of these aircraft used in the assault. The operational mission was to:

1. Cut signal communications and message links on the Neufchâteau–Bastogne and Neufchâteau–Martelange roads. [Neufchâteau being the largest southern-most city in Belgium] 
2. Prevent the approach of reserves from the Neufchâteau area
3. Facilitate the capture of pillboxes and the advance by exerting pressure against the line of pillboxes along the border from the rear.

The German infantry were engaged by several Belgian patrols equipped with T-15 armoured cars. Several Belgian counterattacks were repulsed, among them an attack by the 1st Light "Chasseurs Ardennais" Division. Unsupported, the Germans faced a counterattack later in the evening by elements of the French 5th Cavalry Division, dispatched by General Charles Huntziger from the French 2nd Army, which had "massive" tank strength. The Germans were forced to retreat. The French, however, failed to pursue the fleeing Germans, stopping at a dummy barrier. By the next morning, the 2nd Panzer Division had reached the area, and the mission had largely been accomplished. From the German perspective, the operation hindered rather than helped Heinz Guderian's Panzer Corps. The regiment had blocked the roads and, against the odds, prevented French reinforcements reaching the Belgian–Franco-Luxembourg border, but it also destroyed Belgian telephone communications. This inadvertently prevented the Belgian field command recalling the units along the border. The 1st Belgian Light Infantry did not receive the signal to retreat and engaged in a severe fire-fight with the German armour, slowing down their advance.

The failure of the Franco–Belgian forces to hold the Ardennes gap was fatal. The Belgians had withdrawn laterally upon the initial invasion and had demolished and blocked routes of advance, which held up the French 2nd Army moving north toward Namur and Huy. Devoid of any centre of resistance, the German assault engineers had cleared the obstacles unchallenged. The delay that the Belgian Ardennes Light Infantry, considered to be an elite formation, could have inflicted upon the advancing German armour was proved by the fight for Bodange, where the 1st Panzer Division was held up for a total of eight hours. This battle was a result of a breakdown in communications and ran contrary to the operational intentions of the Belgian Army.
Meanwhile, in the central Belgian sector, having failed to restore their front by means of ground attack, the Belgians attempted to bomb the bridges and positions that the Germans had captured intact and were holding on 11 May. Belgian Fairey Battles of 5/III/3 escorted by six Gloster Gladiators attacked the Albert Canal bridges. Bf 109s from I./"Jagdgeschwader" 1 ("JG" 1) and I./"JG" 27 intercepted and "JG" 1 shot down four Gladiators and both units destroyed six Battles and heavily damaged the remaining three. Eight CR.42s were evacuated from Brustem to Grimbergen near Brussels but seven Gladiators and the last remaining Hurricanes from 2/I/2 "Escadrille" were destroyed at Beauvechain Air Base and Le Culot by He 111s and I./"JG" 27 respectively. The RAF contributed to the effort to attack the bridges. The British dispatched Bristol Blenheims from 110 and 21 Squadron—the first squadron lost two, one to I./"JG" 27. 21 Squadron suffered damage to most of the bombers because of intense ground-fire. The French "Armée de l'air" dispatched LeO 451s from GBI/12 and GBII/12 escorted by 18 Morane-Saulnier M.S.406 of GCIII/3 and GCII/6. The operation failed and one bomber was lost while four M.S.406s fell to I."JG" 1. The French claimed five. Meanwhile, 114 Squadron lost six Blenheims destroyed when Dornier Do 17s of "Kampfgeschwader" 2 bombed their airfield at Vraux. Another Battle of No. 150 Squadron RAF was lost in another raid.

The German counter-air operations were spearheaded by "Jagdgeschwader 26" ("JG" 26) under the command of Hans-Hugo Witt, which was responsible for 82 of the German claims in aerial combat between 11 and 13 May. Despite the apparent success of the German fighter units, the air battle was not one-sided. On the morning of 11 May ten Ju 87s of "StG" 2 were shot down attacking Belgian forces in the Namur–Dinant gap, despite the presence of two "Jagdgeschwader"—"27" and "51". Nevertheless, the Germans reported a weakening in Allied air resistance in northern Belgium by 13 May.

During the night of 11 May, the British 3rd Infantry Division under the command of General Bernard Law Montgomery, reached its position on the Dyle river at Leuven. As it did so the Belgian 10th Infantry Division, occupying the position, mistook them for German parachutists and fired on them. The Belgians refused to yield but Montgomery claimed to have got his way by placing himself under the command of the Belgian forces, knowing that when the Germans came within artillery range the Belgians would withdraw.

Alan Brooke, commander of the British II Corps sought to put the matter of cooperation right with King Leopold. The King discussed the matter with Brooke, who felt a compromise could be reached. Van Overstraeten, the King's military aide, stepped in and said that the 10th Belgian Infantry Division could not be moved. Instead, the British should move further south and remain completely clear of Brussels. Brooke told the King that the 10th Belgian Division was on the wrong side of the Gamelin line and was exposed. Leopold deferred to his advisor and chief of staff. Brooke found Overstaeten to be ignorant of the situation and the dispositions of the BEF. Given that the left flank of the BEF rested on its Belgian ally, the British were now unsure about Belgian military capabilities.
The Allies had more serious grounds for complaint about the Belgian anti-tank defences along the Dyle line, that covered the Namur–Perwez gap which was not protected by any natural obstacles. Only a few days before the attack, General Headquarters had discovered the Belgians had sited their anti-tank defences ("de Cointet" defences) several miles east of the Dyle between Namur–Perwez.

After holding onto the Albert Canal's west bank for nearly 36 hours, the 4th and 7th Belgian infantry divisions withdrew. The capture of Eben-Emael allowed the Germans to force through the Panzers of the 6th Army. The situation for the Belgian divisions was either to withdraw or be encircled. The Germans had advanced beyond Tongeren and were now in a position to sweep south to Namur, which would threaten to envelop the entire Albert Canal and Liège positions. Under the circumstances, both divisions withdrew. On the evening of 11 May, the Belgian Command withdrew its forces behind the Namur–Antwerp line. The following day, the French 1st Army arrived at Gembloux, between Wavre and Namur, to cover the "Gembloux gap". It was a flat area, devoid of prepared or entrenched positions.

The French 7th Army, on the northern flank of the Belgian line, protected the Bruges–Ghent–Ostend axis and, covering the Channel ports, had advanced into Belgium and into the Netherlands with speed. It reached Breda in the Netherlands, on 11 May. But German parachute forces had seized the Moerdijk bridge on the Hollands Diep river, south of Rotterdam, making it impossible for the French to link up with the Dutch Army. The Dutch Army withdrew north to Rotterdam and Amsterdam.
The French 7th Army turned east and met the 9th Panzer Division about east of Breda at Tilburg. The battle resulted in the French retiring, in the face of "Luftwaffe" air assaults, to Antwerp. It would later help in the defence of the city. The "Luftwaffe" had given priority to attacking the French 7th Army's spearhead into the Netherlands as it threatened the Moerdijk bridgehead. "Kampfgeschwader" 40 and "54" supported by Ju 87s from "VIII. Fliegerkorps" helped drive them back. Fears of Allied reinforcements reaching Antwerp forced the "Luftwaffe" to cover the Scheldt estuary. "KG 30" bombed and sank two Dutch gunboats and three Dutch destroyers, as well as badly damaging two Royal Navy destroyers. But overall the bombing had a limited effect.

Following the arrival of Gamelin's military envoy, General Champon (10 May)The Belgian government's strategy became, to conform with the French strategy. This affirmed the Dyle plan: concentrating Belgian forces in the centre of Belgium, by withdrawing behind the K-W line, extending from Antwerp to Wavre. French forces would cover two obvious gaps: one, between Wavre and Namur, known as the "Gembloux gap" and another centred on Dinant, from the French border to the city of Namur. The gap was an unfortified, untrenched space in the main Belgian defensive line. stretched from the southern end of the Dyle line, from Wavre in the north, to Namur in the south, to .

During the night of 11/12 May, the Belgians were fully engaged in withdrawing to the Dyle line, covered by a network of demolitions and rearguards astride Tongeren.
During the morning of 12 May, King Leopold III, General van Overstraeten, Édouard Daladier, General Alphonse Georges (commander of the First Allied army Group, comprising the BEF, French 1st, 2nd, 7th and 9th Armies), General Gaston Billotte (coordinator of the Allied Armies) and General Henry Royds Pownall, Gort's chief of staff, met for a military conference near Mons. It was agreed the Belgian Army would man the Antwerp–Leuven line, while its allies took up the responsibility of defending the extreme north and south of the country.

The Belgian III Corps, and its 1st "Chasseurs Ardennais", 2nd Infantry and 3rd Infantry Divisions had withdrawn from the Liège Fortified Position ("PFL") to avoid being encircled. One regiment, the Liège Fortress Regiment, stayed behind to disrupt German communications. Further to the south, the Namur Fortified Position ("PFN"), manned by VI Corps' 5th Infantry Division and the 2nd "Chasseurs Ardennais" with the 12th French Infantry Division, fought delaying actions and participated in a lot of demolition work while guarding the position.

As far as the Belgians were concerned, it had accomplished the only independent mission assigned to it: to hold the Liège–Albert Canal line long enough for the Allied units to reach friendly forces occupying the Namur–Antwerp–Givet line. For the remainder of the campaign, the Belgians would execute their operations in accordance with the overall Allied plan.

As units already on the Dyle line worked tirelessly to organise better defensive positions in the Leuven–Antwerp gap, other Belgian soldiers fought rearguard actions. The 2nd Regiment of Guides and the 2nd Carabineers Cyclists of the 2nd Belgian Cavalry Division covered the retreat of the 4th and 7th Belgian divisions and were particularly distinguished at Tienen (Tirlemont) and Halen.

In support of Belgian forces in the area, the RAF and French flew air defence operations over Tienen and Leuven (Louvain). The RAF Advanced Air Striking Force committed 3, 504, 79, 57, 59, 85, 87, 605, and 242 squadrons to battle. A series of air battles were fought with "JG" 1, 2, 26, 27 and 3. Messerschmitt Bf 110s from "Zerstörergeschwader" 26 ("ZG" 26), and bomber units "LG" 1, 2 and "KG" 27 were also involved. Over Belgium and France, the day was disastrous for the British: 27 Hurricanes were shot down.

On 12 May, as the German Army Group A advanced westward out of the Belgian Ardennes, Army Group B's 6th Army launched offensive thrusts towards Brussels.

To the Allies, the Belgian failure to hold onto its eastern frontiers was a disappointment (as they were thought to be capable of holding out for two weeks).The Allied Chiefs of Staff had sought to avoid an encounter mobile battle without any strong fixed defences to fall back on and hoped Belgian resistance would last long enough for a defensive line to be established. Nevertheless, a brief lull fell on the Dyle front on 11 May which enabled the Allied armies to get into position by the time the first major assault was launched the following day. Allied cavalry had moved into position and infantry and artillery were reaching the front more slowly, by rail. Although they were unaware of it, the First Allied Army Group and the Belgian Army outnumbered and outgunned Walther von Reichenau's German 6th Army.

On the morning of 12 May, in response to Belgian pressure and necessity, the Royal Air Force and the "Armée de l'Air" undertook several air attacks on the German-held Maastricht and Meuse bridges to prevent German forces flowing into Belgium. 74 sorties had been flown by the Allies since 10 May. On 12 May, eleven out of eighteen French Breguet 693 bombers were shot down. The RAF Advanced Air Striking Force, which included the largest Allied bomber force, was reduced to 72 aircraft out of 135 by 12 May. For the next 24 hours, missions were postponed as the German anti-aircraft and fighter defences were too strong. The results of the bombing are difficult to determine. The German XIX Corps war diary's situation summary at 20:00 on 14 May noted:The completion of the military bridge at Donchery had not yet been carried out owing to heavy flanking artillery fire and long bombing attacks on the bridging point … Throughout the day all three divisions have had to endure constant air attack — especially at the crossing and bridging points. Our fighter cover is inadequate. Requests [for increased fighter protection] are still unsuccessful. The "Luftwaffe's" operations includes a note of "vigorous enemy fighter activity through which our close reconnaissance in particular is severely impeded". Nevertheless, inadequate protection was given to cover RAF bombers against the strength of German opposition over the target area. In all, out of 109 Fairey Battles and Bristol Blenheims which had attacked enemy columns and communications in the Sedan area, 45 had been lost. On 15 May, daylight bombing was significantly reduced. Of 23 aircraft employed, four failed to return. Equally, owing to the Allied fighter presence, the German XIX Corps War Diary states, "Corps no longer has at its disposal its own long-range reconnaissance … [Reconnaissance squadrons] are no longer in a position to carry out vigorous, extensive reconnaissance, as, owing to casualties, more than half of their aircraft are not now available."

On 13 May, in light of the withdrawal to the main defensive line, which was now being supported by the British and French Armies, King Leopold issued the following proclamation to improve morale after the defeats at the Albert Canal:

The French expected a major German thrust or thrusts to converge on the Gembloux gap. This corridor was now the responsibility of the French 1st Army, with six elite divisions including the 2nd (2e Division Légère Mécanique, or 2 DLM) and 3rd Light Mechanized Divisions. The French Cavalry Corps, under the command of René Prioux, was to advance beyond the line (east) to provide a screen for the move. The French 1st and 2nd Armoured Divisions were to be moved behind the French 1st Army to defend its main lines in depth. The Cavalry Corps was equal to a German Panzer Corps and was to occupy a screening line on the Tirlemont–Hannut–Huy axis. The operational plan called for the Corps to delay the German advance on Gembloux and Hannut until the main elements of the French 1st Army had reached Gembloux and dug in.

On 12 May, Erich Hoepner XVI Panzerkorps – which had previously attacked out of the Maastricht bulge and defeated the Belgian defences at Liege, compelling the Belgian I Corps to retreat – launched an offensive at Hannut. The 3rd and 4th Panzer Divisions and Prioux's corps clashed head-on, on 12 May. Contrary to popular belief, the Germans did not outnumber the French. Frequently, figures of 623 German and 415 French tanks are given. In fact, the German 3rd and 4th Panzer Divisions numbered 280 and 343 tanks respectively. The "2 DLM" and "3 DLM" numbered 176 Somuas and 239 Hotchkiss H35s. Added to this force were the considerable number of Renault AMR-ZT-63s in the Cavalry Corps. The R35 was equal or superior to the Panzer I and Panzer IIs in armament terms. This applies all the more to the 90 Panhard 178 armoured cars of the French Army. Its 25mm main gun could penetrate the armour of the Panzer IV. In terms of tanks that were capable of engaging and surviving a tank-vs-tank action, the Germans possessed just 73 Panzer IIIs and 52 Panzer IVs. The French had 176 SOMUA and 239 Hotchkisses. German tank units also contained 486 Panzer I and IIs, which were of dubious combat value given their losses in the Polish Campaign.

The German forces were able to communicate by radio during the battle and they could shift the point of the main effort unexpectedly. The Germans also practiced combined arms tactics, while the French tactical deployment was a rigid and linear leftover from the First World War. French tanks did not possess radios and often the commanders had to dismount to issue orders. Despite the disadvantages experienced by the Germans in armour, they were able to gain the upper hand in the morning battle on 12 May, encircling several French battalions. The combat power of the French 2 DLM managed to defeat the German defences guarding the pockets and freeing the trapped units. Contrary to German reports, the French were victorious on that first day, preventing a Wehrmacht break-through to Gembloux or seizing Hannut. The result of the first day's battle was:
The effect on the German light tanks was catastrophic. Virtually every French weapon from 25mm upward penetrated the 7-13mm of the Panzer I. Although the Panzer II fared somewhat better, especially those that had been up-armoured since the Polish Campaign, their losses were high. Such was the sheer frustration of the crews of these light Panzers in [the] face of heavier armoured French machines that some resorted to desperate expedients. One account speaks of a German Panzer commander attempting to climb on a Hotchkiss H-35 with a hammer, presumably to smash the machine's periscopes, but falling off and being crushed by the tank's tracks. Certainly by day's end, Prioux had reason to claim that his tanks had come off best. The battlefield around Hannut was littered with knocked-out tanks–the bulk of which were German Panzers–with by far and away the bulk of them being Panzer Is and IIs.
The following day, 13 May, the French were undone by their poor tactical deployment. They strung their armour out in a thin line between Hannut and Huy, leaving no defence in depth, which was the point of sending the French armour to the Gembloux gap in the first place. This left Hoepner with a chance to mass against one of the French Light Divisions ("3 DLM") and achieve a breakthrough in that sector. Moreover, with no reserves behind the front, the French denied themselves the chance of a counterattack. The victory saw the Panzer Corps out-manoeuvre 2 DLM" on its left flank. The Belgian III Corps, retreating from Liege, offered to support the French front held by the 3 DLM. This offer was rejected.

"2 DLM" lost no AFVs, but "3 DLM" lost 30 SOMUAs and 75 Hotchkisses. The French had disabled 160 German tanks. But as the poor linear deployment had allowed the Germans the chance of breaking through in one spot, the entire battlefield had to be abandoned, the Germans repaired nearly three quarters of their tanks; 49 were destroyed and 111 were repaired. They had 60 men killed and another 80 wounded. In terms of battlefield casualties, the Hannut battle had resulted in the French knocking-out 160 German tanks, losing 105 themselves.

Despite the failure by the Germans at Hannut, there was no way to rebuild a continuous Allied front. The French Cavalry Corps had achieved its mission and was withdrawn,

German units were also attacking towards Dinant, through the "condroz" (low hills) of the Province of Namur. Between 12 May and 15 May, Hoth's XV Panzerkorps attacked the French II and XI Corps – including many armoured units – along the Dinant-Flavion-Florennes corridor, in the Battle of Dinant () and .

Meanwhile, Hoepner was pursuing Prioulx's units withdrawing from Hannut toward Gembloux. Being impatient, Hoepner did not wait for his infantry divisions to catch up. Instead, he hoped to continue pushing the French back and not give them time to construct a coherent defence line. German formations pursued the enemy to Gembloux. The Panzer Corps ran into retreating French columns and inflicted heavy losses on them. The pursuit created severe problems for the French artillery. The combat was so closely fought that there was an increasing danger of friendly fire incidents. Nevertheless, the French, setting up new anti-tank screens and Hoepner, lacking infantry support, caused the Germans to attack positions head-on.

Although suffering numerous tactical reverses, operationally the Germans diverted the Allied First Army Group from the lower Ardennes area. In the process his forces, along with the "Luftwaffe" depleted Prioux' Cavalry Corps. When news of the German breakthrough at Sedan reached Prioux, he withdrew from Gembloux. With the Gembloux gap breached, the German Panzer Corps, the 3rd and 4th Panzer Divisions, were no longer required by Army Group B and were handed over to Army Group A. Army Group B would continue its own offensive to force the collapse of the Meuse front. The Army Group was in a position to advance westward to Mons, outflank the BEF and Belgian Army protecting the Dyle–Brussels sector, or turn south to outflank the French 9th Army.

The German attempts to capture Gembloux on 14–15 May were repulsed. German losses had been heavy at Hannut and Gembloux that the two Panzer Divisions concerned were forced to slow their pursuit.The 4th Panzer Division was down to 137 tanks on 16 May, including just four Panzer IVs. The 3rd Panzer Division was down by 20–25 percent of its operational force, while the 4th Panzer Division 45–50 percent of its tanks were not combat ready. Damaged tanks were quickly repaired, but its strength was initially greatly weakened.

The French 1st Army had also taken a battering and despite winning several tactical defensive victories it was forced to retreat on 15 May owing to developments elsewhere, leaving its tanks on the battlefield, while the Germans were free to recover theirs.

In the central Namur area, the French V Corps, under René Altmayer, withdrew to defend the bridges on the Sambre at Charleroi, although the Belgian General Staff was not informed of this redeployment. Finding itself isolated in the Namur Fortified Position, the Belgian VII Corps abandoned it on 15 May.

On 16 and 17 May Reinhardt's XLI Korps attacked Charlero, but was repulsed by the 5th North African Infantry Division.

On the morning of 15 May, German Army Group A broke the defences at Sedan and was now free to drive for the English Channel. The Allies considered a wholesale withdrawal from the Belgian trap. The withdrawal would reflect three stages: the night of 16/17 May to the River Senne, the night of 17/18 May to the river Dendre and the night of 18/19 May to the river Scheldt. The Belgians were reluctant to abandon Brussels and Leuven, especially as the Dyle line had withstood German pressure well.
The Belgian Army, the BEF and the French 1st Army, in a domino effect, was ordered/forced to retire on 16 May to avoid their southern flanks from being turned by the German armoured forces advancing through the French Ardennes and the German 6th Army advancing through Gembloux. The Belgian Army was holding the German Fourteenth Army on the KW-line, along with the French 7th and British armies. Had it not been for the collapse of the French 2nd Army at Sedan, the Belgians were confident that they could have checked the German advance.

The situation called for the French and British to abandon the Antwerp–Namur line and strong positions in favour of improvised positions behind the Scheldt, without facing any real resistance. In the South, General Deffontaine of the Belgian VII Corps retreated from the Namur and Liège regions, the Liège fortress region put up stiff resistance to the German 6th Army. In the North, the 7th Army was diverted to Antwerp after the surrender of the Dutch on 15 May, but was then diverted to support the French 1st Army. In the centre, the Belgian Army and the BEF suffered little German pressure. On 15 May, the only sector to really be tested was around Leuven, which was held by the British 3rd Division. The BEF was not pursued vigorously to the Scheldt.

After the withdrawal of the French Army from the northern sector, the Belgians were left to guard the fortified city of Antwerp. Four infantry divisions (including the 13th and 17th Reserve Infantry Divisions) engaged the German Eighteenth Army's 208th, 225th and 526th Infantry Divisions. The Belgians successfully defended the northern part of the city, delaying the German infantry forces while starting to withdraw from Antwerp on 16 May. The city fell on 18/19 May after considerable Belgian resistance. On 18 May the Belgians received word that Namur's Fort Marchovelette had fallen; Suarlee fell on 19 May; St. Heribert and Malonne on 21 May; Dave, Maizeret and Andoy on 23 May.
Between 16 and 17 May, the British and French withdrew behind the Willebroek Canal, as the volume of Allied forces in Belgium fell and moved toward the German armoured thrust from the Ardennes. The Belgian I Corps and V Corps also retreated to what the Belgians called the Ghent bridgehead, behind the Dendre and Scheldt. The Belgian Artillery Corps and its infantry support defeated attacks by the Eighteenth Army's infantry and in a communiqué from London, the British recognized the "Belgian Army has contributed largely toward the success of the defensive battle now being fought.
Nevertheless, the now-outnumbered Belgians abandoned Brussels and the Government fled to Ostend. The city was occupied by the German Army on 17 May. The very next morning, Hoepner, the German XVI Corps commander, was ordered to release the 3rd and 4th Panzer Divisions to Army Group A. This left the 9th Panzer Division attached to the Eighteenth Army as the only armoured unit on the Belgian front.

By 19 May, the Germans were hours away from reaching the French Channel coast. Gort had discovered the French had neither plan nor reserves and little hope for stopping the German thrust to the channel. He was concerned that the French 1st Army on its southern flank had been reduced to a disorganized mass of "fag-ends", fearing that German armour might appear on their right flank at Arras or Péronne, striking for the channel ports at Calais or Boulogne or north west into the British flank. Their position in Belgium massively compromised, the BEF considered abandoning Belgium and retreating to Ostend, Bruges or Dunkirk, the latter lying some to inside the French border.

The proposals of a British strategic withdrawal from the continent was rejected by the War Cabinet and the Chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS). They dispatched General Ironside to inform Gort of their decision and to order him to conduct an offensive to the south-west "through all opposition" to reach the "main French forces" in the south [the strongest French forces were actually in the north]. The Belgian Army was asked to conform to the plan, or should they choose, the British Royal Navy would evacuate what units they could. The British cabinet decided that even if the "Somme offensive" was carried out successfully, some units may still need to be evacuated, and ordered Admiral Ramsay to assemble a large number of vessels. This was the beginning of Operation Dynamo.
Ironside arrived at British General Headquarters at 06:00 am on 20 May, the same day that continental communications between France and Belgium was cut. When Ironside made his proposals known to Gort, Gort replied such an attack was impossible. Seven of his nine divisions were engaged on the Scheldt and even if it was possible to withdraw them, it would create a gap between the Belgians and British which the enemy could exploit and encircle the former. The BEF had been marching and fighting for nine days and was now running short of ammunition. The main effort had to be made by the French to the south.
The Belgian position on any offensive move was made clear by Leopold III. As far as he was concerned, the Belgian Army could not conduct offensive operations as it lacked tanks and aircraft; it existed solely for defence. The King also made clear that in the rapidly shrinking area of Belgium still free, there was only enough food for two weeks. Leopold did not expect the BEF to jeopardize its own position in order to keep contact with the Belgian Army, but he warned the British that if it persisted with the southern offensive the Belgians would be overstretched and their army would collapse. King Leopold suggested the best recourse was to establish a beach-head covering Dunkirk and the Belgian channel ports. The will of the CIGS won out. Gort committed just two infantry battalions and the only armoured battalion in the BEF to the attack, which despite some initial tactical success, failed to break the German defensive line at the Battle of Arras on 21 May.

In the aftermath of this failure, the Belgians were asked to fall back to the Yser river and protect the Allied left flank and rear areas. The King's aide, General Overstraten said that such a move could not be made and would lead to the Belgian Army disintegrating. Another plan for further offensives was suggested. The French requested the Belgians withdraw to the Leie and the British to the French frontier between Maulde and Halluin, the Belgians were then to extend their front to free further parts of the BEF for the attack. The French 1st Army would relieve two more divisions on the right flank. Leopold was reluctant to undertake such a move because it would abandon all but a small portion of Belgium. The Belgian Army was exhausted and it was an enormous technical task that would take too long to complete.

At this time, the Belgians and the British concluded that the French were beaten and the Allied Armies in the pocket on the Belgian–Franco border would be destroyed if action was not taken. The British, having lost confidence in their Allies, decided to look to the survival of the BEF.

The Belgian battle-front on the morning of 22 May extended some from north to south, beginning with the Cavalry Corps, which checked its advance at Terneuzen. V, II, VI, VII and IV Corps (all Belgian) were drawn up side by side. Two further signal Corps were guarding the coast. These formations were then largely holding the eastern front as the BEF and French forces withdrew to the west to protect Dunkirk, which was vulnerable to German assault on 22 May. The eastern front remained intact, but the Belgians now occupied their last fortified position at Leie. The Belgian I Corps, with only two incomplete divisions, had been heavily engaged in the fighting and their line was wearing thin. On that day, Winston Churchill visited the front and pressed for the French and British Armies to break out from the north-east. He assumed that the Belgian Cavalry Corps could support the offensives' right flank. Churchill dispatched the following message to Gort:
1. That the Belgian Army should withdraw to the line of the Yser and stand there, the sluices being opened.
2. That the British Army and French 1st Army should attack south-west toward Bapaume and Cambrai at the earliest moment, certainly tomorrow, with about eight divisions, and with the Belgian Cavalry Corps on the right of the British.
Such an order ignored the fact that the Belgian Army could not withdraw to the Yser, and there was little chance of any Belgian Cavalry joining in the attack. The plan for the Belgian withdrawal was sound; the Yser river covered Dunkirk to the east and south, while the La Bassée Canal covered it from the west. The ring of the Yser also dramatically shorted the Belgian Army's area of operations. Such a move would have abandoned Passchendaele and Ypres and would have certainly meant the capture of Ostend while further reducing the amount of Belgian territory still free by a few square miles.
On 23 May, the French tried to conduct a series of offensives against the German defensive line on the Ardennes–Calais axis but failed to make any meaningful gains. Meanwhile, on the Belgian front, the Belgians, under pressure, retreated further, and the Germans captured Terneuzen and Ghent that day. The Belgians also had trouble moving the oil, food and ammunition that they had left. The "Luftwaffe" had air superiority and made everyday life hazardous in logistical terms. Air support could only be called in by "wireless" and the RAF was operating from bases in southern England which made communication more difficult. The French denied the use of the Dunkirk, Bourbourg and Gravelines bases to the Belgians, which had initially been placed at its disposal. The Belgians were forced to use the only harbours left to them, at Nieuport and Ostend.

Churchill and Maxime Weygand, who had taken over command from Gamelin, were still determined to break the German line and extricate their forces to the south. When they communicated their intentions to King Leopold and van Overstraten on 24 May, the latter was stunned. A dangerous gap was starting to open between the British and Belgians between Ypres and Menen, which threatened what remained of the Belgian front. The Belgians could not cover it; such a move would have overstretched them. Without consulting the French or asking permission from his government, Gort immediately and decisively ordered the British 5th and 50th Infantry Divisions to plug the gap and abandon any offensive operations further south.

On the afternoon of 24 May, von Bock had thrown four divisions, of Reichenau's 6th Army, against the Belgian IV Corps position at the Kortrijk area of the Leie during the Battle of the Lys (1940). The Germans managed, against fierce resistance, to cross the river at night and force a one-mile penetration along a 13-mile front between Wervik and Kortrijk. The Germans, with superior numbers and in command of the air, had won the bridgehead. Nevertheless, the Belgians had inflicted many casualties and several tactical defeats on the Germans. The 1st, 3rd, 9th and 10th Infantry Divisions, acting as reinforcements, had counterattacked several times and managed to capture 200 German prisoners. Belgian artillery and infantry were then heavily attacked by the "Luftwaffe", which forced their defeat. The Belgians blamed the French and British for not providing air cover. The German bridgehead dangerously exposed the eastern flank of the southward stretched BEF's 4th Infantry Division. Montgomery dispatched several units of the 3rd Infantry Division (including the heavy infantry of the 1st and 7th Middlesex battalions and the 99th Battery, 20th Anti-Tank Regiment), as an improvised defence.

A critical point of the "Weygand Plan" and the British government and French Army's argument for a thrust south, was the withdrawal of forces to see the offensive through which had left the Belgian Army over-extended and was instrumental in its collapse. It was forced to cover the areas held by the BEF in order to enable the latter to engage in the offensive. Such a collapse could have resulted in the loss of the Channel ports behind the Allied front, leading to a complete strategic encirclement. The BEF could have done more to counterattack von Bock's left flank to relieve the Belgians as von Bock attacked "across" the fortified British position at Kortrijk. The Belgian High Command made at least five appeals for the British to attack the vulnerable left flank of the German divisions between the Scheldt and the Leie to avert disaster.

Admiral Sir Roger Keyes transmitted the following message to GHQ:
Van Overstraten is desperately keen for strong British counterattack. Either north or south of Leie could help restore the situation. Belgians expect to be attacked on the Ghent front tomorrow. Germans already have a bridgehead over canal west of Eecloo. There can be no question of the Belgian withdrawal to Yser. One battalion on march NE of Ypres was practically wiped out today in attack by sixty aircraft. Withdrawal over open roads without adequate fighter support very costly. Whole of their supplies are east of Yser. They strongly represent attempt should be made to restore the situation on Leie by British counter-attack for which opportunity may last another few hours only.

No such attack came. The Germans brought fresh reserves to cover the gap (Menen–Ypres). This nearly cut the Belgians off from the British. The 2nd, 6th and 10th Cavalry Divisions frustrated German attempts to exploit the gap in depth but the situation was still critical.
On 26 May, Operation Dynamo officially commenced, in which large French and British contingents were to be evacuated to the United Kingdom. By that time, the Royal Navy had already withdrawn 28,000 British non-fighting troops. Boulogne had fallen and Calais was about to, leaving Dunkirk, Ostend and Zeebrugge as the only viable ports which could be used for evacuation. The advance of the 14th German Army would not leave Ostend available for much longer. To the west, the German Army Group A had reached Dunkirk and were from its centre on the morning of 27 May, bringing the port within artillery range.

The situation on 27 May had changed considerably from just 24 hours earlier. The Belgian Army had been forced from the Leie line on 26 May, and Nevele, Vynckt, Tielt and Iseghem had fallen on the western and central part of the Leie front. In the east, the Germans had reached the outskirts of Bruges, and captured Ursel. In the west, the Menen–Ypres line had broken at Kortrijk and the Belgians were now using railway trucks to help form anti-tank defences on a line from Ypres–Passchendaele–Roulers. Further to the west the BEF had been forced back, north of Lille just over the French border and was now in danger of allowing a gap to develop between themselves and the Belgian southern flank on the Ypres–Lille axis. The danger in allowing a German advance to Dunkirk would mean the loss of the port which was now too great. The British withdrew to the port on 26 May. In doing so, they left the French 1st Army's north-eastern flank near Lille exposed. As the British moved out, the Germans moved in, encircling the bulk of the French Army. Both Gort and his Chief of Staff, General Henry Pownall, accepted that their withdrawal would mean the destruction of the French 1st Army, and they would be blamed for it.

The fighting of 26–27 May had brought the Belgian Army to the brink of collapse. The Belgians still held the Ypres–Roulers line to the west, and the Bruges–Thelt line to the east. However, on 27 May, the central front collapsed in the Iseghem–Thelt sector. There was now nothing to prevent a German thrust to the east to take Ostend and Bruges, or west to take the ports at Nieuport or La Panne, deep in the Allied rear. The Belgians had practically exhausted all available means of resistance. The disintegration of the Belgian Army and its front caused many erroneous accusations by the British. In fact, on numerous occasions, the Belgians had held on after British withdrawals. One example was the taking over of the Scheldt line, where they relieved the British 4th Infantry Division, allowing it to retire through their ranks. Despite this, Gort and to a greater extent Pownall, showed anger at the Belgian King's decision to surrender on 28 May, considering it undercut the war effort. When it was inquired if any Belgians were to be evacuated, Pownall was reported to have replied, "We don't care a bugger what happens to the Belgians".

The Belgian Army was stretched from Cadzand south to Menen on the river Leie, and west, from Menin, to Bruges without any sort of reserves. With the exception of a few RAF sorties, the air was exclusively under the control of the "Luftwaffe", and the Belgians reported attacks against all targets considered an objective, with resulting casualties. No natural obstacles remained between the Belgians and the German Army; retreat was not feasible. The "Luftwaffe" had destroyed most of the rail networks to Dunkirk, just three roads were left: Bruges–Torhout–Dixmude, Bruges–Ghistelles–Nieuport and Bruges–Ostend–Nieuport. Using such axes of retreat was impossible without losses owing to German air supremacy (as opposed to air superiority). Water supplies were damaged and cut off, gas and electricity supplies were also cut. Canals were drained and used as supply dumps for whatever ammunition and food-stuffs were left. The total remaining area covered just 1,700 km², and compacted military and civilians alike, of which the latter numbered some 3 million people. Under these circumstances Leopold deemed further resistance useless. On the evening of 27 May, he requested an armistice.

Churchill sent a message to Keyes the same day, and made clear what he thought of the request:
Belgian Embassy here assumes from King's decision to remain that he regards the war as lost and contemplates [a] separate peace. It is in order to dissociate itself from this that the constitutional Belgian Government has reassembled on foreign soil. Even if present Belgian Army has to lay down its arms, there are 200,000 Belgians of military age in France, and greater resources than Belgium had in 1914 which to fight back. By present decision the King is dividing the Nation and delivering it into Hitler's protection. Please convey these considerations to the King, and impress upon him the disastrous consequences to the Allies and to Belgium of his present choice. 

The Royal Navy evacuated General Headquarters at Middelkerke and Sint-Andries, east of Bruges, during the night. Leopold III, and his mother Queen Mother Elisabeth, stayed in Belgium to endure five years of self-imposed captivity. In response to the advice of his government to set up a government-in-exile Leopold said, "I have decided to stay. The cause of the Allies is lost."
The Belgian surrender came into effect at 04:00 on 28 May. Recriminations abounded with the British and French claiming the Belgians had betrayed the alliance. In Paris, the French Premier Paul Reynaud denounced Leopold's surrender, and the Belgian Premier Hubert Pierlot informed the people that Leopold had taken action against the unanimous advice of the government. As a result, the king was no longer in a position to govern and the Belgian government in exile that was located in Paris (later moved to London following the fall of France) would continue the struggle. The chief complaint was that the Belgians had not given any prior warning that their situation was so serious as to capitulate. Such claims were largely unjust. The Allies had known, and admitted it privately on 25 May through contact with the Belgians, that the latter were on the verge of collapse.

Churchill's and the British response was officially restrained. This was due to the strong-willed defence of the Belgian defensive campaign presented to the cabinet by Sir Roger Keyes at 11:30 am 28 May. The French and Belgian ministers had referred to Leopold's actions as treacherous, but they were unaware of the true events: Leopold had not signed an agreement with Hitler in order to form a collaborative government, but an unconditional surrender as Commander-in-Chief of the Belgian Armed Forces.

The casualty reports include total losses at this point in the campaign. The figures for the Battle of Belgium, 10–28 May 1940, cannot be known with any certainty.

Belgian casualties stood at:

Numbers for the Battle of Belgium are unknown, but the French suffered the following losses throughout the entire western campaign, 10 May – 22 June:

Numbers for the Battle of Belgium are unknown, but the British suffered the following losses throughout the entire campaign, 10 May – 22 June:

The consolidated report of the "Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" regarding the operations in the west from 10 May to 4 June (German: "Zusammenfassender Bericht des Oberkommandos der Wehrmacht über die Operationen im Westen vom 10. Mai bis 4. Juni") reports:




</doc>
<doc id="23289641" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23289641" title="Kendrick Moxon">
Kendrick Moxon

Kendrick Lichty Moxon is an American Scientology official and an attorney with the law firm Moxon & Kobrin. He practices in Los Angeles, California, and is a lead counsel for the Church of Scientology. Moxon received a B.A. from American University in 1972, and a J.D. degree from George Mason University in 1981. He was admitted to the Washington, D.C. bar association in 1984, and the State Bar of California in 1987. Moxon's early work for the Church of Scientology involved legal affairs, and he also held the title of "reverend". He worked out of the Scientology intelligence agency known as the Guardian's Office (GO), and was named as an unindicted co-conspirator after the Federal Bureau of Investigation's investigation into criminal activities by Scientology operatives called "Operation Snow White". An evidence stipulation in the case signed by both parties stated he had provided false handwriting samples to the FBI; Moxon has since said that he did not "knowingly supply" false handwriting samples.

The bulk of Moxon's legal work is Scientology-related. He has served as Commissioner of the Scientology-affiliated organization Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR). He represented the Church of Scientology in 1988 in a billion-dollar class action lawsuit against the organization by former Scientologists which was dismissed in Los Angeles Superior Court. In 1990 Moxon represented the organization in a suit against the Internal Revenue Service in an attempt to gain access to information about Scientology held by the IRS. He assisted 50 Scientologists in filing separate lawsuits against the organization Cult Awareness Network (CAN), which led to the bankruptcy of the organization. He represented the plaintiff in the Jason Scott case against CAN and cult deprogrammer Rick Ross.

A Scientology publication said Moxon had used church doctrine in bringing down CAN. Its assets were bought in bankruptcy court by a Scientologist and legal associate of Moxon's. Moxon said he was proud of what he had done, referring to the old CAN organization as a "hate group". Moxon represented the manager of the Scientology facility Golden Era Productions in a filing against Keith Henson, a critic of Scientology. Moxon filed an affidavit in 2000 in the case involving the criminal prosecution of the Church of Scientology in the death of Scientologist Lisa McPherson, and defended her treatment by Scientology staffers as part of a religious practice.

Moxon was born in Pennsylvania. He graduated from American University in 1972 with a B.A. degree in Anthropology. He received his J.D. degree from George Mason University in 1981. He was admitted to the bar of Washington, D.C. on September 6, 1984, and the State Bar of California on June 17, 1987.

In 1979, Moxon and Carla Smith had a daughter, Stacy Grove Meyer. Meyer died on June 25, 2000 after she fell off a ladder and was electrocuted after touching a 7,200-volt wire while working at Golden Era Productions. Golden Era Productions was cited by the California Division of Occupational Safety and Health for improper wiring precautions near a vault where Grove Meyer had been working. The California Occupational Safety and Health Administration investigated the incident, and determined that her death was not related to the safety violations at the facility. Grove Meyer had worked for two years at Golden Era Productions in landscaping and maintenance.

In 1977, Moxon served as an official of the Church of Scientology, and held the title of "reverend". His role within the organization in 1977 was called "Director of the Ministry of Legal Affairs of the Founding Church of Scientology". Along with Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard and nineteen other Scientologists, Moxon was named as an unindicted co-conspirator after the Federal Bureau of Investigation's investigation into criminal activities by Scientology operatives called "Operation Snow White". At the time of the indictments and investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the Operation Snow White case, Moxon was working in the church intelligence agency then known as the Guardian's Office (GO). Operation Snow White was the name coined by Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard for a mission by the organization's intelligence division to illegally obtain documents from the United States government. As part of Operation Snow White, members of the Guardian's Office broke into U.S. government offices including those of the Internal Revenue Service, in order to steal documents relating to Scientology.

A 1979 stipulation of evidence signed by officials for Scientology states that Moxon provided false handwriting samples of GO operative Michael Meisner to the FBI. Both parties to the case were in agreement that Moxon responded to an October 14, 1976 subpoena titled "Grand Jury subpoena for all original known handwriting exemplars of Michael Meisner and the employment application and personnel records of Mr. Meisner in the possession of the Church of Scientology" by providing "fake handwriting samples in lieu of Mr. Meisner's true handwriting exemplars" to the United States government. The stipulation stated Moxon was "directed to supply the government with fake handwriting samples". Nine Scientologists signed the stipulation as part of a plea bargain. According to a 1976 letter from the "District of Columbia Security Office" of the Guardian's Office, "Rick Moxon" and four other individuals had either "full data or almost all of it", about covert operations against the United States government. According to the Guardian's Office letter, Moxon was prevented under penalty of a US$50,000 fine from disclosing his knowledge of the church cover operations. The non-disclosure agreement was titled "Covenant of Non-Disclosure; 'Doomsday Agreement'". The letter told an official for the Church of Scientology to instruct Moxon "if they do talk, then they will be expelled forever, hounded by the GO [Guardian Office] until doomsday, and left to rot in the Physical Universe".

Moxon stated to the "Phoenix New Times" that the stipulation of evidence was written by FBI agents and signed by church officials. He asserted that he did not "knowingly supply" samples of false handwriting to the FBI, and said that he was investigated by bar associations for California and Washington, D.C. before being admitted to the respective bar associations. According to the "Phoenix New Times", Moxon is "in good standing" with both bar associations. Former church intelligence operative Frank Oliver told the "Phoenix New Times" that in his work for the replacement to the Guardian's Office, the Office of Special Affairs, his last assignment for the organization was to assist Moxon in setting up a special unit focused on the Cult Awareness Network. Oliver stated that the goal of his work with Moxon was to recruit individuals who would become plaintiffs in lawsuits against the Cult Awareness Network.

Moxon acted as attorney for the Church of Scientology in 1988 when former Scientologists sued the organization in a billion-dollar class action lawsuit. According to Moxon the former Scientologists included some members who were subject to excommunication, and they requested the return of donations they had made to the organization, as well as payment for time working on its behalf. The case was dismissed by a Los Angeles Superior Court judge, and Moxon characterized the plaintiffs as "a few former members who apparently banded together for the purpose of making a monetary killing".

In 1990 Moxon represented the Church of Scientology in a lawsuit against the Internal Revenue Service in an attempt to gain access to government documents on the organization. "The actions taken by the IRS in this case are typical of the agency's harassive treatment of religious groups," said Moxon in a statement in "The Fresno Bee". During the Church of Scientology's battle with the IRS, Moxon's law firm hired private investigators to investigate the government agency. Private investigator Michael L. Shomers said he set up a dummy operation called "Washington News Bureau", posed as a reporter, and attempted to collection material on Scientology critics. Shomers also said he infiltrated IRS conferences in attempts to collect data on IRS employees that may have been skipping appointments, drinking or having affairs. Shomers said he was either paid in cash or by checks from Moxon's firm Bowles & Moxon. According to "The New York Times", Moxon said Shomers' activities were legal, and that he and other Scientology attorneys used private investigators to counter falsehoods from "rogue government agents".

Moxon assisted Scientologists in filing 50 lawsuits against the Cult Awareness Network (CAN), which eventually led to the bankruptcy of the organization. Moxon confirmed to the "St. Petersburg Times" that his firm assisted the Scientologists with their litigation against CAN for mostly no charge, and that Scientology churches "helped a little bit, but very little" with the case. Moxon asserted that his legal services were requested by individual Scientologists because of his religious discrimination litigation experience. "These were filed by [individual] Scientologists who were victimized by CAN. That’s the long and short of it," said Moxon. Moxon stated to "60 Minutes" "They didn't--they didn't spring up serendipitously. A number of Scientologists came to our firm and said, 'I'm being discriminated against by CAN.'"

Jason Scott of the Life Tabernacle Church in Bellevue, Washington was taken from his home in 1991 and subjected to "deprogramming". Deprogrammer Rick Ross had been referred to Scott's mother by a local volunteer for CAN, and Moxon represented Scott in a lawsuit against Ross and CAN. Moxon took on Jason Scott's case "pro bono". According to a "60 Minutes" report on Scientology's actions against the Cult Awareness Network, two affidavits used by Moxon in the case were false. Scott won a jury judgment of US$5 million including $1.8 million against CAN, and CAN later declared bankruptcy. After the CAN organization was purchased in bankruptcy court by a Scientology attorney, Scott fired Moxon and hired Graham Berry, a Los Angeles lawyer who had previously represented clients in suits against the Church of Scientology. Scott and Ross settled in 1996 for $5,000 and 200 hours of time from Ross for his intervention services.

Scott stated that he felt he had been manipulated as part of the Church of Scientology's plan to destroy CAN. According to the "Chicago Tribune", Scott and his relatives felt Moxon was not paying enough attention to Scott's financial judgment, and was instead focused on a "personal vendetta" against CAN. "Basically, Jason said he was tired of being the poster boy for the Scientologists. My son has never been a member of the Church of Scientology. When he was approached by Moxon, he was lured by his promises of a $1 million settlement, so he went for it," said Scott's mother Katherine Tonkin in a statement to the "Chicago Tribune".

After Scott fired Moxon, Moxon filed emergency motions in two states and alleged Scott had been influenced by supporters of CAN to hire Berry as his lawyer. "He's really been abused by CAN and disgustingly abused by this guy Berry," said Moxon in a statement in "The Washington Post". Moxon, who had argued in the case that Ross and associates had hindered a competent adult's freedom to make his own religious decisions, immediately filed court papers seeking to rescind the settlement and appoint a guardian for Scott, whom he called "incapacitated." That effort failed. Jason Scott stated he felt he had been a "pawn" in Scientology's "whole game".

Moxon was involved in the sale of CAN's confidential files when the organization was in bankruptcy proceedings. Individuals that had confided in the prior version of the CAN organization expressed anxiety about their confidential files being sold to other groups, but Moxon stated: "People who have committed crimes don't want them to be revealed." Moxon's former legal associate, Scientologist Steven Hayes, purchased the assets of the Cult Awareness Network in bankruptcy court. In 2000, Moxon co-authored a paper on the Cult Awareness Network with Anson D. Shupe and Susan E. Darnell. The paper, titled "CAN, We Hardly Knew Ye: Sex, Drugs, Deprogrammers' Kickbacks, and Corporate Crime in the (Old) Cult Awareness Network", was presented at the 2000 meeting of the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion in Houston, Texas. The old "CAN no longer exists because it was a hate group that destroyed families. I’m very proud of what I’ve done," said Moxon in a statement in "The American Lawyer".

According to a Scientology publication, Moxon utilized Scientology doctrine to bring about the demise of the Cult Awareness Network. The publication, authored by Scientology official Kurt Weiland, stated: "A civil case was filed by the victim against [Rick] Ross and the Cult Awareness Network. This time he had an attorney who knew what he was doing and understood PTS/SP tech! The attorney was a Scientologist and OT [Operating Thetan] Rick Moxon." "PTS/SP tech" is Scientology terminology referring to the organization's founder L. Ron Hubbard's prescribed tactics of handling enemies called "suppressive persons" (SPs) and their associates, called "potential trouble sources" (PTSs). The Cult Awareness Network was seen by Scientology as a "SP" organization.

Moxon represented manager Ken Hoden of the Church of Scientology's Golden Era Productions in February 1998 when he filed a restraining order against Keith Henson after Henson protested against Scientology in May 1997 and January 1998 outside the Golden Era film studios in Gilman Hot Springs, California. Moxon had argued that Henson was dangerous based on comments critical of Scientologists he had posted on the Internet, and his knowledge in the fields of cryonics and explosives. Hoden received a temporary restraining order against Henson, but the Riverside Superior Court judge refused to make the restraining order permanent.

In 1999, Moxon represented members of the Seventh-day Adventists and Unification Church in a lawsuit against a Maryland state task force which was investigating the effects of religious cults on college campuses. The Unification Church and Seventh-day Adventists members claimed that their constitutional rights were violated and described the "Task Force to Study the Effects of Cult Activities on Public Senior Higher Education Institutions" as a "religious inquisition".

With fellow Scientology attorney Helena Kobrin, Moxon filed an affidavit in Pinellas-Pasco Circuit Court in March 2000, complaining to the judge about the criminal prosecution of the Church of Scientology related to the death of Lisa McPherson. They claimed that the prosecution held an "extreme religious bias" and a "narrow-minded concept of a church". They defended the practice of the Scientology staffers that had kept Lisa McPherson at the Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater, Florida, asserting they had been involved in the "Introspection Rundown", which they called an "entirely religious" practice developed by Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard. They wrote that "Forcing a Scientologist to receive psychiatric services would be like forcing an Orthodox Jew to eat pork or forcing a devoted Catholic to have an abortion. It is simply unacceptable and unthinkable to our religious faith and conscience." Moxon said that the wrongful death lawsuit filed by members of McPherson's family against the Church of Scientology was "nothing more than a vehicle to say bad things about the church". The criminal prosecution in the Lisa McPherson case was dropped due to issues with record-keeping by the medical examiner; a wrongful death civil suit was settled in 2004.

According to Scientology general counsel Elliot Abelson, the bulk of Moxon's legal work is Scientology-related. In addition to his office with his law firm, as of 1997 Moxon also kept a legal office in the Church of Scientology's headquarters at Hollywood, Los Angeles, California. Moxon has also served as legal advisor to the Scientology-affiliated organization Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR). According to a CCHR press release from 2001, Moxon represented CCHR International as its Commissioner.

In 2014, Moxon sought arbitration through the National Arbitration Forum to have the Internet domain name, "KendrickMoxon.com", transferred from Donald Myers to Moxon's ownership. Moxon successfully demonstrated to the Forum arbitrator that Myers "registered and used the domain name in bad faith", and Moxon's petition was granted.

In 2013, Private Investigator Dwayne Powell was arrested on obstruction and prowling charges related to following Ron Miscavige. During the arrest, police found found firearms and a homemade silencer. After his arrest, Powell claimed to have been paid $10,000 per week by Scientology through an intermediary. According to the Los Angeles Times, Moxon's firm paid Powell $16,000 and kept Powell on the payroll two years after his arrest.





</doc>
<doc id="23319465" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23319465" title="Battle of Sedan (1940)">
Battle of Sedan (1940)

The Battle of Sedan or Second Battle of Sedan (12–15 May 1940) was an engagement in the Second World War fought during the 1940 German invasion of France. It was part of the German "Wehrmacht"s operational plan codenamed "Fall Gelb" (Case Yellow) for an offensive through the hilly and heavily forested Ardennes, to encircle the Allied armies in Belgium and north-eastern France. German Army Group A crossed the Meuse river with the intention of capturing Sedan and pushing northwards towards the Channel coast, in order to entrap the Allied forces that were advancing east into Belgium, as part of the Allied Dyle Plan strategy.

Sedan was situated on the east bank of the Meuse River. Its capture would give the Germans a base from which to capture the Meuse bridges and cross the river. Should this occur, the German divisions could then advance across the open and undefended French countryside, beyond Sedan, and to the English Channel. On 12 May, Sedan was captured without resistance. In the following days, the Germans defeated the French defences surrounding Sedan on the west bank of the Meuse. This was largely achieved by the "Luftwaffe". As a result of German bombing and low morale, the French defenders were unable to mount a coherent defence. The Germans captured the Meuse bridges at Sedan allowing them to pour forces including armour across the river. On 14 May, the Allied air forces, the Royal Air Force (RAF) and "Armée de l'Air" (French Air Force) tried to destroy the bridges, and prevent German reinforcements reaching the west bank. The "Luftwaffe" prevented them from doing so. In large air battles, the Allies suffered high losses which depleted Allied bomber strength in the campaign.

The crossing of the Meuse enabled the Germans to break into the strategic depths, or undefended rear, of the Allied front and to advance to the English Channel without significant opposition. The French attempted to launch counter-attacks against the German-held bridgeheads, from 15–17 May, but the offensives fell victim to delay and confusion. Five days after consolidating their bridgeheads at Sedan, on 20 May, the German Army reached the Channel. The victory at Sedan achieved the operational goal of "Fall Gelb" and encircled the strongest Allied armies, including the British Expeditionary Force. The resulting battles destroyed the remaining French army as an effective fighting force, and expelled the British Army from the continent, leading to the defeat of France in June 1940. The battle at Sedan was instrumental in the fall of France.

On 10 May 1940, the "Wehrmacht" invaded Luxembourg, Netherlands and Belgium. In the Netherlands the Germans made steady progress. By 12 May, units of the German Army Group B were closing on Rotterdam and Amsterdam, while in central Belgium the Germans were close to reaching the Dyle river east of Brussels. In response to the invasions, the Allied First Army Group, under the command of Gaston Billotte, containing the French Seventh Army, French Ninth Army, French First Army and the British Expeditionary Force, advanced to the Dyle river in order to form a solid front line as part of the Dyle Plan, a defensive strategy to halt the German advances in Belgium. However, the offensive by Army Group B was a diversion. The main thrust of "Fall Gelb" was to be conducted by Army Group A through the Ardennes in Luxembourg and southern Belgium. Once these lightly defended areas were negotiated, Army Group A's "XIX. Panzerkorps" (19th Tank Corps), under the command of Heinz Guderian, was to strike into France at Sedan, located on the Meuse river. Its capture would enable a German advance into the undefended depths of France and to the English Channel, into the rear of the Allied mobile forces advancing into Belgium. The result would be a strategic-level encirclement.

For the offensive, the "Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" (German High Command) gave Army Group A the most powerful concentration of German armour and motorised forces. Although Army Group B was allocated 808 tanks, over of the total German tanks, they were largely light tanks such as the Panzer I and Panzer II, as opposed to the Panzer III and Panzer IV. The heavier tanks were handed over to Army Group A as it required the best machines to conduct the critical operation at Sedan. Army Group A contained 1,753 tanks of the heavier types.

Following the First World War, the French General Staff had ruled out the idea of a future German thrust through the Ardennes–Sedan sector. The French were certain such terrain could not be crossed by tanks. Marshal Philippe Pétain described them as "impenetrable". Maurice Gamelin described the geographical feature as "Europe's best tank obstacle". The "barrier" of the Meuse and Ardennes appeared to be a sound strategic defence feature that a future enemy could not get through or go around. The French concluded that at best, a German assault through the Ardennes towards Sedan would not reach the Meuse until two weeks after the start of any German offensive, taking between five and nine days to penetrate the Ardennes alone.

The French assessments were less credible in the light of military exercises carried out in 1938. That year, General André-Gaston Prételat took command of manoeuvres which created a scenario whereby the German Army launched an assault with seven divisions, including four motorised infantry divisions and two tank brigades (the type of the remaining three are not given). The "French" side's defences collapsed. "The result was a defeat of so comprehensive a nature that the wisdom of publishing it was questioned lest morale be damaged." As late as March 1940, a French report to Gamelin named the defences at Sedan, the last "fortified" position on the Meuse, and the last before the open country of France, as "entirely inadequate." Prételat had correctly identified the landscape as relatively easy terrain for armour to cross. At most, he concluded, the Germans would take 60 hours to reach the Meuse and take one day to cross it. This estimate was to prove only three hours too late. The Germans achieved the Meuse crossing after just 57 hours.

The French Army authorised fresh attempts to increase the strength of the fortifications in the autumn of 1939, but severe winter weather prevented the pouring of concrete and the delivery of the necessary materials. On 11 April 1940, General Charles Huntziger asked for another four divisions to work on the defences but was refused.

The French defences at Sedan were weak and neglected. The French had long believed that the German Army would not attack through the Sedan sector as part of their concentrated effort, and only Brigadier General Pierre Lafontaine's French 55th Infantry Division, a category B division, was allocated to this sector. The Maginot Line ended east of Sedan at La Ferté, where Fort No. 505 constituted its most westerly position. Sedan was a part of the extended Maginot Line that ran north behind the Meuse river. Between Sedan and La Ferté lay the Stenay gap, which was a stretch of unprotected terrain not covered by French defences or natural obstacles. This was the reason a significant number of French generals insisted on strengthening this sector, while ignoring Sedan.

As the French constructed further fortifications, "Luftwaffe" reconnaissance aircraft picked up the activity and reported it. The steep slopes on the banks of the Meuse, added to what appeared in photographic reconnaissance to be a formidable barrier of bunkers and defence lines, caused Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt, the commander in chief of Army Group A, to question the wisdom of Guderian in choosing Sedan as the point of maximum effort. To identify how strong these fortifications were, a team of photographic specialists were called in to evaluate the pictures. Their analysis concluded that what appeared to be strong fortified positions were just the construction sites of half-built bunkers that were, to all intents and purposes, empty shells. The contribution of the specialists tilted the Sedan attack plan into Guderian's favour.

General Huntziger was happy to rely on "concrete" to ensure the safety of Sedan as he rejected the idea that the Germans would attack through the Ardennes. The Second Army built of concrete fortifications along its front, but very little in the Sedan sector. Only 42 bunkers protected the Sedan bridgeheads on the outbreak of war in September 1939 and an additional 61 were built by 10 May. However, by 10 May, most of the bunkers were incomplete, lacking gun port shutters for the artillery casemates. Some of the bunkers lacked rear doors, making them vulnerable to infiltration by infantry. To the north of Sedan, on the northern bend of the Meuse, the town of Glaire overlooked the crossing points on the river, which was to be where the German armour would deliver its heaviest blow. There was a gap of between Bunker 305 at Glaire and Bunker 211 next to the Pont Neuf bridge. This allowed an attacker coming from the north to use the good road routes through the Fleigneux–Saint-Menges–Glaire axis to enter Sedan from the north.

The defences at Sedan also lacked any mines. The French Second Army was guarding a front of , and was given only 16,000 mines. Of that number, 7,000 were given to the cavalry divisions that were intended to delay a German advance through southern Belgium as well as to blockhouse points along the Franco–Belgian border. That left 2,000 for the defence of the river Meuse. Of those, the 55th Infantry Division got 422. Not all of these were laid, and some barriers were moved during the bunker construction in the Sedan sector.

As the German Army advanced through southern Belgium on 12 May, General Ewald von Kleist and Guderian clashed over where the main point of effort should fall. Kleist was Guderian's immediate superior, commanding "Panzergruppe von Kleist", consisting of XLI Panzer Corps and XIX Panzer Corps (under Guderian). Kleist pressed for the main point to come at Flize, further west than Sedan. Kleist argued that the blow would avoid a double river crossing at the Meuse (at Sedan) and Ardennes canal (to the west of Sedan). Moreover, the blow would strike at the dividing line between the French Ninth Army and the French Second Army. Guderian saw things differently, and pointed out that a thrust along the lines of Kleist's plan would put the flank of the advance within range of the fortress artillery at Charleville-Mézières, some north west of Sedan. The shift of operations further north would also disperse concentration (or "Schwerpunkt") and disrupt the intense planning of the German tactical units, who had been in training for the Sedan attack and an advance north-west, for months. He also felt that a regrouping period in front of Sedan would delay the assault for 24 hours and allow the French to bring up reinforcements. Kleist agreed that such a delay was unacceptable, so he agreed to Guderian's plan.

Nevertheless, while Kleist accepted the folly of the Flize detour, he insisted the offensive concentration point should be made west of the Ardennes Canal. Kleist reaffirmed this in a letter to Guderian on 18 April, but when operations began Guderian ignored this completely. Guderian had wanted a large, bridgehead at Sedan and the rapid occupation of Stonne and the high ground surrounding Sedan.

Guderian's plan for 13 May was straightforward. The 2nd Panzer Division in the north was to form the right flank of the assaulting force when it reached the Meuse near Donchery. The 1st Panzer Division, reinforced by the "Infantry Regiment Großdeutschland", a battalion of assault engineers, and divisional artillery of the 2nd and 10th Panzer Divisions, was to make the main attack by crossing the Meuse just north of Sedan and seizing the Heights of la Marfee overlooking the city. The 10th Panzer Division was to cross the Meuse south of Sedan and protect the southern flank of the corps. Throughout the day, large masses of troops and equipment assembled north of the Meuse in preparation for the river crossing.

The German forces consisted of the 1st, 2nd and 10th Panzer Divisions. The 1st Panzer Division under the command of "General-Major" (Major General) Friedrich Kirchner, had on strength 52 Panzer IIs, 98 Panzer III, 58 Panzer IV, 40 Panzer 35(t) and eight Sd.Kfz. 265 Panzerbefehlswagens. The 2nd Panzer Division, under the command of "Generalleutnant" (Lieutenant General) Rudolf Veiel, had to hand 45 Panzer I, 115 Panzer II, 59 Panzer III and 32 Panzer IVs. It also had 16 Sd.Kfz. 265. The 10th Panzer Division, under the command of "Generalleutnant" Ferdinand Schaal, had 44 Panzer I, 113 Panzer II, 58 Panzer III, 32 Panzer IV and 18 Sd.Kfz. 265. In total Guderian could muster 60,000 men, 22,000 vehicles, 771 tanks and 141 artillery pieces. He could also call upon 1,470 aircraft.

Part of Guderian's problem was the lack of mobile artillery. He had no intention of halting the breakout in order to wait for additional artillery units to be moved into place to assault Sedan. Instead, Guderian requested maximum support from the "Luftwaffe". For the first few days the German air arm would be used mostly in support of Army Group B. Most of the air support over Sedan was to be provided by "Luftflotte 3" (Air Fleet 3). Initially, only limited numbers of air units were to be used, but the "Luftwaffe"s workload was greatly increased nearer the time of the battle. The "Luftwaffe" was to commit "I. Fliegerkorps" (1st Air Corps under Ulrich Grauert), "II. Fliegerkorps" (under Bruno Loerzer), "V. Fliegerkorps" (under Robert Ritter von Greim), and "VIII. Fliegerkorps" (under Wolfram Freiherr von Richthofen). These units came from "Luftflotte 2" and "Jagdfliegerführer 3" (Fighter Leader 3). The most significant unit was "VIII. Fliegerkorps", nicknamed the "Nahkampf-Fliegerkorps" (Close Support Air Corps), which contained "Sturzkampfgeschwader 77" (Dive bomber Wing 77), a powerful concentration of dive-bomber units equipped with the Junkers Ju 87 "Stuka" precision ground attack aircraft. This powerful air concentration numbered some 1,470 aircraft; 600 Heinkel He 111 and Junkers Ju 88 medium bombers and Dornier Do 17 light bombers, 250 Ju 87s, 500 Messerschmitt Bf 109s and 120 Messerschmitt Bf 110s.

In the sector of Longwy, Sedan and Namur, where the Ardennes and the River Meuse meet, the French Ninth Army and French Second Army were made up chiefly of poor quality divisions. Reinforcements were minimal, and those units were equipped with obsolete weapons. The resources at the disposal of the two Series B divisions, the 55th and later 71s Infantry Divisions, who were to bear the brunt of the attack, were weak. They had almost no Regular officers and they had not been broken-in to war conditions by being in contact with the enemy.

The 55th Infantry Division guarding Sedan had little time for combat training, as its time had been spent in construction work. The division consisted mainly of reservists, most of who were over the age of 30. Little attempt was made to improve the poor combat quality of the division. One officer, First Lieutenant Delas of the 1st Battalion 147th Fortress Infantry Regiment was arrested and confined for 15 days for ordering firing practice with a 25mm anti-tank gun in a nearby quarry.
The division's commanding officer, General Lafontaine, put more faith into fortifications than training, as he believed it would compensate for the weakness of the division. The men of the division lacked the confidence and will to fight when the battle took place.

The organisation of the French 55th Infantry Division was chaotic. Most units had been involved in construction work and were constantly moved to different tactical positions. Of the nine companies in position by 10 May, only a few had been holding their respective positions for even a few days and were not familiar with them. One of the premier infantry regiments, the 213th Infantry Regiment, was removed from the line altogether and was replaced with the 331st Regiment. In some cases, Infantry regiments were made up of several different companies from several different battalions from different regiments. For example, the 295th Infantry Regiment's 6th Company, 2nd Battalion, was made up of four different companies which were drawn from three different battalions belonging to three different regiments.

Such actions damaged the cohesion of the units that were initially strong. The 147th Fortress Regiment was the backbone of the 55th Infantry Division and was to occupy the bunker positions on the Meuse. At the start of mobilisation, the unit had high morale and very good cohesion. Because of the constant changes in organisation, however, the unit's battalions were "torn apart again and again".

To relieve the 55th Infantry Division, the French 71st Infantry Division was ordered out of reserve and into the frontline. The presence of the 71st Infantry shortened the front from along the Meuse. This would increase the density of fighting strength in the immediate area, but such a move was only partially complete by 10 May, as it was scheduled to be completed on 13–14 May, three days "after" the German attack. Although the two divisions had 174 artillery pieces, more than the German forces opposing them, they had to share that force between them. Both divisions were short of anti-tank and anti-aircraft guns, a critical short-coming.

The main problem confronting Guderian and his Sedan method was inadequate artillery support. Several batteries were stuck in traffic in the Ardennes and he could not rely on the artillery batteries of his Panzer Divisions only. Everything depended on the support of the "Luftwaffe". General der Flieger Hugo Sperrle, commander of "Luftflotte 3", had planned a conventional method of a brief bombardment before the ground forces moved in. After preparatory raids, the medium and dive-bombers were to smash the French defences in a concentrated blow lasting 20 minutes. The raid was planned for 16:00 before the infantry crossed the Meuse. In collaboration, Bruno Loerzer's "II. Fliegerkorps" had developed the concept of the rolling raid with Guderian. The idea of a single massed strike was abandoned, and the German air units were to attack in small formations but constantly, through the day. It was deemed the effect would be threefold; the French artillery would be eliminated, the effect of continuous raids would damage enemy morale, and smaller formations would be more systematic and accurate against targets such as bunkers.

Unknown to Guderian, von Kleist, his immediate superior, had contacted Loerzer and banned Guderian's proposed long systematic approach in favour of one big assault. Guderian complained. Kleist ignored him. Yet, the following morning, Loerzer rejected Kleist's method and went ahead with the agreed rolling bombing as discussed with Guderian. Loerzer would later say that the official order from Hugo Sperrle had arrived too late to make changes.

By nightfall on 12 May, Guderian's XIX. "Panzerkorps" rolled into Sedan. Guderian reported there was no sign of the enemy. With the city itself secured, Guderian would now have to strike south, across the defended rear behind Sedan, which in turn was protected by a large bunker complex located on Marfee ridge, a piece of high ground covering the Sedan-Meuse river to the south. But there were three fundamental choices. He could obey tactical necessity and protect the bridgeheads against a French counter-attack from the south; he could strike west towards Paris with his Corps; or he could carry out the dash to the Channel. Remembering the Chief of Operations, 1st Panzer Division, Walther Wenck's saying, "Hit with your fists, don't feel with your fingers!", Guderian decided on the last option.

In the early hours of 13 May, the 10th Panzer Division slipped into position upstream to the north-east of Sedan, ready to strike at its designated crossing point near the town of Wadelincourt. Downstream, the 2nd Panzer Division moved into position to cross at Donchery. The 1st Panzer Division prepared to strike at the Gaulier bridgehead, near Floing, in the centre of Sedan's tactical front. It was on the northern bend of the Sedan Meuse loop that the "Luftwaffe" was to make its maximum effort, between Gaulier and Wadelincourt. To supplement his air support, Guderian stripped most of his Panzer Divisions of their artillery, which he then positioned directly opposite Gaulier. However, the artillery regiments lacked ammunition. Sustained and damaging bombardment through shelling was impossible. The "Luftwaffe" was going to have to do most of the work. Guderian reported that his Corps had only 141 artillery pieces against the French 174. To the north and south of Sedan, the French X Corps and French XXXXI Corps (at the artillery fortress at Charleville-Mézières) could also add their artillery and shell Guderian's Panzer units as they crossed the bridgeheads. The slow advance of artillery units to the front added to the German numerical inferiority, which was now 1:3 against. Only in the afternoon did the German artillery make an appearance, but with little effect. The 2nd Panzer Division was forced to attack without artillery support. For these reasons, Guderian had decided the outcome depended on the quality of air support, acting as flying artillery.

"Luftflotte 3" (commanded by Hugo Sperrle), supported by "Luftflotte 2" (commanded by Albert Kesselring), executed the heaviest air bombardment the world had yet witnessed and the most intense by the "Luftwaffe" during the war. The Luftwaffe committed two "Sturzkampfgeschwader" (dive bomber wings) to the assault, flying 300 sorties against French positions, with "Sturzkampfgeschwader 77" alone flying 201 individual missions. A total of 3,940 sorties were flown by nine "Kampfgeschwader" (Bomber Wing) units often in "Gruppe" strength.

The planned aerial assault would last for eight hours, from 08:00-16:00. Loerzer and Richthofen committed two "Stuka" units to the attack. Loerzer's Ju 87s flew some 180 missions against Sedan's bunkers whilst Richthofen's managed 90. The nine "Kampfgruppen" (bomber wings) of Bruno Loerzer's "II. Fliegerkorps" flew 900 missions against the 360 of Wolfram Freiherr von Richthofen's "VIII. Fliegerkorps". "VIII. Fliegerkorps"s total mission count on the Meuse front was 910 compared to "II. Fliegerkorps" 1,770 missions.

The "Luftwaffe"s target was the Marfee heights which lay behind Sedan to the south east. They contained the fortified artillery positions and dominated the approaches to the strategic and operational depths beyond Sedan and the Meuse. The "Luftwaffe" was two hours late in appearing but the effort made was considerable. The attacks were made in "Gruppe" (group) strength and against the line of maximum resistance along the enemy gun line. To restrict enemy movements and communications, German fighters swept the area to cut land-lines and strafe fortifications, with some shooting of radio antennae off command posts. The attacks isolated the forward defence lines. "Sturzkampfgeschwader 77" struck first in the morning of 13 May. In just five hours, 500 Ju 87 sorties had been flown.

The "Luftwaffe" cowed the defenders, breaking them psychologically. The gunners, the backbone of the defences, had abandoned their positions by the time the German ground assault had begun. The cost to the "Luftwaffe" was just six aircraft, three of which were Ju 87s.

The French 55th Infantry Division was not prepared for such an attack. French soldiers had commented on the massive psychological effect of the bombardment, in particular the siren of the Ju 87. However, after the war, it was discovered that none of the bunkers had been destroyed by direct hits. Moreover, just 56 French casualties were suffered. It was the indirect effect that did the damage. The telecommunication cables were destroyed (most had been laid out in the open) through bombing, paralysing the division's communications, and the psychological damage crippled its defensive capacity.

The ensuing psychological damage contributed to "the panic of Bulson". At about 19:00 on 13 May, a report by a French artillery observer was passed on incorrectly. There was a rumour that German tanks were approaching the town of Bulson. The false reports spread and the French 55th Infantry Division deserted their positions. German sources say that the first German tank crossed the Meuse River 12 hours later. By the time the error was realised, most of the artillerymen and infantrymen had abandoned their heavy equipment.

The central ground assault was to be conducted by the 1st Panzer Division and supported by the Infantry Regiment Großdeutschland and the "Sturmpionier-Battalion 43" (43rd Assault Engineer Battalion) as the 1st Panzer only had a single rifle regiment. The "Großdeutschland" would be attached to the 1st Panzer Division for the remainder of the campaign and it was the first unit to breach the defences on Hill 247, the high ground dominating Gaulier. The regiment, much to their surprise, discovered the "Luftwaffe" had failed to destroy the enemy bunkers. Enemy small arms fire ensured that crossing the river at Pont Neuf bridge could not be done in rubber assault boats as intended. The Regiment retreated. Reconnaissance found an enemy Bunker, No. 211, was still active. Its location guarded the bridgehead, making it dangerous for German infantry attempting a crossing. A platoon of infantry guns (75 mm short barrel artillery) failed to knock it out. An 8.8 cm FlaK dual purpose gun (88 mm) was brought in to do the job. It succeeded, but the following crossing failed as machine gun fire came from another flanking position that had not been spotted. Once this was dealt with by the 2nd Battalion, the remainder of the regiment crossed the river. Throughout the rest of the day, the regiment moved up and into the French defences, the 2nd Battalion's 6th, 7th and 8th Companies gradually knocking out each bunker. Despite the other two battalions being held up further south, by 20:00 the central Hill 247 had been taken. The "Großdeutschland" Regiment had now penetrated into the French defences.

On Hill 301, further west, the First Rifle Regiment under Col. Hermann Balck had helped take the position by nightfall. With help from two platoons of the 3rd Company of the 34th Assault Engineer Battalion, it had succeeded in knocking out the bunker positions. The regiment inched westward and was able to see the 2nd Panzer Division on the extreme west flank of the 1st Panzer, attacking the bunker position near Donchery. Several Panzers were knocked out. The First Rifle Regiment, 1st Panzer, had crossed the boundary into the 2nd Panzer's territory. They eased the 2nd Panzer's passage by knocking out several bunkers on their eastern flank and succeeded in cutting the Donchery-Sedan road. The infantry also succeeded in knocking out most of the casemates in the area using flamethrower teams to destroy the bunkers whose infantry failed to surrender quickly. The last bunker to surrender did so at 22:40 hours on 13 May. By that time, elements of the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions had negotiated the Meuse river.

The 2nd Panzer had been given the most difficult job. Its advance through the Ardennes trapped and delayed it in nearly of traffic. Consequently, it arrived late at Donchery, after the 1st and 10th Panzer Divisions had initiated their assaults across the Meuse. Due to a combination of its being late and the attacks of its sister units, the enemy defences were alerted in advance of the 2nd Panzer's offensive. Crossing at the extreme western end of the Sedan sector on the Donchery axis, it was forced to advance across open terrain for the last 3 km before reaching the bridgehead. This subjected the division to fire from Donchery and the Bellevue Castle's 75mm artillery casemates, located slightly to the east of the town. Several boats were tied to the Panzers and dragged across, but the tanks were knocked out. The bulk of the 174 artillery pieces available to the French at Sedan were concentrated on the 2nd Panzer Division's front. Most were located in the bunkers on the south side of the river Meuse-Donchery sector. Some of the French 102nd Infantry division's batteries also joined in from the north west, at Charleville. The only way to respond was with howitzers but the 2nd Panzer Division had handed its heavy howitzers over to the 1st Panzer. Only 24 guns remained and they did not arrive on the battlefield until 17:00. When they arrived, they had only had a couple of shells per gun owing to the logistical tailback in the Ardennes.

All attempts to land on the southern side of the Meuse failed. Fortunately for Guderian, the 1st Panzer Division succeeded in crossing the Meuse in the centre (see above). Once completed, it headed into the right (eastern) flank of the French at Donchery. Some of its units cleared the Meuse bend. Assault Engineers and 1st Panzer Division neutralised the guns at Bellevue Castle, and cleared the bunker positions along the Meuse River from the rear. The artillery falling on the 2nd Panzer Division's eastern flank was stopped. With the threat of artillery fire on its right flank removed, the units on the 2nd Panzer's left flank crossed the river and infiltrated the French positions opposite Donchery at 20:00. Heavy French fire continued from the bunkers in front of Donchery on the south side of the Meuse. It was not until 22:20, in darkness, that regular ferrying missions enabled the reinforcement of the German bridgehead.

The 10th Panzer Division, like the 2nd Panzer Division, had detached its heavy artillery batteries to support neighbouring units. It was left with just 24 light 105 mm howitzers. Moreover, the batteries were short of ammunition. The "Luftwaffe" had not helped the 10th Panzer Division as most of the air attacks were in support of the 1st Panzer Division in the central sector. This meant all of the French artillery and machine gun positions in the area of Wadelincourt were undisturbed. Added to this, the newly inserted 71st Infantry Division and French X Corps in the Rémilly area prevented the 10th Panzer Division making any quick progress. The Division also had to advance down to the river on open flat terrain of some .

Near the town of Bazeilles, the Engineers and assault infantry had gathered to prepare the boats for the crossing of the Meuse at Wadelincourt when an artillery barrage from the French positions destroyed 81 out of 96 rubber boats. The plan of attack had included an assault by both the 69th and 89th Infantry Regiments, but the loss of so many boats meant that only the 86th Infantry Regiment was able to conduct the crossing. The 69th Infantry Regiment was kept in reserve to follow the 86th as reinforcements.

The 10th Panzer Division's assaults failed all along the Meuse front. The only success came from a small 11-man team (five engineers and six infantrymen) of the 2nd Company, "Panzerpionier-Batailion 49" (49th Panzer Engineer Battalion) placed under the 1st Battalion, 86th Infantry Regiment. Unsupported and acting on their own initiative, this small force led by "Feldwebel" Walter Rubarth opened a decisive breach by knocking out seven bunker positions. Follow-up units from the 1st Battalion 86th Rifle Regiment had crossed over by 21:00 and stormed the remaining bunkers on Hill 246, where the main French defence positions were located. By the end of the day, the bridgehead had been consolidated and the objective taken.

In the central sector, at Gaulier, the Germans began moving 3.7 cm Pak 36 light infantry field artillery across the Meuse to provide support to infantry across the river. By 01:00 on 14 May, a pontoon bridge had been erected over which Sd.Kfz. 222, Sd.Kfz. 232 and Sd.Kfz. 264 armoured cars began to dismount in the bridgeheads. French reports spoke of German tanks crossing the bridges. Such reports were in error, as the first Panzers only crossed at 07:20 on 14 May. Prior to this masses of lorries, armoured cars and other traffic had passed through but not tanks.

The capture of Sedan and the expansion of the bridgeheads alarmed the French who called for a total effort against the bridgeheads at Sedan, to isolate the three Panzer Divisions. General Gaston-Henri Billotte, commander of the First French Army Group, whose right flank pivoted on Sedan, urged that the bridges across the Meuse be destroyed by air attack, convinced that "over them will pass either victory or defeat!". General Marcel Têtu, commander of the Allied Tactical Air Forces ordered: "Concentrate everything on Sedan. Priority between Sedan and Houx is at 1,000,000 to 1".

No. 103 Squadron and No. 150 Squadron RAF of the RAF Advanced Air Striking Force (AASF) flew 10 sorties against the targets in the early morning. In the process they suffered only one loss in a forced landing. Between 15:00–16:00, 71 RAF bombers took off escorted by Allied fighters. The impressive escort was offset by the presence of German fighter units that outnumbered the Allied escort fighters by 3:1. No. 71 Wing RAF lost 10 Fairey Battles and five Bristol Blenheims. No. 75 Wing RAF lost 14–18 Battles and No. 76 Wing RAF lost 11 Battles. Out of 71 bombers dispatched, 40–44 bombers were lost, meaning a loss rate of 56–62 percent. The AASF lost a further five Hawker Hurricanes. The AASF flew 81 sorties and lost 52 percent of its strength. No 2 Group RAF also contributed with 28 sorties. The bombing results were poor, with three bridges damaged and one possibly destroyed.

French Air Forces under the command of "Commandant des Forces" (Commander of Forces) Marcel Têtu "Aeriennes de Cooperation du Front Nord-Est" (Ardennes Cooperation Front North East, or FACNE) rarely supported the British efforts despite substantial reinforcements. They flew only an average of one sortie per day, including strategic defensive missions. One reason for this was heavy French bomber losses on the previous two days. During the Battle of Maastricht in the Netherlands, the "Groupement de Bombardement" (Bomber Groups, or GB) had its squadrons reduced. GB I/12 and II/12 had only 13 LeO 451s between them. "Groupement de Bombardement d'Assaut 18" (GBA 18) had only 12 of 25 Breguet 693s left. GB I/34 and II/34 could muster eight aircraft out of 22 Amiot 143s, I/38 seven out of 12, and II/38 six out of 11. All of these groups were sent to Sedan on 14 May. Escort was given from "Groupement de Chasse" (Fighter Groups, or GC). GC III/7 with 12 Morane 406s, 12 Bloch 152s of I/8 and nine Dewoitine D.520s of I/3 took part. GBA 18 was escorted by 15 Bloch 152s of GC I/8. The missions cost the French five bombers, two from ground fire. After this date, the French bomber forces were eliminated from the fight over Sedan. The major efforts were now made by the AASF.

The Allied bombers received mostly poor protection. Only 93 fighter sorties, (60 by the French) were flown. The French lost 21 fighters in the operation. The German air defence was soon reinforced by "Jagdgeschwader 26" and "Jagdgeschwader 27" (Fighter Wings 26 and 27). One of the premier German fighter units responsible for the heavy loss rate was "Jagdgeschwader 53" (Fighter Wing 53), who later engaged French bombers who tried to succeed where the AASF failed. The attacks failed as they were uncoordinated. Along with fighter aircraft, the Germans had assembled powerful flak concentrations in Sedan. The FlaK battalions of the 1st, 2nd and 10th Panzer Divisions numbered 303 anti-aircraft guns. This force was built around the 102nd FlaK Regiment with its 88 mm, 37 mm, and rapid fire 20 mm weapons. So heavy was the defensive fire that the Allied bombers could not concentrate over the target. Allied bomber pilots called it "hell along the Meuse". On 14 May, the Allies flew 250 sorties, the French losing 30 (another source states 21) and the RAF losing 20 fighter aircraft. Another 65 were heavily damaged. Out of 109 RAF bombers dispatched, 47 were shot down. This meant 167 aircraft had been lost against one target. Bruno Loerzer called 14 May "the day of the fighter".

The German Generals, in particular Guderian, were relieved that the "Luftwaffe" had prevented the Allied bombers from knocking out their supply bridges. By nightfall, at least 600 tanks, including those of the 2nd Panzer Division which had to use the 1st Panzer Division's bridge at Gaulier (owing to theirs not having yet been constructed), were across the Meuse. The German victory in the air battle had been decisive.

Charles Huntziger, commanding the Second Army was unconcerned by the capture of Sedan, or of the collapse of French defences in the face of air attack. He expected considerable French reserves, particularly X Corps, to stabilise the front. The forces at the French commander's disposal were formidable. Guderian's decision to strike north west left the 10th Panzer Division protecting the bridgehead alone. Against this force was the XXI Corps (3d Armoured Division, 3d Motorised Infantry Division, 5th Light Cavalry Division, 1st Cavalry Brigade) under Flavigny. A second group, consisting of the 2d Light Cavalry Division and 3d Tank Division reinforced Flavigny. X Corps, with the 12th and 64th Reconnaissance Battalions, elements of the 71st Infantry Division, 205th Infantry Regiment, the 4th Tank Battalion were also to join the attack. The French had nearly 300 tanks, with 138 main battle tanks consisting of Hotchkiss and Char B1-Bis.

The French tanks had heavier armour and armament than the Panzers. The Panzer IV had 30 mm of armour, while the Hotchkiss had 45 mm, and the Char B1 had 60 mm of protection. Moreover, its main armament, one 47 mm and one 75 mm gun, outmatched all the German tanks. In an open field engagement, Guderian's armour stood little chance. Two-thirds of his units were equipped with Panzer I and IIs. Just 30 of the Panzer IVs were on his order of battle. However, one crucial disadvantage of the French tanks, considered as a very broad whole, was their low endurance. They needed refuelling after just two hours. They were also slow in speed, complicating high tempo operations.

During 14 May, General Lafontaine had moved the 55th Infantry Division's command post from its position on the Marfee heights to Bulson, south of Sedan. The French had prepared, to an extent, for a German breakthrough at Sedan, and accordingly placed X Corps available for a counter-attack. It was to occupy the Bulson position on the Chéhéry–Bulson–Haraucourt axis and strike at the Meuse bridgeheads. The terrain included heavily wooded areas, and the units left behind convinced General Charles Huntziger, commander of the French Second Army, that they would be able to hold Bulson, and the Germans would not be able to exploit their tactical victory at Sedan on 14 May.

The Germans suffered a seven-hour delay in getting their armour across the bridge from 01:20-07:30, which could have been disastrous for the Panzer divisions. The French had already initiated plans for counter-attacks with armour on the German-held bridgehead during the night but delays in bringing up forces, procrastination (inclined towards momentary adaptation towards defensive stancing and posturing), and hesitation on the part of local overall French command at large, made worse by the resulting confusion from the panic and retreat of the infantry who had also abandoned their positions and artillery as part of the "panic of Bulson", made an attack possible only in the morning of 14 May. The commander of X Corps' artillery, Colonel Poncelet, had tried to keep his units where they were, but had reluctantly ordered a retreat. This decision resulted in the Corps artillery battalions abandoning many heavy artillery pieces and caused the collapse of the 55th Infantry Division ("panic of Bulson") and a partial collapse of the 71st Infantry Division. Poncelet killed himself a few days later.

On 13–14 May, the Germans were vulnerable. A strong attack at this point by the French armoured units could have prevented Guderian from breaking out of the Meuse bridgeheads and changed the outcome of the campaign. However, the French commanders, already deeply schooled and versed in the rather staunchly defensively-focused broad, generalized doctrine of methodological warfare, were located far to the rear, which meant they lacked a real-time and up-to-date picture of the battle. When intelligence did filter through, it was out-of-date. This was to prove fatal, especially coupled with the case of the matter that the French generalship at large was expecting a considerably more prolonged process of initial German assault phase and overall attack effort as a whole.

The race to Bulson ridge began at 16:00 on 13 May. At 07:30 on 14 May, French armour advanced to Bulson ridge with a view to seizing the high ground vacated by the infantry of the 55th Infantry Division on 13 May. But the main, primary objective was to destroy the German bridgeheads. While that may have been possible on 13 May, the odds had shifted against the French.

The X Corps attack involved a strike on the left flank by the 213th Infantry Regiment and 7th Tank Battalion, and on the right flank by the 205th Infantry Regiment and 4th Tank Battalion. The right flanking force arrived late, so the 213th Infantry and the 7th Tank Battalion advanced alone on the north axis. It was thought that the 213th could reach an area in between Chéhéry and Bulson in one hour fifty minutes and the 7th Tank Battalion in two hours. Yet it was not until 17 hours after the original order to advance to Bulson that the lead French tanks reached the Bulson ridge. They found the Germans had beaten them there by a few minutes.

Lafontaine had hesitated over the 24 hours since the afternoon of 13 May. He spent hours reconnoitring the terrain, sometimes trying to contain and reason with fleeing, routing scores of French infantrymen and artillerymen of the 55th and 71st Infantry Divisions, and travelling around the area to various regimental headquarters, looking for his Corps commander, General Gransard (whom was deliberately reconnoitring the terrain, for some time, at that relative point in time), for an order to attack, and, in the meantime, extemporarily assessing and conferring with some local command personnel. Owing to this Lafontaine also delayed issuing orders to the tactical attack units until 05:00 on 14 May, by which time the Germans had consolidated their bridgehead and the Panzer divisions' combined arms infantry teams were already advancing inland to Bulson. Lafontaine had had a mission plan since 20:00 on 13 May to defeat the Germans and retake the Meuse bridgeheads, but he waited for an order to proceed. Lafontaine's need for an order was contrary to the unit actions of the Germans, who operated the tactically more efficient "Auftragstaktik" (Mission Command) system. Ultimately, Lafontaine had squandered valuable hours essential for a prompt, perhaps opportune and timely, perhaps potentially decisive counter-attack effort.

The French had an opportunity to throw the Germans back into the Meuse but they missed their chance owing to poor staff-work. The 1st Panzer Division had struggled to advance as quickly as it would have liked, and was jammed on the roads leading out of Gaulier and Sedan. Moreover, the German soldiers were exhausted after a five-day advance. A quick counter thrust by just two infantry regiments and two tank battalions would have "plunged the Germans into crisis". Even a failed attack, and the holding of Bulson, would have allowed it to be used by formations of the Second French Army and the tank units, including the French 3rd Armoured Division, of General Jean Adolphe Louis Robert Flavigny's powerful French XXI Corps which were moving up from the Maginot line area in the south.

That said, however, additionally, the French lacked neither relatively mobile tanks nor relatively offensively-intended tanks, in the local area of battle just as well so, for the most part, as in the whole broad Western European theatre of war and campaign of military operations of the time. French military doctrine dictated that the tanks, mostly FCM 36s, predominantly and primarily designed and intended as basically defensive-oriented infantry-support units, were to advance with the infantry. The speed of the FCM 36 was not designed to go any faster for this reason, so its top speed was only 24 km/h (15 mph). It took from 07:30 to 08:45 on 14 May for the French armour to traverse the last to the ridge. Lead elements of the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions had reached the ridge just minutes before, having travelled in less time. But the initial clash was not in the Germans' favour. Instead of making sure the medium Panzer III and Panzer IV tanks had priority in crossing the Meuse, the Germans had sent few across, and the van of the advance contained mostly lightly armed and lightly armoured although faster Panzer Is and Panzer IIs.

The initial encounters took place as the Battle of Hannut was being fought in Belgium. The results were much the same. On the southern face of Bulson, General Friedrich Kirchner, commander of the 1st Panzer Division, suffered several tactical reverses and saw the 37mm shells from his 3.7 cm PaK 36 anti-tank guns and Panzer IIIs bounce off the more heavily armoured French tanks. A number of the German tanks were knocked out in rapid succession. The Germans had to hold the French at the ridge. Kirchner was forced to send in his tanks in dribs and drabs, tactics which Guderian hated, but which he himself decided there was no other recourse. It was once again the German tanks' radio equipment that enabled them to move around quickly and communicate with one another, to change the point of defence or attack quickly. The speed of the German tanks also enabled them to offset their inferiority in combat power to the French tanks. Often, the Panzer III and IVs could speed into the rear of French formations, closing quickly and knocking out the French armour from the rear. The Germans noted the particular weakness between the chassis and turret of the French tanks, which were vulnerable to their fire.

The French artillery concealed in wooded areas proved more potent than the tanks. The German 1st Panzer Company was wiped out by French artillery, and pulled back with just one battleworthy tank. The Company retreated under the cover of part of the ridge, and moved its single tank back and forth, simulating the presence of many German tanks. Diverted from their success at Gaulier, near Sedan, the 2nd Panzer Company was rushed to the spot and managed to delay the French armoured advance. The Großdeutschland Infantry Regiment's late arrival tilted the scales. They managed to eliminate the anti-tank lines and entrenched French infantry.

On the left side of the Bulson ridge, the Germans encountered 13 French tanks with support from infantry near Chéhéry. The Germans' advance intended to strike at Connage to the south of the town of Chéhéry, to outflank the French. Kirchner reacted quickly, ordering two anti-tank platoons to be set up at Connage. The 37 mm guns struggled to halt the French armour which then outflanked the position at Connage by moving to the west while the infantry advanced from the south east on the German right flank. Fortunately the 43rd Assault Engineer Battalion and the 8th Company, 2nd Battalion, 2nd Panzer Regiment arrived and pushed the French back to the town of Chémery-sur-Bar, some south west of Bulson, and due south of Connage.

At 10:45, Lafontaine ordered a retreat and Guderian finally got heavy artillery from the Großdeutschland Infantry Regiment. The 88 mm dual role artillery guns and the heavier Panzer III and IVs reached the area of the battle. By this time, the French 7th Tank Battalion had been wiped out and the 213th Infantry Regiment had been devastated. Only 10 French tanks, out of 40, remained. In the two pitched battles the 7th Tank Battalion fought that day they lost 10 from 13. Delays on the right flank meant the 205th Infantry Regiment and 4th Tank Battalion did not reach their starting line until 10:45, by which time the battle on the left wing had been lost and further attacks on the right would have made little sense. The 1st Panzer Division's victory parade was held in Chemery at 12:00, but it was cut short when the "Luftwaffe" bombed the square by mistake inflicting a few casualties.

The German High Command did not want to exploit the victory at Sedan and Bulson until the German infantry divisions had caught up with the three Panzer divisions. To Guderian, this was madness and would throw away the victory at Sedan and allow the enemy time to recover and reorganise its still formidable armoured units. Guderian decided to push for the Channel, even if it meant ignoring the High Command and Hitler himself. Guderian ordered the 10th Panzer Division and Großdeutschland Infantry Regiment to hold the Sedan bridgehead, while the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions struck north west, towards the Channel. Now that they were pushing largely at an 'open door', the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions advanced into the undefended French rear with speed.

The Sedan bridgeheads were still not safe. French forces were massing to the south. Guderian decided it was better to mount an aggressive defence given the lack of any suitable anti-tank weapons for a defensive battle. The better option would be to attack rather than defend. The advance of the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions had assisted his progress. They ran into and defeated elements of X Corps near Chemery. The French Corps was heading towards Sedan, but withdrew southward after the engagement. Any potential threat on the German western flank had been removed.
Part of Guderian's original plan had called for a feint south towards and behind the Maginot Line, to mask the intention to thrust to the channel. General Franz Halder had dropped this from "Fall Gelb", but Guderian resurrected it and ordered the 10th Panzer Division and Großdeutschland Infantry Regiment to attack across the Stonne plateau. In this innocuous town, a vicious two-day battle took place in which the Germans came face to face with the premier French tank, the Char B1-Bis, for the only time. One of these tanks, commanded by Pierre Billotte, proved invulnerable to German anti-tank fire and took 140 hits, and knocked out 13 German tanks (two PzKpfw IV and eleven PzKpfw III) and a number of anti-tank guns. It transpired that the French had concentrated their own armour there to mount another attack on the Sedan bridgeheads. The battle of Stonne took place between 15 and 17 May, and the town changed hands 17 times. Ultimately the failure of the French to hold it meant the final failure to eliminate the Sedan bridgeheads.
The French offensive at Stonne was of vital importance. The town remained a base situated on high ground overlooking Sedan. The French could use it as a base from which to launch long-term attacks on Sedan. On 15 May, the battle began. The French committed the 3d Company, 49th Tank Battalion; 1st Company, 45th Tank Battalion; and the 2d Company, 4th Tank Battalion; the 1st Battalion, 67th Infantry Regiment; and the 1st Company, 51st Infantry Regiment. The French infantry were slow in their advance, which meant the armour outran them. Alone, the tanks tried to attack and failed. At this time, Stonne was held only by the 1st Battalion Großdeutschland supported by only nine of the Regiments 12 anti-tank artillery guns. As the French pressed forward, the weak German defence struggled to hold its ground. However, when one German platoon managed to knock out three French Char B1s the French tank crews panicked, and drove away to the south. It was a psychological victory for the Germans which encouraged their continued defence of the position. In the next attacks, they held their positions and fought. The town would fall to each side over the next 48 hours, as offensive followed counter-attack. The 10th Panzer sent its 1st Battalion, 69th Infantry Regiment to support the hard-pressed Großdeutschland. The Germans retook the town at 17:00 on 17 May, for the fourth time in nine hours.

The Germans reinforced their defences on the night of 16 May with the VI Corps, consisting of the 16th Division under Heinrich Krampf, and 24th Infantry Division. It was a timely deployment. By this time the Großdeutschland had lost 570 men and were in need of rest and the "Panzerjägerkompanie 14" (14th Panzer Anti-tank Company) had lost six of its 12 guns. It had also lost 12 dead and 65 wounded. Stonne was destroyed. Around 33 French tanks and 24 German Panzers were knocked out. With the IV Corps now supporting the German defence and counter-attacks, the town was captured for the 17th and final time at 17:45 on 17 May.

The French defeat at Sedan left the Allied Army Groups in Belgium with sparse flank protection. The German attack, especially the breakout from the bridgeheads at Sedan, was so fast that there were hardly any major combats. Many French soldiers were in such shock that they were taken prisoner before they could offer resistance, which also explains the low casualty rates for both sides. The two assault engineer battalions under Korthals achieved the most important success. By eliminating the bunkers in the Bellevue sector, they made the breakthroughs of the 1st and 2nd Panzer Divisions possible. This was achieved without a single casualty.

There is consensus among military historians that the Battle at Sedan sealed the fate of Belgium and France. On 14 May, the Allied forces had been wrongfooted and through the failures in deployment had effectively lost the campaign. The advance to the Channel would trap 1,700,000 soldiers and expel the Allies from Western Europe.

Unfortunately for the Germans, the bulk of the British Army escaped from the port of Dunkirk. The German Army eventually won the ensuing Battle of Dunkirk, forcing the Allied Armies to leave behind large amounts of equipment, but failed, through controversial circumstances, to eliminate the British manpower trapped in the pocket. The encirclement destroyed the best units of the French Army, including a prisoner of war total of 40,000, but significant forces did escape (139,732 British and 139,037 French). Some French forces would return to France and participate in the battles of June 1940, before surrendering along with the rest of the French armed forces on 25 June 1940, when the Armistice of 22 June took effect.



</doc>
<doc id="23350971" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23350971" title="Hurricane Andres (2009)">
Hurricane Andres (2009)

Hurricane Andres was the first named storm and hurricane of the 2009 Pacific hurricane season. Forming on June 21, Andres gradually intensified as it tracked along the Mexican coastline. Deep convection developed around the center of circulation and by June 23, the storm attained hurricane-status, peaking with winds of 80 mph (130 km/h). Upon attaining this intensity, the storm featured a developing eyewall within a central dense overcast. Within 36 hours, the storm rapidly degenerated, having most of the convection being displaced by high wind shear, becoming a non-tropical trough during the afternoon of June 24.

Prior to becoming a tropical depression, Andres produced heavy rainfall in Oaxaca and Honduras, resulting in two deaths. Rough seas off the coast of Guerrero resulted in one fatality. Inland, flooding caused by heavy rains killed two additional people. An additional 20 people were injured. Several dozen structures were damaged and a few were destroyed. Total losses from the hurricane reached MXN 3 million ($231,000 USD) in Colima. Following the storm, roughly 350 people were left homeless.

Hurricane Andres originated out of a tropical wave that entered the eastern Pacific basin on June 16 after crossing Central America. Over the following few days, showers and thunderstorms began to organize around the wave. At this time, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) remarked upon the possibility for tropical cyclone formation. By June 20, the wave spawned an area of low pressure roughly 175 mi (280 km) south-southeast of Acapulco, Mexico. Around 1200 UTC the following day, the system had become sufficiently organized for the NHC to designate the low as Tropical Depression Two-E. The depression briefly track westward before turning towards the northwest, a track which it would maintain for the remained of its existence, due to a mid-tropospheric ridge located northeast of the system.

It continued to organize throughout the day on June 21, developing banding features and increased convection. Several hours after being classified a depression, the system intensified into a tropical storm, at which time it received the name "Andres". Upon being named, Andres marked latest date that the first named storm of a season developed since 1969 when Tropical Storm Ava developed on July 1 of that year. By the morning of June 22, very deep thunderstorm activity existed near the center, and the overall convective pattern had become more symmetric in nature. Favorable conditions, warm sea surface temperatures, allowed Andres to gradually intensify as it tracked near the Mexican coastline. However, strong wind shear, a factor that generally weakens tropical cyclones, had little effect on the developing storm.
By the evening of June 22, satellite imagery indicated the formation of an eyewall; by this time Andres was near hurricane-status. Early the next day, the center of circulation became embedded within a central dense overcast and Andres intensified into a hurricane, the first of the season, around 0600 UTC. At this time, the storm attained its peak intensity with winds of 80 mph (130 km/h) and a minimum barometric pressure of 984 mbar (hPa; 29.06 inHg); the storm was located roughly 80 mi (130 km) southwest of Lázaro Cárdenas upon attaining this intensity. Twelve hours after becoming a hurricane, most of the deep convection associated with the storm had weakened; however, Hurricane Hunters still recorded 75 mph (120 km/h) winds despite the ragged appearance of Andres.

By the evening of June 23, Andres weakened to a tropical storm due to increasing wind shear, decreasing sea surface temperatures as it entered a more stable air mass. The system began to rapidly degenerate, as convection became dislocated from the center and the overall structure of Andres degraded. By 1200 UTC on June 24, the storm weakened into a tropical depression while situated roughly 100 mi (155 km) west of Cabo Corrientes, Jalisco. Shortly after, the depression sharply turned north and degenerated into a trough of low pressure, no longer a tropical cyclone.

The NHC issued several watches and warnings for portions of the Mexican coastline; the first was a tropical storm watch for areas between Zihuatanejo and Manzanillo on June 22. Several hours later, a portion of the watch was upgraded to a warning as Andres neared the coastline. By 1500 UTC, a hurricane watch was declared for areas between Lazaro Cardenas and Cabo Corrientes, Jalisco and the tropical storm watch for Zihuatanejo to Lazaro Cardenas was discontinued. Roughly six hours later, a hurricane warning was raised for Punto San Telmo to Cabo Corrientes and the tropical storm warning and hurricane watch were extended northward to Punto San Telmo. By the following afternoon, the hurricane watch was discontinued and several hours later, areas under a tropical storm warning followed suit. Early on June 24, all watches and warnings associated with Andres were discontinued as it rapidly dissipated offshore. Authorities closed ports in Lázaro Cárdenas, Manzanillo and Puerto Vallarta because of rough seas. Schools throughout Colima were closed prior to the storm and Mexican officials raised the awareness level to orange.

Prior to classification as a tropical cyclone, the storm dropped over of rainfall in some areas, triggering flooding and landslides. Heavy rain, produced by the wave that spawned Andres, in Honduras killed two people. A river overflowed its banks, flooding homes and surrounding land. On Mexican Federal Highway 200, gusty winds blew down about fifteen trees. In the city of Acapulco, it was reported that fallen trees damaged two cars. Rough seas led to the drowning of a fishermen in a lagoon at Tecpán de Galeana, Guerrero, while flooding caused by the storm prompted the evacuation of 200 people; 14 shelters were opened to accommodate the evacuees. Additionally, some trees were downed along the coast. Swells up to caused structural damage along the Mexican coastline, with the worst being around Acapulco where several bars and restaurants were damaged or destroyed. In Jalisco, 20 temporary shelters were opened to house evacuees following the storm. The Civil Protection System prepared relief materials, consisting of 600 blankets, 600 mattresses and 700 cots to house people in emergency shelters.

In the municipality of Atoyac de Alvarez, in the community of Cerro Prieto, 350 people were left homeless by the storm. Similarly, the paths that connect the towns of San Vicente de Jesus San Vicente and La Soledad Benítez-Paradise in this town, there were cuts in solitary vehicle traffic. In the community of La Soledad, heavy rains accompanied by hail hit 38 homes, crops and coffee grounds cultivation in the region. In Colima, 50 homes and two hotels were inundated by flood waters, leaving MXN 3 million ($231,000 USD) in damage. In Puebla, heavy rains produced by the outer bands of the hurricane triggered flooding that killed two people. In addition to the fatalities, 20 people were injured by the storm. In the wake of the storm, the Government of Mexico allocated roughly MXN 3 million ($231,000 USD) in funds which would be distributed to 96 businesses significantly affected by the storm. These funds accounted for supplies, such as refrigerators and stoves to help restart their industries.




</doc>
<doc id="23399213" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23399213" title="2010 Giro d'Italia">
2010 Giro d'Italia

The 2010 Giro d'Italia was the 93rd edition of the Giro d'Italia, one of cycling's Grand Tours. The Giro started off in Amsterdam on 8 May and stayed in the Netherlands for three stages, before leaving the country. The route included climbs such as Monte Zoncolan, Plan de Corones, the Passo del Mortirolo and the Passo di Gavia before ending in Verona with an individual time trial.

Principal favorites for overall success in the Giro included Ivan Basso of the team, Cadel Evans for , and 's Carlos Sastre. After three weeks of racing, it was Basso who claimed his second Giro d'Italia title, after also winning in 2006. David Arroyo from and Basso's teammate Vincenzo Nibali rounded out the podium. Australian riders won all the lesser jersey awards, with Evans taking the points classification, 's Matthew Lloyd the winner of the mountains classification, and Richie Porte of the Giro's best young rider.

The road race stages in the Netherlands were both marred by repeated crashes, which led to some unexpected big time gaps before the transfer to Italy. The overall standings were very turbulent in the first week, with four different riders holding the race leader's pink jersey. The 11th stage greatly re-shaped the overall standings, when several riders, including Sastre, gained almost 13 minutes against the remainder of the field. Porte took the pink jersey after this stage. Two days later, Arroyo took the jersey, and kept it for five days. He eventually lost it to Basso on the first of two very difficult mountain stages to close out the Giro. Success was fairly widespread among the Giro's 22 teams, as 17 of them came away with either a stage win, classification win, or stint in the pink jersey.

The 22 teams in the race were announced on 22 March. Sixteen teams were guaranteed a place in the race by virtue of a September 2008 agreement between the UCI and the organizers of the season's three Grand Tours. Those guaranteed a place are those who were members of the UCI ProTour at the time of the agreement. Two from this group, and , declined to participate in the race, instead focusing on the Tour de France and the Vuelta a España. Two new teams joined the ProTour for 2010. One, , participated in the race, but the other, , did not wish to participate, since they planned to send their best riders to the partially concurrent Tour of California. Seven UCI Professional Continental teams, two of which ( and ) were part of the September 2008 agreement as they were members of the ProTour at that time, joined the 15 ProTour teams to round out the teams list. Each team entered a squad of nine riders, giving the event a 198-rider peloton at its outset.

The race's 22 teams were:
The Giro, like the 2009 Vuelta a España before it and the forthcoming Tour de France, began in the Netherlands. The two Dutch Professional Continental teams, and , had both ridden Grand Tours in 2009. Throughout the season, the two teams tried to prove their combativeness in the hopes of securing Grand Tour invites, trying especially to outdo one another. Since the openings to the Giro and the Tour were partly financed by Dutch tax money, Vacansoleil's team manager called for political help to get invites for his team, but neither Dutch team made it into either the Giro or the Tour. Consequently, neither made the Vuelta a España teams selection, either. The teams' disappointment at their non-invitation led to communications with UCI President Pat McQuaid, which may result in reforms to how teams are selected for the Grand Tours.

The Giro was often described as being wide open in terms of who had the best chance to win it. This is because many notable riders, including the past three champions, did not enter. 2007 Giro d'Italia champion Danilo Di Luca, who originally finished second in the 2009 Giro d'Italia, was suspended by his national federation in February for a doping incident in the 2009 Giro. 2008 Giro d'Italia champion Alberto Contador skipped the Giro to better focus on the Tour de France, as he also had in the previous season. After first indicating that he might defend his championship, 2009 champion Denis Menchov also announced that he would not ride the Giro, instead focusing on the Tour de France, in order to complete the career sweep of the Grand Tours. Lance Armstrong and Levi Leipheimer, leaders of the squad in the 2009 Giro, announced in October 2009 that they would ride the partially concurrent Tour of California instead of the Giro, which is why was not selected for the Giro.

Just five days before the race began, the UCI announced several riders were under suspicion of doping by virtue of irregular values in their biological passports. Among them was Franco Pellizotti, who had been set to be one of the leaders for the team and had been described as a pre-race favorite. While team firmly stood behind Pellizotti in the case and expressed anger that the UCI unveiled their findings so close to the start of the Giro, they obligingly pulled him from their squad. He was replaced by Vincenzo Nibali, who had been planning to ride the Tour of California as a squad leader. While not an overall favorite, Alessandro Ballan intended to participate in the race, stating in October that it was a certainty he would start, after missing out on the Giro in 2009 when he was world champion. This was an indication well in advance that the was in line for an invite to the race. Ballan was later suspended by his team as a result of an internal doping investigation, meaning he had to miss the Giro. He was later cleared of any wrongdoing.
Most pre-race analyses identified Ivan Basso, Cadel Evans, and Carlos Sastre as the major favorites to win the overall classification, with Evans perhaps the consensus pick. Basso and Sastre had both ridden the Giro in 2009 and come away finishing in the top five. Sastre also won two difficult mountain stages in the race's final week, and was noted as a rider who gets stronger as a race goes along, making the Giro's very climbing-intensive third week possibly sit in his favor. Evans had finished on a Grand Tour podium in each of the past three seasons, including in the most recent three-week event, the 2009 Vuelta a España. He also entered the race as the reigning world cycling champion and had had a successful 2010 season to date, with a win in La Flèche Wallonne and a podium finish in the Tirreno–Adriatico. Neither Basso nor Sastre had raced much in the 2010 season prior to the Giro. Other riders named as contenders included Bradley Wiggins, former Giro winners Damiano Cunego and Stefano Garzelli, Alexander Vinokourov, Marzio Bruseghin, Christian Vande Velde, Domenico Pozzovivo, David Moncoutié, and Michele Scarponi. Race director Angelo Zomegnan also named Basso, Evans, and Sastre as his three favorites, and included Wiggins and Linus Gerdemann as possible darkhorses.

Mark Cavendish and Daniele Bennati, stage winners in the past two editions of the Giro, were absent from this race, but several top sprinters took the start in Amsterdam. These included Tyler Farrar, André Greipel, and Alessandro Petacchi, all of whom had themselves won Grand Tour stages in 2009 and figured to be top favorites for the Giro's flat stages. Former Tour de France points classification winner Óscar Freire intended to make his Giro debut in this race, but he pulled out due to sinusitis shortly before the race started. Other sprinters in the Giro peloton included Robbie McEwen, Freire's teammate Graeme Brown, Baden Cooke, Leonardo Duque, Sebastian Haedo, Wouter Weylandt, and Greg Henderson.
The Giro's 21 stages were divided into the following classifications by race organizers Gazzetta dello Sport: four time trials (three individual and one team), seven flat stages, five mixed stages, and six mountain stages. The race began in the Netherlands, the ninth time in the Giro's history that the race began outside Italy, and the first since 2006's start in Belgium. A short individual time trial and two flat stages were held there. Starting the race away from Italy meant that an early rest day, coming just three days into the 23-day race, was necessary to transfer to Italy. The first stage upon entering Italy was a team time trial, the fifth consecutive year that discipline had featured in the Giro. Stage 7 visited Tuscany and was raced partly on unpaved roads used yearly in the Italian semi-classic Montepaschi Strade Bianche. The course honored Italian cycling legends Gino Bartali, Fausto Coppi, and Costante Girardengo by passing through their hometowns in the first road race stages in Italy.

Five stages ended with climbs, with most coming in the race's last week. The first was stage 8 to Monte Terminillo, a long climb gaining of vertical elevation for an average gradient of 7.3 percent, one of the most difficult climbs in the Apennine Mountains in the region of Abruzzo. The next was Monte Zoncolan in the Carnic Alps, which at in length was shorter than some of the other climbs in the race, but with of vertical gain in that time, its 20 percent maximum gradient made it one of the most difficult. The Stage 16 individual time trial went to Plan de Corones, on a course identical to the one used in the 2008 Giro d'Italia. In , this stage gained over and featured a section with 24 percent gradients in the final kilometer. The Giro's last two road race stages were especially climbing-intensive, including the Passo del Mortirolo, rising in for an average gradient of 10 percent, and the Passo di Gavia, known for being climbed during the 1988 Giro d'Italia in the middle of a driving blizzard. The Gavia was also the "Cima Coppi", the race's highest point, and Stage 20, in which it featured, was considered the queen stage. Other climbs during the race included the Passo del Bratello, Monte Grappa, the Passo delle Palade, the Passo di Santa Cristina, the Forcola di Livigno, and the last climb of the race, the Passo del Tonale. Most of these climbs also featured difficult descents.

The route was noted to appeal to many types of riders, be they climbers, sprinters, or time trialists. The race had seven flat stages which figured into end in mass sprints, and the hilly mixed stages were inviting for breakaways. Sastre, one of the first riders to announce he would ride the Giro, commented that the route was much harder than that of the 2009 Giro, and would demand a very strong climber to be its champion. Zomegnan concurred that the route favored climbers, noting that the distance spent time trialing was not great and that it would take errors from climbing specialists to allow a rider better suited for time trialing to be Giro champion.

The Giro began in Amsterdam with an individual time trial. Favorites for the stage included two British riders, captain Bradley Wiggins and ' David Millar. Several riders in the Giro peloton considered Wiggins the prohibitive favorite. Wiggins won the stage, securing the first pink jersey. A major surprise on the stage was Grand Tour rookie Brent Bookwalter from coming in second, just 2 seconds off Wiggins' winning time. Millar was seventh, 6 seconds back. This set the stage for a turbulent opening to the Giro, as both of the road race stages in the Netherlands featured several crashes. The courses for the road stages in the Netherlands were noted to have a lot of street furniture on them, which combined with the riders' nerves on the first day of a three-week Grand Tour as well as crosswinds from the North Sea to make the first mass-start stages very perilous. Tyler Farrar, Carlos Sastre, Christian Vande Velde, Greg Henderson, Wiggins, Alessandro Petacchi, Domenico Pozzovivo, Marzio Bruseghin, Filippo Pozzato, and Gilberto Simoni all fell from their bikes at some point while the Giro was in the Netherlands. There were also many other crashes that took down so many riders it was difficult to keep track of exactly who was effected. Crashing and, consequently, falling away from the leading group on the road, meant different things for different riders. For sprinters like Farrar and Petacchi, crashing meant they were unlikely to be able to contest the finishes for stage wins, while overall contenders like Wiggins and Sastre lost time in the general classification. For the second year in a row, Vandevelde suffered a broken collarbone as a result of his crash, consequently abandoning the race. Despite crashing during stage 2, Farrar got up and was able to win the stage from a depleted field sprint. The state of the roads in the Netherlands and the sheer quantity of crashes that took place there incurred much criticism and questions over whether they should be included in a Grand Tour. Cadel Evans and Alexander Vinokourov both took the pink jersey while the Giro was in the Netherlands. Vinokourov held it prior to the transfer to Italy, with six riders from three teams within 10 seconds of him, meaning the pink jersey still remained very much in flux.

After the transfer, the first stage in Italy was a team time trial, a race where each member of the squad races against the clock together, and the team's time is taken for the fifth rider to cross the finish line. was the winning squad, and had a time gap over Vinokourov's team that was sufficiently large enough for Vincenzo Nibali to become the fourth race leader in as many stages. At last, there was stability in the race leadership, as Nibali comfortably retained over the next two stages, both of which featured breakaways taking the day's honors while the peloton finished together. Stage 7 was a major one, incorporating stretches of gravel roads near the finish. The day on which this stage was run also happened to have very heavy rainfall, making the course muddy and dangerous. Much like had happened in the Netherlands, a great many riders crashed in this stage, perhaps chief among them Wiggins and Sastre, who both lost more than four minutes. Nibali also crashed, and upon seeing this, Alexander Vinokourov, Damiano Cunego, and Cadel Evans broke free of the leading group. Evans won the stage, one of many riders to cross the finish line covered in mud, and Vinokourov took back the race leadership. Through the first mountain stage and two flat stages that followed, the overall standings did not change much, and Vinokourov retained the jersey.

Stage 11 into L'Aquila provided for major changes to the overall standings. More than 50 riders formed the day's escape group, and they quickly took 20 minutes advantage. Among them were Sastre, Wiggins, and 's Richie Porte, who was holding the white jersey as best young rider and, at sixth overall, was the best-placed man in the group. Sastre, Wiggins, and Porte all had multiple support riders with them in the breakaway who set strenuous paces to keep the group away. The main field, containing the Giro's top favorites, pulled back a little time but was still nearly 13 minutes behind stage winner Evgeni Petrov at the finish. The day's result massively shuffled the overall classification. Porte was the only rider who had been in the top ten before the stage who remained there afterward, and took the pink jersey. Sastre and Wiggins, who entered the Giro as contenders but had fallen well back in the overall standings before this stage, both moved back into the top ten.

Porte kept the pink jersey for two days, conceding it to David Arroyo, a fellow member of the L'Aquila breakaway, on stage 14 when he could not climb Monte Grappa with the leaders on the day. On this stage, the race's overall favorites began to creep back into the top of the overall classification, as previous race leaders Nibali, Vinokourov, and Evans assumed 8th through 10th in the standings. There were again great changes to the overall classification in stage 15, by way of the climb up Monte Zoncolan. Ivan Basso won the stage and greatly reduced his deficit to Arroyo, though the Spaniard still held the pink jersey after this stage. Evans, Scarponi, Vinokourov, and Nibali also finished well-placed and moved up. Wiggins again fell out of contention, this time conclusively so, by losing 25 minutes on the climb. Evans turned in the best ride of the pre-race favorites in the Plan de Corones time trial, closing his deficit to Basso and moving past Sastre in the overall. After this stage, the only riders left in the top ten from the L'Aquila breakaway were Arroyo, Porte, Sastre, and Robert Kišerlovski, who all finished the Giro in the top ten.

After a stage each for the breakaway and the sprinters, during which there were no major changes to the overall standings, the riders were faced with the very climbing-intensive final two road stages. The team rode a very hard tempo in stage 19 over the Passo del Mortirolo, which eventually whittled that group down to just Basso, Nibali, and Scarponi. They crossed the Mortirolo more than two minutes ahead of Arroyo, which was nearly enough time to make Basso the virtual race leader. Arroyo, noted as a far better descender than Basso, took very aggressive lines coming down the Mortirolo and caught up with Vinokourov, Sastre, Evans, and John Gadret, who had been between him and the leading trio. Basso's group had only 30 seconds on Arroyo's at the start of the stage-concluding Aprica climb, but they took more and more time as the climb went on and finished three minutes ahead, giving Basso the pink jersey with two days left to race. Arroyo elected not to try to aggressively descend any of the four large climbs on course in the final road race stage, settling for second place by riding with Basso and the other top riders in the peloton most of the day. There were a few changes in time gaps, but the same riders remained in the top ten from the previous day, as Johan Tschopp won the stage from a breakaway. The individual time trial in Verona which closed out the Giro also provided for small changes to the overall, but Basso's 15th place on the stage was easily enough to make him Giro champion. Arroyo and Nibali rounded out the podium.

Australian riders won each of the lesser jersey awards. Evans won the points classification, represented in 2010 with a red jersey in a return to the original colour scheme for the three minor classifications that reflected the colours of the Italian flag. Evans's victory came about by way of nine top-ten finishes, including a stage win, over the course of the race. This classification was tightly contested throughout the race; six different riders held the jersey, and it changed hands nine times. Matthew Lloyd of won the green jersey for the mountains classification, taking maximum mountains points during his stage-winning breakaway in stage 6. He made morning breakaways later on in mountain stages to take points on other climbs and consolidate his lead. Porte won the white jersey as best young rider, holding it for all but three stages. Success was widespread among the 22 teams in the race. In sharp contrast to the 2009 Giro, the only rider to win multiple stages in this year's race was Farrar, who took the sprint finishes to stages 2 and 10. , , , , , , , and each won one stage. had two stage wins, first with Wouter Weylandt in a depleted sprint finish to stage 3 in the Netherlands, and two stages later Jérôme Pineau led a winning breakaway across the finish line. 's Chris Anker Sørensen won stage 8 on Monte Terminillo after figuring into a morning breakaway, and their time trial specialist Gustav Larsson won the final race against the clock in Verona. won multiple sprint stages, first with leadout man Matthew Goss when ace sprinter André Greipel missed out on the opportunity, and later Greipel himself took a win. took back-to-back stage wins, first with Petrov in L'Aquila and then with Filippo Pozzato, who won a 10-man sprint after a late breakaway in stage 12. After there had been no Italian stage winners for the first 11 days of racing, Pozzato's stage win was the first of five in a row and six overall for Italian riders. Nibali and Basso were among those stage winners; as they also won the stage 4 team time trial, theirs was the only squad with more than two stage wins. They also won both teams classifications, the time-based Trofeo Fast Team and the points-based Trofeo Super Team. , , and did not win any stages, but Vinokourov's and Arroyo's stints in the pink jersey and Tom Stamsnijder's win in the "Traguardo Volante" classification meant that they did not come away from the Giro empty-handed. Only , , , , and came away from the Giro with nothing, even though Milram had one of their riders (Paul Voss) wearing the Mountains jersey at some point.

In the 2010 Giro d'Italia, four different jerseys were awarded. For the general classification, calculated by adding each cyclist's finishing times on each stage, and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass-start stages, the leader received a pink jersey. This classification was considered the most important of the Giro d'Italia, and the winner was considered the winner of the Giro.

Additionally, there was a points classification, which awarded a red jersey. In the points classification, cyclists got points for finishing in the top 15 in a stage. Unlike in the better known points classification in the Tour de France, the type of stage had no effect on what points were on offer – each stage had the same points available on the same scale. The win earned 25 points, second place earned 20 points, third 16, fourth 14, fifth 12, sixth 10, and one point fewer per place down to a single point for 15th. In addition, points could be won in intermediate sprints.

There was also a mountains classification, the leadership of which was marked by a green jersey. In the mountains classifications, points were won by reaching the top of a climb before other cyclists. Each climb was categorized as either first, second, or third category, with more points available for the higher-categorized climbs. The "Cima Coppi", the race's highest point of elevation, awarded still more points than the other first-category climbs.

The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification, marked by a white jersey. This was decided the same way as the general classification, but only riders born after 1 January 1985 were eligible.

There were also three classifications for teams. In the Trofeo Fast Team classification, the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time; the Trofeo Super Team was a team points classification, with the top 20 placed riders on each stage earning points (20 for first place, 19 for second place and so on, down to a single point for 20th) for their team; and the Fair Play classification rewarded those teams that best avoided penalty points for minor technical infringements.

The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run.

Other less well-known classifications, whose leaders did not receive a special jersey, were awarded during the Giro. These awards were based on points earned throughout the three weeks of the tour. Each mass-start stage had one intermediate sprint, the "Traguardo Volante", or T.V. The T.V. gave bonus seconds towards the general classification, points towards the regular points classification, and also points towards the T.V. classification. This award was known in previous years as the "Intergiro" and the "Expo Milano 2015" classification. It was won by Tom Stamsnijder of the team.

Other awards included the Combativity classification, which was a compilation of points gained for position on crossing intermediate sprints, mountain passes and stage finishes. Mountains classification winner Matthew Lloyd won this award. The Azzurri d'Italia classification was based on finishing order, but points were awarded only to the top three finishers in each stage. It was won, like the closely associated points classification, by Cadel Evans. Additionally, the "Premio della Fuga" rewarded riders who took part in a breakaway at the head of the field, each rider in an escape of ten or fewer riders getting one point for each kilometre that the group stayed clear. 's Jérôme Pineau was first in this competition. Teams were given penalty points for minor technical infringements. was most successful in avoiding penalties, and so won the Fair Play classification.

The Giro was one of 26 events throughout the season that contributed points towards the 2010 UCI World Ranking. Points were awarded to the top 20 finishers overall, and to the top five finishers in each stage.



</doc>
<doc id="23421744" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23421744" title="French battleship Henri IV">
French battleship Henri IV

Henri IV was a pre-dreadnought battleship of the French Navy built to test some of the ideas of the prominent naval architect Louis-Émile Bertin. She began World War I as guardship at Bizerte. She was sent to reinforce the Allied naval force in the Dardanelles campaign of 1915, although some of her secondary armament had been removed for transfer to Serbia in 1914. Afterwards, she was relegated to second-line roles before being sent to Taranto as a depot ship in 1918. She was struck from the navy list in 1920 and scrapped the following year.

"Henri IV" was designed by the famous French naval architect Louis-Émile Bertin to evaluate some of his ideas. She was designed to make her a small target and lacked most of the normal rear superstructure common to ships of her period, other than that needed to keep her rear turret from being washed out. Her rear hull had only of freeboard, although she was built up to the normal upper deck height amidships and at the bow for better sea-keeping and to provide for her crew. Her superstructure was narrow and recessed from the hull above the main deck.

"Henri IV" was smaller than her predecessors, at overall. She had a beam of and a maximum draft of . She was significantly lighter than the "Charlemagne"-class battleships and displaced only normally, some less than the earlier ships. Her crew consisted of 26 officers and 438 enlisted men.

"Henri IV" had three vertical triple-expansion steam engines, each driving one propeller shaft. The engines were rated at using steam provided by 24 Niclausse boilers and gave a top speed of . She carried a maximum of of coal that gave her a range of at a speed of .

"Henri IV" carried her main armament of two 40-caliber Canon de 274 modèle 1893/1896s in two single-gun turrets, one forward on the upper deck and the other on the main deck at the rear. The guns fired armor-piercing projectiles at a muzzle velocity of .

The ship's secondary armament consisted of seven 45-caliber Canon de 138 mm Modèle 1893 naval guns. Four were mounted in individual casemates on the main deck; two more were mounted on the shelter deck with gun shields and the last gun was mounted in a shelter deck turret superfiring over the rear main gun turret. This was the first superfiring turret in naval history and, in this case, was not very successful because the barrel of the 138 mm gun was too short to clear the sighting hood of the turret below. These guns fired shells at muzzle velocities of .

Twelve 40-caliber Canon de 47 mm Modèle 1885 Hotchkiss guns were mounted as anti-torpedo boat guns. They were mounted in platforms in the foremast and mainmast and on the superstructure. They fired a projectile at to a maximum range of . Their theoretical maximum rate of fire was fifteen rounds per minute, but only seven rounds per minute sustained. Two submerged torpedo tubes were also carried. Exactly which types of torpedoes carried is unknown, but most of the torpedoes in service during the war had warheads of , maximum speeds of and maximum ranges of .

"Henri IV" had a waterline armor belt of Harvey armor that was high and tapered from the maximum thickness of that to at the ship's ends. The belt ended short of the stern in a traverse bulkhead. The lower edge of this belt tapered as well from in thickness. The upper armor belt was mostly thick and ran from the bow to aft of the midsection. It was generally high, but increased to forward and ended in a traverse bulkhead. The maximum thickness of the armored deck was , but tapered to at the ship's ends. Below this was a thinner armored deck that tapered from on the centerline to at the edges. It curved down about to form a torpedo bulkhead before it met up with the inner bottom. This system was based on experiments conducted in 1894 and was more modern than that used in the Russian battleship "Tsesarevich" although it was still too close to the side of the ship. The main turret armor was in thickness and the ammunition shafts were protected by of armor. The casemates for the 138 mm guns ranged from in thickness and their ammunition tubes had of armor.

"Henri IV" was laid down at Cherbourg on 15 July 1897 and launched on 23 August 1899, but did not enter service until September 1903, at a cost of ₣15,660,000 francs. The ship spent the early part of World War I as the guardship at Bizerte, until February 1915 when she was assigned to the newly formed Syrian Squadron ("escadre de Syrie"). This squadron was intended to attack Turkish positions and lines of communication in Syria, Lebanon, Palestine and the Sinai Peninsula. "Henri IV" was transferred to the French squadron in the Dardanelles campaign to replace the sunk battleship and the damaged after the Allies suffered heavily during their first attempt to sail through the Dardanelles and past the fortifications them on 18 March 1915. The ship bombarded Kum Kale, on the Asiatic side of the Dardanelles in support of the French diversionary landing on 25 April 1915, and provided fire support for the troops ashore for the rest of the month. She was hit eight times while providing support during this time.

Three of her 138.6 mm guns had been dismounted by November 1914 and sent to reinforce the French naval mission to Serbia, known as "Mission D", by rail from Salonica. In 1916, she was assigned to the Complementary (Reserve) Division of the 3rd Battle Squadron. Subsequently she served with the French Eastern Division in Egypt and then she was sent to Taranto in 1918 as a depot ship. "Henri IV" was stricken from the Navy List in 1920 and scrapped the following year.




</doc>
<doc id="23485769" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23485769" title="Doug Fister">
Doug Fister

Douglas Wildes Fister (born February 4, 1984) is an American former professional baseball pitcher. He played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Seattle Mariners, Detroit Tigers, Washington Nationals, Houston Astros, Boston Red Sox, and Texas Rangers from 2009 through 2018.

Fister bats left-handed, and throws right-handed. He was born in Merced, California and attended Golden Valley High School. He then attended Merced College, and later Fresno State University. He spent four seasons (2006–2009) in the Seattle Mariners minor league organization before being promoted to their Major League roster in 2009.

Fister was born February 4, 1984, to Larry and Jan Fister. Larry Fister is a fire captain who played football at Fresno State University from 1976 to 1977. Jan is a homemaker. Fister has three siblings; a brother, Jacob and two sisters, Casey and Wendy. He grew up in Merced, California where he began playing baseball at the age of six.

He was a fan of both the Oakland Athletics and San Francisco Giants as a child. His favorite player was Cal Ripken, Jr. Fister also played soccer, football and basketball as a child. He shares a middle name (Wildes) with both his brother, father and grandfather.

Fister attended Golden Valley High School where he pitched and was the team's utility player. He was a two-year letterman and a first-team All-Central California Conference selection in his senior season, batting .456 with a home run and 12 runs batted in (RBIs). He was also named a first team all-conference selection in basketball, averaging over 30 points per game as a senior. He and former MLB catcher Dusty Ryan graduated in the same class.

Fister attended Merced College from 2003 to 2004. At Merced, he was a two-year letterman and participated in the 2003 Junior College All-Star Game. In 2003, he was a preseason All-American. Fister was drafted by the San Francisco Giants in the 49th round of the 2004 Major League Baseball draft but chose to transfer to Division I Fresno State University, where he played for the Bulldogs. In 2005, Fister led Fresno State with wins (7) and was second on the team in innings pitched (93) and strikeouts (77). He also appeared in 26 games at first base in 2005. That season, he was drafted by the New York Yankees in the sixth round but chose to stay at Fresno State for his senior season. In 2006, Fister had an 8-6 record and a 4.10 earned run average in 20 games. Following the season, Fister was drafted by the Seattle Mariners in the seventh round of the 2006 Major League Baseball draft.

Fister was selected by the Seattle Mariners in the seventh round of the 2006 Major League Baseball draft, and signed on June 10, 2006. He began his professional career that season with the Class-A Short-Season Everett AquaSox of the Northwest League. Fister went 3–5 with a 2.25 ERA, four saves, and 35 strikeouts in 20 games; four starts. He was first on the AquaSox in games finished (13), and ERA; tied for second in saves, and wins; and was third among pitchers in games played (20). The next season, 2007, Fister played with the Double-A West Tenn Diamond Jaxx of the Southern League. That season, he went 7–8 with a 4.60 ERA, one complete game, and 85 strikeouts in 24 games, all starts. Fister led the Diamond Jaxx pitching staff in wins, and home runs allowed (14); was tied for first in complete games; was second in hits allowed (156); and was third in losses, games started, innings pitched (131), runs allowed (78), and earned runs allowed (67).

Fister continued to play for the Double-A West Tenn Diamond Jaxx in 2008. On April 23, Fister was named the Southern League Pitcher of the Week. Fister became the Southern League's first 10-game loser on July 10. On the season, Fister went 6–14 with a 5.43 ERA, and 104 strikeouts in 31 games; 23 starts. Fister was first among Diamond Jaxx pitchers in losses, games started, innings pitched (134), hits allowed (155), runs allowed (95), earned runs allowed (81), home runs allowed (12); and was second in wins, bases on balls (walks) allowed (45), and strikeouts. He was also first in the Southern League in runs allowed; and was second in losses, and earned runs allowed. At the end of the 2008 regular season, Fister played in the Arizona Fall League (AFL) with the Peoria Javelinas. In the AFL, Fister was involved in no decisions with a 3.32 ERA, and 22 strikeouts in 11 games, all in relief.

In 2009, Fister began the season with the Double-A West Tenn Diamond Jaxx for the third time in his career. However, he was later promoted to the Triple-A Tacoma Rainiers, and eventually the Seattle Mariners.

In just two games with the Diamond Jaxx, Fister went 1–0 and gave-up no earned runs. With the Rainiers, Fister went 6–4 with a 3.81 ERA, and 79 strikeouts in 22 games, 17 starts.

On August 7, Fister was promoted to the majors. As a result, pitcher Jason Vargas was optioned to Triple-A Tacoma to make room for Fister on the Mariners' 25-man roster.

In his major league debut against the Tampa Bay Rays on August 8, Fister pitched one inning, struck out one, gave up one hit, and gave up one walk. He made his first start on August 11 against the Chicago White Sox and picked up the loss. Fister's first win came on August 16 against the New York Yankees. Fister finished the season with a major league record of 3–4 with a 4.13 ERA, and 36 strikeouts in 11 games, 10 starts.

In 2010, Fister started the first game for the Mariners in spring training. Going into the season, Fister, and fellow starting pitchers Garrett Olson, Luke French and Jason Vargas competed for the Mariners' fifth spot in the starting rotation. Fister ended up getting a job in the rotation (as did Vargas). On April 19, Fister took a no-hitter into the seventh inning against the Baltimore Orioles until it was broken up by Nick Markakis' leadoff single. Although the Mariners suffered early season woes, the "Seattle Post-Intelligencer" praised Fister and fellow starter Jason Vargas as reasons for why the Mariners were not doing worse, stating, "If Doug Fister and Jason Vargas hadn't been excellent at the back end of the rotation, God knows where this club would be."

In 2011, Fister was the Mariners' number three starter behind Félix Hernández and Jason Vargas.

On July 30, 2011, Fister was traded to the Detroit Tigers along with relief pitcher David Pauley in exchange for Casper Wells, Charlie Furbush, Francisco Martinez, and a player to be named later. On August 17, the Tigers sent former first round pick Chance Ruffin to the Mariners to complete the trade. Before being dealt to the Detroit Tigers, Fister had a 3–12 record with a 3.33 ERA in 21 starts.

After his trade to the Tigers, Fister went 8–1 with a 1.79 ERA in 10 starts. He finished the 2011 regular season 11–13, with an ERA of 2.83 that placed him fourth among American League pitchers.

Fister was named the American League Pitcher of the Month for September after going 5–0 with a 0.53 ERA in five starts.

Facing the New York Yankees in the American League Divisional Series, Fister bounced back from a rough game 1 outing to earn the win in the decisive game 5. Fister limited the Yankees to one run on five hits and two walks over five innings in the Tigers 3–2 victory, which sent them to the American League Championship Series.

In Game 3 of the American League Championship Series, he held the Texas Rangers' offense to two runs in 7 innings to get the win in a 5–2 Tigers victory.

On April 7 while pitching against the Red Sox, Fister left the game due to an injury. The next day, Fister was placed on the 15-day disabled list with a strain of the costochondral muscle in his left side, an injury to the ribcage. Brayan Villarreal was recalled from Triple-A Toledo to take his place on the roster. On September 22, Fister threw his first career shutout, blanking the Minnesota Twins 8-0 on seven hits. In his next start on September 27, Doug set an American League record by striking out nine batters in a row against the Kansas City Royals. This was just one short of the major league record (10) set by Tom Seaver in 1970. He finished the 2012 regular season with a 10-10 record and a 3.45 ERA in 26 starts.

Fister pitched in the second game of the ALDS against the Oakland A's, picking up a no decision in a 5–4 victory while giving up two runs in seven innings. He also got a no-decision in Game 1 of the 2012 ALCS against the New York Yankees, despite surrendering no runs in innings of work. Fister was struck in the head by a line drive off the bat of Giants outfielder Gregor Blanco during the second inning of Game 2 of the 2012 World Series. Fister continued to pitch the game, holding the Giants to one run over six innings before turning it over to the bullpen.

Fister was injury-free in 2013, making 32 starts for the Tigers. He set career highs in wins (14), win percentage (14-9, .609) and strikeouts (159), while finishing the regular season with a 3.67 ERA.

Doug made a start in Game 4 of the 2013 ALDS against the Oakland Athletics, with the Tigers facing elimination. He gave up three runs and seven hits in six innings of work. The Tigers won the game with a late rally, so Fister did not factor in the decision. In Game 4 of the 2013 ALCS against the Boston Red Sox, Fister gave up just one run on eight hits, striking out seven over six innings and earning the win in a 7-3 Tigers victory.

Following the 2013 season, Fister was named a finalist for the Gold Glove Award for the pitcher position alongside Mark Buehrle and R.A. Dickey. Fister finished the season with zero errors for a perfect 1.000 fielding percentage. Additionally, he led all American League pitchers in putouts (23) and double plays started (5), and was seventh in assists (29).

On December 2, 2013, Doug Fister was traded to the Washington Nationals for utility man Steve Lombardozzi and left handed pitchers Ian Krol and Robbie Ray.
During spring training with the Nationals, Fister developed a strained lat muscle on his right side that put him on the disabled list to start the 2014 season. He returned on May 9 against the Oakland Athletics where he gave up five earned runs on nine hits in innings. He bounced back in his next start, against the Arizona Diamondbacks, Fister gave up one earned run on five hits in seven innings. Fister finished the 2014 season with a 16-6 record over 164 IP, tallying 98 strikeouts, a 1.08 WHIP (5th in the NL among qualified starters), and a 2.41 ERA (4th in the NL).

Fister pitched in 25 games for the Nationals in 2015, 15 of which were starts. He posted a 5–7 record, 4.19 ERA, and 63 strikeouts in 103 innings pitched.

On January 28, 2016, Fister signed a one-year, $7 million contract with the Houston Astros.

On May 20, 2017, Fister signed a contract with the Los Angeles Angels. On June 21, 2017, he opted out of a minor league contract with the Angels, and was placed on waivers.

On June 23, 2017, Fister was claimed off waivers by the Boston Red Sox. On June 25, Fister made his first start with the Red Sox, going 6 innings and striking out 6 batters, allowing 3 earned runs and in a 2-4 loss against the Los Angeles Angels. On an August 22 start in Cleveland, Fister allowed a lead off home run to Francisco Lindor to briefly tie the score at 1-1, but this would turn out to be the only hit registered by the Indians as Fister would go on to pitch a complete game 1-hitter and not allow a hit to the final 28 batters faced in the game in an eventual 9-1 Red Sox win.

On November 28, 2017, Fister signed a one-year, $4 million, contract with the Texas Rangers that included an option for the following season. During the 2018-19 offseason, Fister decided to retire.

Fister throws four pitches, and is mainly a groundball pitcher. His two seam fastball is thrown at . His other pitches are a cutter (), a curveball (), and a changeup (). The curveball is his best swing-and-miss pitch, with a career whiff rate of over 30%. Fister walks few batters; he finished third and fourth in 2010 and 2011, respectively, in lowest walks per nine innings ratio.

Fister runs each day that he does not pitch.

Fister stands and was among the tallest players in the major leagues.

Fister and his wife, Ashley, have two daughters.


</doc>
<doc id="23487999" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23487999" title="Hajj">
Hajj

The Hajj (; "" "pilgrimage") is an annual Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, the holiest city for Muslims, and a mandatory religious duty for Muslims that must be carried out at least once in their lifetime by all adult Muslims who are physically and financially capable of undertaking the journey, and can support their family during their absence. Literally speaking, Hajj means heading to a place for the sake of visiting. In Islamic terminology, Hajj is a pilgrimage made to Kaaba, the ‘House of God’, in the sacred city of Mecca in Saudi Arabia. The rites of Hajj, which according to Islam go back to the time of Prophet Abraham who re-built Kaaba after it had been first built by Prophet Adam, are performed over five or six days, beginning on the eighth and ending on the thirteenth day of Dhu al-Hijjah, the last month of the Islamic calendar. It is one of the five pillars of Islam, alongside Shahadah, Salat, Zakat and Sawm. The Hajj is the second largest annual gathering of Muslims in the world, after the Arba'een Pilgrimage in Karbala, Iraq. The state of being physically and financially capable of performing the Hajj is called "istita'ah", and a Muslim who fulfils this condition is called a "mustati". The Hajj is a demonstration of the solidarity of the Muslim people, and their submission to God (Allah). The word Hajj means "to attend a journey", which connotes both the outward act of a journey and the inward act of intentions.

The pilgrimage occurs from the 8th to 12th (or in some cases 13th) of Dhu al-Hijjah, the last month of the Islamic calendar. Because the Islamic calendar is lunar and the Islamic year is about eleven days shorter than the Gregorian year, the Gregorian date of Hajj changes from year to year. Ihram is the name given to the special spiritual state in which pilgrims wear two white sheets of seamless cloth and abstain from certain actions.

The Hajj (sometimes spelt Hadj, Hadji or Haj also in English) is associated with the life of Islamic prophet Muhammad from the 7th century, but the ritual of pilgrimage to Mecca is considered by Muslims to stretch back thousands of years to the time of Abraham. During Hajj, pilgrims join processions of hundreds of thousands of people, who simultaneously converge on Mecca for the week of the Hajj, and perform a series of rituals: each person walks counter-clockwise seven times around the Kaaba (the cube-shaped building and the direction of prayer for the Muslims), runs back and forth between the hills of Safa and Marwah, drinks from the Zamzam Well, goes to the plains of Mount Arafat to stand in vigil, spends a night in the plain of Muzdalifa, and performs symbolic stoning of the devil by throwing stones at three pillars. After the sacrifice of their animal, the Pilgrims then are required to shave their head. Then they celebrate the three-day global festival of Eid al-Adha.

Pilgrims can also go to Mecca to perform the rituals at other times of the year. This is sometimes called the "lesser pilgrimage", or "‘Umrah" (). However, even if they choose to perform the Umrah, they are still obligated to perform the Hajj at some other point in their lifetime if they have the means to do so, because Umrah is not a substitute for Hajj.

In 2017, the number of pilgrims coming from outside the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to perform "hajj" was officially reported as 1,752,014 and 600,108 Saudi Arabian residents bringing the total number of pilgrims to 2,352,122.
The word in comes from the "" , which means ""holiday"", from the triliteral Semitic root ח-ג-ג. The meaning of the verb is "to circle, to go around". Judaism uses circumambulation in the Hakafot ritual during Hoshanah Rabbah at the end of the Festival of Sukkot and on Simchat Torah; traditionally, Jewish brides circumambulate their grooms during the wedding ceremony under the chuppah. From this custom, the root was borrowed for the familiar meaning of holiday, celebration and festivity. In the Temple, every festival would bring a sacrificial feast. Similarly in Islam, the person who commits the Hajj to Mecca has to turn around the Kaaba and to offer sacrifices.

The present pattern of Hajj was established by Muhammad. However, according to the Quran, elements of Hajj trace back to the time of Abraham. According to Islamic tradition, Abraham was ordered by God to leave his wife Hajara and his son Ishmael alone in the desert of ancient Mecca. In search of water, Hajara desperately ran seven times between the two hills of Safa and Marwah but found none. Returning in despair to Ishmael, she saw the baby scratching the ground with his leg and a water fountain sprang forth underneath his foot. Later, Abraham was commanded to build the Kaaba (which he did with the help of Ishmael) and to invite people to perform pilgrimage there. The Quran refers to these incidents in verses and . It is said that the archangel Gabriel brought the Black Stone from Heaven to be attached to the Kaaba.

In pre-Islamic Arabia, a time known as "jahiliyyah", the Kaaba became surrounded by pagan idols. In 630 CE, Muhammad led his followers from Medina to Mecca, cleansed the Kaaba by destroying all the pagan idols, and then reconsecrated the building to Allah. In 632 CE, Muhammad performed his only and last pilgrimage with a large number of followers, and instructed them on the rites of Hajj. It was from this point that Hajj became one of the five pillars of Islam.

During the medieval times, pilgrims would gather in big cities of Syria, Egypt, and Iraq to go to Mecca in groups and caravans comprising tens of thousands of pilgrims, often under state patronage. Hajj caravans, particularly with the advent of the Mamluk Sultanate and its successor, the Ottoman Empire, were escorted by a military force accompanied by physicians under the command of an "amir al-hajj". This was done in order to protect the caravan from Bedouin robbers or natural hazards, and to ensure that the pilgrims were supplied with the necessary provisions. Muslim travelers like Ibn Jubayr and Ibn Battuta have recorded detailed accounts of Hajj-travels of medieval time. The caravans followed well-established routes called in Arabic "darb al-hajj", lit. "pilgrimage road", which usually followed ancient routes such as the King's Highway.

The date of Hajj is determined by the Islamic calendar (known as Hijri calendar or AH), which is based on the lunar year. Every year, the events of Hajj take place in a five-day period, starting on 8 and ending on 12 Dhu al-Hijjah, the twelfth and last month of the Islamic calendar. Among these five days, the 9th Dhul-Hijjah is known as Day of Arafah, and this day is called the day of Hajj. Because the Islamic calendar is lunar and the Islamic year is about eleven days shorter than the Gregorian year, the Gregorian date for Hajj changes from year to year. Thus, each year in the Gregorian calendar, the pilgrimage starts eleven days (sometimes ten days) earlier than the preceding year. This makes it possible for the Hajj season to fall twice in one Gregorian year, and it does so every 33 years. The last time this phenomenon occurred was 2006. 

The table below shows the Gregorian dates of Hajj of recent years (the dates correspond to 9 Dhul-Hijjah of Hijri calendar):

Fiqh literature describes in detail the manners of carrying out the rites of Hajj, and pilgrims generally follow handbooks and expert guides to successfully fulfill the requirements of Hajj. In performing the rites of hajj, the pilgrims not only follow the model of Muhammad, but also commemorate the events associated with Abraham.

When the pilgrims reach the appropriate Miqat (depending on where they're coming from), they enter into a state of holiness – known as Ihram – that consists of wearing two white seamless cloths for the male, with the one wrapped around the waist reaching below the knee and the other draped over the left shoulder and tied at the right side; wearing ordinary dress for the female that fulfills the Islamic condition of public dress with hands and face uncovered; taking ablution; declaring the intention (niyah) to perform pilgrimage and to refraining from certain activities such as clipping the nails, shaving any part of the body, having sexual relations; using perfumes, damaging plants, killing animals, covering head (for men) or the face and hands (for women); getting married; or carrying weapons. The ihram is meant to show equality of all pilgrims in front of God: there is no difference between the rich and the poor.

Donning such unsewn white garments entirely distances man from material ostentation and engrosses him in a world of purity and spirituality. Clothes show individuality and distinction. They create superficial barriers that separate man from man. The garments of Ihram, however, are the antithesis of that individualism. You join a mass and become nothing but a drop of water in an ocean that has no special identity of its own. Ihram clothing is also a reminder of shrouds which every human has to wear after death. This helps you assume your original shape as a man, just one of the "descendants of Adam" who will die one day.

On the 8th Dhu al-Hijjah, the pilgrims are reminded of their duties. They again don the ihram garments and confirm their intention to make the pilgrimage. The prohibitions of ihram start now.
The 8th day of Dhu al-Hijjah coincides with the Tarwiyah Day. The name of Tarwiyah refers to a narration of Ja'far al-Sadiq . He described the reason that there was any water at Mount Arafat in the 8th day of Dhu al-Hijjah. If pilgrims wanted to stay at Arafat, he would have prepared water from Mecca and carried it by themselves to there. So they told each other drink enough. Finally, this day called Tarwiyah that means to quench thirst in the Arabic language. 
The Tarwiyah Day is the first day of Hajj ritual. Also at this day, Husayn ibn Ali began to go to Karbala from Mecca. Muhammad prophet nominated to Tarwiyah Day as one of the four chosen days.

The ritual of "Tawaf" involves walking seven times counterclockwise around the Kaaba. Upon arriving at "Al-Masjid Al-Ḥarām" (, The Sacred Mosque), pilgrims perform an arrival "tawaf" either as part of Umrah or as a welcome tawaf. During tawaf, pilgrims also include Hateem – an area at the north side of the Kaaba – inside their path. Each circuit starts with the kissing or touching of the Black Stone (Hajar al- Aswad). If kissing the stone is not possible because of the crowds, they may simply point towards the stone with their hand on each circuit. Eating is not permitted but the drinking of water is allowed, because of the risk of dehydration. Men are encouraged to perform the first three circuits at a hurried pace, known as "Ramal", and the following four at a more leisurely pace.

The completion of "Tawaf" is followed by two Rakaat prayers at the Place of Abraham (Muqam Ibrahim), a site near the Kaaba inside the mosque. However, again because of large crowds during the days of Hajj, they may instead pray anywhere in the mosque. After prayer, pilgrims also drink water from the Zamzam well, which is made available in coolers throughout the Mosque.

Although the circuits around the Kaaba are traditionally done on the ground level, "Tawaf" is now also performed on the first floor and roof of the mosque because of the large crowds.

This rite is actually the manifestation of Tawhid, the Oneness of God.  The heart and soul of the pilgrim should move around Kaaba, the symbol of the House of Allah, in a way that no worldly attraction distracts him from this path. Only Tawhid should attract him. Tawaf also represents Muslims’ unity. During Tawaf, everyone encircles Kaaba collectively.

Tawaf is followed by "sa'ay", running or walking seven times between the hills of Safa and Marwah, located near the Kaaba. Previously in open air, the place is now entirely enclosed by the Sacred Mosque, and can be accessed via air-conditioned tunnels. Pilgrims are advised to walk the circuit, though two green pillars mark a short section of the path where they run. There is also an internal "express lane" for the disabled. After sayee, the male pilgrims shave their heads and women generally clip a portion of their hair, which completes the Umrah.

After the morning prayer on the 8th of Dhu al-Hijjah, the pilgrims to Mina where they spend the whole day and offer noon, afternoon, evening, and night prayers. The next morning after morning prayer, they leave Mina to go to Arafat.

The 9th Dhul-Hijjah is known as Day of Arafah, and this day is called the Day of Hajj.

On 9th Dhu al-Hijjah before noon, pilgrims arrive at Arafat, a barren and plain land some 20 kilometers east of Mecca, where they stand in contemplative vigil: they offer supplications, repent on and atone for their past sins, and seek mercy of God, and listen to sermon from the Islamic scholars who deliver it from near Jabal al-Rahmah (The Mount of Mercy) from where Muhammad is said to have delivered his last sermon. Lasting from noon through sunset, this is known as 'standing before God' (wuquf), one of the most significant rites of Hajj. At Masjid al-Namirah, pilgrims offer noon and afternoon prayers together at noon time. A pilgrim's Hajj is considered invalid if they do not spend the afternoon on Arafat.

Pilgrims must leave Arafat for Muzdalifah after sunset without praying maghrib (sunset) prayer at Arafat. Muzdalifah is an area between Arafat and Mina. Upon reaching there, pilgrims perform Maghrib and Isha prayer jointly, spend the night praying and sleeping on the ground with open sky, and gather pebbles for the next day's ritual of the stoning of the Devil (Shaitan).

After returning from Muzdalifah, the Pilgrims spend the night at Mina.

Back at Mina, the pilgrims perform symbolic stoning of the devil (Ramy al-Jamarat) by throwing seven stones from sunrise to sunset at only the largest of the three pillars, known as Jamrat al-Aqabah. The remaining two pillars (jamarah) are not stoned on this day. These pillars are said to represent Satan. Pilgrims climb ramps to the multi-levelled Jamaraat Bridge, from which they can throw their pebbles at the jamarat. Because of safety reasons, in 2004 the pillars were replaced by long walls, with catch basins below to collect the pebbles.

After the casting of stones, animals are slaughtered to commemorate the story of Ibrahim and Ismael. Traditionally the pilgrims slaughtered the animal themselves, or oversaw the slaughtering. Today many pilgrims buy a sacrifice voucher in Mecca before the greater Hajj begins, which allows an animal to be slaughtered in the name of God (Allah) on the 10th, without the pilgrim being physically present. Modern abattoirs complete the processing of the meat, which is then sent as charity to poor people around the world. At the same time as the sacrifices occur at Mecca, Muslims worldwide perform similar sacrifices, in a three-day global festival called "Eid al-Adha".

After sacrificing an animal, another important rite of Hajj is shaving head or trimming hair (known as Halak). All male pilgrims shave their head or trim their hair on the day of Eid al Adha and women pilgrims cut the tips of their hair.

On the same or the following day, the pilgrims re-visit the Sacred Mosque in Mecca for another "tawaf", known as "Tawaf al-Ifadah", an essential part of Hajj. It symbolizes being in a hurry to respond to God and show love for Him, an obligatory part of the Hajj. The night of the 10th is spent back at Mina.

Starting from noon to sunset on the 11 Dhu al-Hijjah (and again the following day), the pilgrims again throw seven pebbles at each of the three pillars in Mina. This is commonly known as the "Stoning of the Devil".

On 12 Dhu al-Hijjah, the same process of stoning of the pillars as of 11 Dhu al-Hijjah takes place. Pilgrims may leave Mina for Mecca before sunset on the 12th.

If unable to leave on the 12th before sunset or opt to stay at free will, they must perform the stoning ritual again on the 13th before returning to Mecca.

Finally, before leaving Mecca, pilgrims perform a farewell tawaf called the Tawaf al-Wadaa. 'Wadaa' means 'to bid farewell'. The pilgrims circle the Kaaba seven times counter-clockwise, and if they can, attempt to touch or kiss the Kaaba.

Though not a part of Hajj, pilgrims may choose to travel to the city of Medina and the Al-Masjid an-Nabawi (Mosque of the Prophet), which contains Muhammad's tomb. The Quba Mosque and Masjid al-Qiblatayn are also usually visited.

Most of the Hajj related issues are handled by Ministry of Hajj and Umrah. Making necessary arrangements each year for the growing number of pilgrims poses a logistic challenge for the government of Saudi Arabia, which has, since the 1950s, spent more than $100 billion to increase pilgrimage facilities. Major issues like housing, transportation, sanitation, and health care have been addressed and improved greatly by the government by introducing various development programs, with the result that pilgrims now enjoy modern facilities and perform various rites at ease. The Saudi government often sets quota for various countries to keep the pilgrims' number at a manageable level, and arranges huge security forces and CCTV cameras to maintain overall safety during Hajj. Various institutions and government programs, such as the Haj subsidy offered in India or the Tabung Haji based in Malaysia assist pilgrims in covering the costs of the journey. For 2014 Hajj, special Hajj information desks were set up at Pakistani airports to assist the pilgrims.

In order to enter Saudi Arabia to participate in the Hajj, visa requirements exist

Traditionally, the pilgrimage to Mecca was mainly an overland journey using camels as a means of transport. During the second half of the nineteenth century (after 1850s), steamships began to be used in the pilgrimage journey to Mecca, and the number of pilgrims traveling on sea route increased. This continued for some time, until air travel came to predominate; Egypt introduced the first airline service for Hajj pilgrims in 1937. Today, many airlines and travel agents offer Hajj packages, and arrange for transportation and accommodation for the pilgrims. King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah and Prince Mohammad Bin Abdulaziz Airport in Medina have dedicated pilgrim terminals to assist the arrival of pilgrims. Other international airports around the world, such as Indira Gandhi in New Delhi, Rajiv Gandhi International Airport in Hyderabad, Jinnah in Karachi and Soekarno-Hatta in Jakarta also have dedicated terminals or temporary facilities to service pilgrims as they depart and return home. During Hajj, many airlines run extra flights to accommodate the large number of pilgrims.

During official Hajj days, pilgrims travel between the different locations by bus or on foot. The Saudi government strictly controls vehicles access into these heavily congested areas. However, the journey could take many hours due to heavy vehicular and pedestrian traffic. In 2010, the Saudi government started operating the Al Mashaaer Al Mugaddassah Metro line as an exclusive shuttle train for pilgrims between Arafat, Muzdalifa and Mina. The service, which operates only during the 7 days of Hajj, shortens the travel time during the critical "Nafrah" from Arafat to Muzdalifah to minutes. Due to its limited capacity, the use of the metro is not open to all pilgrims and is subject to strict controls by Saudi officials.

Pilgrim numbers have greatly increased in recent years, which has led to numerous accidents and deaths due to overcrowding. The first major accident during Hajj in modern times occurred in 1990, when a tunnel stampede led to the death of 1,462 people. Afterwards, various crowd-control techniques were adopted to ensure safety. Because of large crowds, some of the rituals have become more symbolic. For example, it is no longer necessary to kiss the Black Stone. Instead, pilgrims simply point at it on each circuit around the Kaaba. Also, the large pillars used for pebble throwing were changed into long walls in 2004 with basins below to catch the stones. Another example is that animal sacrifice is now done at slaughterhouses appointed by the Saudi authorities, without the pilgrims being present there.

For Hajj in 2016, Saudi authorities will also be giving pilgrims GPS-tracked electronic bracelets.

Despite safety measures, incidents may happen during the Hajj as pilgrims are trampled or ramps collapse under the weight of the many visitors. During 2015 Hajj, a stampede resulted in 769 deaths and injuries to 934 others, according to the Saudi authorities. A report from Associated Press totalled at least 1470 fatalities from official reports from other countries, making it the most deadly such episode to date. Concerns were raised in 2013 and 2014 about the spread of MERS because of mass gatherings during the Hajj. Saudi Health Minister Abdullah Al-Rabia said authorities have detected no cases of MERS among the pilgrims so far. He also said that, despite few cases of MERS, Saudi Arabia was ready for the 2014 pilgrimage.

In November 2017, Saudi authorities banned selfies at the two holy sites.

To the Muslims, Hajj is associated with religious as well as social significance. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the obligation for performing this pilgrimage is only fulfilled if it is done on the eighth to twelfth day of the last month of the Islamic calendar. If in a given year, an adult Muslim is in good health and his life and wealth is safe, they must perform the Hajj in the same year. Delaying it is considered sinful unless the delay is caused by reasons beyond their control.

Apart from being an obligatory religious duty, the Hajj is seen to have a spiritual merit that provides the Muslims with an opportunity of self-renewal. Hajj serves as a reminder of the Day of Judgment when Muslims believe people will stand before God. Hadith literature (sayings of Muhammad) articulates various merits a pilgrim achieves upon successful completion of their Hajj. After successful pilgrimage, pilgrims can prefix their names with the title 'Al-Hajji', and are held with respect in Muslim society. However, Islamic scholars suggest Hajj should signify a Muslim's religious commitment, and should not be a measurement of their social status. Hajj brings together and unites the Muslims from different parts of the world irrespective of their race, colour, and culture, which acts as a symbol of equality.

A 2008 study on the impact of participating in the Islamic pilgrimage found that Muslim communities become more positive and tolerant after Hajj experience. Titled "Estimating the Impact of the Hajj: Religion and Tolerance in Islam's Global Gathering" and conducted in conjunction with Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government, the study noted that the Hajj "increases belief in equality and harmony among ethnic groups and Islamic sects and leads to more favorable attitudes toward women, including greater acceptance of female education and employment" and that "Hajjis show increased belief in peace, and in equality and harmony among adherents of different religions."

Malcolm X, an American activist during the Civil Rights Movement, describes the sociological atmosphere he experienced at his Hajj in the 1960s as follows:

In 2014, Saudi Arabia was expected to have earned up to $8.5 billion from Hajj. Saudi Arabia's highest source of revenue after oil and gas is Hajj and the country is expected to depend more on Hajj as the amounts of available oil and gas for sale decline.

Furthermore, the increase of religious tourism from about 12 million Muslims annually to almost 17 million by 2025 has given rise to increasing luxury hotel businesses in the area to accommodate pilgrims. The Abraj al-Bait firm intends to build hotels, shopping malls and apartments which is claimed to be an estimated value of three billion dollars. According to The Embassy of Saudi Arabia, the nation's royals are working towards establishing programs which promote sanitation, housing, transportation, and welfare as the amount of visiting pilgrims increases.

There has been a substantial increase in the number of pilgrims during the last 92 years, and the number of foreign pilgrims has increased by approximately 2,824 percent, from 58,584 in 1920 to 1,712,962 in 2012. Because of development and expansion work at Masjid al-Haram, the authority restricted the number of pilgrims in 2013. The following number of pilgrims arrived in Saudi Arabia each year to perform Hajj.

In Islamic eschatology about Hajj and Mahdi:



Hajj is one of the most important acts of faith a Muslim can commit. The act is one of the Five Pillars of Islam and is considered mandatory for those who practice Islam. As presented above, the pilgrimage is entrenched in traditions and codified by a multitude of holy texts. Muslims are bound in a contract with Allah and Hajj is one of the payments which Allah requires of his followers.

For this reason, those who are unable to make themselves, are permitted to send another in their place under specific circumstances. First, the person who send someone in their place must be unable because of an incurable sickness or old age. If the sickness may be cured, the follower of Allah must go when they are able. Also, Hajj Badal may be performed on a person's behalf if they are already deceased. This act is considered a form of vicarious atonement. In this case, one of the Five Pillars of Islam can be completed for a Muslim who was not able to fulfill their duties while living.

Like the requirements for the person who is having Hajj being completed on their behalf, there are also requirements for those who are carrying out the act. When the person committing the act enters the Ihram—the holy garb worn during Hajj—they must acknowledge the person who they are representing. Also, when the Ihram is donned, the Hajj can only be for the single person who they represent and not for themselves. Another qualifications is that the present person must be Muslim and in good standing with the Islamic community. Because there are multiple distinct types of Hajj, the person performing the ceremony in another's place must attend the type which is desired by the unable. Lastly, if the person is still alive, then the performer of the Hajj Badal must ask for the permission of the person they hope to represent.

The basis of Hajj Badal can be found in the writings of Abd Allah ibn Abbas who recorded the Prophet Muhammad's words. When approached by a woman from Juhayan, this exchange occurred between the two: "My mother vowed to go for Hajj, but she died before she did so. Can I perform Hajj on her behalf?" The Prophet replied: "Yes, perform Hajj on her behalf. Do you not think if your mother owed a debt that you would pay it off for her? Fulfil her debt to Allah; for Allah is more deserving that what is owed to him should be paid." (Hadith No.77, narrated by Ibn Abbas) Other instances of recorded conversation which solidified the act were recorded by other Islamic scholars such as Abdullah bin Az-Zubair and Al-Fadl ibn 'Abbas.

However, the validity of Hajj Badal has been questioned by other Islamic scholars. The Ulama, a large body of Islamic scholars, oppose Hajj Badal because of its imitation of Christian beliefs. Also, the Qur’an contains phrases which state that no man can truly bear the responsibility of others. Hajj Badal is an act which shifts the Islamic duty of a person to another which contradicts the teaching of the Qur’an. Hadiths, which are supposed sayings of the prophet Muhammed, cannot contradict the Qur’an according to Usool-e-Fiqh—the guiding Jurisprudence principles of Islam.

Another reason why Hajj Badal is criticized stems from lack of consistency. Out of the Five Pillars of Islam, none are subject to vicarious atonement. If prayer, Kalima, fasting, or Zakat are not able to be atoned for vicariously, then why can Hajj. Permitting vicarious atonement harms the strictness of performing Islamic traditions on the living and could harm the religion as a whole.

Lastly, passages in the Qur’an—specifically 22:28—stress the importance of witnessing the traditions of Hajj with one's own eyes. Hajj Badal effectively prevents a follower of Islam from partaking in the ceremonies. This contradiction with the word of the Qur’an is another reason why Islamic scholars disapprove of the practice.




Arba'een Pilgrimage

</doc>
<doc id="23536321" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23536321" title="Shaoguan incident">
Shaoguan incident

The Shaoguan incident was a civil disturbance which took place overnight on 25/26 June 2009 in Guangdong province, China. A violent dispute erupted between migrant Uyghurs and Han Chinese workers at a toy factory in Shaoguan as a result of allegations of the sexual assault of a Han Chinese female. Groups of Han Chinese set upon Uyghur co-workers, leading to at least two Uyghurs being violently killed by angry Han Chinese men (although other reports indicate a higher death toll), and some 118 people injured, most of them Uyghurs.

The event was widely cited as the trigger event for July 2009 Ürümqi riots, which ostensibly started as a peaceful street protest demanding official action over the two Uyghurs who died in Shaoguan. Following trials in October 2009, one person was executed and several others sentenced to terms between life imprisonment and five to seven years.

The factory where the incident took place is the Xuri ("Early Light") Toy Factory (), owned by Hong Kong-based Early Light International (Holdings) Ltd., the largest toy manufacturer in the world. The company's Shaoguan factory in the Wujiang district employs some 16,000 workers. At the behest of the Guangdong authorities, it hired 800 workers from Kashgar, in Xinjiang as part of an ethnic program which relocated 200,000 young Uyghurs since the start of 2008. According to "The Guardian", most workers sign a one- to three-year contract then travel to factory dormitories in the south; in addition to their salaries ranging from 1,000 yuan to 1,400 yuan a month（which is extremely high compared to their local income, many get free board and lodging. Most of these Kashgars are away from home to work for the first time. "The New York Times" quoted "Xinjiang Daily" saying in May that 70 percent of the young Uyghurs had "signed up for employment voluntarily." 

An official in charge of ethnic and religious affairs in Guangdong said that the province had hired Uygurs, aged from 18 to 29, in May. A small group of Uyghurs arrived on 2 May, and workers at the factory remarked that relations between the two groups deteriorated as the number of Uyghurs increased. State media confirmed that all the workers were from Shufu County. China Labor Watch reported that workers at the Shaoguan factory, where the Uyghurs were employed, earned 28 yuan per day compared with 41.3 yuan in its factory in Shenzhen. They noted that rights of workers, Han and Uyghur alike, were frequently violated by verbal abuse from factory supervisors, unpaid overtime, poor dormitory conditions and illegal labour contracts. Li Qiang, executive director of China Labor Watch said that low pay, long hours and poor working conditions combined with the inability to communicate with their colleagues exacerbated deeply held mistrust between the Han and Uyghurs. However, after the incident Guangdong didn't hire Uyghurs anymore, harming the opportunity for Uyghurs to find jobs, enhancing their poverty and strengthening their resentment of Han people.

Overnight on 25–26 June, tensions flared at the factory, leading to a full-blown ethnic brawl between Uyghurs and Han Chinese. As a result of the fighting, 2 Uyghurs died and 118 people were injured, 16 of them seriously. Of the injured, 79 were Uyghurs and 39 were Han. 400 police and 50 anti-riot vehicles were mobilised.

Official sources state that the rioting began at around 2 a.m., and there were reports that they lasted until at least 4.30 a.m., when police arrived. An initial disturbance was reported at around 11 p.m. when security guards responded to a call for help by a female worker who felt intimidated by several chanting male Uyghurs. Two dozen Han workers armed with batons and metal rods then responded; they called for backup using their phones.

Uyghurs maintained that the attacks started after the night shift at around 12.30 a.m., when Han mobs stormed into Uyghur dormitories and started indiscriminate and unprovoked beatings. Amateur videos posted online showed brutal attacks, and Han chasing Uyghurs through the dorm floors. One man said that he saw that security had been overwhelmed by the arrival of outside gangs; he said it was common knowledge that the outsiders brought in machetes. Han and Uyghur witnesses interviewed by the foreign press thought the casualties had been understated by the authorities: a Han claimed to have killed seven or eight Uyghurs; Uyghurs cited "merciless" assaults on those already in ambulances. The rioting stopped soon after the police arrived. A policeman explained their delay in arriving at the scene due to difficulties in assembling enough officers. The two dead men were later named as Aximujiang Aimaiti and Sadikejiang Kaze, both from Xinjiang.

The rioting was sparked by allegations of sexual assault on Han women by Uyghurs, and rumours of an incident in which two female Han workers were sexually assaulted by six Uyghur co-workers at the factory, according to Voice of America. The authorities said that the rumours were false, and had been initiated by a disgruntled former co-worker. Xinhua said that a man surnamed Zhu "faked the information to express his discontent" over failing to find new work after quitting his job at the factory.

Police said that their investigations found no evidence that a rape had taken place. Shaoguan government spokesman Wang Qinxin, called it "a very ordinary incident", which he said had been exaggerated to foment unrest."The Guardian" reported that video of the riots and photographs of the victims were quickly circulated on the internet by Uighur exile groups, along with claims that the death toll was under-reported and the police were slow to act; protests in Ürümqi were assembled by email. "Xinhua" reported that Guangdong authorities had arrested two people who are suspected of having spread rumours online which alleged sexual assault of Han women had taken place. In addition, it reported on 7 July 2009 that 13 suspects had been taken into custody following the incident, of which three were Uyghurs from Xinjiang. Xinhua quoted 23-year-old Huang Jiangyuan saying that he was angry at being turned down for a job in June at the toy factory, and thus posted an article at a forum on sg169.com on 16 June which alleged six Xinjiang boys had raped two girls at the Xuri Toy Factory; Huang Zhangsha, 19, was detained for writing on his online chat space on 28 June that eight Xinjiang people had died in the factory fight. Kang Zhijian, vice director with the Shaoguan Public Security Bureau, said that the offenders would face up to 15 days in administrative detention.

On 8 July 2009, "Xinhua" released an interview with Huang Cuilian, the "Han girl" whose alleged rape triggered the disturbances. The 19-year-old trainee from rural Guangdong, who had worked at the factory less than two months, said: "I was lost and entered the wrong dormitory and screamed when I saw those Uyghur young men in the room... I just felt they were unfriendly so I turned and ran." She recounted how one of them stood up and stamped his feet as if to chase her. "I later realized that he was just making fun of me." She said she only found out hours later that she was the cause of the violence.

Shaoguan authorities moved the Uyghur workers to temporary accommodation, and the workers were transferred on 7 July to another facility belonging to Early Light, 30 km away in Baitu town. The Baitu factory is now reported to be an Uyghur enclave, with, sporting facilities, canteen serving Xinjiang food, a round-the-clock staff clinic, and plain-clothed police officers in their midst. According to the "South China Morning Post", the Kashgar staff were apparently unable to mix with colleagues in their previous location because of the language barrier – a local shop worker estimated that less than one in three spoke Mandarin. Two months on, the "South China Morning Post" found few willing to talk about the events of the fateful night. The authorities' claims that 50 Uyghur workers were granted their repatriation requests following the violence are contested by Uyghur workers.

Abdukeyum Muhammat, deputy secretary of Xinjiang kanji Prefectural Committee of the Communist Party, led a working team to Shaoguan on 27 June. Zhou Yongkang, Politburo Standing Committee member responsible for security, reportedly visited Shaoguan in early September 2009. On 5 August, Xinhua reported that Chinese police had arrested Kurban Khayum, a chef at an Arabic restaurant in Guangzhou who they claimed confessed to being an agent for the World Uygur Congress (WUC) and who allegedly spread rumours that were later used as a pretext to trigger the Ürümqi riots of 5 July. Xinhua alleged that he had fabricated a report that "the factory brawl had caused the death of 17 to 18 people, including three females," which he sent in an e-mail to Rebiya Kadeer.

At a trial on 10 October at Shaoguan Intermediate People's Court, Xiao Jianhua (肖建华) was sentenced to death for being the "principal instigator" of the violence and Xu Qiqi (许其琪) was given a life sentence for manslaughter; three other people were sentenced to seven to eight years for assault. On the same day, the People's Court of Wujiang District, Shaoguan, jailed three more Han workers and three Uyghurs for participating in the brawl; they were sentenced to five to seven years imprisonment.



</doc>
<doc id="23680625" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23680625" title="St George's Church, Trotton">
St George's Church, Trotton

St. George's Church is an Anglican church in Trotton, a village in the district of Chichester, one of seven local government districts in the English county of West Sussex. Most of the structure was built in the early 14th century. However, some parts date to around 1230, and there is evidence suggesting an earlier church on the same site. In 1904, a largely intact and unusually detailed painting was found on the west wall depicting the Last Judgment as described in .

The church is dedicated to St. George, patron saint of England. The rector of St George's also oversees the parish of Rogate with Terwick, and most services are held at St. Bartholomew's church in Rogate: just two services a month take place at Trotton. The church is also used once a month by the British Orthodox Church. The church is recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building for its architectural and historical importance.

Historians have disagreed about its age, and the existence of an older church on the same site. The tower has been dated by its architecture to between 1230 and 1240, but other historians question this date and suggest the tower and the body of the church both date to the 14th century. The porch appears to be a 17th century addition. There is a tomb of Margaret de Camois in the nave. It has been suggested that its location there, rather than the chancel as would be expected for the family of the lord of the manor (which her surname suggests she was), may indicate that the church was built on the site of an earlier, smaller, church and the tomb was in the chancel of that church. Local historian Roger Chatterton-Newman disagrees, saying there would be no need for a church on the site any earlier.

A comprehensive restoration was undertaken by Philip Mainwaring Johnston in 1904. The work cost £700 (£ as of ), and a time capsule containing details of the builders, church officials and contemporary world events was buried at the end of the job.

The church is situated in the village of Trotton, West Sussex, just off the A272 near the River Rother. It stands between the early 15th-century bridge over the river and the 16th-century manor house.

The church has a plain, simple Decorated-style exterior, apart from the tower which is Early English style. The nave and chancel are in a single chamber, separated by a narrow step instead of a chancel arch. The tower stands at the western end of the church, and contains a ring of four bells hung for change ringing. The tenor (largest) bell dates from 1908, the others from 1913; all were cast by John Taylor & Co. The church is built of rubble with ashlar dressings. The roof of the main body is tiled; during the 14th century it had a thatched roof, but this was replaced in about 1400. The tower roof is a shingled octagonal cap.

In 1904, the whitewash was removed from the west wall and a wall painting from the very early days of the church was discovered. This, in itself, is not remarkable. Plenty of early churches have wall paintings; however, this one was unusually rich and detailed. In the centre is Jesus Christ, beneath him is Moses and on his right is the "Carnal Man" surrounded by the Seven Deadly Sins. On his left is the "Spiritual Man" surrounded by the Seven Acts of Mercy. These two characters are depicted on the opposite sides of Christ than is usual in such depictions of the Last Judgement. The red paintwork is mostly in good condition, although the Seven Deadly Sins have started to fade.

There are also paintings on the north and south walls depicting the Camoys family. Camoys was the lord of the manor and it appears he had the church built primarily for his family. This would explain the unusual detail in the paintings. They were intended as rich decoration rather than simply for educating an illiterate congregation.

A table-tomb in the middle of the chancel contains the remains of Thomas de Camoys, 1st Baron Camoys (died 1421, although the inscription states 1419) and his wife Elizabeth Mortimer, a daughter of Edmund Mortimer, 3rd Earl of March. Baron Camoys fought at the Battle of Agincourt in 1415, and his wife was the inspiration for the character of "Gentle Kate" in "Henry IV" by Shakespeare. This is an unusually large brass, the couple being depicted only slightly smaller than life-size and holding hands. The monument was described by Ian Nairn and Nikolaus Pevsner as "one of the biggest, most ornate and best preserved brasses in England".

The nave contains a ledger stone with a brass of Margaret de Camois (died 1310). This is the oldest known brass of a woman in England. A 15th-century niche-tomb existed formerly in the south wall, but had been largely removed by 1780. The table-tomb of Sir Roger Lewknor (died c. 1478) survives in the north-east corner of the chancel. Its sides display festoon motifs and slender sculpted niches. In the south-east corner is the monument to Anthony Foster (died 1643), formed with pilasters.

The churchyard contains a Commonwealth war grave, of a World War I soldier of the Queen's Royal Regiment (West Surrey).

St George's Church was listed at Grade I on 18 June 1959. Such buildings are defined as being of "exceptional interest" and greater than national importance. As of February 2001, it was one of 80 Grade I listed buildings, and 3,251 listed buildings of all grades, in the district of Chichester.

The present ecclesiastical parish of Trotton covers a large north–south area of countryside, includes the village of Trotton and the hamlets of Chithurst and Ingrams Green, and is served by St Mary's Church at Chithurst as well as St George's. Both churches are in the Rural Deanery of Midhurst, one of eight deaneries in the Archdeaconry of Horsham in the Diocese of Chichester.

Eucharistic services are held on the second and fourth Sundays every month. The church is open during the day for visitors.



</doc>
<doc id="23686446" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23686446" title="Gulf Stream">
Gulf Stream

The Gulf Stream, together with its northern extension the North Atlantic Drift, is a warm and swift Atlantic ocean current that originates in the Gulf of Mexico and stretches to the tip of Florida, and follows the eastern coastlines of the United States and Newfoundland before crossing the Atlantic Ocean. The process of western intensification causes the Gulf Stream to be a northward accelerating current off the east coast of North America. At about , it splits in two, with the northern stream, the North Atlantic Drift, crossing to Northern Europe and the southern stream, the Canary Current, recirculating off West Africa.

The Gulf Stream influences the climate of the east coast of North America from Florida to Newfoundland, and the west coast of Europe. Although there has been recent debate, there is consensus that the climate of Western Europe and Northern Europe is warmer than it would otherwise be due to the North Atlantic drift which is the northeastern section of the Gulf Stream. It is part of the North Atlantic Gyre. Its presence has led to the development of strong cyclones of all types, both within the atmosphere and within the ocean. The Gulf Stream is also a significant potential source of renewable power generation. The Gulf Stream may be slowing down as a result of climate change.

The Gulf Stream is typically 100 kilometres (62 mi) wide and 800 metres (2,600 ft) to 1,200 metres (3,900 ft) deep. The current velocity is fastest near the surface, with the maximum speed typically about 2.5 metres per second (9 kph; 5.6 mph).

European discovery of the Gulf Stream dates to the 1512 expedition of Juan Ponce de León, after which it became widely used by Spanish ships sailing from the Caribbean to Spain. A summary of Ponce de León's voyage log, on April 22, 1513, noted, "A current such that, although they had great wind, they could not proceed forward, but backward and it seems that they were proceeding well; at the end it was known that the current was more powerful than the wind." Its existence was also known to Peter Martyr d'Anghiera.

Benjamin Franklin became interested in the North Atlantic Ocean circulation patterns. In 1768, while in England, Franklin heard a curious complaint from the Colonial Board of Customs: Why did it take British packets several weeks longer to reach New York from England than it took an average American merchant ship to reach Newport, Rhode Island, despite the merchant ships leaving from London and having to sail down the River Thames and then the length of the English Channel before they sailed across the Atlantic, while the packets left from Falmouth in Cornwall?

Franklin asked Timothy Folger, his cousin twice removed (Nantucket Historical Society), a Nantucket Island whaling captain, for an answer. Folger explained that merchant ships routinely crossed the then-unnamed Gulf Stream—identifying it by whale behavior, measurement of the water's temperature, and changes in the water's color—while the mail packet captains ran against it. Franklin had Folger sketch the path of the Gulf Stream on an old chart of the Atlantic and add written notes on how to avoid the Stream when sailing from England to America. Franklin then forwarded the chart to Anthony Todd, secretary of the British Post Office. Franklin's Gulf Stream chart was printed in 1769 in London, but it was mostly ignored by British sea captains. A copy of the chart was printed in Paris circa 1770–1773, and a third version was published by Franklin in Philadelphia in 1786. The inset in the upper left part of the 1786 chart is an illustration of the migration pattern of herring and not an ocean current.

The Gulf Stream proper is a western-intensified current, driven largely by wind stress. The North Atlantic Drift, in contrast, is largely thermohaline circulation–driven. In 1958 the oceanographer Henry Stommel noted that "very little water from the Gulf of Mexico is actually in the Stream". By carrying warm water northeast across the Atlantic, it makes Western and especially Northern Europe warmer than it otherwise would be.

A river of sea water, called the Atlantic North Equatorial Current, flows westward off the coast of Central Africa. When this current interacts with the northeastern coast of South America, the current forks into two branches. One passes into the Caribbean Sea, while a second, the Antilles Current, flows north and east of the West Indies. These two branches rejoin north of the Straits of Florida.

The trade winds blow westward in the tropics, and the westerlies blow eastward at mid-latitudes. This wind pattern applies a stress to the subtropical ocean surface with negative curl across the north Atlantic Ocean. The resulting Sverdrup transport is equatorward.

Because of conservation of potential vorticity caused by the northward-moving winds on the subtropical ridge's western periphery and the increased relative vorticity of northward moving water, transport is balanced by a narrow, accelerating poleward current. This flows along the western boundary of the ocean basin, outweighing the effects of friction with the western boundary current, and is known as the Labrador current. The conservation of potential vorticity also causes bends along the Gulf Stream, which occasionally break off due to a shift in the Gulf Stream's position, forming separate warm and cold eddies. This overall process, known as western intensification, causes currents on the western boundary of an ocean basin, such as the Gulf Stream, to be stronger than those on the eastern boundary.

As a consequence, the resulting Gulf Stream is a strong ocean current. It transports water at a rate of 30 million cubic meters per second (30 sverdrups) through the Florida Straits. As it passes south of Newfoundland, this rate increases to 150 million cubic metres per second. The volume of the Gulf Stream dwarfs all rivers that empty into the Atlantic combined, which barely total 0.6 million cubic metres per second. It is weaker, however, than the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. Given the strength and proximity of the Gulf Stream, beaches along the East Coast of the United States may be more vulnerable to large sea-level anomalies, which significantly impact rates of coastal erosion.

The Gulf Stream is typically wide and to deep. The current velocity is fastest near the surface, with the maximum speed typically about . As it travels north, the warm water transported by the Gulf Stream undergoes evaporative cooling. The cooling is wind-driven: Wind moving over the water causes evaporation, cooling the water and increasing its salinity and density. When sea ice forms, salts are left out of the ice, a process known as brine exclusion. These two processes produce water that is denser and colder (or, more precisely, water that is still liquid at a lower temperature). In the North Atlantic Ocean, the water becomes so dense that it begins to sink down through less salty and less dense water. (The convective action is not unlike that of a lava lamp.) This downdraft of cold, dense water becomes a part of the North Atlantic Deep Water, a southgoing stream. Very little seaweed lies within the current, although seaweed lies in clusters to its east.

In April 2018, two studies published in "Nature" found the Gulf Stream to be at its weakest for at least 1,600 years.

The Gulf Stream is influential on the climate of the Florida peninsula. The portion off the Florida coast, referred to as the Florida current, maintains an average water temperature at or above during the winter. East winds moving over this warm water move warm air from over the Gulf Stream inland, helping to keep temperatures milder across the state than elsewhere across the Southeast during the winter. Also, the Gulf Stream's proximity to Nantucket, Massachusetts adds to its biodiversity, as it is the northern limit for southern varieties of plant life, and the southern limit for northern plant species, Nantucket being warmer during winter than the mainland.

The North Atlantic Current of the Gulf Stream, along with similar warm air currents, helps keep Ireland and the western coast of Great Britain a couple of degrees warmer than the east. However, the difference is most dramatic in the western coastal islands of Scotland. A noticeable effect of the Gulf Stream and the strong westerly winds (driven by the warm water of the Gulf Stream) on Europe occurs along the Norwegian coast. Northern parts of Norway lie close to the Arctic zone, most of which is covered with ice and snow in winter. However, almost all of Norway's coast remains free of ice and snow throughout the year. Weather systems warmed by the Gulf Stream drift into Northern Europe, also warming the climate behind the Scandinavian mountains.

The warm water and temperature contrast along the edge of the Gulf Stream often increase the intensity of cyclones, tropical or otherwise. Tropical cyclone generation normally requires water temperatures in excess of . Tropical cyclone formation is common over the Gulf Stream, especially in the month of July. Storms travel westward through the Caribbean and then either move in a northward direction and curve toward the eastern coast of the United States or stay on a north-westward track and enter the Gulf of Mexico. Such storms have the potential to create strong winds and extensive damage to the United States' Southeast Coastal Areas. Hurricane Sandy in 2012 was a recent example of a hurricane passing over the Gulf Stream and gaining strength.

Strong extratropical cyclones have been shown to deepen significantly along a shallow frontal zone, forced by the Gulf Stream itself, during the cold season. Subtropical cyclones also tend to generate near the Gulf Stream. 75 percent of such systems documented between 1951 and 2000 formed near this warm water current, with two annual peaks of activity occurring during the months of May and October. Cyclones within the ocean form under the Gulf Stream, extending as deep as beneath the ocean's surface.

The theoretical maximum energy dissipation from the Gulf Stream by turbines is in the range of 20–60 GW.

One suggestion, which could theoretically supply power comparable to several nuclear power plants, would deploy a field of underwater turbines placed 300 meters (980 ft) under the center of the core of the Gulf Stream. Ocean thermal energy could also be harnessed to produce electricity using the temperature difference between cold deep water and warm surface water.




</doc>
<doc id="23691318" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23691318" title="There's More Than One of Everything">
There's More Than One of Everything

"There's More Than One of Everything" is the finale of the first season of the American science fiction drama television series "Fringe". The finale followed David Robert Jones' (Jared Harris) attempts to open a doorway to the parallel universe, while the Fringe team tries to stop him. It ends with FBI agent Olivia Dunham (Anna Torv) discovering a startling secret about Massive Dynamic founder William Bell (Leonard Nimoy).

The episode's story was co-written by Akiva Goldsman and Bryan Burk, and the teleplay was co-written by Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman, while Brad Anderson directed. The episode marked the first appearance of guest actor Nimoy as William Bell. Co-creator J.J. Abrams, having worked with Nimoy on the 2009 film "Star Trek", begged the actor to join the series through a series of phone conversations. Nimoy signed on for three episodes and found playing the character to be a "unique experience" after so many years portraying Spock.

The episode first aired on May 12, 2009 in the United States, and was watched by an estimated 9.28 million viewers. "There's More Than One of Everything" received mostly good reviews, with many critics praising the revelations concerning the parallel universe. Many critics offered opinions on the depiction of the Twin Towers, with most reactions being positive.

While Nina Sharp (Blair Brown) recovers from the gunshot sustained in the previous episode, the Fringe team's investigation reveals that the man in white bandages is David Robert Jones (Jared Harris). Olivia Dunham (Anna Torv) and Phillip Broyles (Lance Reddick) discuss locating William Bell for questioning, whom they believe is behind all the fringe events that have been occurring all season.

Meanwhile, Walter Bishop (John Noble) is at a graveyard, where he solemnly stares at an unknown gravestone. Olivia, Peter Bishop (Joshua Jackson), and Astrid Farnsworth (Jasika Nicole) begin searching for Walter. Nina tells Olivia that an energy cell was stolen from her mechanical arm by Jones, and that he was formerly a Massive Dynamic employee who had looked up to Bell as a "father figure" until they had a falling-out. When Olivia demands to speak to Bell, Nina explains that she does not know where he is, as Bell has been communicating these past few months "strictly electronically". Nina believes Jones is trying to confront Bell, and promises Olivia that if she stops Jones, Nina will arrange a meeting between her and Bell.

On a busy New York City street, Jones and his team use the energy cell to open a doorway into a parallel universe and bring a truck through, but are apparently unsuccessful, as Jones complains he used the "wrong coordinates". Having previously observed Walter at the graveyard, The Observer (Michael Cerveris) arrives with Walter at the Bishops' beach house, and gives Walter a coin, telling him to remember what he has to find. Walter goes on alone into the house, while Olivia and Charlie interview witnesses who saw Jones extract the truck from the doorway. They discover that the truck's VIN numbers do not exist, which implies the "truck was never made". A further interview with Nina reveals to the Fringe team that the truck is from another universe, and that Jones is using the stolen energy cell to travel to that universe.

Peter finds Walter and chooses to meet his father alone, as he believes Walter is upset from the past several days. Now at the beach house, Peter and Walter search for and retrieve a device that can seal shut the doorway into the other universe. Walter explains to Peter that he once lost something very dear to him and that he had to go and bring it back from another reality; the device was created to prevent something from following him.

After Jones makes another unsuccessful attempt to open a doorway at a soccer field in Providence, Olivia searches through old case files related to science and unexplained phenomena, and discovers a geographic connection between the soccer field, the city street, and several of their past Fringe cases. Olivia and Walter come to the same conclusion, that Jones is going to use a site at Reiden Lake to reopen the doorway, the epicenter of these Fringe events. Olivia, Peter, and Walter intercept Jones while he is opening another window and is halfway through it. Peter triggers Walter's device, killing Jones by sealing the doorway.

At the end of the episode, Walter again goes alone to visit the graveyard; he tearfully observes a gravestone marked "Peter Bishop 1978-1985", suggesting that Walter's legitimate son died. Nina Sharp later calls Olivia and implies to her that she can meet William Bell in Manhattan. On the way to the hotel she almost gets into a car crash, at which point she is transported to the parallel universe. After no one shows up at the hotel restaurant. Olivia leaves, as she assumes that she got stood up. However, when in an elevator to leave the building, Olivia is teleported to another location and is directed to an office. After reading a newspaper headline indicating that President Obama was preparing to move into the "new" White House, she is greeted by William Bell (Leonard Nimoy) and inquires where she is. The final shot pans out the window revealing that they are standing inside the South Tower of the World Trade Center.

The character of Massive Dynamic founder William Bell was originally meant to be revealed earlier in the first season, but the writers changed their minds as the show progressed. In early April 2009, "Entertainment Weekly" announced that "Star Trek" actor Leonard Nimoy had been cast as Bell. He and "Fringe" co-creator J.J. Abrams already had a relationship after working together on the 2009 film "Star Trek"; Abrams stated in an interview that he called Nimoy and begged him to join "Fringe", explaining the show and the character. Nimoy sounded interested but wanted to become more familiar with the show, so Abrams and the other producers sent him as much information as they could about "Fringe", until Nimoy agreed. This exchange of phone calls, in which Nimoy responded with interest when pitched the idea, was also how Abrams was able to cast him in his "Star Trek" reboot. Nimoy later explained "When they contacted me about working on "Fringe" -- the same people, the same attitude, the same creativity, the same creative team – it was very enticing". According to Abrams, "The idea that he will play the mysterious, much-referenced William Bell is a thrill. I know I sound like a goofy fan boy, but I can’t help it: Leonard is an icon of the genre and such a wonderful actor. To have him come on board "Fringe" is a mind-blowing honor".

Nimoy was hired for three episodes, beginning with the season finale. "Fringe" co-creator Roberto Orci described Nimoy's character as "a mix of Howard Hughes and Bill Gates", while Nimoy referred to Bell as a "master of the universe" who is "brilliant, wealthy and very powerful". Nimoy's part of the final scene of the episode with Olivia was very brief. Nimoy described the scene as "interesting, entertaining" and "that you'll want to see more of this relationship and what it's all about". Actress Anna Torv described the final scene as calm yet threatening, "That's what's kind of cool about working on Fringe, is everything seems kind of calm and lovely, but there's always something going on underneath". While shooting, Nimoy commented that the character "was a unique experience," as he had not acted outside of the Spock character for a number of years. Nimoy has stated in multiple interviews that his "Fringe" role will be the last project in his acting career.
The episode's teleplay was co-written by executive producers Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman, while consulting producer Akiva Goldsman and executive producer Bryan Burk co-wrote the story. Producer Brad Anderson served as episode director, his fourth credit of the season. J.J. Abrams called the finale "the end of one chapter and the start of another", and believed it was "a huge turning point" for all three main characters.

Co-creator and executive producer Roberto Orci explained in an interview that the big reveal at the end of the episode, in which Olivia meets Bell in the parallel universe, was actually planned for a fourth season, but the writers decided "let's actually answer something instead and not get, not just rely on that mystery forever. And so we actually chose to give kind of a big answer and have to come with a different show than we ever intended". The writers wanted to use an iconic image for the scene, leading to staff writer Andrew Kreisberg's suggestion of the Twin Towers. Wyman first thought it was "the greatest idea in the world" before having doubts that its use would "sensationalize" it. He explained, "But then, when we started thinking about it, we thought collectively America really understood 9/11 is such a monumental moment so we felt it wasn’t exploited but indicative of the times we’re living in right now. We used it and that was the end of the first season and then we were all really thrilled with where it was going." The cast would later recollect on the series, and for Jackson, considered that the show has never "had a better visual or a better cliff-hanger" as this finale.

To create the scene where Jones brings a semi truck from the parallel universe, the special effects crew took a smaller truck and dressed it enough so that it seemed like the longer semi with the help of CGI; the result was that in the episode, the viewer is led to believe that the truck had been "cut" in half after unsuccessfully entering the prime universe doorway. It was rigged so that it appeared to be on a tilt, and cables linked it to smash into a passing car. As the production crew considered William Bell to be a "Renaissance man", they filled Bell's office with "things that inspire him," such as a prototype of Nina's mechanical arm and other items that "evoke images and stimulate thought".

In the final scene set in the parallel universe, a newspaper states the (presumably recently inaugurated) Obamas are moving into the "new" White House, indicating that the traditional presidential residence had been recently rebuilt. Another headline has former President John F. Kennedy addressing the United Nations. Another part of the newspaper depicts Boston Celtics player Len Bias winning the MVP award, when Bias in fact died in 1986 in the prime universe.

"There's More Than One of Everything" was season one's finale. The episode was watched by an estimated 9.28 million viewers in the United States.

In between the first two seasons, Fox aired repeats of the first season featuring Twitter comments about the episodes from executive producers Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman, and actors John Noble and Joshua Jackson.

The episode received generally positive reviews, with multiple critics lauding the performances of actors Anna Torv and John Noble. In his review for "Entertainment Weekly", critic Ken Tucker wrote this his "mind was blown not once, but twice" due to the many revelations about two universes; "Fringe" "has vaulted to the upper reaches of current television". In a second review, Tucker praised the "beautifully, startlingly executed" special effects when the "hole" in the universe closed. Writing for The A.V. Club, critic Zach Handlen gave the episode an "A", and felt the episode made him want to go back and rewatch season one because the finale had "so many references and back story nods that I wanted to have everything in my head together". Andrew Hanson from the "Los Angeles Times" thought the finale "leads to a wealth of possibilities... The déjà universe was a bold move. I can’t wait to see what our friends at "Fringe" do with it". Writing for the "Chicago Tribune", critic Maureen Ryan heaped praise on the "excellent" episode, and complimented "the quietly creepy atmosphere, the slowly building tension in the dual Walter/Olivia stories, the way those stories were skillfully woven together, the suitably tense lakeside encounter between Olivia, Peter and Mr. Jones". 

Though some critics appreciated how "Fringe" chose to end the finale with a shot of the World Trade Center, others disliked it. Jeff Pinkner defended their decision by explaining they chose it because the building is "obviously very iconic" and it best displayed that in the parallel universe, "things are both better and in some ways worse. It's just different choices, the road not taken". Leonard Nimoy also defended the writers, commenting that when he received the script, he thought it "was very interesting and really kind of daring contemporary television to pull in that story... You know, it's not easy to use that kind of stuff without seeming somehow exploitive. But I thought they did it very, very well". Many critics expressed that because of the episode, they couldn't wait for the following season to begin. IGN's Ramsey Isler rated the episode 9.2/10, while website blogger io9 listed "There's More Than One of Everything" as one of the "crucial" episodes new viewers must watch to get into the show.

"The Futon Critic" listed it the 16th best television episode of 2009, explaining "J.J. Abrams and company know all about big reveals... but this one, in which William Bell reveals himself as living in a parallel universe where the Twin Towers weren't lost, was one of their most indelible". In a comparison of "There's More Than One of Everything" and "The X-Files" episode "4-D", UGO Networks columnist Alex Zalben wrote that the "Fringe" episode won "by a landslide. This episode kicked the show into high gear, while '4-D' was "The X-Files" winding down." Jeff Jensen of "Entertainment Weekly" named "There's More Than One of Everything" the seventh best episode of the series, calling it "the episode that changed everything... With that, the most hyped show of the 2008-2009 TV season produced a moment that finally earned it buzz." Den of Geek ranked the episode as the fifth best of the entire series, while IGN ranked it the ninth best.

Bryan Burk, Akiva Goldsman, Jeff Pinkner, and J.H. Wyman submitted the episode for consideration in the Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series Category at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards. They also submitted two other episodes, "Pilot" and "Bound", but did not receive any nominations.



</doc>
<doc id="23739321" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23739321" title="Royal prerogative in the United Kingdom">
Royal prerogative in the United Kingdom

The royal prerogative is a body of customary authority, privilege, and immunity attached to the British Monarch (or "sovereign"), recognised in the United Kingdom. The monarch is regarded internally as the absolute authority, or "sole prerogative", and prerogative the source of many of the executive powers of the British government.

Prerogative powers were formerly exercised by the monarch acting on his or her own initiative. Since the 19th century, by convention, the advice of the prime minister or the cabinet—who are then accountable to Parliament for the decision—has been required in order for the prerogative to be exercised. The monarch remains constitutionally empowered to exercise the royal prerogative against the advice of the prime minister or the cabinet, but in practice would only do so in emergencies or where existing precedent does not adequately apply to the circumstances in question.

Today the royal prerogative is available in the conduct of the government of the United Kingdom, including foreign affairs, defence, and national security. The monarchy has a significant constitutional presence in these and other matters, but limited power, because the exercise of the prerogative is in the hands of the prime minister and other ministers or other government officials.

The royal prerogative has been called "a notoriously difficult concept to define adequately", but whether a particular type of prerogative power exists is a matter of common law to be decided by the courts as the final arbiter. A prominent constitutional theorist, A. V. Dicey, proposed in the nineteenth century that:

While many commentators follow the Diceyan view, there are constitutional lawyers who prefer the definition given by William Blackstone in the 1760s:
Dicey's opinion that any action of governance by the monarch beyond statute is under the prerogative diverges from Blackstone's that the prerogative simply covers those actions that no other person or body in the United Kingdom can undertake, such as declaration of war. Case law exists to support both views. Blackstone's notion of the prerogative being the powers of an exclusive nature was favoured by Lord Parmoor in the De Keyser's Royal Hotel case of 1920, but some difficulty with it was expressed by Lord Reid in the Burmah Oil case of 1965. A clear distinction has not been necessary in the relevant cases, and the courts may never need to settle the question as few cases deal directly with the prerogative itself.

The royal prerogative originated as the personal power of the monarch. From the 13th century in England, as in France, the monarch was all-powerful, but this absolute power was checked by "the recrudescence of feudal turbulence in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries". An early attempt to define the royal prerogative was stated by Richard II's judges in 1387.

During the 16th century, this "turbulence" began to recede, and the monarch became truly independent. Under Henry VIII and his successors, the king was the head of the Protestant English church, and therefore not answerable to the clergy. The rise of Parliament in this period, however, was problematic. While the monarch was "the predominant partner in the English constitution", the courts stopped short of declaring him all-powerful, recognising the role that Parliament played. In "Ferrer's Case", Henry recognised this, noting that he was far more powerful with the consent of Parliament than without. Nowhere was this more apparent than in the matter of taxation: Sir Thomas Smith and other writers of the period pointed out the monarch could not impose taxation without Parliament's consent.

At the same time, Henry and his descendants normally followed the will of the courts, despite the fact they were theoretically not bound by judges. William Holdsworth infers that by regularly asking the legal officers of the crown and judiciary for legal advice and consent, Henry recognised the need for a stable government to follow the law. He also contends that the view that the law is supreme over all "was the view of all the leading lawyers and statesmen and publicists of the Tudor period". It was accepted that while the King had "unfettered discretion", he was limited in areas where the courts had imposed conditions on the use of the prerogative, or where he had chosen to do so.

The first dent in this stability came about in 1607, with the "Case of Prohibitions". James VI and I claimed that as monarch, he had a divine right to sit as a judge and interpret the common law as he saw fit. Led by Sir Edward Coke, the judiciary rejected this idea, stating that while the monarch was not subject to any individual, he was subject to the law. Until he had gained sufficient knowledge of the law, he had no right to interpret it; Coke pointed out that such knowledge "demanded mastery of an artificial reason ... which requires long study and experience, before that a man can attain to the cognizance of it". Similarly, in the "Case of Proclamations" in 1611, Coke held that the monarch could only exercise those prerogatives he already had, and not create new ones.

With the Glorious Revolution, King James VII and II was replaced by Queen Mary II and her husband King William III. At the same time the Bill of Rights 1689 was drafted, which cemented the monarch's subservience to Parliament. It specifically limited the royal prerogative, with Article 1 holding that the "power of suspending the laws or the execution of laws by regal authority without consent of Parliament is illegal", and article 4 confirming that "levying money for or to the use of the Crown by pretence of prerogative, without grant of Parliament, for longer time, or in other manner than the same is or shall be granted, is illegal". The Bill also confirmed that Parliament had the right to limit the use of remaining prerogatives, as evidenced by the Triennial Act 1694, which required the monarch to dismiss and call Parliament at certain times.

One of the monarch's historic prerogatives was the dissolution of Parliament, which was "perhaps the most important residual prerogative exercised personally by the sovereign, and represents the greatest potential for controversy." This prerogative was normally exercised at the request of Parliament and the prime minister, either at his or her discretion or following a motion of no confidence. Constitutional theorists have had differing views as to whether a unilateral dissolution of Parliament would be possible today; Sir Ivor Jennings wrote that a dissolution involves "the acquiescence of ministers", and as such the monarch could not dissolve Parliament without ministerial consent; "if ministers refuse to give such advice, she can do no more than dismiss them". A. V. Dicey, however, believed that in certain extreme circumstances the monarch could dissolve Parliament single-handedly, on the condition that "an occasion has arisen on which there is fair reason to suppose that the opinion of the House is not the opinion of the electors... A dissolution is allowable, or necessary, whenever the wishes of the legislature are, or may fairly be presumed to be, different from the wishes of the nation."

The monarch could force the dissolution of Parliament through a refusal of royal assent; this would inevitably lead to a government resigning. By convention, the monarch always assents to bills; the last time the royal assent was not given was in 1708 during the reign of Queen Anne when she withheld royal assent from the Scottish Militia Bill. This does not mean that the right to refuse has died: George V believed he could veto the Third Irish Home Rule Bill; Jennings writes that "it was assumed by the King throughout that he had not only the legal power but the constitutional right to refuse assent". The royal prerogative to dissolve Parliament was abrogated by the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011. Section 6(1) of the Act however specifically states that the monarch's power to prorogue Parliament is not affected by the Act.

The appointment of the prime minister is also, theoretically, governed by the royal prerogative. Technically the monarch may appoint as prime minister anyone she wants to appoint, but in practice the appointee is always the person who commands a majority in the House of Commons. Usually, this is the leader of the political party that is returned to Parliament with a majority of seats after a general election. Difficulties may result with a so-called hung parliament, in which no party commands majority support, as last occurred in 2017. In this situation, constitutional convention is that the previous incumbent has the first right to form a coalition government and seek appointment. If the prime minister decides to retire in the middle of a parliamentary session, as Anthony Eden did in 1957, the monarch has no discretion. There is usually a "prime minister-in-waiting" who commands the support of the majority of the Commons; he or she will near-automatically be appointed.

The most noted prerogative power that affects the judicial system is the prerogative of mercy, which has two elements: the granting of pardons and the granting of "nolle prosequi". Pardons may eliminate the "pains, penalties and punishments" from a criminal conviction, though they do not remove convictions themselves. This power is commonly exercised on the advice of the Secretary of State for the Home Department; the monarch has no direct involvement in its use. Exercises of this power may also take the form of commutations, a limited form of pardon where the sentences is reduced, on certain conditions. The granting of a pardon is not subject to judicial review, as confirmed by "Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service", but the courts have chosen to criticise its application or lack thereof, as in "R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Bentley". Granting "nolle prosequi" is done by the Attorney General of England and Wales (or the equivalent in Scotland or Northern Ireland) in the name of the crown, to stop legal proceedings against an individual. This is not reviewable by the courts, as confirmed by "R v Comptroller of Patents", and does not count as an acquittal; the defendant may be brought before the courts on the same charge at a later date.

The royal prerogative is in much use in the realm of foreign affairs. It is the monarch who recognises foreign states (although several statutes regulate the immunities enjoyed by their heads and diplomatic representatives), issues declarations of war and peace, and forms international treaties. The monarch also has the power to annex territory, as was done in 1955 with the island of Rockall. Once territory has been annexed, the monarch has complete discretion as to the extent to which the government will take over the former government's liabilities; this was confirmed in "West Rand Central Gold Mining Company v The King". The monarch also has the power to alter British territorial waters and cede territory. Her freedom to do these things in practice is doubtful, in that they might deprive British citizens of their nationality and rights. When the island of Heligoland was ceded to Germany in 1890, Parliamentary approval was first sought. The monarch can also regulate colonies and dependent territories by exercising the prerogative through Orders in Council. The courts have long fought against the monarch's use of this power: in "R (Bancoult) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (No 2)", the Court of Appeal ruled that using Orders-in-Council to frustrate judicial rulings was an unlawful abuse of power, although this ruling was later overturned.

A judgment delivered in the Court of Appeal in 1988 ("ex parte Everett"), and re-stated in a ruling of the High Court delivered in July 2016, confirmed that granting or withdrawing British passports has always been an exercise of the Royal Prerogative, and continues to be exercisable in the Secretary of State's discretion.

Under the common law, citizens have the right freely to leave and enter the United Kingdom. In "R v Foreign Secretary ex parte Everett", the courts held that it was their right to review the granting of passports to, and the withholding of passports from, British citizens. The writ of "ne exeat regno" is also used to prevent a person leaving the country. The right to make treaties is a disputed prerogative power: under Blackstone's definition, a prerogative power must be one unique to the monarch.

The monarch also has power to exercise her prerogative over the granting of honours, the regulation of the armed forces and ecclesiastical appointments. Although the granting of most honours is normally decided by the executive, the monarch is still the person who technically awards them. Exceptions to this rule are membership of the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the Order of Merit, the Royal Victorian Order and the Royal Victorian Chain, which the monarch has complete discretion to grant. In relation to the armed forces, the monarch is the Commander in Chief, and members are regulated under the royal prerogative. Most statutes do not apply to the armed forces, although some areas, such as military discipline, are governed by Acts of Parliament. Under the Crown Proceedings Act 1947, the monarch is the sole authority for the armed forces, and as such their organisation, disposition and control cannot be questioned by the courts. This exercise of prerogative power gives the Crown authority to recruit members of the armed forces, appoint commissioned officers, and establish agreements with foreign governments to station troops in their territory. The prerogative empowers the monarch to appoint bishops and archbishops in the Church of England, and to regulate the printing and licensing of the authorised Church of England version of the Bible. The monarch also exerts a certain influence power on His or Her weekly and closed conversations with the Prime-Minister of the United Kingdom.

"R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Northumbria Police Authority", recognised that the prerogative also includes the power to "take all reasonable steps to preserve the Queen's peace", and in "Burmah Oil Co. v Lord Advocate", the House of Lords took the view that it extended to "doing all those things in an emergency which are necessary for the conduct of [the Second World War]."

Today, the monarch exercises the prerogative almost exclusively in line with the advice of her government. Leyland notes that:

In simple terms, the prerogative is used to govern the realm in the name of the Crown; although the monarch has the "right to be consulted, the right to encourage, and the right to warn", her role involves no exercise of discretion.

Today, some prerogative powers are directly exercised by ministers without the approval of Parliament, including the powers of declaring war and of making peace, the issue of passports, and the granting of honours. Prerogative powers are exercised nominally by the monarch, but on the advice of the prime minister (whom the monarch meets weekly) and of the cabinet. Some key functions of the British government are still executed by virtue of the royal prerogative, but generally the usage of the prerogative has been diminishing as functions are progressively put on a statutory basis.

Several influential decisions of the House of Lords have determined the limited scope for the use of prerogative powers. In 1915, an appeal was made to the House of Lords, "Re Petition of Right" ("Shoreham Aerodrome Case"), but during the appeal the case was settled and the appeal withdrawn when the Crown agreed to pay compensation. The appeal was from a unanimous decision of the Court of Appeal that the Crown, both under the statutory Defence of the Realm Regulations and by the royal prerogative, was entitled to take and occupy, for military purposes in wartime, a commercial airfield on the south coast. The government argued that this action was to defend against an invasion; the courts held that for the prerogative to be exercised, the government must demonstrate that a threat of invasion exists. This was backed up by "The Zamora" (1916), where the Privy Council, on appeal from the Prize Court, held generally that to exercise a power not granted by statute (such as a prerogative power) the government must prove to the court that the exercise is justified. The next decision came in "Attorney General v De Keyser's Royal Hotel Ltd" (1920), where the House of Lords confirmed that a statutory provision in an area where prerogative powers are in use "abridges the Royal Prerogative while it is in force to this extent – that the Crown can only do the particular thing under and in accordance with the statutory provisions, and that its prerogative power to do that thing is in abeyance".

This principle of statutory superiority was extended in "Laker Airway Ltd v Department of Trade", concerning the revocation of a commercial airline operator's licence (December 1976), where it was confirmed that prerogative powers could not be used to contradict a statutory provision, and that in situations to which the power and the statute both applied, the power could only be used to further the aim of the statute. Another extension came with "R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Fire Brigades Union", where the Court of Appeal held that even if a statute had not yet come into force, the prerogative could not be used to alter this statute to "conflict with Parliament's wishes".

Whilst the royal prerogative is deployed by the UK government when making (and unmaking) treaties, the Supreme Court held in "R (Miller) v Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union" that the government could not use the prerogative to serve notice of termination of the UK's membership of the EU (under Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union). Instead legislative authority via an Act of Parliament was required by the Government. The Court's reasoning was that such a notice would inevitably affect rights under domestic law (many EU rights having direct effect in the UK). On the assumption that triggering Article 50 would inevitably result in Brexit, using the prerogative in this way would therefore frustrate the intention of parliament to confer those rights. Following this decision, Parliament decided to provide legal authorisation to the Government to serve a notice in accordance with Article 50. This was duly granted in the European Union (Notification of Withdrawal) Act 2017 and Theresa May exercised the power on 29 March 2017.

Before the modern judicial review procedure superseded the petition of right as the remedy for challenging the validity of a prerogative power, the courts were traditionally only willing to state whether or not powers existed, not whether they had been used appropriately. They therefore applied only the first of the Wednesbury tests: whether the use was illegal. Constitutional scholars such as William Blackstone consider this appropriate:

During the 1960s and 70s this attitude was changing, with Lord Denning saying in the "Laker Airway" case that "seeing that the prerogative is a discretionary power to be exercised for the public good, it follows that its exercise can be examined by the courts just as any other discretionary power which is vested in the executive." The most authoritative case on the matter is "Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service", generally known as the GCHQ case. The House of Lords confirmed that the application of judicial review would be dependent on the nature of the government's powers, not their source. Foreign policy and national security powers are considered outside the scope of judicial review, while the prerogative of mercy is considered within it, as per "R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Bentley".

Abolition of the royal prerogative is not imminent, and recent movements to abolish the role of the monarchy and its royal prerogative in government have been unsuccessful. The Ministry of Justice undertook a "review of executive Royal Prerogative powers" in October 2009. Former Labour MP and cabinet minister Tony Benn campaigned unsuccessfully for the abolition of the royal prerogative in the United Kingdom in the 1990s, arguing that all governmental powers in effect exercised on the advice of the prime minister and cabinet should be subject to parliamentary scrutiny and require parliamentary approval. Later governments argued that such is the breadth of topics covered by the royal prerogative that requiring parliamentary approval in each instance where the prerogative is currently used would overwhelm parliamentary time and slow the enactment of legislation.





</doc>
<doc id="23796139" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23796139" title="Tempus Fugit (The X-Files)">
Tempus Fugit (The X-Files)

"Tempus Fugit" is the seventeenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series "The X-Files". It premiered on the Fox network on . It was directed by Rob Bowman, and written by Frank Spotnitz and series creator Chris Carter. "Tempus Fugit" featured guest appearances by Joe Spano, Tom O'Brien and Brendan Beiser, and saw the return of Scott Bellis as alien abductee Max Fenig. The episode helped to explore the overarching mythology, or fictional history of "The X-Files". "Tempus Fugit" earned a Nielsen household rating of 11.9, being watched by 18.85 million people in its initial broadcast. The title translates from Latin as "time flies."

The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) who work on cases linked to the paranormal, called X-Files. In the episode, Max Fenig—an old acquaintance of Mulder—is found dead following an airplane crash, which Mulder believes to have been caused by a UFO attempting to abduct Fenig. "Tempus Fugit" is a two-part episode, with the plot continuing in the next episode, "Max".

"Tempus Fugit" was conceived when the series' special effects supervisor Dave Gauthier constructed an elaborate rig capable of simulating a crashing airplane. Carter and Spotnitz expanded upon the idea of a crash to bring back the character of Fenig, who had last been seen in season one's "Fallen Angel". "Tempus Fugit" received mixed to positive critical reception, and earned the production crew two Emmy Award nominations, including a win for Outstanding Sound Editing For A Series.

Four years after his abduction, Max Fenig (Scott Bellis) is traveling on Flight 549, which is flying over upstate New York. He watches another man on the plane who seems to be following him. The man heads to the plane's bathroom, where he assembles a zip gun. However, when he comes back out, the airplane begins shaking and a bright light flashes outside, showing that the plane is encountering a UFO. The emergency door next to Max's seat is opened.

Elsewhere, Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) celebrate Scully's birthday. They are approached by a woman named Sharon Graffia, who claims to be Max's sister; she tells them that Max planned to deliver something to Mulder, but that his flight to Washington has crashed. The agents head to the crash site in Northville, New York, and attend an NTSB meeting where Flight 549's final transmissions are shown. Mulder theorizes that the plane was forced down by aliens attempting to abduct Max; the NTSB team, led by chief investigator Mike Millar (Joe Spano), dismisses his claims.

When Mulder and Scully survey the crash site, they realize that there is a nine-minute disparity between the crash and the time on the victims' wristwatches, indicating missing time. Mulder believes that Max was abducted from the plane and that his body will not be found. Meanwhile, Scott Garrett, a Man in Black posing as an NTSB investigator, steals the zip gun from the assassin's body and erases his face and fingerprints with acid. Larold Rehbun, a passenger who sat next to Max, is found alive. His injuries indicate exposure to radiation.

Upon being confronted by Scully, Sharon denies that Max brought a radioactive substance aboard the plane, but divulges that she is not actually Max's sister. She also gives up details about his underground life. Scully subsequently tells Mulder that Max worked at a nuclear weapons assembly facility in Colorado under an alias, and believes that he may have caused the crash after bringing plutonium on board; Mulder, however, believes that Max was taken off the plane by a UFO, and that Rehbun's injuries were caused by exposure to the craft. Scully informs Mulder that Max's body has already been pulled from the crash site. Meanwhile, Sharon is abducted from her hotel room.

After identifying Max's body, Mulder finds that the wristwatches have been stolen from the other victims. He refutes the NTSB's official explanation of malfunction as a cause of the crash, and is doubtful that the true cause will be found unless they discern what happened during the nine minutes of missing time. The agents visit Sergeant Louis Frish (Tom O'Brien), an air traffic controller from the U.S. Air Force who was on duty during the crash. Frish denies anything unusual happened. However, after the agents leave, Frish and a colleague argue over whether to reveal the "truth" about Flight 549's demise.

After finding Sharon's trashed hotel room, Mulder meets with Millar, who tells him that the door was pulled off the plane from the outside while it was in flight. Later, Frish finds his colleague dead from a faked suicide. A group of commandos arrive to capture Frish, but he escapes. Frish goes to see Mulder and Scully, telling them that he lied before and that his commanding officer had ordered him to track the plane's coordinates as it was being intercepted by a second aircraft. Seconds later, there was an explosion and the plane disappeared from his radar. Mulder believes that a third aircraft, a UFO, approached the plane and was destroyed by the second aircraft, also causing Flight 549 to crash. The agents leave with Frish and are soon chased by the commandos, but they manage to lose them by driving under a landing plane. Meanwhile, Millar returns to the crash site and encounters a UFO. He finds Sharon nearby, having just been returned by her abductors.

Scully returns to Washington with Frish while Mulder heads to Great Sacandaga Lake, searching for the crashed UFO. Scully brings Frish to a local bar where they run into fellow FBI agent Pendrell (Brendan Beiser). Garrett soon enters the bar seeking to kill Frish, accidentally shooting Pendrell instead while Scully shoots him back. Meanwhile, Mulder arrives at the lake where he finds a team of men already searching for the crashed UFO. He dives underwater and finds the craft, including an alien body. Before he can return to the surface, a bright light shines down from above the water. 

During the production of the third season, special effects supervisor Dave Gauthier constructed an elaborate mock-up of a Boeing 737 airplane in order to be able to simulate a crash. Series creator Chris Carter decided to make use of this rig during the fourth season. When conceiving of the episode, the desire to add to Fox Mulder's emotional involvement by having someone he knew on board led to the writers bringing back the character of Max Fenig to be that person.

Scott Bellis, who had previously portrayed Fenig in the first season episode "Fallen Angel", had auditioned for other roles on the show in the interim, but had always been rejected by the producers because his character was felt to be too memorable. Bellis met series star David Duchovny at a gym several times, and learnt from him that the character of Max was being considered for a two-part episode. The episode's co-writer Frank Spotnitz did not want to have Fenig's appearance "milked" or do something the show had already done. As such he came up with the idea to kill off Fenig in the first part of the episode, which he felt was "a bold choice".

Gauthier's 737 rig—which required of hydraulic fluid to construct—was designed to move across multiple axes in order to better simulate turbulence; it could rotate 22 degrees each way about its length, and move four feet to either side. The fuselage could be opened up at intervals every to better allow cameras to record inside it. The show's producers wanted the plane crash site and investigation to be as authentic as possible, so they used a National Transportation Safety Board official to act as their technical advisor on the episode to ensure that everything was properly recreated. The NTSB officials noted that the site was authentic in every way "except for the smell"; Carter has noted that this level of verisimilitude left some of the crew members "frightened by their work". Director Rob Bowman admitted that the episode exceeded its given budget, noting that Carter would often defend him from Fox studio officials angry at his production costs. Bellis' abduction scene, in which his character is levitated through the door of the airplane, was achieved by pulling the actor out of the airplane rig with a harness; additional coverage was achieved by repeating this with a stuntman, who Bellis notes was pulled out of the rig "a lot harder".

"Tempus Fugit" premiered on the Fox network on , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11.9 with an 18 share, meaning that roughly of all television-equipped households, and of households watching television, were tuned in to the episode. A total of viewers watched this episode during its original airing.

The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics. Zack Handlen, writing for "The A.V. Club", rated "Tempus Fugit" an A−. Handlen praised the effectiveness of the cold open, and noted the episode highlighted how "particularly ruthless" the series was with its recurring cast, noting "the mortality rate helps to create a mood of ever-encroaching doom, as if the darkness that seems about to swallow Mulder and Scully in so many scenes ... is as much symbolic as it is literal". Paula Vitaris, writing for "Cinefantastique", rated "Tempus Fugit" two-and-a-half stars out of four, describing it as "gripping" with "lots of action". However, Vitaris felt that the fleeting use of guest star Scott Bellis was "a waste", and that the discovery of an alien corpse towards the end "robs this story of any ambiguity". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated the episode four stars out of five, calling it "the best conspiracy episode we've seen in nearly two years". Shearman and Peason felt that "Tempus Fugit" was "told very clearly, with remarkably little baggage", and praised the acting of guests Tom O'Brien and Joe Spano. Twelve members of the show's post-production crew won the 1997 Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Editing For A Series for their work on this episode; while four others received a nomination for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series.




</doc>
<doc id="23810915" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23810915" title="Up in the Air (2009 film)">
Up in the Air (2009 film)

Up in the Air is a 2009 American comedy-drama film directed by Jason Reitman and written by Reitman and Sheldon Turner, based on the 2001 novel of the same name, written by Walter Kirn. The story is centered on corporate "downsizer" Ryan Bingham (George Clooney) and his travels. Vera Farmiga, Anna Kendrick, and Danny McBride also star. Filming was primarily in St. Louis, Missouri, which substituted for a number of other cities. Several scenes were filmed in Detroit, Omaha, Las Vegas and Miami.

Reitman promoted "Up in the Air" with personal appearances at film festivals and other showings, starting with the Telluride Film Festival on September 5, 2009. The Los Angeles premiere was at the Mann Village Theater on November 30, 2009. Paramount scheduled a limited North American release on December 4, 2009, broadening the release on December 11, 2009, with a wide release on December 23, 2009.

The National Board of Review and the Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association named "Up in the Air" the Best Picture of 2009. It received eight Critics' Choice Movie Awards nominations and garnered a win for Adapted Screenplay, six Golden Globe Award nominations, earning a win for Best Screenplay, and three Screen Actors Guild nominations. It received six Academy Award nominations and recognition from numerous critics' associations.

Ryan Bingham works for a human resources consultancy firm which specializes in termination assistance, and makes his living traveling to workplaces across the United States, conducting company layoffs and firings on behalf of employers. He also gives motivational speeches, using the analogy "What's in Your Backpack?" to extol the virtues of a life free of burdensome relationships with people as well as things. A frequent flyer, Ryan has no fixed abode, relishes his travels, and aspires to become the seventh and youngest person to earn ten million frequent flyer miles with American Airlines. During his travels, he meets another frequent flyer named Alex, and they begin a casual relationship.

Ryan is called back to his company's offices in Omaha, Nebraska. Natalie Keener, a young and ambitious new hire, promotes a program designed to cut costs by conducting layoffs via videoconferencing. Ryan raises concerns that the program could be seen as detached and apathetic, arguing that Natalie knows nothing about the reality of the firing process or how to handle upset people. He then plays the role of a fired employee to demonstrate her inexperience. Ryan's boss assigns him to bring Natalie on his next round of terminations to show her the ropes.

As they travel together, Natalie questions Ryan's philosophies on life, particularly on relationships and love, but Ryan is adamant that he is more than happy with his lifestyle. During the trip, Natalie is shattered when her boyfriend unceremoniously dumps her by text message, and Ryan and Alex try to comfort her. On the test run, the earlier concerns Ryan raised prove valid; one laid-off person breaks down in tears before the camera, and Natalie is unable to comfort him. Another threatens to commit suicide. Natalie later lectures Ryan about his refusal to consider a commitment to Alex in spite of their obvious compatibility, and becomes infuriated; she apologizes later, but soon afterward they are both ordered back to Omaha to implement Natalie's program.

Instead of returning immediately to Omaha, Ryan convinces Alex to accompany him to his younger sister's wedding. He learns that the reason the couple had him take photos of a cutout picture of them in various places was because they cannot afford a honeymoon. When the groom gets cold feet, Ryan's older sister talks Ryan into using his motivational skills to persuade the groom to go through with the wedding. Although this runs counter to Ryan's personal philosophy, he successfully argues that the important moments in life are rarely unshared. The wedding proceeds without any further hitches.

Ryan begins having second thoughts about his life and philosophies. As he starts delivering his "What's in Your Backpack?" speech at a convention in Las Vegas, he realizes he no longer believes it, and walks off the stage. On an impulse, he flies to Alex's home in Chicago. When she opens the door, Ryan is stunned to discover she is married and has children, and leaves before her husband can suspect anything. She later tells him over the phone that her family is her real life and he is an escape.

On Ryan's flight home, the crew announces that he has just crossed the ten million mile mark, and a small celebration is thrown. The airline's chief pilot comes out of the cockpit to meet Ryan. He notes that Ryan is the youngest person to reach the milestone. When asked where he is from, a disheartened Ryan can only respond, "here."

Ryan calls the airline to transfer five hundred thousand miles each to his sister and brother-in-law, enough for them to fly around the world for their honeymoon. His boss tells Ryan that a woman he and Natalie fired during their travels has killed herself, and that an upset Natalie has quit via text message. The company also puts the remote-layoff program on hold.

Natalie applies for a job in San Francisco, where she was offered a job before following her now ex-boyfriend to Omaha. The interviewer is impressed by her qualifications and a glowing recommendation from Ryan, and hires her. The film concludes with Ryan standing in front of a vast destination board, looking up, and letting go of his luggage.

The film has a thematic connection to the children's book "The Velveteen Rabbit", which appears in the film, before the wedding.

Reitman noted that

Reitman also later stated that "the movie is about the examination of a philosophy. What if you decided to live hub to hub, with nothing, with nobody?".

Walter Kirn wrote "Up in the Air", the book on which the film is based, during a snowbound winter on a ranch in rural Montana, while thinking about airports, airplanes and first-class passengers he had met who would strongly resemble Ryan Bingham. The novel was published in 2001 and, shortly after, Sheldon Turner discovered the book and wrote a screenplay adaptation, which he sold to DreamWorks in 2003.

Canadian-American filmmaker Jason Reitman later came upon the novel (initially attracted by the Christopher Buckley blurb on the cover) while browsing in the Los Angeles bookstore Book Soup. Reitman persuaded his father, Canadian-American filmmaker Ivan Reitman, to purchase the book's film rights, and the elder Reitman commissioned a screenplay from Ted Griffin and Nicholas Griffin, who used some elements from Turner's script in their work. Jason Reitman then developed his own screenplay, incorporating some of the original script that was (unbeknownst to Reitman) written by Turner. Some Turner inventions that were used in the film include Ryan's boilerplate termination speech ("Anyone who ever built an empire or changed the world sat where you're sitting right now ..."), a key plot point involving a suicide, and the character of Ryan's partner (written by Turner as male). Reitman initially attempted to claim sole credit for writing the film, then later admitted to confusion when the Writers Guild of America ruled that he should share credit with Turner, whose script Reitman claimed to have never read. He and Turner later appeared at a WGA event where both said they were happy to share credit, after Turner's contribution to the final product was made clear. At a press screening, Reitman also said that his father Ivan had written "the best line in the movie."

Though Reitman has claimed in countless interviews that he wrote the parts specifically for George Clooney, Vera Farmiga, Anna Kendrick, Jason Bateman, Danny McBride, Melanie Lynskey, Amy Morton, Sam Elliott and Zach Galifianakis, some of the actors publicly stated their confusion in Reitman's assertion, if only because they knew he was meeting with other actors all along including his choice to fill his last lead role with Ellen Page (who starred in Reitman's previous film "Juno") for the part that Kendrick ultimately played. On the part played by Farmiga, he cited her ability to walk a fine line between aggressiveness and femininity. On Kendrick, Reitman cited that he was inspired by her performance in "Rocket Science". On Clooney, he said, "If you're going to make a movie about a guy who fires people for a living and you still want to like him, that actor better be damn charming and I don't think there's a more charming actor alive than George Clooney. I was very lucky he said yes." Reitman said, on the "B.S. Report with Bill Simmons", that he considered Steve Martin for the part if Clooney declined the role. Reitman said that he would have changed the movie with Martin and given Martin "his "Lost in Translation"."

Approximately 4,600 people applied to be extras in the film during the open call on January 24, 2009 and January 25, 2009, at Crestwood Court in St. Louis, Missouri. "Up in the Air" cast 2,000 extras with 15 to 25 Missouri actors in minor speaking roles. About 250 extras were used from the Omaha, Nebraska, area. They were used for filming inside and outside the terminal at Eppley Airfield, while Clooney acted out most of his scenes inside the terminal.

While filming in St. Louis and Detroit, Reitman placed an ad in the paper asking if people who recently lost their job wanted to be in a documentary about job loss. He specified "documentary" in the ad so that actors would not respond. Reitman was amazed by how many people of different age, race, and gender were willing to speak frankly about what happened and what a cathartic experience it had been. The film crew received a startling 100 responses, including 60 people filmed (30 in Detroit and 30 in St. Louis). Twenty-two are seen in the film. The interviews ran for about ten minutes on what it is like to lose their job in this poor economy, and after that they would "fire" them on camera and ask them to either respond the way they did the day they lost their job or, if they preferred, the way they wished they had responded.

Filming was mostly done in the St. Louis area. Several scenes were filmed at the Berry and McNamara Terminals at Detroit Metro Airport in late February 2009 with minimal filming in Omaha, in Las Vegas and in Miami, Florida. Missouri and St. Louis leaders provided $4.1 million in tax credits for the $25 million film. Producers set up a St. Louis production office on January 5, 2009. Filming began in St. Louis on March 3, 2009, and continued through the end of April. The film includes 80 different sets at 50 locations throughout the St. Louis area, including St. Louis Lambert International Airport Concourse C and Concourse D (which played the part of several airports across America), the Mansion House apartments in downtown St. Louis, Hilton St. Louis at the Ballpark, Hilton St. Louis Airport, DHR International building (8000 Maryland Ave.), the Cheshire Inn, the GenAmerica building (700 Market), Renaissance Grand Hotel, Maplewood United Methodist Church, and Affton High School. The film was shot at Lambert-St. Louis International Airport for five days, twenty hours each day.

In October 2008, Production Services of Omaha scouted locations in Omaha, Nebraska for three days of filming in late April with Clooney. Some of the scenes were shot inside the Visitor's Bureau and in a condo in the Old Market area of downtown Omaha and at the south end of the main terminal at Eppley Airfield.

Reitman needed fifty days to film "Up in the Air", eight of which were devoted to aerial shooting. The aerial shots turned out to be more difficult than expected. He was unable to use three days of the aerial filming. Many aerial shots, such as the crop circle on fire, are seen in the Paramount trailer, but are not used in the film. The pilot who flies the Boeing 747 that carried the space shuttle flew the aircraft for the aerial shots.

The film features heavy product placement, with American Airlines, Chrysler, Hertz, Travelpro, and Hilton Hotels all featured prominently. Competing brands are displayed as blurs in scene backgrounds or are replaced with pseudonyms in dialogue. However, the brands did not pay for the exposure; rather, they waived the fees for the producers to shoot on location, such as at AA's airport areas and inside Hilton hotels. Reitman expressed his desire to use actual brands as he finds them less distracting.

The post-production schedule for "Up in the Air" was shorter than Jason Reitman's previous two films. The editing team had only 16 to 17 weeks post-schedule, whereas an editing deadline is usually from 22 to 26 weeks. Reitman was involved in post-production while shooting. The film was shot entirely on location and Glauberman stayed in Los Angeles to cut. She would send him scenes every day or every other day as she finished them, and he would view them. He flew home every weekend to work with her for a few hours on Saturday or Sunday in order to stay on schedule.

Editing helped determine how nonverbal moments shape the first meeting between Ryan and Alex, who become lovers. "In a scene like that, there is a sort of playfulness that goes on," editor, Dana E. Glauberman said. "There were little looks that they gave each other. Sometimes I stayed a beat longer on a take to get that little sparkle in their eyes ... You can see a lot of playfulness in the quick cuts back and forth when they are teasing each other, but then there are also certain moments that Vera would give a little raise of an eyebrow, or George would give the same thing. Those tiny nuances are really helpful to show their character and show what they are after."

"Up in the Air: Music from the Motion Picture" is the official soundtrack to the film, released by Warner Music on November 9, 2009, and composed by Rolfe Kent, who recorded his score with a 55-piece ensemble of the Hollywood Studio Symphony at the Sony Scoring Stage. It was orchestrated by Tony Blondal.

Kevin Renick wrote the song "Up in the Air" two years prior to knowing that Reitman was working on a film adaptation to the book. He had been laid off at the time, and was an unrecorded, unemployed St. Louis musician. When Renick researched the film he discovered that the theme of the film was much the same as the song he had written. "The song is about uncertainty, disconnection and loneliness, while alluding to career transition," Renick explained. "It's a melancholy song, and a narrative about finding out where your life's going to go." He handed a cassette to Reitman after the director did an interview at Webster University. Renick included a spoken-word introduction about the song on the cassette so that Reitman would know why he was given the song. Reitman found a tape deck, listened, liked the song and placed the original introduction and song from the cassette midway through the credits. Reitman stated that the song has a do-it-yourself authenticity.

Reitman heavily promoted "Up in the Air" with personal appearances at film festivals and other showings. He stated that he could relate to and enjoys the idea of Ryan Bingham's lifestyle. "Yesterday <nowiki>[October 28, 2009]</nowiki> I took my 10th flight in 10 days so I live that life myself and I kinda enjoy it," Reitman said, "I think when you're in an airplane it's the last refuge for the people who enjoy being alone and reading a book."

Reitman documented his experiences promoting the film. He took photos of everyone who interviewed him and recorded videos in every city he visited. He edited these images into a short video titled "Lost In The Air: The Jason Reitman Press Tour Simulator".

"Up in the Air" was screened as a "sneak preview" at the Telluride Film Festival on September 6, 2009, before its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) on September 12. The film was initially not scheduled to be completed for another three months, but Reitman rushed production in order to maintain a streak of debuting his films at TIFF.

During October and November 2009, "Up in the Air" screened at festivals including the Aspen Filmfest, the Woodstock Film Festival, the Hamptons International Film Festival, the Mill Valley Film Festival, the Austin Film Festival, the London Film Festival, the St. Louis International Film Festival, the Starz Denver Film Festival, and the Stockholm International Film Festival. It was the only American film to compete for the Golden Marc'Aurelio Audience Award for Best Film at the International Rome Film Festival. On November 6, "The New York Times" film critic Janet Maslin interviewed Reitman and Kirn at the Jacob Burns Film Center following a screening of the film.

Following the positive response the film received at the Telluride Film Festival, Paramount intended to move "Up in the Air" from its original release date of December 4, 2009, planning for a November 13 limited release going wide before the Thanksgiving holiday. However, this schedule conflicted with the release of "The Men Who Stare at Goats", another Clooney film. The film was eventually released on December 4 in fifteen theaters spanning twelve markets, broadening in the next week to 72 theaters and going into wide release on December 23, 2009. It was released in other countries beginning in early 2010.

"Up in the Air" was shown at a sneak preview on September 5, 2009 and September 6, 2009 at the Telluride Film Festival. Reitman had fueled speculation that he would give a sneak preview at that festival. He posted pictures from Telluride on his Twitter account. Prior to the first showing, people waited two hours to get into "Up in the Air" and hundreds were turned away.

The world premiere for "Up in the Air" occurred at 2009's Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) which ran from September 10 to 19, 2009. The press showing was on Friday September 11, 2009. Public screenings were on September 12, 13, and 19. Reitman originally did not plan to debut the film at TIFF, since it was not scheduled to be ready for another three months. He rushed production to keep his Toronto debut streak going.

The first clip of the film debuted on Apple Inc. website on September 8, 2009. The first trailer was available on iTunes on September 10, 2009 and on September 18, 2009, it screened before the new movies "The Informant!" and "Love Happens". The second trailer became available on October 1, 2009.

Reitman received Aspen Film's first New Directions Award and participated in a question and answer session following a screening of "Up in the Air" on Friday October 2, 2009 at the Wheeler Opera House. The Aspen Film Festival ran from September 30, 2009 through October 4, 2009. It was shown twice at the Tinker Street Cinema on the closing day of the Tenth Annual Woodstock Film Festival 2009 on October 4, 2009. Vera Farmiga and Lucy Liu participated in a question and answer session moderated by entertainment journalist Martha Frankel after the film and in the Sunday noontime WFF Actor's Dialogue panel. The 2009 Hamptons International Film Festival showed "Up in the Air" on October 10, 2009 during its run at Long Island, New York's east end from October 8 to October 12, 2009.

The Spotlight Tribute held during the 32nd edition of Mill Valley Film Festival hosted an interview with Reitman and a screening of "Up in the Air" on Wednesday October 14, 2009 in the Smith Rafael Film Center, San Rafael, California. The Mill Valley Film Festival ran from October 8 to October 18, 2009. It was also shown four times at the 53rd London Film Festival which was held from October 14–19, 2009. "Up in the Air" was the only American film to compete for the Golden Marc'Aurelio Audience Award for Best Film at the fourth annual International Rome Film Festival which ran from October 15 through October 23, 2009. It was shown three times from October 17 to October 19, 2009. Reitman showed "Up in the Air" at ShowEast in Orlando, Florida on October 26 and October 27, 2009, and asked for the movie theater owners and managers to support the picture as fervently as they did his film "Juno" two years earlier. Reitman also held a Q&A and pep talk with film students at the University of Central Florida.

The first St. Louis press screening happened on October 28, 2009 at the Tivoli Theater. "Up in the Air" closed the Austin Film Festival on October 29, 2009 at the Paramount. Reitman attended the screening. The Austin Film Festival ran from October 22 to October 29, 2009. The Palm Springs International Film Society showed "Up in the Air" on Thursday, October 29, 2009 at the Regal Cinema in Palm Springs, California. Anna Kendrick was present at the showing.

Vera Farmiga and Anna Kendrick hosted a screening of "Up in the Air" at the Paris Theatre, New York City, New York on Thursday November 5, 2009. On November 6, 2009, the New York City Apple Store in SoHo hosted a conversation with director Jason Reitman. On November 6, 2009 "The New York Times" critic Janet Maslin interviewed Reitman and Kirn during a Q&A session held at the Jacob Burns Film Center after a screening of "Up in the Air". The question and answer session was followed by a reception in the Jane Peck Gallery. The Boston Sunday Night Film Club had a free screening on Sunday November 8, 2009, with a Q&A session with Reitman following the screening.

"Up in the Air" was the centerpiece for the 18th Annual St. Louis International Film Festival, which was held from November 12 to November 22, 2009. The film was shown November 14, 2009 at the Tivoli Theater in University City, Missouri with Jason Reitman and Michael Beugg in attendance. Kevin Renick, the St. Louis musician who wrote the song "Up in the Air", performed half an hour prior to the screening. Yukon Jake, who performed in the wedding scene in "Up in the Air", provided entertainment during the party prior to the screening. The party took place at the St. Louis Ballpark Hilton and the Airport Hilton. Both are featured in the film.

On November 14, 2009, Paramount flew 50 members of the press to New York with Anna Kendrick, Sad Brad Smith and representatives of American Airlines to promote "Up in the Air". The film was shown on the aircraft's video monitors during the flight from New York to Los Angeles. American Airlines provided the Boeing 767 gratis. Smith performed a few songs including "Help Yourself" in the aisle of the aircraft. On November 18, 2009, "Backstage" and Paramount Pictures had a special screening of "Up in the Air" for Screen Actors Guild and "Backstage" members at The Paramount Theatre (on the Paramount Lot), Los Angeles, California. The screening of the film was followed by a conversation with cast members Vera Farmiga and Anna Kendrick. The Starz Denver Film Festival closed on November 22, 2009 with a screening of "Up in the Air", with an introduction by J.K. Simmons, who was in town to accept the festival's Cassavetes Award earlier that afternoon. The 20th Stockholm International Film Festival, which ran from November 18 to November 29, 2009, closed with a screening of "Up in the Air" on November 29, 2009.

The film was released in both DVD and Blu-ray Disc formats on March 9, 2010, and sold 536,441 units in its first week of release, worth $9,114,133 of consumer spending. To date the film has sold 1,162,509 home copies, equivalent to $18,517,122 of sales.

"Up in the Air" was released in 15 theaters in the U.S. on December 4, 2009 and ranked number 13. It took in $1,181,450, with an average of $78,763 per theater. After three days it expanded to 72 theaters and took in $2,394,344 ($33,255 per theater), during the second weekend. During its third weekend, it broke into the top 10 as it widened to 175 theaters ahead of its nationwide expansion on December 23, 2009. It came in at number 8 with $3,210,132–$18,344 per theater. The film expanded to 1,895 theaters on December 23. It completed its domestic run on April 8, 2010, with a total domestic gross of $83,823,381 and a foreign total of $83,019,358 for a worldwide gross of $166,842,739.

"Up in the Air" received critical acclaim, with Clooney's performance receiving widespread praise, as well as Kendrick and Farmiga. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film an approval rating of 91% based on 269 reviews, with a rating average of 8.1/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Led by charismatic performances by its three leads, director Jason Reitman delivers a smart blend of humor and emotion with just enough edge for mainstream audiences." On Metacritic, the film has a rating score of 83 out of 100, based on 36 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".

The sneak preview of "Up in the Air" was the highest profile hit during the Telluride film festival. The film also tied for third place in the Toronto International Film Festival Indiewire poll.

Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" wrote, ""Up in the Air" makes it look easy. Not just in its casual and apparently effortless excellence, but in its ability to blend entertainment and insight, comedy and poignancy, even drama and reality, things that are difficult by themselves but a whole lot harder in combination. This film does all that and never seems to break a sweat." "Entertainment Weekly" Owen Gleiberman agreed, rating the film an A as a "rare and sparkling gem of a movie, directed by Jason Reitman with the polish of a master."

Claudia Puig of "USA Today" praised the film's sense of timeliness, writing, "It's tough to capture an era while it's still happening, yet "Up in the Air" does so brilliantly, with wit and humanity ... Reitman emerges as a modern-day Frank Capra, capturing the nation's anxieties and culture of resilience." Stephen Saito of "IFC.com" wrote, "It touches on larger themes of mass unemployment, cultural alienation and technology as a crutch. But ultimately, it's really an expertly done character study that's a dramatic change of pace from director Jason Reitman's previous two films." Jonathan Romney of "The Independent" wrote, "Its cynical wit almost places it in the Billy Wilder bracket: "Up In The Air" is as eloquent about today's executive culture as "The Apartment" was about that of 1960. It is a brutal, desolate film – but also a superb existential rom-com, and the most entertaining lesson in contemporary socio-economics that you could hope for." Roger Ebert gave the film four stars and wrote, "This isn't a comedy. If it were, it would be hard to laugh in these last days of 2009. Nor is it a tragedy. It's an observant look at how a man does a job."

Calling the film "a slickly engaging piece of lightweight existentialism," Todd McCarthy wrote in "Variety" that "Clooney owns his role in the way first-rate film stars can, so infusing the character with his own persona that everything he does seems natural and right. The timing in the Clooney-Farmiga scenes is like splendid tennis." "The New York Times" Manohla Dargis especially appreciated the film's strong female roles, noting that "the ferocious Ms. Kendrick, her ponytail swinging like an ax, grabs every scene she's in," but wrote that the film "is an assertively, and unapologetically, tidy package, from its use of romance to instill some drama ... and the mope rock tunes that Mr. Reitman needlessly overuses."

The "Chicago Tribune" Michael Phillips wrote, ""Up in the Air" is a slickly crafted disappointment. [It] feels tailor-made for George Clooney, who is very good. But the stakes remain frustratingly low and it's one of those contemporary middlebrow projects that asks us to root for a genial, shallow individual as he learns to be a little less the man he was." Julian Sancton of "Vanity Fair" wrote, "There are two movies in "Up in the Air": one about a guy who's flying around the country firing people, and one about a commitment-phobe who's flying away from responsibility and a shot at true love, as embodied by Farmiga. There is no attempt to braid these two threads together, and that's where the movie feels unsatisfying." J. Hoberman of "The Village Voice" wrote, "Like "Juno", "Up in the Air" conjures a troubling reality and then wishes it away. The filmmakers have peeked into the abyss and averted their eyes ... [the film] warns that you can't go home again – and then, full of false cheer and false consciousness, pretends you can."

"Shave Magazine" Jake Tomlinson gave the film four out of five stars and wrote, "There is a very strong sense of humor as well as emotional depth, yet the scope of the film sometimes limits these sentiments. As a moviegoer, this film provides a satisfying experience where one can take a step back to ponder some of the finer points in our daily lives, but don't expect to find all the answers here."

"Up in the Air" earned various awards and nominations, in categories ranging from recognition of the film itself to its screenplay, direction and editing, to the performance of the three primary actors – George Clooney, Vera Farmiga, and Anna Kendrick. The film received six Academy Award nominations and Farmiga and Kendrick both received nominations for Best Supporting Actress, although the film failed to win any of the awards. At the 63rd British Academy Film Awards, "Up in the Air" won one award – Best Adapted Screenplay, awarded to Reitman and Turner – out of the five for which it was nominated. The Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association named "Up in the Air" Best Picture and awarded Reitman Best Director and Best Screenplay with Turner, and Clooney was given the award for Best Actor. The film also received five nominations at the 67th Golden Globe Awards, with Reitman and Turner taking the award for Best Screenplay. Reitman and Turner also received recognition for the film's screenplay from the Writers Guild of America, where they won the Best Adapted Screenplay award.

The film garnered five nominations from the Satellite Awards, with Rolfe Kent, the film's score composer, winning the Best Original Score award. Clooney, Farmiga and Kendrick were each nominated for an award at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards, but ultimately lost out. Kendrick earned an MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance and the Rising Star Award from Palm Springs International Film Festival for her role in the film. "Up in the Air" won Best Film from eleven awards ceremonies, including the Florida Film Critics Circle, Iowa Film Critics, Southeastern Film Critics, and Vancouver Film Critics Circle. The film earned four nominations for the Best Cast from the Broadcast Film Critics Association, Central Ohio Film Critics, Denver Film Critics Society, and the Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association. At the Kansas City Film Critics Circle and the National Board of Review, "Up in the Air" won each of the awards for which it was nominated. Costume Designer Danny Glicker was nominated for his work by the Costume Designers Guild in the Contemporary Film category. In addition, the film was included on lists of the ten best films of 2009 by Roger Ebert, the American Film Institute, and "The New York Times".



</doc>
<doc id="23811071" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23811071" title="Party in the U.S.A.">
Party in the U.S.A.

"Party in the U.S.A." is a song by American singer Miley Cyrus for her first extended play (EP) "The Time of Our Lives" (2009). It was released on August 11, 2009, by Hollywood Records as the lead single from the project. The song was written and produced by Dr. Luke, with additional songwriting provided by Jessie J and Claude Kelly. "Party in the U.S.A." was originally intended for Jessie J, but after deciding it was not edgy enough for her, they passed it to Cyrus and adjusted the lyrics to fit her persona. Not completely identifying with "Party in the U.S.A.", Cyrus chose it for "The Time of Our Lives" partially due to a need for tracks. The song is a pop song, while the lyrics reflect her relocating from Nashville, Tennessee, to Hollywood, California. This is one of four collaborations between Cyrus and Dr. Luke, with EP title track "The Time of Our Lives", will.i.am's "Fall Down" and "Wrecking Ball" following in 2013.

In the United States, the song peaked at number two on the "Billboard" Hot 100. The song was the seventh best-selling digital single of 2009 in the United States. It was certified seven times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and quadruple platinum by Music Canada. As of July 2017, the song has sold 6 million copies in the United States.

The music video for "Party in the U.S.A.", directed by Chris Applebaum, pays tribute to the 1978 film "Grease" and Cyrus' parents' courting days. It occurs mainly at a drive-in theater and won the MuchMusic Video Award for Best International Artist Video at the 2010 award show. The song was performed live for Cyrus' world tours, the 2009 Wonder World Tour, the 2011 Gypsy Heart Tour, and the 2014 Bangerz Tour. At the 2009 Teen Choice Awards, Cyrus' use of a pole during a performance of "Party in the U.S.A.", which some interpreted to be a dance pole, caused a media uproar. Although co-writer Jessie J originally decided not to record "Party in the U.S.A." after writing it, she did eventually, among various other artists, perform a cover version of the song. "Party in the U.S.A." has also been parodied by "Weird Al" Yankovic.

Soon after signing a record deal with Lava Records, aspiring English singer Jessie J commenced to work on her debut album. She collaborated with songwriters and producers Dr. Luke and Claude Kelly in her first writing session, where "Party in the U.S.A." was conceived with the intention of being performed by Jessie J. However, she decided not to record the song, believing its cheerful tone was at odds with the darker, edgy material she preferred. Jessie J. explained, "And I remember thinking this song is amazing, but I don't know if it's me 110 percent, you know. You can kind of feel it." The song reached Cyrus while she was creating an EP with Dr. Luke. The writing team then reworked the lyrics, intending to write an accompanying theme for Cyrus' joint clothing line with Max Azria, exclusively sold in Wal-Mart stores. In order to please audiences, Dr. Luke, Kelly and Jessie J fixated on composing a fun, upbeat song that narrated reflections of Cyrus' personality. "They feel they're buying into a great experience but also buying into the artist," Kelly said of the song's fans. To write his contributions to the song, Kelly said he desired to mimic Cyrus' songwriting: "It's the same song from a different point of view, you just have to find that unique perspective." To record the song's instrumentation, they decided to mingle computerized sound with "the warmth of live instrumentation", using live electric guitars and drums. Cyrus was pleased with the song and selected it partially due to a need of tracks for "The Time of Our Lives". This is the first of two collaborations between Dr. Luke and Cyrus. Dr. Luke would later co-produce Cyrus' 2013 smash hit single "Wrecking Ball".

Cyrus has stated "Party in the U.S.A." is not a reflection of her musically, as she preferred songs with more of an edge. She said the track was "an all-American song" and claimed she had never heard a Jay-Z song in November 2009, an artist which the lyrics refer to. However, she did state she enjoyed Britney Spears' music, also mentioned in the song. "Party in the U.S.A." was chosen as the lead single from "The Time of Our Lives", as Cyrus thought personnel were "picking up on it", although she did not expect for it to be commercially successful. The song was first played on radio stations on July 29, 2009, following a leak of the track on the Internet on July 28, 2009. "Party in the U.S.A." was officially released for airplay on August 3, 2009, and as a digital download on August 11, 2009.

"Party in the U.S.A." is a song with a length of three minutes and 23 seconds. The song has been described as "reggae-powered pop tune". The song is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 96 beats per minute. It is written in the key of F# major and Cyrus' vocals span two octaves, from F# to D#. Cyrus' vocals feature belter refrains. It follows the chord progression F#–A#m–D#m–C#. The song's instrumentation includes a "clash between feathery jazz guitar chords and a booming synth bassline serving as hook".

The lyrics for "Party in the U.S.A." are written in first person, about Cyrus' relocation from Nashville, Tennessee to Hollywood, California. In the verses, she details occurrences in Hollywood, such as peers questioning her attire, that cause for her to feel homesick and intimidated. Towards the conclusion of each verse, the protagonist listens to her favorite Jay-Z and Britney Spears song, respectively, which leads to the refrains describing how her favorite songs make her feel more confident. Vicki Lutas of BBC interpreted, "However cringe it sounds, your favourite song can make you feel okay and feel more confident, even if you're not really."

Michael Hann of "The Guardian" said "Party in the U.S.A." was a cute pop song. Later, while reviewing the Wonder World Tour, he elaborated that the song was a reminder "that manufactured pop need not be a bad thing – if the manufacturing is good enough". Jaime Gill of Yahoo! Music said, "Fortunately for Cyrus, [the other songs from "The Time of Our Lives"] flee your brain cells within seconds of their final chords, which means you're more likely to remember the breezily brilliant hit 'Party in the U.S.A.'" Mikael Wood of New York City's "Time Out" magazine described the song as a "killer tune [...] which proves that Miley makes for a much better rapper than you might expect". Heather Phares of AllMusic selected the track as one of the EPs best, describing it as a frothy party anthem suitable for Cyrus' alias, Hannah Montana.

Erik Ernst of "The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel" said the song was "ridiculously catchy". Mikael Wood of "Entertainment Weekly" decided that "Party in the U.S.A." was Cyrus' bouncy attempt at urban music, since she had previously transitioned into other markets. Jessica Holland of "The Observer" deemed "Party in the U.S.A." one of the highlights on "The Time of Our Lives". Michael Menachem of "Billboard" stated the song was one of Cyrus' most entertaining songs. Menachem continued, "[Dr. Luke] injects the song with an energy recalling Robyn and early Gwen Stefani. After successfully tackling dance and country formats and delivering one of the year's strongest ballads ('The Climb'), Cyrus continues to show off her impressive range." Ryan Brockington of "The New York Post" said that although the track was more mainstream than Cyrus' prior singles, he did not hate it. Vicki Lutas of BCC described "Party in the U.S.A." as "a breath of fresh air" while being "seriously stomping" and slightly relatable. She said the song's best attribute was Cyrus' voice and concluded that Cyrus contains an ability of making her voice sound interesting all the time. Upon listening to the track, Lutas feels that "suddenly you think someone else is in the room with you and you've got all the ingredients for, well, a huge party contained in one little song."

"Party in the U.S.A." debuted and peaked at number two on the "Billboard" Hot 100 on the week ending August 29, 2009, due to the sale of over 226,000 digital downloads, thus becoming the fastest-selling single released by Hollywood Records. It was kept off number one by "I Gotta Feeling" by the Black Eyed Peas and "Down" by Jay Sean featuring Lil Wayne. It became Cyrus' best-charting effort on the chart up to that point, surpassing her prior best-charting effort "The Climb", which peaked at number four in May 2009. The week's appearance also marked the highest debut by a female solo artist since Carrie Underwood's "Inside Your Heaven", which debuted at number one in July 2005. In the succeeding weeks, "Party in the U.S.A." continued to sell and chart on the "Billboard" Hot 100 strongly, spending 16 consecutive weeks in the top ten and 28 weeks in total. It also peaked at number one on Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs), and number 13 on Adult Pop Songs. According to "Billboard", "Party in the U.S.A." was the seventh-best selling digital single of 2009 in the US. The single was certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for shipments exceeding four million copies and became Hollywood Records' best-selling single to date. By October 2012, "Party in the U.S.A" had surpassed the 5 million sales mark in the United States, making Cyrus the youngest artist to have a single that sold more than five million downloads. As of July 2017, the song has sold 5,981,000 downloads in the US. The song ranks among the best-selling singles of all time.

"Party in the U.S.A." peaked at number three on the Canadian Hot 100. The single was certified quadruple platinum by the Music Canada for the sales of 320,000 digital downloads. The song also became successful in Australia, New Zealand and Japan. On the week ending September 13, 2009, "Party in the U.S.A." debuted at number 14 on the Australian Singles Chart. The following week, the song ascended to a new peak at number nine and peaked at number six on the week ending November 8, 2009. The single was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for the shipment of 140,000 copies. "Party in the U.S.A." debuted at number 11 on the New Zealand Singles Chart and peaked at number three on the week ending November 9, 2009. The single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand (RIANZ) for the shipment of 272,000 copies. On the week ending January 9, 2010, "Party in the U.S.A." debuted at number 49 on the Japan Hot 100 Chart and, in the succeeding week, reached its peak at number four.

In the United Kingdom, "Party in the U.S.A." entered and peaked at number 11. The song tied with "See You Again" and "The Climb", which charted in August 2008 and March 2009, respectively, for Cyrus' best-charting effort in the United Kingdom until 2013. In Ireland, the song peaked at number five. In mainland Europe, "Party in the U.S.A." peaked at number 17 on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles Chart, number six on both the French Singles Chart and Hungarian Singles Chart, and peaked at number 12 on Norwegian Singles Chart. It received lower commercial success throughout other regions of Europe, becoming a top 40 hit in Austria, Belgium (Wallonia and Flanders), Czech Republic, Denmark, Spain and Sweden.

Cyrus contacted Chris Applebaum to direct the accompanying music video for "Party in the U.S.A.", with ideologies for the video already conceived. Her ideas for the video's theme were about "high-gloss, glamorous white trash." She told Applebaum she desired to pay tribute to one of her favorite films, "Grease" (1978), and her parents' courting days. Video conception sprang forward with the idea to resemble the scene in "Grease" where John Travolta sings "Sandy". In the scene, Travolta exits from a car and walks over to a jungle gym, where he sits on a swing and performs the song as projections are displayed in the background. To render homage to her parents' courting days, Cyrus and Applebaum named a drive-in theater in the video Corral Drive-In after a Kentucky drive-in where Cyrus' parents had a date. "In addition, Miley's mom Tish used to drive '79 black Pontiac Trans Am, "Smokey and the Bandit" (1977) style, and obviously that's the car that Miley arrives in," Applebaum said.

The video commences by showing a drive-in theater in the day. Cyrus later arrives in a black 1979 Pontiac Trans Am, clothed by a black tank top, distressed hot pants, cowboy boots and a black vest. Cyrus and several female extras make their way to a blue pick-up truck, where Cyrus sings using a digital microphone and the extras accompany her. In the song's second verse, Cyrus lies against a wall depicting the drive-in's name, "Corral Drive-In". Then, an American flag unravels before a single wall in a vacant landscape, where she sings into a microphone as sparkled confetti drops from above. Later, she, standing on a swing in the center, and numerous backup dancers appear in a jungle gym during the evening. For the song's last refrain, Cyrus performs with four backup dancers on a stage, where the background portrays the American flag and letters above it that spell "USA". Cut-scenes feature people entering the drive-in theater, Cyrus walking throughout the drive-in alone, or her and the backup dancers performing in the jungle gym. The video ends with Cyrus flipping her hair in the stage setting.

A 90-second snippet was shown on September 23, 2009, on "Dancing with the Stars". Subsequently, that day, the video premiered online on ABC's Music Lounge. Jocelyn Vena of MTV said, "The video is reminiscent of Cyrus' performance of the track on the Teen Choice Awards over the summer — minus the pole dancing." According to a survey held by MTV, responses for the music video varied from populations who were "not feeling it" for various reasons to those who enjoyed "the video's energy and thought that the added bit of sexiness was a healthy progression for Cyrus." At the 2010 MuchMusic Video Awards, the video won the MuchMusic Video Award for Best International Artist Video and was nominated for the , but lost to Adam Lambert's video for "Whataya Want From Me". The video has amassed over 670 million views on YouTube.

Cyrus' first live performance of "Party in the U.S.A." at the Teen Choice Awards held on August 10, 2009. Clothed by a tank top that revealed a portion of her bra, black hot pants, and leather boots, Cyrus and backup dancers appeared from a trailer. Midway through the performance, Cyrus danced atop an ice cream pushcart with a pole (which was suggested to be a dance pole by numerous critics) for approximately forty seconds. Cyrus described the performance to be about her heritage: "[My] performance tonight is funny, but I wanted it to be about [something more]. I'm like, 'This is to represent where I am from. I'm so proud of it.' All the girls trying to be Hollywood and stuff with their big glasses, me shooing them away." The performance was met with a media uproar in regards to her dancing being too suggestive and sexual for a teen-oriented event, which caused The Walt Disney Company to issue a statement distancing themselves from the performance. Ian Drew, senior editor of "Us Weekly" said, "She already has this risque image, so it really wasn't much of a stretch. That's how Britney [Spears] took off. She was the good girl gone bad, and it looks to be working for Miley as well." Other contemporary critics used negative comparisons to Spears, but Cyrus welcomed the comparisons via a post on her official Twitter account. Child psychologist Wendi Fischer told "Newsday": Cyrus was communicating to her fans that it is acceptable to pole dance, which, according to Fischer, was unacceptable. "Miley's only 16. Why is she rushing it?", she concluded. Other critics defended Cyrus. Apryl Duncan of About.com said viewers should have fixated on her accomplishments that night, winning six awards, rather than the sexuality of the performance. Following the backlash of the performance, Cyrus replaced the ice cream pushcart with a luggage cart while touring.

In 2009 Cyrus continued promotion for the single and "The Time of Our Lives", performing "Party in the U.S.A." on "The Today Show" and "VH1 Divas" in the United States. In the winter, she promoted the track in the United Kingdom at 95.8 Capital FM's Jingle Bell Ball, the annual gala for British Royal Family, Royal Variety Performance, and "", as well as in Ireland on "The Late Late Show". Cyrus performed the song on all venues of her first world concert tour, the Wonder World Tour, which extended from September to December 2009. During each performance, Cyrus was costumed by a black tank top, black hot pants, black leather boots and a blue jean vest as images on the overhead screens depicted an abundance of sites in and representations of the United States. She roamed throughout the stage with numerous backup dancers and, mid-performance, entered a luggage cart that escorted her throughout the stage again. The lyrics' reference to Jay-Z was replaced with one for Michael Jackson in all live performances. Mikael Wood of "The Los Angeles Times", who attended the September 22, 2009, concert at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, believed "Cyrus managed a reasonable approximation of a rapper" in the performance. Dave Paulson of "The Tennessean" reported that the song's performance at the November 25, 2009, concert at the Sommet Center in Nashville, Tennessee, "received cheers at Jonas Brothers–worthy decibel levels."

In 2010, while promoting her "Can't Be Tamed" album, Cyrus performed "Party in the U.S.A." at Rock in Rio concerts in Lisbon, Portugal, and Madrid, Spain, the 1515 Club in Paris, France, G-A-Y club in London, "Good Morning America", 2010 MuchMusic Video Awards, and a concert at the House of Blues in Los Angeles, which was streamed across over thirty websites owned by MTV Networks. In 2011 she performed the song in her second and third world concert tours, the Gypsy Heart Tour
In 2013 Cyrus sang "Party in the U.S.A." during her performances held to promote "Bangerz" album. She performed the single on "Jimmy Kimmel Live!", 2013 iHeartRadio Music Festival in Las Vegas, "The Today Show", and the series of Jingle Ball concerts in December (including Jingle Bell Ball in Los Angeles). In 2014 she included this song on her Bangerz Tour. While singing "Party in the U.S.A.", Cyrus wore a cropped blonde wig, a leotard with red, white, and blue sequins, a white cowboy hat, star spangled boots, and a set of fake teeth during the performance. The backup dancers were dressed as American monuments. Her performance received positive reviews from critics. Théoden Janes of "The Charlotte Observer" wrote, "She turned a verse of Party in the U.S.A. into a cool, cocky rap" and John J. Moser of "The Morning Call" said that the performance resonated with the audience, even though Cyrus was lifted atop a huge pedestal. Jane Stevenson of the "Toronto Sun" wrote, "She went for a big ending, with fireworks, confetti, an elevating stage and dancers dressed as Abe Lincoln, Mount Rushmore, the Liberty Bell and The Statue of Liberty for the final older song Party in the U.S.A." A critic from "Nashville Scene" wrote, "Party in the U.S.A. was sung by Miley and screamed back by every person in the crowd. Cue red-white-and-blue confetti. Cue fireworks. Pack the Bangerz Tour up and put the circus back on the road. Fans in other cities need to party, too." Cyrus also performed the song during the musical festival on June 21, 2014, Summertime Ball at Wembley Stadium of London, in front of 80,000 people.

In honor of Pride Month, Cyrus performed "Party in the USA" at the Capital Pride in Washington, D.C. on June 11, 2017. On September 15, she performed the song for the BBC Radio 1 Live Lounge, accompanied with other songs like "Malibu", "See You Again", "Younger Now" and a cover of Roberta Flack's "The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face".

On a season six episode of "The Office", "Sabre", Ed Helms (portraying Andy Bernard) and Ellie Kemper (portraying Erin Hannon) performed a parody of "Party in the U.S.A." for the coordinating director of Sabre, using an acoustic guitar. The parody was focused on the city in which the series is set, Scranton, Pennsylvania. Due to their boss mispronouncing the word "Sabre", it ended without a rhyme. Kelly West of Cinema Blend wrote, "Still, it was adorable seeing the two sing together. Unfortunately, the rhythm of their flirtation is just as awkward (and equally charming) as the rhythm of the song they attempted to perform."

On the May 26, 2011 episode of talk show "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon", "Party in the U.S.A." was covered in the style of Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young, a recurrent bit on the show. Host Jimmy Fallon sang lead (impersonating Neil Young), while playing an acoustic guitar and harmonica. Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young members David Crosby and Graham Nash joined to Fallon with vocal harmonies. Matthew Perpetua of "Rolling Stone" described it as "a sad, beautifully harmonized folk rendition of Miley Cyrus' 'Party in the U.S.A.' that manage[d] to make the joyful tween anthem sound like a vintage ."

A parody titled "Party in the CIA" was included on "Weird Al" Yankovic's 13th studio album, "Alpocalypse" (2011).

Prior to the 2012 London Olympics, the United States women's national soccer team made a video of the players lip-synching to the song; the video became very popular.

In 2016, a rendition of "Party in the U.S.A", covered by Alana D, was featured in .
Following the death of Osama bin Laden on May 2, 2011, a resurgence in the popularity of the "Party in the U.S.A." video occurred. The official YouTube video was flooded with comments regarding the death of bin Laden and it was immediately deemed a celebratory anthem for the event. Moreover, the song's association to his death continued on other social medias, like Facebook and Twitter, and it was played as individuals celebrated outside of the White House. About it becoming an anthem for bin Laden's death, Nitsuh Abebe of "New York" magazine wrote, "I have to confess that my list of reactions to the news did not get anywhere near 'watch a Miley Cyrus video.' The reason it occurred to others is surely as simple as it seems: This is a recent hit song whose title is dominated by the words "party" and "U.S.A." Looking for anything more apt would be overthinking it. Cyrus' video [...] is stocked with a great many of those things we like and do well: a drive-in theater, trucks and muscle cars, Daisy Dukes, giant flags. It is, just like bin Laden's death, another convenient opportunity to celebrate ourselves."




</doc>
<doc id="23820388" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23820388" title="Reality Killed the Video Star">
Reality Killed the Video Star

Reality Killed the Video Star is the eighth solo studio album by English singer-songwriter Robbie Williams, released in November 2009. The album was produced by Trevor Horn and recorded between September 2008 and August 2009 in London and Los Angeles. It debuted in the top ten of 22 national album charts worldwide, and has received varying reviews from music critics. It incorporates elements of pop rock, dance-rock, alternative rock and adult contemporary music. "Reality Killed the Video Star" was viewed by critics and fans as being Williams' "comeback album" after the relative failure of his 2006 release, "Rudebox".

The album was preceded by lead single "Bodies" released in October 2009. Other single releases include "You Know Me" and "Morning Sun". The album has been certified platinum in Europe for sales of over one million copies, including 900,000 copies sold in the UK alone. Despite this, it was Williams' first studio album not to reach number one on the UK Albums Chart, beaten to the top spot by a margin of less than 1% by JLS's self-titled debut album.

"Reality Killed the Video Star" was Williams' first studio album in three years. In that period, he worked with many producers, including Guy Chambers, Soul Mekanik, Mark Ronson, and Trevor Horn.
However, the British singer confirmed in August 2009 on his official website that the entire album was produced by Trevor Horn, and added that it was recorded in London.

Rumours of a new studio album co-written with Chambers had surfaced in early 2007, along with known commitments required by Williams to complete his EMI contract. British singer-songwriter Laura Critchley commented that she had sung vocals for three songs, and said that the LP would not be released until 2009.
At first it was believed that Williams had reunited with Chambers, but it was later confirmed that the song "Blasphemy" was co-written by the pair during the recording sessions of Williams' 2002 album "Escapology".

In February 2009, it was confirmed that Williams had written material with Soul Mekanik, Chambers and Ronson. The singer's spokesman, Tim Clark, said that the artist was planning to begin recording sessions in March and that the new album would be released in late 2009. The album was mostly written in Williams' home studio and was recorded in London. Amongst those who collaborated in the songwriting were Danny Spencer and Kelvin Andrews, Brandon Christy, Craig Russo, Richard Scott and Scott Ralph, Chas Jankel and Fil Eisler.

On his official website, Williams wrote that he was working with producer Trevor Horn on his new album; he described himself as "buzzing" and went on to call the album's sound "Very, very big". Williams revealed that the new album would be titled "Reality Killed the Video Star", a reference to the song "Video Killed the Radio Star" by Horn's former band The Buggles. The album was originally planned to be named "Il Protagonista" (Italian for "The Protagonist") until Williams' management told him to change the title as it was "too pretentious". In July 2009 Williams wrote on his official blog about the album: "My album's a killer: old Robbie, new Robbie and a Robbie that neither of us have met...". "The A.V. Club" has also reported that during 2007, Williams had recorded an unreleased experimental album that, he later said, would have amounted to "career suicide".

Before the album's release, Williams spoke about his hopes for the album: "I want people to feel elated, I want them to dance, I want them to forget about who they are and where they are for 50 minutes – and, within those 50 minutes of forgetting who they are, I also hope people relate to the songs. This is a record that I’m very proud of – I think it’s fucking brilliant. I want it to be the record that, if people think of Robbie Williams, they go, Yeah, "Reality Killed the Video Star"." He also talked about his collaboration with producer Trevor Horn: "He’s added something to the record that I haven’t had on previous records – his genius".

In the wake of Michael Jackson's death on 25 June 2009, Williams was reported to have written and recorded a last minute tribute song to Jackson that would be included on the album. The track, "Morning Sun", was co-written by James Bond lyricist Don Black. During his "BBC Electric Proms" concert at The Roundhouse in London on 20 October 2009 Williams said about the song: "I thought it was about Michael Jackson [...] but it's actually about me again."

The British singer-songwriter unveiled the album at an industry playback in London, where EMI UK and Ireland president Andria Vidler hosted the event. Mark Sutherland from "Billboard" said that the album "marks a return to Williams' trademark pop sound after 2006's more experimental – and commercially under-performing – "Rudebox"". Sutherland felt that even though the lead single 'Bodies', "features a refinement of the more electronic sound debuted on "Rudebox", much of the album returns to the fertile, adult pop ground of Williams' previous smash hit albums "Escapology" and "Intensive Care"". He felt that the album highlights are the "lush ballads 'Morning Sun' and 'You Know Me', the intricate wordplay of 'Blasphemy' and the 1980s sound of 'Last Days of Disco'", while also noting that "a confident-sounding Williams also experiments with some light psychedelia on 'Deceptacon' and electronic dance music on the anthemic 'Starstruck' and 'Difficult for Weirdos'." Jude Rogers from The Quietus said that the song "Do You Mind?" "puts Status Quo, Slade and a gallon of glam-rock in a bottle, shakes it up, and make an interesting, if rather peculiar, froth." Rogers said that on the track "Starstruck" "Goldfrapp's "Felt Mountain", "The Ipcress File" soundtrack and the shadow of Broadcast fall over the first ten seconds of this song about our obsession with celebrity". "Deceptacon" contains a "peculiar set of lyrics, floating on waves of reverb, sad strings and icy keyboards" Rogers said that "It's an unshowy meditation the shallowness of fame, with a fantastic, mournful outro." Mike Diver from BBC Music said that "Bodies" is "A strange brew of string flourishes, rumbling low end, oriental undertones and even an Enigma-style break into Gregorian territory", Diver also said that "Last Days of Disco" is "reminiscent of Eurythmics".

A special CD called "Songbook" was given away free with 11 October 2009 issue of British newspaper "The Mail on Sunday". The CD featured twelve classic Robbie Williams tracks, including live recordings from Slane Castle, Cologne, London's The Forum and Knebworth, and also contained six 30-second clips of tracks from "Reality Killed the Video Star". The singer appeared on "The X Factor" on 11 October 2009 to perform "Bodies" live.
He was featured on the November 2009 cover of "GQ" magazine UK, where he also gave an interview about the album. Williams performed some material from "Reality Killed the Video Star" on the "BBC Electric Proms" at The Roundhouse in London on 20 October 2009. It was Williams' first live performance in over three years and was broadcast live in nearly 200 cinemas across Europe on 20 October and a few weeks later in Australia, South Africa and Mexico. The show featured a full band conducted by Trevor Horn. The concert received many positive reviews, and Williams also set a new Guinness World Record for "the most simultaneous cinematic screenings of a live concert".
Initially, Williams was set to perform on 5 November 2009 at the "MTV Europe Music Awards 2009" in Berlin at the O2 World, however, due to a scheduling conflict, he did not perform.

On 6 November 2009, Williams gave an interview and also performed on "Friday Night with Jonathan Ross". On the release day of the album in the UK, 9 November 2009, Williams appeared on "Loose Women" for a special edition of the show as the only guest. A special intimate live show at "The Metro Theatre" took place in Sydney on 25 November 2009 where Williams performed material from the new album and some of his classic hits. He performed his single "Bodies" in Australia at the "ARIA Music Awards" on 26 November 2009 which was held at the Acer Arena.
On Tuesday, 8 December 2009, Williams performed an intimate show in London to less than 200 people at the "Radio Theatre" in Broadcasting House. An exclusive show was performed by Williams for a limited number of fans at the Melkweg in Amsterdam on 9 December 2009. Williams performed his hit "Angels" on 12 December 2009 as a duet with Olly Murs on the live final of "The X Factor", also performing the second single from the album, "You Know Me".

Williams performed "Morning Sun", the third single from "Reality Killed the Video Star", on 23 January 2010 at the "NRJ Music Awards" where he also received two awards for "International Male Artist of the Year" and the "NRJ Award of Honour". "Morning Sun" was also performed on 13 February 2010 (Williams' 36th birthday) on the UK TV show "So You Think You Can Dance". He performed a medley of his greatest hits, including the three singles from "Reality Killed the Video Star", on 16 February at the "2010 BRIT Awards" where Williams won the "Outstanding Contribution to Music Award". He won the award for "Best International Male Artist" at the 2010 "ECHO" Awards in Berlin on 4 March, making it his seventh "Echo Award" for this category since 2002. Williams also performed "Morning Sun" at the show.

The song "Bodies" was released as the album's first official single. It premiered on BBC Radio 1 on 4 September 2009. It was released on 12 October 2009, reaching number two in the UK Singles Chart, and has since been certified Silver for sales in excess of 200,000 copies. It has since reached the top 5 and top 10 in several charts across Europe as well as in Australia. The song was also named one of the best singles of 2009 by the music website Popjustice. Jennifer Cooke from PopMatters said that "Bodies" is "vintage Williams, and his strongest single since 'Feel' (2002). Featuring his two favorite subjects, God and sex (not necessarily in that order)".

"You Know Me" was the second single to be taken from the album. It was released on 7 December 2009 in the UK, where it peaked at number six on the singles chart and was also certified Silver for sales of over 200,000 copies. The song managed to peak inside the top 20 and top 30 on many European charts and in Australia. PopMatters' Jennifer Cooke felt that "You Know Me" had "a Motown flavor reminiscent of "Escapology"'s 'Something Beautiful'." Jude Rogers from The Quietus said that the song is "Nonsensical and brilliant".

"Morning Sun" was issued as the third single from the record. In the UK, it was released as the official Sport Relief Single on 8 March 2010. The music video for the single was directed by Vaughan Arnell and filmed at Universal Studios Hollywood. "Morning Sun" peaked at number 45 on the UK Singles Chart, making it Williams' first single not to enter the top 40. Jude Rogers from The Quietus said that the song features a vocal "that shows what his voice really can do" and that "Even a middle-eight that nods towards the trippy oompah of 'I Am the Walrus' can't change a mood that is both grand but melancholy, epic but reflective."

"Last Days of Disco" was released as a promotional single in the United States on 5 October 2010. The single featured several remixes by the artists including Roger Sanchez, Still Going, Black Van and Mighty Mouse. As of January 2011, the song has peaked at number seven on the "Billboard" Hot Dance Club Songs chart.

"Reality Killed the Video Star" received a varied response from music critics. One review aggregater, Metacritic, gave it an average score of 64/100 based on its sample of 17 reviews. John Bush from AllMusic gave the album two stars out of five. He praised songs like "Bodies" and "Morning Sun" but felt that many songs "sound rushed and the performances lackluster". He concluded that the album is "not decidedly worse than 2002's "Escapology", it's just bad in a different way. Whereas "Escapology" found Robbie disappearing into his own neuroses, this one is a hopeless mélange of satire and sincerity where, from song to song, neither can immediately be distinguished." Chris Mincher from "The A.V. Club" gave the album a "C" rating stating that: "Neurotically examining his personality quirks through decidedly unoriginal, un-quirky pop songs, Williams apparently wants to express his individuality with classic-rock reference points and frustratingly nonsensical novelty tracks."

Mark Sutherland from "Billboard" gave the album a favourable review. He said that it offers "string-drenched ballads, slick George Michael-style electronic dance-pop, Elvis Costello-esque clever wordplay and the slightly cheesy, supremely catchy MOR pop he made his name with." Sutherland said that "The end result may not be enough to convince America it's missing out, but expect this album to bring the already-converted back onboard in droves." Dave Karger from "Entertainment Weekly" gave it a "B+" rating. Karger felt that, although the album "contains fewer knockout potential hits than past efforts", it does feature "the two strongest soul-flecked tracks of Williams' career", in "You Know Me" and "Won't Do That", and that the singer "simply sounds fantastic with a horn section".
Ben Hogwood from MusicOMH gave the album a mixed review, awarding it with three stars (out of five). He said that the "new songs reflect [a] safer maturity". Hogwood said that the album is "more like a big band version of George Michael's 'Older' than a funked-up 'Faith'" and that, although it has "a killer tune or two", the album is not exhibit the "same vitality of years ago." Talking about the production, he felt that "the orchestrations are layered on thickly in an attempt to bring some brightness to the grey." Hogwood concluded that Williams' "new found maturity suits his voice on one hand, but given his musical past it makes him a far safer proposition than he used to be."

"Los Angeles Times" music critic Ann Powers gave the album three stars (out of four) stating that the album is "bullishly diverse". She said that the album is "a full-body flex matching buttery ballads with laser-flecked dance tracks and arch updates from the music hall;". Powers felt that the songs "showcase the nasally soulful Williams as an irresistibly smart, cosmopolitan manchild of the overly wired world." Regarding the lyrics, Powers said that Williams "focuses hard on the out-of-body experience of the everyday." She said that the production on the album is "gorgeous" and that "Williams benefits greatly from the gifts of the producer's longtime team, including the arranger Anne Dudley." Mikael Wood from "Spin" gave the album a 7/10 rating. He said that the album includes "cowbell-enhanced rave-up, a bit of Lady Gaga–ish electro-pop, and one track named after Transformers" and went on to call the record "a charm offensive with stars and stripes".

Slant Magazine music critic Jonathan Keefe gave the album a mixed review, rating it with two and a half stars (out of five) and talked about Williams' lack of success in the United States, calling him "one of the U.S. pop market's biggest missed opportunities". Keefe felt that the album featured the sort of "heavy balladry and slick adult-pop" that made Williams' earlier records unappealing to American audiences and suggested that by "downplaying [his] formerly irrepressible charm", "Reality Killed the Video Star" doesn't do enough to reintroduce the singer to the US pop market.
Andy Gill of "The Independent" gave the album three stars out of five, commenting that "Williams' albums have increasingly come to focus upon the singer himself, which has consequently made them less and less appealing to those not entirely smitten with his charms." This sentiment was echoed by Rosie Swash from "The Observer" who also gave the album three stars out of five. She said that ""Reality Killed the Video Star" is littered with references to his fall from grace, most of which hinge on the premise that someone or something else is truly responsible for his diminishing popularity." Swash said that "If there's a theme here it's not obvious, but it turns out Williams can be quite interesting when he moves off the topic of himself." Swash concluded that the album swings between "mawkish strings and piano overproduction" and "flashes of genuine pop frivolity".

In the United Kingdom, the album sold over 85,000 copies in its first day on sale and 238,125 copies in its first week, around 1,500 less than the self-titled debut album from JLS, which debuted at number one. The album had the third-highest first-week sales of 2009 in the UK, behind "JLS" and Susan Boyle's debut album "I Dreamed a Dream", the latter of which debuted with 410,000 copies sold. In 2010 it was certified triple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry for sales of over 900,000 copies. "Reality Killed the Video Star"s sales week were the highest for a number-two album since James Blunt's "Back to Bedlam" sold 273,183 copies to claim the runners-up spot behind Eminem's "" in December 2005. It has sold 905,469 copies as of May 2016.

Though it missed the top spot in the UK, the album debuted at number one on the European Top 100 Albums chart and spent two weeks at this position. It was certified platinum for sales of more than 1 million copies throughout Europe (which includes UK sales) by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. In continental Europe, the album was certified double platinum in Germany for sales of over 400,000 copies. In France, the album has sold over 100,000 copies, earning a platinum certification from the Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique. In Italy, the album sold over 70,000 copies and was awarded a platinum certification by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry.
The album has also reached the top ten in Portugal, Spain, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Sweden, and Austria.

Outside of Europe, the album reached number one in Australia and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for sales of 70,000 units. It also reached the top ten in New Zealand, where it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand for selling more than 7,500 copies. In Latin America, the album reached the top ten in Mexico and was certified gold for shipments of 30,000 units. The album also earned a gold disc in Argentina for shipments of over 20,000 units.

All tracks produced by Trevor Horn. Additional production on "Do You Mind" by Stephen Hague.


Performers on the album include:




</doc>
<doc id="23846223" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846223" title="Wide Open (Millennium)">
Wide Open (Millennium)

"Wide Open" is the ninth episode of the first season of the American crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It premiered on Fox on January 3, 1997. The episode was written by Charles D. Holland and directed by Jim Charleston. "Wide Open" featured guest appearances by Glynn Turman and Roger Cross.

Forensic profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen), a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group, tracks a serial killer who hides in his victims' homes and preys on those who feel most safe.

"Wide Open" was Charleston's second, and Holland's only, contribution to the series. The episode opens with a quote from the biblical Book of Job, and makes reference to author Patricia Highsmith. It received mixed reviews from critics.

A man, Cutter (Pablo Coffey), visits an open house viewing, where he is given a tour by the estate agent, and seems to take an interest in the bedroom of a young girl. That night, the owners have returned home, and are settling down for the evening when their daughter, Patricia, begins screaming. Later, a security guard for the family's alarm company finds the bodies of the parents hacked to death on the first floor, but Patricia is nowhere to be seen.

The Millennium Group, a private investigative group, dispatches profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) to the scene, where he meets Seattle detective Bob Bletcher (Bill Smitrovich). Black finds the house's alarm system, noticing that it did not go off until the killer left the house. He deduces that the killer stayed hidden in the house during the viewing, emerging that evening to kill the family. However, Black also notices something near an air vent; pulling it from the wall, he finds Patricia, alive but greatly disturbed.

Black's wife Catherine (Megan Gallagher), a clinical social worker, warns against questioning Patricia — although she is an important witness, she is only a child and is in a fragile mental state. Black and Bletcher visit James Glen (Glynn Turman) a graphology expert, having found the killer's signature in the viewing's guestbook. Analysis of the killer's handwriting links him to almost forty open house viewings over the previous six months.

An estate agent receives a video recording of the murders in the post, leaving Black puzzled. That same day, the killer hides in another open house, later murdering a woman with a shotgun before calling the police to the scene. Black finds an X drawn in blood under the house's welcome mat; Patricia has begun drawing red Xs in her crayon pictures, which Catherine takes notice of. Black reviews the videotape, finding a reflection of the killer in a glass pane. Extracting a picture from this, he requests to show it to Patricia, but stops himself, realizing that the killer let Patricia live so that she could relive the events when questioned.

Cutter, a crossing guard, hides the shotgun in a dumpster, calling the police to report finding it. The police officer who takes his statement later recognizes him on seeing the video. Black has deduced the killer's motives—he is trying to undermine society's notion of safety. Black and Bletcher organize a stakeout at another open house, identifying Cutter when he arrives; however, Cutter escapes into the neighborhood. Black realizes that he has hidden in a nearby house, where he and Bletcher find the occupants tied up. Cutter ambushes Black, knocking him down, but before Cutter can escape, the family's dog lunges at him, sending him falling over a mezzanine to his death. Bletcher later tells Black that Cutter's aunt and uncle were tortured to death in front of him when he was a child, which led him to recreate the torment for other families.

"Wide Open" is the second of two episodes of "Millennium" to be directed by James Charleston, who had also helmed the earlier first season episode "Blood Relatives". The episode also marked the only contribution to the series from writer Charles D. Holland.

Pablo Coffey, who portrayed Cutter, the episode's serial killer, would later appear in "Manus Domini", an episode of "Millennium" creator Chris Carter's series "Harsh Realm". The episode features Glynn Turman as a graphologist, portraying the discipline in an exaggerated, "near-psychic" manner; although it had been portrayed more realistically in the second episode of the series, "Gehenna". Bill Smitrovich, who plays recurring character Bob Bletcher, had previously portrayed a graphologist in the 1986 film "Manhunter", which has been seen an influence on "Millennium".

The character of Patricia Highsmith—the little girl who survives the first attack—is named for the author Patricia Highsmith, author of "Strangers on a Train" and the Tom Ripley series of novels. The episode opens with a quotation from the Book of Job, one of the poetic books of the Ketuvim, the third part of the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible. Another passage from the Book of Job had been used in the opening of the episode "Dead Letters". Biblical verses were also used at the beginning of other episodes in the series, including the Book of Exodus in "Kingdom Come"; the Book of Jeremiah in "Weeds"; and the Gospel of Luke in "Blood Relatives".

"Wide Open" was first broadcast on the Fox Network on January 3, 1997; and earned a Nielsen rating of 6.9, meaning that roughly of all television-equipped households were tuned in to the episode. The episode was watched by approximately households.

"Wide Open" received mixed reviews from critics. Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated the episode one-and-a-half stars out of five, finding that its cold open was "the most distinctive thing about the whole case". Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode's killer was unspectacular, remaining "largely anonymous"; and that his death scene was "as half-hearted a climax as he deserves". Writing for "The A.V. Club", Zack Handlen rated the episode a B+, describing it as "thoroughly unsettling" and "solid stuff". Handlen felt that the treatment of the episode's villain was better than most other instalments of the series, which "helps give the episode overall a stronger sense of purpose". However, it was felt that the character of Frank Black was still too vague and impersonal, coming across simply as "a generic representation of Chris Carter's idea of heroism". Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated "Wide Open" 3.5 out of 5. Gibron felt that the episode had "a clever premise, a great deal of suspense and some gruesomely graphic imagery", but criticized the "off-the-cuff" manner in which the killer's motives were explained.




</doc>
<doc id="23846248" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846248" title="Loin Like a Hunting Flame">
Loin Like a Hunting Flame

"'Loin Like a Hunting Flame" is the twelfth episode of the first season of the American crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It premiered on the Fox network on January 31, 1997. The episode was written by Ted Mann, and directed by David Nutter. "Loin Like a Hunting Flame" featured guest appearances by William Lucking, Hrothgar Mathews and Harriet Sansom Harris.

Forensic profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen), a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group, joins a fellow Group member to track a killer driven by sexual neuroses and who uses mood-altering drugs to gain control of his victims.

"Loin Like a Hunting Flame" has received mostly negative reviews from critics, with its treatment of female characters being seen as particularly poor. The episode—Nutter's last contribution to the series—contains several literary references, alluding to both Dylan Thomas and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.

In Boulder, Colorado, a rave is underway in a nightclub. Pharmacist Art Nesbitt (Hrothgar Matthews) approaches a young couple, offering them drugs. Later, all three of them are in a room elsewhere, with Nesbitt recording the couple having sex. When they finish, he poisons them by injection. Their naked bodies are found the following day in a botanic garden, posed to resemble the story of Adam and Eve. The Millennium Group, a private investigative firm, despatches offender profilers Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) and Maureen Murphy (Harriet Sansom Harris) to aid the police investigation. Detective Thomas (William Lucking) feels uncomfortable working with Murphy, believing that women do not understand male sex offenders.

Elsewhere, Nesbitt is spying on a swingers' party, and follows two women as they leave to buy more alcohol for the party. He impersonates a police officer and pulls their car over. The next day the women are reported missing by their husbands, and their bodies are found posed in a park. Nesbitt is next seen working in his pharmacy, when another young couple come in to purchase medication in preparation for an exotic honeymoon. Nesbitt instead surreptitiously gives them an MDMA-like drug, suggesting they take it immediately.

Meanwhile, the investigation has found traces of this drug in the other victims, with Black believing that the killer not only has access to it through his occupation but is likely consuming it himself while committing his crimes in order to readily act on his sexual fantasies. Black follows up on this, and investigates Nesbitt's pharmacy. Nesbitt is not working at the time, but Black realizes he must be the killer. He interviews Nesbitt's wife (Barbara Howard), finding that they have not had sex in eighteen years of marriage—however, Nesbitt has recently become interested in trying again.

Later, Detective Thomas tells Black that he really has no problem with Murphy—his true issue with the case is his own past. Having investigated sexual offences in the past, Thomas had found the cases affecting him personally, leaving him unable to have sex with his wife and leading to their divorce.

Black realizes that the killer is trying to experience the sexual encounters he missed out on before his marriage, and that he believes his victims are living the happiest moments of their lives because of his actions. He returns to the Nesbitt home, finding the honeymooning couple locked in a bomb shelter below the house. Black runs upstairs, thinking that Nesbitt will murder his wife, but arrives in time to see him commit suicide by injection instead.

"Loin Like a Hunting Flame" is the second of four episodes of "Millennium" to have been written by Ted Mann, who had previously written "The Judge", and would go on to write "Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" and the first-season finale "Paper Dove". The episode was directed by David Nutter, and was his last directing credit for the series, having helmed "Pilot", "Gehenna" and "522666" earlier in the season.

A member of Fox's Standards and Practices department was flown out to the episode's Vancouver, British Columbia filming location. She was asked to watch the episode being produced to ensure that it did not breach any of the network's censorship rules. Several of the scenes that were being produced required quite small spaces during filming, requiring Nutter to record additional coverage on a handheld camera, which he later played back to the Standards and Practices liaison for approval.

The episode's title is taken from a line in the Dylan Thomas poem "Ballad of the Long-legged Bait", which was first published in 1946's "Deaths and Entrances"; while the quotation displayed at the beginning—"Two souls, alas, are housed within my breast"—is taken from Goethe's "Faust", a two-part 19th century play by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. Both literary allusions serve to highlight the secret life of the character of Nesbitt—the first in its subject matter, the second thematically echoing the character's two lives. Several of the cast had previously worked with series creator Chris Carter on his previous series "The X-Files"—Harriet Sansom Harris had appeared in the first season episode "Eve"; Hrothgar Matthews had played roles in four episodes; and Tyler Labine, who briefly appeared handing out leaflets in the episode's cold open, had made appearances in two episodes of that series.

"Loin Like a Hunting Flame" was first broadcast on the Fox Network on January 31, 1997; and earned a Nielsen rating of 8, meaning that roughly of all television-equipped households were tuned in to the episode.

"Loin Like a Hunting Flame" received mostly negative reviews from critics. Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated the episode two-and-a-half stars out of five, finding Mann's writing to lack tension and imagination. Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode "has good moments, and is at least efficient and watchable", but believed that it "doesn't really deliver anything special, doesn't try to be anything other than average". Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated "Loin Like a Hunting Flame" 4 out of 5, describing it as being "handled in a subtle, somber manner". Gibron felt that "the events unfold in this episode evenly and eerily", and it serves as an example of "what could have been done had the show's focus, both literally and metaphysically, remained on crime". Writing for "The A.V. Club", Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode an F, calling it "quite possibly one of the worst episodes of television I've ever seen". VanDerWerff felt that the episode's wariness of the 1990s rave subculture was particularly dated. He also felt that "Loin Like a Hunting Flame" served as a prominent example of "Millennium" "social conservatism", noting that it seems "fairly closed-off from other points-of-view" than that of the character Frank Black.




</doc>
<doc id="23846262" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846262" title="Sacrament (Millennium)">
Sacrament (Millennium)

"'Sacrament" is the fifteenth episode of the first season of the American crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It premiered on the Fox network on February 21, 1997. The episode was written by Frank Spotnitz, and directed by Michael W. Watkins. "Sacrament" featured guest appearances by Philip Anglim, Dylan Haggerty and Brian Markinson.

Millennium Group consultant Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) faces difficulty when his sister-in-law is abducted after her son's baptism. Meanwhile, Black's daughter Jordan begins to show signs of experiencing the same seemingly-psychic visions that have plagued him.

Spotnitz's script for "Sacrament", which he has called his favourite of those written for "Millennium", draws inspiration from real life serial killers John Wayne Gacy and Dennis Nilsen. The episode has received mostly positive reviews from critics, and was viewed by approximately 6.81 million households during its original broadcast.

Millennium Group member Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) joins his brother Tom (Philip Anglim) and sister-in-law Helen (Liz Bryson) for their newborn son's christening. After the child is baptized, Black joins his daughter Jordan (Brittany Tiplady), finding her in hysterics. She claims to have seen a man hurting Helen; when Black and his brother rush outside, they find the baby in the back of Tom's car, but Helen is gone.

Black's contact in the Seattle Police Department, Bob Bletcher (Bill Smitrovich), insists that Black should not get involved in the case as he is too close to the victims. However, Black insists he can be of assistance, and reviews security footage of a stranger investigating Tom's luggage after their flight. Bletcher reports that a stolen car has been found abandoned, with Helen's blood inside. Fellow Millennium Group member Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) helps Black identify the kidnapper from a set pictures of sex offenders in the Seattle area—Black recognizes Richard Green (Dylan Haggerty) as the man from the airport footage.

Tom later searches Black's office, stealing his gun and finding Green's name and address. Tom confronts Green at his home, demanding to know where his wife is. The police, who have been watching Green's house, intervene and take Tom home before anyone is harmed. Black apologizes for keeping information from Tom, but warns him that his outburst is exactly why he did so. Watts has meanwhile tracked forensic evidence from the abandoned car to a cabin in the woods; blood found there matches both Green and Helen, and a ring is discovered which is identified as Helen's wedding ring.

Meanwhile, a mysteriously ill Jordan continues to ask about Helen's whereabouts, and her remarks about Helen's conditions lead Black to believe she is starting to experience the seemingly-psychic visions he is capable of seeing, which allow him to see the evil people are capable of. Elsewhere, Green is arrested. His property is searched but Helen is nowhere to be found—although another corpse is dug up in the garden, evidently killed nine years before. Black deduces that Green could not have killed Helen at the cabin as his house was already being watched by the police. He sees a set of tools in Green's home which he realizes were not used for murder or torture, but to immure Helen in the basement. Black and the police dismantle a newly finished plaster wall, finding Helen injured but alive; it is at this point that Black realizes Green was simply a pawn, used by his father to lure victims to the house.

"Sacrament" was written by Frank Spotnitz and directed by Michael W. Watkins. Spotnitz had previously written "Weeds" earlier in the first season, as well as penning "TEOTWAWKI", "Antipas" and "Seven and One" in the series' third season. Spotnitz was a prolific writer for "Millennium" sister show "The X-Files", receiving his first writing credit for that series for the episode "End Game". Spotnitz has described "Sacrament" as his favourite script for the series, finding the character of Richard Green to be "creepy" and believing that "the solution to the mystery [was] sufficiently unexpected".

"Sacrament" is the only episode of "Millennium" to have been directed by Watkins. Watkins' work on the episode led to him becoming a director and executive producer for "The X-Files" when that series moved production to Los Angeles. The episode features the last appearance in the series by Brian Markinson as Seattle police officer Teeple; Markinson had previously portrayed the character in the earlier first season episodes "The Judge" and "Blood Relatives".

The treatment of the two victims seen in "Sacrament"—the immurement of Helen Black and the burial in the garden of the unidentified second victim—appear to have been based on the methods used by real life serial killers John Wayne Gacy, Dennis Nilsen and Dorothea Puente to dispose of their victims. Both Gacy and Nilsen habitually murdered men they had taken home as lovers, with Gacy storing bodies in the crawl space of his home, and Nilsen keeping corpses in wardrobes and under the floorboards. Puente would kill her tenants for their money and bury their bodies in the gardens of the properties they were renting.

"Sacrament" was first broadcast on the Fox Network on February 21, 1997. The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6.4 during its original broadcast, meaning that of households in the United States viewed the episode. This represented approximately households, and left the episode the seventy-seventh most-viewed broadcast that week.

The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics. "The A.V. Club" Zack Handlen rated the episode an A−, noting that it "subvert[s] our expectations" when dealing with the fallibility of a protagonist. Handlen felt that the episode's plot was somewhat inevitable following the introduction of Black's family, but that it was handled well; he also felt positively about the episode's symbolism of the vulnerability of innocence. Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated the episode 5 out of 5, calling it ""Millennium" at its best". Gibron felt that "Sacrament" was "a taut, well-executed thriller" whose events "unfold with logic and authenticity". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated "Sacrament" three stars out of five. Shearman felt that the plot was "a bit humdrum", finding that some emotional development was simply treated as "padding"; however, he praised guest star Philip Anglim for his performance.




</doc>
<doc id="23846264" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846264" title="Covenant (Millennium)">
Covenant (Millennium)

"'Covenant" is the sixteenth episode of the first season of the American crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It premiered on the Fox network on March 21, 1997. The episode was written by Robert Moresco, and directed by Roderick J. Pridy. "Covenant" featured guest appearances by John Finn, Michael O'Neill and Sarah Koskoff.

Millennium Group consultant Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) travels to Utah to construct a profile on a convicted murderer (Finn) who is asking for the death sentence. Reconstructing the crime, Black begins to doubt the man's guilt.

Elements of "Covenant" were inspired by real-life murderers Albert Fish, Susan Smith and Arthur Shawcross. The episode was viewed by approximately 6.7 million households in its original broadcast. It has received positive reviews, with Moresco's script praised for its subtlety.

Millennium Group member Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) travels to Provo, Utah to meet Calvin Smith (Michael O'Neill), the prosecutor in a local murder case; and Didi Higgens (Sarah Koskoff), a pathologist for the County Medical Examiner's office. Smith and Higgens have been involved in the trial of former sheriff William Garry (John Finn), who has been convicted of killing his three children and wife. Garry pleaded guilty to murders, and forensic evidence has linked him to a wood-carving chisel used to commit the murders. Black has been asked to construct an offender profile for Garry, to determine whether the man is sufficiently dangerous to society for a judge to issue a death penalty. Garry himself is asking to be executed.

Black travels to Garry's home with a deputy, Kevin Reilly (Steve Bacic). Daubed in blood on the kitchen window are the numbers "1 28 15", which Reilly notes no one has been able to understand. Black also listens to a recording of Garry's confession, which details the murders meticulously. Black convinces Garry's attorney to allow him an interview, insisting he will be entirely impartial. Garry tells Black he had planned the murders for some time, motivated by hatred for his wife and monetary concerns. Black refutes this, pointing out that Garry had carved a wooden angel as a gift for his wife that same day, using the chisel that was the murder weapon. Smith, realizing that Black does not believe Garry to be guilty, dismisses him from the case.

Black discovers that Garry had been having an affair, having previously believed that Mrs. Garry was the unfaithful one; he also realizes that Garry was unaware that his wife was pregnant. Black has Higgens help him in getting the bodies exhumed, allowing the two to see that Mrs. Garry's wounds were not defensive, but self-inflicted. Black also determines that the message written in blood was in fact "I 28 15"—Book of Isaiah, chapter 28, verse 15; which is concerned with lies and falsehoods. Black pieces together the actual events of the night of the murders, realizing that Mrs. Garry killed her children before committing suicide; before she died she blamed Garry for her actions, causing him to seek atonement by admitting to the crimes. Reilly admits to having helped Garry rearrange the crime scene to incriminate himself; Black urges him to come forward with the real events to save his friend's life.

"Covenant" was written by Robert Moresco and directed by Roderick J. Pridy, and was the first contribution to the series by either of the two. Moresco would go on to write "Broken World" later in the first season, and also acted as a producer during the series' run. Pridy would return to helm the second season episode "The Mikado".

Guest star John Finn would go on to appear in "Millennium" sister show "The X-Files", playing the recurring character Michael Kritschgau in several episodes beginning with season four's "Gethsemane". Sarah Koskoff, who portrayed assistant pathologist Didi Higgens, also had a minor recurring role in "The X-Files", making several appearances as an alien abductee. "Covenant" featured the last appearance in the series by Don MacKay as the Black family's neighbour Jack Meredith. MacKay had previously portrayed the character in "Pilot", "Gehenna" and "Weeds".

The premise of a repentant murderer seeking to atone for their actions appears to have been based on the real-life case of Albert Fish, who practised severe self-harm after killing twelve-year-old Grace Budd. Fish would insert needles into his perineum and force rose stems along his urethra to be forcibly pulled out. However, the actual murders may have been inspired by the case of Susan Smith, a mother of two who drowned her children by sinking her car in a lake. Mention is also made in the episode of Arthur Shawcross, whose recidivism is cited by Garry's prosecutors as an example of why murder should warrant a death penalty. Shawcross was released from prison after serving a sentence for killing two children, only to kill eleven women while on parole.

"Covenant" was first broadcast on the Fox Network on March 21, 1997. The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6.9 during its original broadcast, meaning that of households in the United States viewed the episode. This represented approximately households, and left the episode the sixty-third most-viewed broadcast that week.

The episode received positive reviews from critics. "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a B+, praising Moresco's script for its subtlety. VanDerWerff noted the premise's similarity to the Susan Smith case, and felt that the episode "actually gains strength from a certain distance from when it originally aired. Back then, it was just another ripped-from-the-headlines tale of a murderous mother. Now, it’s a crafty mystery that doesn’t reveal its cards until late". Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated the episode 4 out of 5, noting that the episode "broke clichés and trampled all over formulas". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated "Covenant" four-and-a-half stars out of five, calling it "Millennium's version of Twelve Angry Men". Shearman praised Morseco's writing, noting that the episode was "tightly plotted and boast[ed] extremely good dialogue". Shearman felt that Koskoff's acting showed a "naivety that isn't as subtle as the script demands", but overall felt that the episode was "fresh and exciting".




</doc>
<doc id="23846287" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846287" title="Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions">
Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions

"Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions'" is the nineteenth episode of the first season of the American crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It premiered on the Fox network on April 25, 1997. The episode was written by Ted Mann and Harold Rosenthal and directed by Thomas J. Wright. "Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" featured guest appearances by Sarah-Jane Redmond and Richard Cox.

Millennium Group consultant Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) is convinced to return to work after the death of a close friend. However, it soon becomes apparent that his first case back on the job is much deeper than he had expected.

"Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" features the final appearances in the series by both Bill Smitrovich and Robin Gammell. The episode has received mixed to positive reviews from critics, and was viewed by approximately 6.5 million households in its initial broadcast.

Millennium Group consultant Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) runs out to a supermarket parking lot where he witnesses a lawyer, Alistair Pepper (Richard Cox), being confronted by a man named Sammael (Rodney Eastman). Sammael raises his hand, and a bolt of lightning arcs from his fingers to strike Pepper dead; however, when Black reaches Sammael, he finds a pistol at the killer's feet.

A few days before fellow Group member Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) investigates a murder in a suburban home, in which occult paraphernalia has been laid out in a disorganized manner. Watts contacts Black for help with the case. However, Black is still recovering from the murder of his friend Bob Bletcher (Bill Smitrovich), who was murdered in Black's home. Watts hangs up when he sees Sammael looking through the house's window, but by the time he can investigate, Sammael is gone.

Watts later shows Black a picture taken at the murder scene, with Sammael recognizable among a crowd of people. Elsewhere, a man named Martin (Guy Fauchon) is arrested after slitting a babysitter's throat at a public park; despite the seemingly random nature of the crime, Black believes that the man may be connected to Bletcher's murder. However, he soon starts to suspect that Martin may be innocent of the crime he has been arrested for. Black also has a dream in which a mutilated Bletcher tries and fails to speak to him, which leads Black to believe he has lost his ability to see into the minds of others.

The case against Martin falters as evidence disappears and witnesses fail to identify him in a line-up. Black is approached by Pepper, Martin's self-appointed lawyer, who extends Black an invitation to join his legal practice. Martin later claims in court to have killed Bletcher. Elsewhere, another Millennium Group member, Mike Atkins (Robin Gammell), receives a telephone call from someone pretending to be Black. Meanwhile, Black suspects that the occult-oriented murder may have been committed to draw the Group, and Black, into the open again.

In his jail cell, Martin cuts his own throat with a concealed razor blade; however, a coroner later finds that his death was caused by an aneurysm. Black believes that Pepper is somehow involved. Watts and Black find Atkins murdered in a hotel room, and chase a suspect down a fire escape and into a supermarket. Inside, Black finds Pepper, but as Pepper moves in and out of view, his appearance seems to change to that of Martin, and then of Lucy Butler (Sarah-Jane Redmond), the woman Black suspects to have killed Bletcher. Pepper leaves the supermarket and approaches his car, where he is confronted and killed by Sammael. As Black apprehends Sammael, he is told that Pepper was killed as a "consequence of his own error"; Black takes it to mean that there is a larger mystery to which his own involvement is only tangential.

"Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" is the third of four episodes of "Millennium" to have been written by Ted Mann, who had previously written "The Judge" and "Loin Like a Hunting Flame", and would go on to write the first season finale "Paper Dove". Director Thomas J. Wright would go on to direct twenty-six episodes across all three seasons. Wright would also direct "Millennium", the series' crossover episode with its sister show "The X-Files". "Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" is co-writer Harold Rosenthal's only credit throughout the series.

Both the title of the episode and the invocation spoken by the character of Sammael refer to four of the nine choirs of angels in Christian mythology. Christian angelology holds that there are three groupings of three choirs each. The Thrones are the third-highest ranking choir, belonging to the group charged with attending to God, and are described as stern incarnations of holy justice. Dominions, the fourth-highest choir, belong to the group appointed to deal with God's creations. Dominions lead the lower orders and impart wisdom to humanity. Powers belong to the same tier as Dominions, and are tasked with countering the threat of temptation by the devil and demons. Principalities are the seventh-highest ranking choir and belong to the lowest grouping of angels, those most likely to appear to mankind. Principalities oversee those humans who rule over others, teaching kings and heads of families the skills needed to lead.

"Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" features the final appearance of the character Bob Bletcher. Smitrovich had first portrayed Bletcher in "Pilot", appearing intermittently throughout the first season. Bletcher was murdered in the previous episode, "Lamentation". The episode also features the death of Millennium Group member Mike Atkins, played by Robin Gammell, who had also portrayed the character in the earlier episode "Gehenna". Sarah-Jane Redmond, who had first portrayed Lucy Butler in "Lamentation", would return in the second season episode "A Room with No View", and the third season episodes "Antipas" and "Saturn Dreaming of Mercury".

"Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" was first broadcast on the Fox Network on April 25, 1997. The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6.7 during its original broadcast, meaning that of households in the United States viewed the episode. This represented 6.5 million households, and left the episode the sixty-fifth most-viewed broadcast that week.

"Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" received mostly positive reviews from critics. "The A.V. Club" Zack Handlen rated the episode an A, describing it as "gleefully grim". Handlen felt that the episode represented the series coming into its own, noting that ""Millennium", after weeks of hinting at possibilities without delivering much of anything, has finally started to give a real sense that yes, there "is" a lot of bad news happening, and it really does make a twisted kind of sense". Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated the episode 3.5 out of 5, noting that it shared similar themes with the direction the series would take in its second season. Gibron described the episode as "spooky and somewhat surreal", adding that "the entire installment crackles with possibilities". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated "Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" four stars out of five, describing it as being "surprising, intriguing, moody and pretentious". Shearman compared the episode thematically to Mann's earlier script for "The Judge", and noted that while the story "doesn't make for an especially comprehensible yarn, it does produce an episode that is genuinely uneasy viewing".




</doc>
<doc id="23846298" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846298" title="Broken World (Millennium)">
Broken World (Millennium)

"'Broken World" is the twentieth episode of the first season of the American crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It premiered on the Fox network on May 2, 1997. The episode was written by Robert Moresco and Patrick Harbinson, and directed by Winrich Kolbe. "Broken World" featured guest appearances by Ingrid Kavelaars, Donnelly Rhodes and Jo Anderson.

Millennium Group consultant Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) travels to North Dakota to track down a burgeoning serial killer who has progressed from mauling horses to attacking and killing people.

"Broken World" featured the last directorial effort for the series by Kolbe, and the last script written by Moresco; however, Harbinson would return to write further episodes in later seasons. The episode has been compared to Peter Shaffer's 1973 play "Equus", and received a Genesis Award from the Humane Society of the United States in 1998.

In Bowman, North Dakota, a stable-hand named Sally Dumont (Ingrid Kavelaars) is attacked and left unconscious after she finds a horse has been murdered in its stall. Private investigation organization the Millennium Group send offender profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) to investigate, as twenty-one horses have been killed in the same manner over the past two years in the area. Black believes the culprit is in the early stages of developing into a sexually motivated serial killer. Investigating the stables, the word "help" is found written in human blood, while semen is found near where the horse was killed. Black concludes the killer is struggling with the new feelings of having attacked a person and not an animal.

The killer—Willi Borgsen (Van Quattro)—is next seen attacking pigs in a trailer using a cattle prod. Borgsen is accosted by the pigs' owner, and responds by turning the cattle prod on him. The victim's body is later found in a nearby thicket. Black examines the scene, determining from the bootprints and evidence of the cattle prod being used that the killer works in a slaughterhouse.

Another human victim is later found on a farm, alongside another dead horse. The phrase "thank you" is daubed on a nearby wall. The North Dakota police set up an anonymous phone number to appeal for information, which Borgsen uses to taunt Black by describing the pleasure he derives from killing. Black consults with a veterinarian, Claudia Vaughan (Jo Anderson), about the case, and learns that the area is home to a Premarin farm—estrogen for pharmaceutical use is derived from the urine of mares which are kept pregnant, their foals killed for meat to be exported. Black feels the killer may have been raised on one of these farms.

Borgsen contacts Black again, confessing that his latest killing has not satisfied him. Black warns that his urges will only grow, and will never be satisfied again. When Borgsen hangs up, Black deduces that Vaughan is to be the next victim. Black, fellow Group member Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) and Sheriff Falkner (John Dennis Johnston) track the kidnapped Vaughan to an equine slaughterhouse. Falkner is attacked and incapacitated by Borgsen as Black locates a still-living Vaughan, who has been hung by her jacket from a meat hook. Black is then confronted by Borgsen, who knocks him down with the cattle prod. Borgsen is about to kill Black with a captive bolt pistol, but is trampled to death by several escaped horses.

"Broken World" was written by Robert Moresco and Patrick Harbinson. Moresco had previously written "Covenant" earlier in the first season, and also acted as a producer during the series' run. Harbinson, making his first contribution to the series with this episode, would later pen a further four episodes in the third season—"Via Dolorosa", "Darwin's Eye", "The Sound of Snow" and "Through a Glass Darkly". "Broken World" also marked the final episode of "Millennium" helmed by director Winrich Kolbe, who had previously worked on "Lamentation", "Force Majeure" and "Kingdom Come".

During production, "Broken World" was instead set to be titled "Equus", which is Latin for "horse" and was also the title of a 1973 play by Peter Shaffer concerning a young man with violent sexual urges towards horses. The episode opens with a quote from Friedrich Nietzsche's 1883–1885 treatise "Thus Spoke Zarathustra"—"Man is the cruelest animal". Guest star Donnelly Rhodes, who portrayed Peter Dumont, would later make an appearance in the third season episode "...Thirteen Years Later" in an unrelated role.

"Broken World" was first broadcast on the Fox Network on May 2, 1997. The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6.8 during its original broadcast, meaning that of households in the United States viewed the episode. This represented 6.6 million households, and left the episode the sixty-eighth most-viewed broadcast that week.

The episode received mixed reviews from critics. "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a C, comparing it to the first act of Shaffer's "Equus". VanDerWerff described the episode as "a bland, boring mess that ends with one of the most ridiculous deux ex machinas I’ve seen in ages", and felt that "the guest cast is uniformly poor", singling out Van Quattro as being "laughably bad". Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated the episode 3 out of 5, calling it " enthralling" but "not completely successful". Gibron felt that elements of the setting were "very sinister", but found the "overwhelming pro-horse mantras" of some characters to be "silly". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated "Broken World" three stars out of five, finding it "too familiar and too tentative to make much impact". Shearman felt that the episode would have been better placed earlier in the series' broadcast order, but by this stage in the first season it had been "outgrown".

"Broken World" received a Genesis Award in 1998, presented by the Humane Society of the United States in the category "Television Dramatic Series".




</doc>
<doc id="23846347" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846347" title="The Beginning and the End (Millennium)">
The Beginning and the End (Millennium)

"'The Beginning and the End" is the first episode of the second season of the American crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It premiered on the Fox network on September 19, 1997. The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong, and directed by Thomas J. Wright. "The Beginning and the End" featured a guest appearance by Doug Hutchison as the Polaroid Man.

In this episode, Millennium Group profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) must track down the man who has kidnapped his wife Catherine (Megan Gallagher). During his hunt, Group member Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) reveals that the Group is much more secretive and mysterious than Black had ever known.

"The Beginning and the End" marks the first episode produced with Morgan and Wong as co-executive producers; their tenure in charge of the series would last the entirety of the second season. Guest star Hutchison was a frequent collaborator with the writers, having worked together in several other series. The episode was seen by approximately 7.15 million households in its original broadcast, and has received mixed to positive reviews from television critics.

The episode begins in media res from the ending of the preceding episode, "Paper Dove", showing Millennium Group member Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) returning by plane to Seattle with his wife Catherine (Megan Gallagher) and daughter Jordan (Brittany Tiplady). As Black takes Jordan to their car, Catherine is drugged and kidnapped by a strange man (Doug Hutchison). The abductor—the Polaroid Man—hides Catherine in his car and escapes with her to the mountains overlooking the city.

Black's fellow Group members arrive to help, though he had not yet contacted any of them. They set up roadblocks throughout the city but are unsuccessful in finding Catherine. Black returns home, where his colleague Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) tells him about trying to conceive a son with his wife. Watts had once been assigned to a child-murder case in which the dismembered infant's body had been found in a cooler. He believed that God would reward him with his longed-for son if he could find the killer—years later, he still only has his three daughters, which has caused him to realize you must sacrifice one thing to gain another. Watts then has a Group member install software on Black's computer, allowing him access to sensitive documents—Black comments that he thought he already had full access before. Watts also explains that the Group's interest in Black is the reason for the Polaroid Man's actions. Elsewhere, the Polaroid Man ties up Catherine in a dark room.

Black struggles to find anything useful while investigating the abduction. However, he begins to experience seemingly-psychic visions which lead him to believe she is being held in their former home. The police raid the address but find it empty; Black finds a polaroid of another house inside. He is able to track down the address of this house, but goes alone this time. Reaching it, he finds Catherine in the basement, bound to a rafter. He goes to untie her but is blinded by a camera flash. He struggles with the Polaroid Man, which we see through a series of photographs taken by the man's camera. Black is able to wrest the Polaroid Man's knife away from him and stab him to death.

Returning home, Catherine packs a suitcase for Black, telling him that she cannot have him in their home for the time being, believing that he sacrificed a part of himself in killing her attacker. She hopes that time apart might help him recover what he is missing inside; he takes the case and drives off.

"The Beginning and the End" was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong, and directed by Thomas J. Wright. Wright had previously directed five episodes of the first season—"Dead Letters", "The Wild and the Innocent", "The Thin White Line", "Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" and "Paper Dove"—and would go on to direct a further twenty episodes over the series' run. Wright would also go on to direct "Millennium", the series' crossover episode with its sister show "The X-Files". The episode was the fourth to have been written by Morgan and Wong, after "Dead Letters", "522666" and "The Thin White Line" in the first season. The duo would go on to pen a further eleven episodes over the course of the second season, having taken the roles of co-executive producers for the season.

Doug Hutchison's character, credited here as "Polaroid Man", had previously appeared in the first season finale "Paper Dove". In that episode the character was credited as "The Figure", and been portrayed by Paul Raskin. The character had been a presence in the series since "Pilot", but had often merely been alluded to without being seen. Hutchison had worked with Morgan and Wong several times before; they had first met during production of "Squeeze", an episode of "Millennium" sister show "The X-Files", and again on Morgan and Wong's short-lived series "".

Discussing plans for the season, Morgan noted that "the Millennium Group is a much deeper organization" than seen in the first season, adding that "they're considering [Frank Black] for a candidate for the group (and) trying to show him that at the millennium there's going to be an event - either fire and brimstone or harmonic convergence". Wong spoke about how the character of Catherine Black, saying "there's a different relationship between Frank and his family this season because of the separation ... I think that will not only bring some kind of heartfelt drama but humor into it". The episode makes use of the Talking Heads song "Life During Wartime", taken from their 1979 album "Fear of Music".

"The Beginning and the End" was first broadcast on the Fox network on September 19, 1997. The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 7.3 during its original broadcast, meaning that of households in the United States viewed the episode. This represented approximately households, and left the episode the fifty-third most-viewed broadcast that week.

The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics. Writing for "The Buffalo News", Alan Pergament rated the episode three stars out of five, describing it as "moody" but "muddled and confusing". Pergament noted that "the suspense of the premiere actually is enhanced by all the summer speculation about the future role of Gallagher", and felt that Morgan and Wong were "trying to bring "Millennium" into "X-File" territory". "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a A−, finding that it allows the series to "[turn] a corner, from a serial killer show with stained-glass window overtones, to a show that revels in those overtones, a show that plays in age-old symbols with a decided taste of the weird". VanDerWerff also felt that a monologue delivered by O'Quinn was an example of Morgan and Wong's best writing, and that the actor's delivery was the key to keeping the scene serious in tone. Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated the episode 4.5 out of 5, noting that it "starts Season 2 off in high style". Gibron found that the episode "has a nice sense of internal adventure to it, giving us a chance to learn more about our main players while setting the groundwork for some certified surreality to come". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated "The Beginning and the End" two-and-a-half stars out of five. Shearman felt that the episode had "an overwritten quality", citing the Polaroid Man's dialogue as the main example of this; he also believed that the development of Catherine Black as a character seemed poorly executed, with the character lacking enough depth to "retain the audience's sympathies".




</doc>
<doc id="23846362" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846362" title="Sense and Antisense (Millennium)">
Sense and Antisense (Millennium)

"'Sense and Antisense" is the third episode of the second season of the crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on October 3, 1997. The episode was written by Chip Johannessen and directed by Thomas J. Wright. "Sense and Antisense" featured guest appearances from Clarence Williams III and Ricky Harris.

"Millennium" centers on offender profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen), who investigates unusual crimes as part of the private investigative organisation the Millennium Group. In this episode, Black aids in the search for a man who is supposedly carrying a highly contagious virus and discovers the secret behind the Human Genome Project.

Johannessen has described "Sense and Antisense" as having suffered from extensive script re-writes; his original version dealt more strongly with racial issues but was rewritten at the behest of the network's broadcast standards office. The episode earned a mixed reception from television critics, and was viewed by approximately 6.57 million households upon its initial broadcast.

Patient Zero (Clarence Williams III) tries to hail a taxi on a busy street, but is continually ignored. He is eventually picked up by Gerome Knox (Ricky Harris), but suffers a seizure in the back of the taxi, raving about a threat against his life. Knox takes him to hospital, where he is diagnosed as a drug addict. Zero is sedated, but becomes agitated when two men enter the hospital lobby; Knox helps him escape, believing his life is in danger. The two men, Wright and Patterson, quarantine the area, as Zero is carrying a highly contagious disease.

Millennium Group member Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) is contacted for help in finding Zero, and travels to a briefing on the situation. It is explained that Zero is carrying a disease ordinarily confined to the Congo. Meanwhile, Zero and Knox are attempting to have a local newspaper run Zero's story, believing he has been infected in a racially motivated conspiracy akin to the Tuskegee syphilis experiment. Police locate and apprehend Zero, who manages to smear blood on Black's shirt.

Black has the blood tested, and finds it free of any pathogen; meanwhile, the government center running the earlier briefing has vanished. Black realizes he was tricked into finding Zero for an ulterior motive, eventually learning that the organisation responsible is carrying out medical experiments on the homeless, and may be tied to the Millennium Group. Elsewhere a homeless man, acting similarly to Zero, attacks two policemen, and is killed in response. Black and fellow Group member Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) investigate, but are clearly not welcome. Black manages to obtain a blood sample from the dead man, and finds a stretcher tag which he believes is connected to the United States Department of Energy.

Further examination of the blood of both Zero and the dead man reveal that their condition has been induced through gene therapy. Watts and Black theorize that the DOE is developing a biological weapon which would incite violence and rioting in a targeted population; they learn that the research is being conducted by scientists involved in the Human Genome Project. Later, the body of Knox is found at a nearby morgue. Later, Black and Watts, assisted by local police, raid an office building connected to the project, which they believe is using homeless shelters to test their pathogen. They hope to recover Zero in the raid, but find him cogent and working for the project—his real name is Dr. William Kramer, and he denies any knowledge of the incident. Black believes Kramer was accidentally infected during his work, and finds a photograph in the man's office, showing him in military uniform, taking part in the 1994 Rwandan Genocide.

"Sense and Antisense" was written by Chip Johannessen, who went on to write a total of twelve episodes across all three seasons, including the series' final episode, "Goodbye to All That". The episode was directed by Thomas J. Wright; Wright had directed six episodes previously and would helm a further nineteen over the series' run. Wright would also go on to direct "Millennium", the series' crossover episode with its sister show "The X-Files".

Johannessen was ultimately unhappy with how the episode turned out, believing that it suffered as a result of frequent re-writes to the script. Johannessen's original draft focused more heavily on racial issues, which Fox's broadcast standards office objected to. The episode makes use of Bobby Darin's song "Gyp the Cat" in a diegetic manner. Darin's music has been noted by "Millennium" resident composer Mark Snow as a hallmark of the works of executive producers Glen Morgan and James Wong, and would also appear in the episodes "Beware of the Dog", "Monster", and "Goodbye Charlie".

"Sense and Antisense" was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on October 3, 1997. The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6.7 during its original broadcast, meaning that of households in the United States viewed the episode. This represented approximately 6.59 million households, and left the episode the seventy-second most-viewed broadcast that week.

The episode generally received mixed reviews from critics. "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a C+, finding that it to be ambitious but ultimately feeling that it attempted too much at once. VanDerWerff found the episode "entertaining", but added that it "feels like something that’s been rewritten at least one time too many, to incorporate more and more ideas until the center cannot hold". Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated the episode 4 out of 5, praising Williams' guest appearance. Gibron also felt positively about the episode's complexity, feeling that it displayed "a certain intelligence" in assuming such a pace. Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated "Sense and Antisense" two stars out of five, describing it as "too thin and too obvious". Shearman praised Williams' guest appearance, but felt that the episode seemed too close thematically to "The X-Files" to work well on its own.




</doc>
<doc id="23846387" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23846387" title="The Hand of St. Sebastian">
The Hand of St. Sebastian

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" is the eighth episode of the second season of the American crime-thriller television series "Millennium". It originally aired on the Fox network on November 14, 1997. The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong, and directed by Thomas J. Wright. "The Hand of St. Sebastian" featured a guest appearance from C. C. H. Pounder.

Millennium Group offender profilers Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) and Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) travel to Germany to locate a preserved relic of Saint Sebastian, unintentionally discovering cracks within the unity of the Group.

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" was inspired by Wong's research into Freemasonry and the Knights Templar; Wong wanted to replicate the disharmony of these societies within the Millennium Group. The episode has received mixed responses from critics, and was viewed by approximately 6.7 percent of the available audience in its initial broadcast.

In 998, a monk is betrayed by his compatriot, and shot to death by archers. As they search his robe to find their objective—the mummified hand of Saint Sebastian—they notice a tattoo on the man's body; an ouroboros, symbol of the Millennium Group.

In 1998, modern Group member Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) asks his colleague Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) for help with a case the Group have not authorized; he remains cryptic as to what it is. They travel to Germany to investigate the murder of a Dr. Schlossburg, whose lab is found to house a mummified body. The two are arrested by German police, but when the police realize they have apprehended fellow investigators they promise cooperation. However, the pair learn that Schlossburg has already been cremated; later they narrowly escape death when their rental car has been rigged with a car bomb.

Black connects the attempt on their lives to Schlossburg's murder. He demands details of the case from Watts, who explains that the mummy found earlier dates to early Christianity, the time when the Millennium Group first convened. However, they realize they are being tailed by two men, and return to their hotel. There, they are met by Cheryl Andrews (C. C. H. Pounder), a fellow Group member who has worked with them in the past. She offers her help but Watts declines it. Watts is later able to access Schlossburg's computer files; meanwhile, the doctor is found to be alive, regaining consciousness in a hospital bed and telling police his assailant was Watts.

Andrews tells Black she has been sent to prevent Watts acting outside the Group's remit; she gives Black a contact number and leaves. Later, Black returns to Schlossburg's lab and finds Watts, who explains that a knightly order, the Knights Chroniclers, had possessed the relic of Saint Sebastian at the turn of the second millennium; the hand imparts knowledge to its possessor that will help to overcome the evils associated with the turn of the millennium. Watts reveals that Schlossburg had uncovered the order's burial ground.

Black and Watts learn that Schlossburg is alive and visit him; the doctor does not recognize Watts, but insists that his attacker identified himself as "Peter Watts". He reveals the locations of the burial ground, in a peat bog. Black and Watts leave to reach it; Schlossburg is murdered shortly afterwards by two assassins. At the bog, the pair find a mummified corpse clutching the relic; however, they have been followed by the police, and Watts is arrested for Schlossburg's murder. Black tracks down Andrews at the storage building where the relic has been taken. They are ambushed by the two assassins, and during their escape, Black mentions where the relic is hidden. Andrews immediately turns on Black; the ambush was a trick to draw the information out of Black, while she had engineered events to use Watts as a fall man to discredit the Group. However, the police are able to intervene, hearing everything and rescuing Black. Later, Watts and Black study the relic, but Black is convinced that their own convictions will be more important to them than mystical artefacts.

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong. It was the ninth episode to have been written by the pair, who had penned several across the first and second seasons. The pair had also taken the roles of co-executive producers for the season. "The Hand of St. Sebastian" was directed by Thomas J. Wright; Wright had directed eight episodes previously and would helm a further seventeen over the series' run. Wright would also go on to direct "Millennium", the series' crossover episode with its sister show "The X-Files".

The episode was driven by Wong's desire to write an episode focussing on Watts, as he wanted to showcase O'Quinn as an actor. Wong also felt "that by revealing that the Millennium Group had existed for centuries and setting the episode overseas, that would give the story greater scope and weight". The introduction of schisms within the Group was inspired by Wong's research into the Knights Templar and Freemasonry, as he considered these secretive organizations to have mirrored the way he wanted to present the Group, and he felt each contained factions or reactionary elements which he wanted to recreate. The episode features the penultimate appearance by C. C. H. Pounder as pathologist Cheryl Andrews. Pounder portrayed the character in four other episodes, appearing across all three seasons.

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" was first broadcast on the Fox network on November 14, 1997. The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6.7 during its original broadcast, meaning that of households in the United States viewed the episode. This represented approximately households, and left the episode the eightieth most-viewed broadcast that week.

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" has received mixed responses from critics. "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a "B+", finding it to contain an entertaining mix of mysticism and espionage. However, he considered the revelation that Andrews was a turncoat within the Group to be confusing, finding it unclear how a human villain could be defined within a series already making use of demons and theological evil. Bill Gibron, writing for DVD Talk, rated the episode 4.5 out of 5, praising the guest performances by Pounder and Hall. Gibron wrote that the episode had a "feature film" feel, and described it as one of the best episodes of the season.

However, Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", rated "The Hand of St. Sebastian" one star out of five. Shearman felt that by this point, the series no longer resembled what it had been in its previous season, derisively comparing it to the "Indiana Jones" film series. He wrote that Henriksen's portrayal of Frank Black seemed "weakened" in the episode, as the actor had built a credible and deep character who now seemed entirely unlike his former self.




</doc>
<doc id="23891257" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23891257" title="Tropical Storm Etau (2009)">
Tropical Storm Etau (2009)

Tropical Storm Etau was the deadliest tropical cyclone to impact Japan since Typhoon Tokage in 2004. Forming on August 8, 2009 from an area of low pressure, the system gradually intensified into a tropical storm. Tracking in a curved path around the edge of a subtropical ridge, Etau continued to intensify as it neared Japan. By August 10, the cyclone reached its peak intensity as a weak tropical storm with winds of 75 km/h (45 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 992 hPa (mbar). Shortly after, Etau began to weaken. Increasing wind shear led to the center becoming devoid of convection and the system eventually weakened to a tropical depression on August 13. The remnants of Etau persisted for nearly three days before dissipating early on August 16.

Although Etau did not make landfall, the outer bands of the storm produced torrential rainfall in Japan, peaking at . These rains triggered deadly flooding and mudslides, especially in Hyōgo Prefecture. Twenty-eight people were killed by the storm and ¥7.1 billion (US$87.5 million) in damage occurred throughout the affected region. According to the Fire and Disaster Management Agency, a total of 5,602 homes were flooded and 183 were destroyed. Following the storm, 600 Japanese soldiers were deployed from Tokyo to assist in cleanup efforts.

Tropical Storm Etau originated on August 5 out of an area of low pressure associated with disorganized convective activity located about 550 km (280 mi) east-northeast of Guam. The following day, the system relocated several dozen kilometers to the north. Convective turning began to appear on satellite imagery and a Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough (TUTT) cell to the north provided a northward component to the system's movement. Early on August 7, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert for the developing system as deep convection consolidated around the low pressure system. Around 0000 UTC on August 8, the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) designated the system as a tropical depression.

Several hours later on August 8, the JTWC also declared the system a tropical depression, classifying it at 10W. Later that day, convection associated with the depression became disorganized, preventing intensification of the system. The depression generally tracked towards the northwest during the day in response a subtropical ridge to the north. By August 9, the center of circulation became more defined as convection wrapped around it. Around 1200 UTC, the JMA upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and gave it the name "Etau". The JTWC, however, did not upgrade the system to a tropical storm for several more hours. On August 10, the JTWC briefly downgraded the storm to a tropical depression. By this time, the system had re-curved to the east around the western periphery of the subtropical ridge. Etau also became slightly disorganized as it began to interact with the baroclinic zone near Japan. Early on August 11, the JMA reported that the storm winds had peaked at 75 km/h (45 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 992 hPa (mbar). Later that day, the storm once more became slightly disorganized due to increased wind shear; however, the JTWC reported that the storm intensified based on satellite intensity estimates and weather radar imagery from Japan.

Later on August 11, the center of Etau became partially devoid of convection, with only a narrow band of shower and thunderstorm activity persisting to the southeast of the center. Increasing wind shear prevented convection from redeveloping and the storm continued to weaken. Early the following day, the JTWC issued their final advisory on Etau as they reported it had weakened to a tropical depression well to the east of Japan. Roughly 24 hours later, the JMA also downgraded the system to a tropical depression. The final advisory on Etau was issued by the JMA early on August 14 as it slowly tracked northward.

In anticipation of wind gusts up to and heavy rains, Japanese officials evacuated roughly 47,000 residents from western regions along the coast as gale warnings were declared by the JMA. Officials also feared that flooding from Tropical Storm Etau would mirror that of Typhoon Morakot in Taiwan where at least 14 were killed in the country's worst flood in 50 years. Six flights in the country were canceled after a plane was struck by lightning. Fifteen railway services were also canceled due to heavy rains. According to officials in Japan, nearly 140,000 people were evacuated to shelters in relation to flooding and landslides produced by Etau.

As Tropical Storm Etau brushed Japan on August 10, torrential rains fell within its outer bands. In a 24‑hour span, a record of rain fell, triggering extensive flooding and landslides. Initial reports stated that 13 people were killed and 10 others were missing due to the storm. Most of the fatalities took place in Hyōgo Prefecture where hundreds of homes were flooded and numerous others were damaged or destroyed by landslides. In some areas, flood waters reached a depth of . One man drowned after driving his car into a flooded street and being overcome by the water. Another person was killed after her home was destroyed by a landslide in Okayama prefecture.

In Tokushima, two people were listed as missing and two others sustained serious injuries. Later news reports stated that up to 18 people were missing following further landslides. The affected region was especially susceptible to landslides due to recent seismic activity, with a magnitude 6.4 earthquake taking place on August 10. By August 11, one of the missing persons was confirmed to have been killed during the storm. About 800 people were placed in public shelters and 53,000 homes were left without running water. By August 12, a total of 18 people were confirmed to have been killed and nine others were still missing. Three bridges in Tokushima were also washed away. Days later, the Japanese Fire and Disaster Management Agency finalized the death toll at 26 with one other missing, making Etau the deadliest tropical cyclone to impact Hyōgo Prefecture, Japan since Typhoon Tokage in 2004. Throughout several prefectures, 5,602 homes were flooded and 183 were destroyed. Landslides triggered by the storm damaged another 2,109 structures, most of which were in Okayama and Hyōgo prefectures. Following severe damages, in the town of Sayo it requested assistance from the national government. As a result, more than 200 troops were deployed to the town. A post-disaster office was also set up by the prime minister's office crisis management center. An additional 400 troops were deployed to the city by August 11 to assist in rescue efforts.




</doc>
<doc id="23893092" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23893092" title="Hurricane Alma (1970)">
Hurricane Alma (1970)

Hurricane Alma was one of only four Atlantic tropical cyclones to reach hurricane status in the month of May. It developed on May 17, 1970 north of Panama, and rapidly intensified on May 20 to peak winds of , near Jamaica and the Cayman Islands. It stalled south of Cuba and deteriorated due to wind shear, and by May 22 it weakened to tropical depression status. After progressing northwestward and crossing western Cuba, Alma reorganized in the Gulf of Mexico, although continued shear prevented strengthening. It moved across Florida on May 25, and on May 27 it dissipated off the coast of Virginia.

The storm first brought gusty winds and heavy rainfall to Jamaica and the Cayman Islands. While it was weakening, Alma produced flooding in central and eastern Cuba, causing seven deaths and forcing 3,000 people to evacuate. Moderate precipitation spread across Florida, while thunderstorms from the storm caused light damage, killing one. Moisture from the storm spread up the Atlantic coast.

Late on May 17, the US National Hurricane Center, reported that a tropical depression had formed about to the southeast of Kingston, Jamaica. Over the next couple of days, the depression became better organized as it moved towards the northwest; on May 19 it entered an area of favorable environmental conditions, which enabled the depression to rapidly intensify. On May 20 it strengthened into a tropical storm, at which point it was given the name Alma. That day, it rapidly strengthened under favorable developmental conditions, which included low wind shear, strong upper-level outflow, and apparent eastward inflow. Later on May 20, a Navy reconnaissance plane recorded winds of , which proved to be the peak intensity of Alma. It became one of only four Atlantic hurricanes on record in the month of May.

Subsequent to its peak intensity, increasing westerly shear disrupted the storm's circulation and thermal pattern, which caused rapid weakening to tropical storm strength and later tropical depression status. By May 22, the low pressure area became poorly defined after stalling south of Cuba; with only a few squalls and showers, advisories were discontinued on Alma. The remnants of Alma continued westward near the Cayman Islands, and later turned to the north, passing over western Cuba.

On May 24, the low pressure area reorganized as spiral rainbands became more evident on radar, and Alma was re-classified as a tropical depression. As the depression approached the Florida coast, radar imagery indicated the system remained well-organized, with a spiral band structure around an eye feature; however, wind shear limited convection and strength, and Alma moved ashore as a depression near Cedar Key on May 25. It turned northeastward and moved across the southeastern United States, becoming extratropical in North Carolina on May 27. After moving off the coast of Virginia, the remnants of Alma were absorbed by an approaching cold front.

After Alma weakened from hurricane status, it passed near the Cayman Islands on May 21, where winds of up to were recorded. Gale-force winds and heavy rainfall also occurred in Jamaica. Heavy rains ahead of the storm caused flash flooding in central and eastern Cuba. Seven people died as a result, and several homes were destroyed. The flooding forced the evacuation of 3,000 people in Oriente Province. Inclement weather closed 16 sugar mills, which stalled harvesting that was already behind schedule in the country.

In Florida, the remnants of Alma brought rainfall across most of the state, with some isolated areas experiencing or more. The highest rainfall from the storm was near Miami, Florida, with of rain. The rainfall was beneficial in alleviating drought conditions, although thunderstorms caused hazardous driving conditions in the Florida Keys and elsewhere in the state. Small craft warnings were posted along the coast. One girl died from lightning in Miami, and a thunderstorm near Fort Myers damaged some roofs and outbuildings. In Saint Petersburg, flooding disrupted phonelines in about 400 households. Merritt Island experienced wind gusts. In Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, and Maryland, Alma dropped moderate rainfall, with some isolated areas receiving up to . Near Columbia, South Carolina, the remnants of Alma spawned a tornado which destroyed a roof.



</doc>
<doc id="23898384" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23898384" title="Schneller Orphanage">
Schneller Orphanage

Schneller Orphanage, also called the Syrian Orphanage, was a German Protestant orphanage that operated in Jerusalem from 1860 to 1940.

It was one of the first structures to be built outside the Old City of Jerusalem – the others being Kerem Avraham, the Bishop Gobat school, Mishkenot Sha’ananim, and the Russian Compound – and paved the way for the expansion of Jerusalem in the 19th century. As a philanthropic institution offering academic and vocational training to hundreds of orphaned and abandoned Arab children, it also exerted a strong influence on the Arab population of Jerusalem and the Middle East through its graduates, who spread its philosophies of "orderliness, discipline, and German language" throughout the region. The Syrian Orphanage was born out of South German Pietism, which combined Biblicism, idealism, and religious individualism.

The orphanage provided both academic and vocational training to orphaned boys and girls from Palestine, Syria, Egypt, Ethiopia, Armenia, Turkey, Russia, Iran, and Germany, graduating students skilled in such trades as tailoring, shoemaking, engraving, carpentry, metalworking, pottery, painting, printing, farming, and gardening. In 1903 a school for the blind was opened on the premises, including dormitories, classrooms and vocational workshops. The orphanage also operated its own printing press and bindery; flour mill and bakery; laundry and clothing-repair service; carpentry; pottery factory; tree and plant nursery; and brick and tile factory. Located on high ground and surrounded by a high stone wall, the orphanage's distinctive onion-dome tower, multistory buildings, and decorative facades exuded the power and influence of European Christians in Jerusalem in the mid-19th century.

Continuous building and land acquisitions increased the size of the orphanage grounds to nearly 150 acres (600 dunam) by World War I. At the beginning of World War II, the British mandatory government deported the German teachers and turned the compound into a closed military camp with the largest ammunition stockpile in the Middle East. On March 17, 1948, the British abandoned the camp and the Etzioni Brigade of the Haganah used it as a base of operations during the 1948 Israeli War of Independence. For the next 60 years the site served as an Israeli army base known as Camp Schneller. The army vacated the premises in 2008. As of 2011, the compound is being developed for luxury housing.

In 2015, remains of a Jewish settlement of the late Second Temple period were discovered at the site. In 2016, archaeologists unearthed an ancient Roman bathhouse and a large wine production facility.

In the mid-19th century, English and German Protestant missions were operating in the Old City of Jerusalem. In 1854 Johann Ludwig Schneller (1820–1896), a German Lutheran missionary, came to Jerusalem from Württemberg together with his wife Magdalene Böhringer and six other members of the Brudergemeinde of Saint Chrischona, Basel, Switzerland, in order to manage the German Protestant mission. On 11 October 1855 Schneller bought from the people of Lifta, a parcel of land outside Lifta, approximately northwest of Jaffa Gate, with the intention of living among and missionizing to the local Arab population, and drew up plans for the construction of a home for his family. The house was constructed from 1855–56. After Schneller and his family took occupancy, the house was attacked several times by Arab robbers from the village of Beit Sorek, forcing them to retreat to the safety of the Old City. At the end of the decade, after the Turks had erected outposts and dispatched armed guards on horseback to patrol Jaffa Road (the route between Jerusalem and the port city of Jaffa, which lay near the Schneller compound), Schneller and his family were able to return to their home.

In 1860 Lebanese Druze massacred thousands of Maronite Christians in Lebanon and Syria. Schneller traveled to Beirut with the intention of rescuing battle-orphaned children. He was rebuffed by the local community, which did not trust foreign Protestant missionaries, but managed to bring back nine orphaned boys to Jerusalem in October 1860. He decided to open an orphanage for them in his home, and by the end of 1861 had enrolled 41 boys in what became known as the Syrian Orphanage (). Over the next four years Schneller expanded his property to 13.6 acres (55 dunam) and erected a -high stone wall around it. Through 1867 Schneller expanded and added new infrastructure, creating a kitchen, dining room, storage cellar, bedrooms and living areas. In 1867 the orphanage began accepting girls.

Funds for construction and expansion, together with clothing and blankets, were solicited from Protestant communities in Germany and Switzerland. Between 1861 and 1885 Schneller collected a total of 550,000 francs in donations.

Schneller was determined to give orphaned and abandoned Arab children a complete education, including teaching them a trade. To that end, he employed both academic and vocational teachers, primarily from Germany. The latter led professional workshops in tailoring, shoemaking, engraving, carpentry, metalworking, pottery, painting, printing, farming, and gardening.

Children stayed at the orphanage for up to 10 years, graduating at the age of 18. They came from all parts of Palestine as well as Syria, Egypt, Ethiopia, Armenia, Turkey, Russia, Iran, and Germany. They were also of differing religious denominations, including Protestant, Greek Orthodox, Catholic, Coptic, and Maronite. Notwithstanding the ethnic diversity of the student body, the language of instruction was German and Arabic. Most of the teachers employed during the orphanage's first 50 years were German, with some Armenians and Arabs.

In 1876 the orphanage had an enrollment of 70 students aged 4 to 17. By 1898 enrollment stood at 200 students. By the time of Schneller's death on 18 October 1896, 1500 students had passed through the orphanage's doors. The actual number of graduates totaled 425 in 1885 and 1169 at the 50th anniversary of the orphanage in 1910.
In 1901 a German noble bequeathed his entire fortune of 700,000 marks toward the establishment of a school for the blind at the orphanage. It opened in 1903 with space for 40 to 50 children, plus workshops to teach the blind weaving and spinning.

Besides classes and vocational workshops, the orphanage operated its own printing press and bindery where it produced its own textbooks, Braille books, and German-language newspapers. It also operated a flour mill and bakery that produced 35,000 loaves of bread a year, a laundry and clothing-repair service, a carpentry, a pottery factory that produced all the clay utensils used in the orphanage, and a tree and plant nursery. At the beginning of the 20th century, a large brick and tile factory was erected on the premises, which produced one million bricks and 250,000 tiles annually.

In 1889 Schneller acquired 1,235 acres (5,000 dunam) in Bir Salem (today Kibbutz Netzer Sereni) in order to develop an agricultural school and land for settlement for his students and graduates. In 1906 another 890 acres (3,600 dunam) was added to the original parcel. Although the agricultural school did not materialize, the grain, fruits and vegetables produced by the farm supplemented the orphanage diet during the food shortages of World War I.

In 1889 Schneller gave over the operation of the orphanage to a consortium based in Stuttgart, while his eldest son, Theodor (1856–1935), became manager of the institution. In 1927 Theodor's youngest son, Ernst, took over the management of the institution until its confiscation by the British in 1940.

Like other European Christian institutions built in Jerusalem in the 1800s, the Schneller Orphanage was situated on high ground and was surrounded by a high stone wall, with an iron gate that was locked at night. The property exuded the power and influence of European Christians in Jerusalem with its multistory buildings, a clock tower, and decorative façade, including reliefs in stone and epigrams. Engraved on the façade of the main building is the verse "Jesus the Messiah, have compassion upon us!" in German and Arabic, as well as the name of the institution, Syrian Orphanage (). There is also a stone relief of a lamb carrying a flag with a cross on it. Following the visit of Kaiser Wilhelm to Jerusalem in 1898, the orphanage received three bells for its tower.

The architectural style of the main building is a combination of Southern German and local Arabic. The tile roof and onion-dome tower mounted on a square base reflects the former, while wide, rounded arches for doors and windows reflect the latter. A lightning rod extends from the onion dome. The H-shaped main building has two interior courtyards which held a water cistern, garden and play area. The entire building covers an area of 50,590 square feet (4,700 square meters). At three stories, the main building housed the central dining room, a kitchen, a study hall, a library, a reading room, a small museum, and a Lutheran church in which students and staff worshipped.

Johann Ludwig Schneller brought in skilled Arab laborers from Bethlehem and Beit Jala to construct a total of eight buildings, which were constructed in stages and completed in the early 20th century. The year of completion and the name of the German city in which the donors for that building lived were engraved on each building façade. One of the buildings, called “the Red House” or “the model house,” was built entirely from materials produced on the orphanage grounds, including bricks, floor tiles and wrought-iron work.

For most of its existence, the orphanage was in a continual state of expansion and modernization. Ruth Kark et al. notes:
... the locksmith-shop was remodeled and changed location within the complex five times between the period of 1861 and 1930 (1861, 1867, 1900, 1908, 1930). The bakery changed place and was modernized six times and – in a similar way – most of the functions and uses of the rooms changed during the seventy years of the institution’s existence.
Johann Ludwig Schneller also purchased land in the vicinity of the orphanage and constructed houses for workers. Two of these "Batei Schneller" (Schneller Houses) still stand across the street from the main entrance, as well as three of the original five homes built several yards to the west (near the present corner of Malkhei Yisrael and Sarei Yisrael Streets). A plaque on each home bears the name of the German city of its donors. The cities are: Halle, Stuttgart, Kletz, Munich, Hamburg, Petersberg, and Erpfingen, Schneller's birthplace.

By 1903 the educational facility had grown to eight buildings and included the orphanage, the school for the blind, and vocational workshops for youth.

In 1910, the jubilee year of the orphanage's founding, a fire destroyed the third floor and wooden roof of the main building, and damaged the second floor where the church was housed. Ludwig Schneller, a son of the founder who was the administrator at the time, managed to collect over 200,000 marks in donations from Germany and rebuilt the entire structure. The upper story of the building was rebuilt in stone.

Building and expansion continued up to World War I, by which time the orphanage occupied 150 acres (600 dunam) of land. The Schneller grounds reached all the way to present-day Romema, where Schneller planted forests on land that eventually housed the Jerusalem Biblical Zoo. The orphanage's holdings were gradually reduced to 17.5 acres with the sale of land to the new neighborhoods of Mekor Baruch and Kerem Avraham.

During World War I, the compound was used by the Turkish army and its allies as a barracks. From 1921 to 1927, Theodor Schneller resumed management of the orphanage, overseeing the modernization of the property with electrical and sewage installations, as well as new machinery for the various workshops. His son Ernst directed the orphanage from 1927 until its confiscation by the British army in 1940. The orphanage's German funding sources were severely curtailed during the 1930s when the Nazi government of Germany banned citizens from sending funds abroad.

When World War II broke out, the British shut down the orphanage and deported its German teachers. The British turned the compound into a closed military camp known as the Schneller Barracks, installing about 50 watchtowers and huts. The camp housed the largest ammunition stockpile in the Middle East, as well as grain storehouses. The Royal Army Pay Corps 90th Battalion occupied the barracks in the late 1940s.

The British camp was targeted for attack by the Irgun on two occasions. On 27 June 1939, the paramilitary group placed a letter bomb in the mailbox attached to the outside wall; the subsequent explosion collapsed part of the wall and injured five Arabs in the vicinity. On 12 March 1947, the Irgun penetrated the camp itself in a pre-dawn operation and detonated explosives in one of the buildings to protest the imposition of martial law on Jerusalem. One British soldier was killed and eight injured in the blasts; martial law was lifted four days later.

On 17 March 1948, the British abandoned the camp and the Etzioni Brigade of the Haganah used it as a home base during the 1948 Israeli War of Independence. For the next 60 years, the compound served as a training base for the Israel Defense Forces and an army clinic; at one point, it also served as headquarters for the Home Front Command.

In 1951 the Israeli army summoned representatives of the World Lutheran Church to remove religious artifacts from the orphanage church; church representatives removed bells, windows and a pipe organ, but left the heavy marble altar encased in a wooden chest. The church was then converted into a basketball arena for the soldiers. In October 2009, on a tour of the facility after the army had vacated the grounds, the provost of the Evangelical German Lutheran Church of the Redeemer noticed the chest and asked for it to be opened, exposing the altar. The Lutherans negotiated for it to be moved to the Lutheran church at Augusta Victoria Hospital, where it was inaugurated in November 2010.

During the 60 years of occupancy by the Israeli army, the base was served by an army synagogue in one of the halls of the main building, including a Torah ark, bookcase, and a balcony door set with 12 stained-glass windows depicting the Twelve Tribes of Israel.

In 2008 the army base relocated to the Ofrit base near Mount Scopus. The Jerusalem municipality put together a "preservation and construction plan" for the Schneller compound, calling for the eight historic buildings to be developed for public use by the Orthodox Jewish community nearby. In November 2010, part of the Schneller grounds were designated as a public parking lot by the municipality to ease the parking problems in the neighboring Geula commercial district. One hundred parking spaces were made available for up to three hours.

In 2011 the Israel Land Administration approved plans for the development of 218 luxury apartments on the property while preserving the eight historic orphanage buildings.

As of 2012, parts of the complex are being used for a Bais Yaakov girls' school, a Gerrer Talmud Torah, a training area for urban combat police, and municipal waste storage.

The philosophy and mission of the Schneller Orphanage continued after World War II in two successor schools in the Middle East.




</doc>
