<doc id="6778068" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6778068" title="Kirsten Gillibrand">
Kirsten Gillibrand

Kirsten Elizabeth Gillibrand (née Rutnik; ; born December 9, 1966) is an American attorney and politician serving as the junior United States Senator from New York since 2009. A member of the Democratic Party, she previously served as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from 2007 to 2009.

Born and raised in upstate New York to two attorney parents, Gillibrand graduated from Dartmouth College and from the UCLA School of Law. After holding attorney positions in government and private practice and working on Hillary Clinton's 2000 U.S. Senate campaign, Gillibrand was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 2006. She represented New York's 20th congressional district, a conservative district in upstate New York, and was re-elected in 2008. During her House tenure, Gillibrand was a Blue Dog Democrat noted for voting against the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (commonly known as the bank bailout) and for supporting Medicare-for-all.

Following Senator Clinton's appointment as Secretary of State in 2009, Governor David Paterson selected Gillibrand to fill the Senate seat that had been vacated by Clinton. Gillibrand won a special election in 2010 to keep the seat, and was subsequently reelected to full terms in 2012 and 2018. During her Senate tenure, Gillibrand has shifted to the left. She has been outspoken on sexual assault in the military and sexual harassment, having criticized President Bill Clinton and Senator Al Franken (both fellow Democrats) for sexual misconduct. She supports paid family leave, a federal jobs guarantee, and the abolition and replacement of the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

On March 17, 2019, Gillibrand announced she is running for President in 2020.

Kirsten Elizabeth Rutnik was born on December 9, 1966, in Albany, New York, the daughter of Polly Edwina (Noonan) and Douglas Paul Rutnik. Both her parents are attorneys, and her father has also worked as a lobbyist. Her parents divorced in the late 1980s. Gillibrand has an older brother, Douglas Rutnik, and a younger sister, Erin Rutnik Tschantret. Her maternal grandmother was Dorothea "Polly" Noonan, a founder of the Albany Democratic Women's Club, a onetime leader in the City of Albany's 20th-century Democratic machine, and a confidant of Albany Mayor Erastus Corning 2nd. She has English, Austrian, Scottish, German, and Irish ancestry.

During her childhood and college years, Gillibrand used the nickname "Tina." She began using her birth name of Kirsten a few years after law school. In 1984, she graduated from Emma Willard School, an all women's private school located in Troy, New York, and then enrolled at Dartmouth College. Gillibrand majored in Asian Studies, studying in both Beijing and Taiwan. While in Beijing, she studied and lived with actress Connie Britton at Beijing Normal University. Gillibrand graduated "magna cum laude" in 1988. While at Dartmouth, she was a member of the Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority. During college, Gillibrand interned at Republican U.S. Senator Alfonse D'Amato's Albany office. Gillibrand received her J.D. from UCLA School of Law and passed the bar exam in 1991.

In 1991, Gillibrand joined the Manhattan-based law firm of Davis Polk & Wardwell as an associate. In 1992, she took a leave from Davis Polk to serve as a law clerk to Judge Roger Miner on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Albany.

Gillibrand's tenure at Davis Polk included serving as a defense attorney for tobacco company Philip Morris during major litigation, including both civil lawsuits and U.S. Justice Department criminal and civil racketeering and perjury probes. As a junior associate in the mid-1990s, Gillibrand defended the company's executives against a criminal investigation into whether they had committed perjury in their testimony before Congress when they claimed that they had no knowledge of a connection between tobacco smoking and cancer. Gillibrand worked closely on the case and became a key part of the defense team. As part of her work, she traveled to the company's laboratory in Germany, where she interviewed scientists about the company's alleged research into the connection. The inquiry was ultimately dropped and it was during this time that she became a senior associate.

While working at Davis Polk, Gillibrand became involved in—and later the leader of—the Women's Leadership Forum, a program of the Democratic National Committee. Gillibrand states that a speech to the group by First Lady Hillary Clinton inspired her:
" was trying to encourage us to become more active in politics and she said, 'If you leave all the decision-making to others, you might not like what they do, and you will have no one but yourself to blame.' It was such a challenge to the women in the room. And it really hit me: She's talking to me."

In 2001, Gillibrand became a partner in the Manhattan office of Boies, Schiller & Flexner. In 2002 she informed Boies of her interest in running for office and was permitted to transfer to the firm's Albany office. She left Boies in 2005 to begin her 2006 campaign for Congress.

Gillibrand has said her work at private law firms allowed her to take on pro bono cases defending abused women and their children and tenants seeking safe housing after lead paint and unsafe conditions were found in their homes. Following her time at Davis Polk, Gillibrand served as Special Counsel to Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Andrew Cuomo during the last year of the Clinton administration. Gillibrand worked on HUD's Labor Initiative and its New Markets Initiative, as well as on TAP's Young Leaders of the American Democracy, and strengthening Davis–Bacon Act enforcement.

In 1999, Gillibrand began working on Hillary Clinton's 2000 U.S. Senate campaign, focusing on campaigning to young women and encouraging them to join the effort. Many of those women later worked on Gillibrand's campaigns. Gillibrand and Clinton became close during the election, with Clinton becoming something of a mentor to the young attorney. Gillibrand donated more than $12,000 to Clinton's senate campaigns.

Gillibrand considered running for office in 2004, in New York's 20th congressional district, against the three-term Republican incumbent John E. Sweeney. However, Hillary Clinton believed circumstances would be more favorable in 2006 and advised her to wait until then. Traditionally conservative, the district and its electoral offices had been in Republican hands for all but four years since 1913, and as of November 2006, 197,473 voters in the district were registered Republicans while 82,737 were registered Democrats. Sweeney said in 2006 that "no Republican can ever lose" . Using New York's electoral fusion election laws, Gillibrand ran in 2006 on both the Democratic and Working Families lines; in addition to having the Republican nomination, Sweeney was endorsed by the Conservative and Independence parties.

During the campaign, Gillibrand got support from other Democratic Party politicians. Mike McNulty, a Democratic Congressman from the neighboring 21st congressional district, campaigned for her, as did both Hillary and Bill Clinton; the former president appeared twice at campaign events. Both parties poured millions of dollars into the respective campaigns.

Many saw Gillibrand as moderate or conservative. "The American Conservative" stated after her eventual victory, "Gillibrand won her upstate New York district by running to the right: she campaigned against amnesty for illegal immigrants, promised to restore fiscal responsibility to Washington, and pledged to protect gun rights."

Gillibrand's legal representation of Philip Morris was an issue during the campaign. Her campaign finance records showed that she received $23,200 in contributions from the company's employees during her 2006 campaign for Congress.

The probable turning point in the election was the November 1 release of a December 2005 police report detailing a 9-1-1 call by Sweeney's wife, in which she claimed Sweeney was "knocking her around the house." The Sweeney campaign claimed the police report was false and promised to have the official report released by State Police, but did not do so. The Sweeney campaign did release an ad in which Sweeney's wife initially described Gillibrand's campaign as "a disgrace." Several months later, Sweeney's wife said her "disgrace" statement was coerced, and that her husband was physically abusive.

By November 5, a Siena poll showed Gillibrand ahead of Sweeney 46% to 43%. She won with 53% of the vote.

Following Gillibrand's win, Republicans quickly began speculating about possible 2008 candidates. Len Cutler, director of the Center for the Study of Government and Politics at Siena College, said that the seat would be difficult for Gillibrand to hold in 2008, noting Republicans substantially outnumbered Democrats in the district.

Gillibrand won her bid for reelection in 2008 over former New York Secretary of State Sandy Treadwell by a 62% to 38% margin. Treadwell lost by that margin despite significantly outspending Gillibrand and promising never to vote to raise taxes, not to accept a federal salary, and to limit himself to three terms in office. Campaign expenditures were the second highest in the nation for a House race. Democrats generally saw major successes during the 2008 congressional elections, credited in part to a coattail effect from Barack Obama's presidential campaign.

Gillibrand's legal representation of Philip Morris was again an issue. Her campaign finance records showed that she received $18,200 from Philip Morris employees for her 2008 campaign, putting her among the top dozen Democrats in such contributions. Questioned during the campaign about her work on behalf of Philip Morris, Gillibrand stated that she had voted in favor of all three anti-tobacco bills in that session of Congress. She said that she never hid her work for Philip Morris, and she added that as an associate at her law firm, she had had no control over which clients she worked for. Davis Polk allowed associates to withdraw from representing clients about whom they had moral qualms.

Upon taking office, Gillibrand joined the Blue Dog Coalition, a group of moderate to conservative Democrats. She was noted for voting against the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, citing concerns regarding insufficient oversight and excessive earmarks. She opposed a 2007 state-level proposal to issue driver's licenses to undocumented immigrants and voted in favor of legislation that would withhold federal funds from immigrant sanctuary cities. Gillibrand also voted for a bill that limited information-sharing between federal agencies about firearm purchasers and received a 100 percent rating from the National Rifle Association (NRA). While Gillibrand expressed personal support for same-sex marriage, she advocated for civil unions for same-sex couples and stated that the same-sex marriage issue should be decided at the state level.

After taking office, Gillibrand became the first member of Congress to publish her official schedule, listing everyone she met with on a given day. She also published earmark requests she received and her personal financial statement. This "Sunlight Report", as her office termed it, was praised by a "New York Times" editorial in December 2006 as being a "quiet touch of revolution" in a non-transparent system. Regarding the earmarking process, Gillibrand stated that she wanted whatever was best for her district and would require every project to pass a "greatest-need, greatest-good" test.

While in the House of Representatives, Gillibrand served on the following committees:

On December 1, 2008, President-elect Barack Obama announced his choice of Hillary Clinton, the junior U.S. Senator from New York, as Secretary of State. Clinton was confirmed by a vote of 94-2 on January 21, 2009. Just hours before being sworn in as Secretary of State, Clinton resigned her senate seat, effective immediately. Obama's December announcement began a two-month search process to fill her vacant Senate seat. Under New York law, the governor appoints a replacement. A special election would then be held in November 2010 for the remainder of the full term, which ended in January 2013.
Governor David Paterson's selection process began with a number of prominent names and high-profile New York Democrats, including Andrew Cuomo, Fran Drescher and Caroline Kennedy, vying for the spot. Gillibrand quietly campaigned for the position, meeting secretly with Paterson on at least one occasion. She said that she made an effort to underscore her successful House elections in a largely conservative district, adding that she could be a good complement to Chuck Schumer. Gillibrand was presumed a likely choice in the days before the official announcement. On January 23, 2009, Paterson held a press conference to announce Gillibrand as his choice.

The response within New York to the appointment was mixed. The upstate New York media was generally optimistic about the appointment of an upstate Senator, as one had not been elected since Charles Goodell left office in 1971. Many downstaters were disappointed with the selection, with some media outlets stating that Paterson had ignored the electoral influence of populous New York City and downstate on state politics. One questioned whether Paterson's administration was aware of " statewide elections are won and lost". Gillibrand was relatively unknown statewide, and many voters found the choice surprising. One source stated, "With every Democrat in New York ... angling for the appointment, there was a sense of bafflement, belittlement, and bruised egos when Paterson tapped the junior legislator unknown outside of Albany."

Shortly before her appointment to the U.S. Senate was announced, Gillibrand reportedly contacted the Empire State Pride Agenda (an LGBT lobbying organization in New York) to express her full support for same-sex marriage, the repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act, the repeal of the Don't Ask, Don't Tell policy regarding gay and lesbian servicemembers, and the passage of legislation banning discrimination against transgender persons. Gillibrand had previously supported civil unions for same-sex couples and argued that the same-sex marriage issue should be left to states. Paterson's office had advised her to reach out to Empire State Pride. 

Gillibrand was sworn in on January 26, 2009; at 42, she entered the chamber as the youngest senator in the 111th Congress. In February she endorsed Scott Murphy, who had been chosen by the New York Democrats as their nominee for her now vacant seat in the House of Representatives. In April, Murphy won the seat against Republican Jim Tedisco by 399 votes and succeeded Gillibrand in the House until 2011.

Gillibrand had numerous potential challengers in the September 14, 2010, Democratic primary election. Some were obvious at the time of her appointment. Most notably, Long Island Congresswoman Carolyn McCarthy was unhappy with Gillibrand's stance on gun control, but McCarthy ultimately decided not to run. Harold Ford, Jr., a former Congressman from Tennessee, considered a run but ultimately decided against it in March 2009. Congressman Steve Israel was also a potential contender but was talked out of it by President Obama.

Concerned about a possible schism in the party that could lead to a heated primary, split electorate, and weakened stance, high-ranking members of the party backed Gillibrand and requested major opponents not to run. In the end, Gillibrand faced Gail Goode, a lawyer from New York City, and won the primary with 76% of the vote.

Despite what was initially expected to be a heated race, Gillibrand easily prevailed against former Republican congressman Joseph DioGuardi in her first statewide election. By the end of October, a Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll showed Gillibrand winning 57-34%. Gillibrand won the November election 63–35%, carrying 54 of New York's 62 counties; the counties that supported DioGuardi did so by a margin no greater than 10%.

Gillibrand's special election victory in 2010 gave her the right to serve the rest of Clinton's second term, which ended in January 2013. Gillibrand ran for a full six-year term in November 2012. In the general election, Gillibrand faced challenger Wendy E. Long, an attorney running on both the Republican Party and Conservative Party lines. Gillibrand was endorsed by "The New York Times" and the "Democrat and Chronicle". She won the election with 72.2% of the vote; in so doing, she surpassed Schumer's 71.2% victory in 2004 and achieved the largest victory margin for a statewide candidate in New York history. She carried all counties except for two in western New York.

In the November 2018 elections, Gillibrand was re-elected to a second term in the Senate, with 67% of the vote. During the campaign, she pledged that she would serve out a full six-year term. She was endorsed by the progressive groups Indivisible Action and Working Families.

A member of the Democratic Party's relatively conservative Blue Dog faction while in the House, Gillibrand has moved her political positions and ideology toward a liberal, progressive position since her appointment to the Senate. In both cases, her views were significantly defined by the respective constituencies she served—a conservative congressional district versus the generally liberal state of New York, especially as defined by New York City. For example, although she had been quiet on the U.S. military's "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" policy when she was in the House, during her first 18 months in the Senate, Gillibrand was an important part of the successful campaign to repeal it.

On April 9, 2009, a combined Schumer–Gillibrand press release said that the two strongly supported a Latino being nominated to the Supreme Court at the time of the next vacancy. Their first choice was Sonia Sotomayor. The two introduced her at Sotomayor's Senate confirmation hearing in July 2009.

During the lame duck session of the 111th Congress, Gillibrand scored two substantial legislative victories: the passage of the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 and the passage of the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation Act. Both were issues she had advocated for during that session. In the aftermath of these victories, Gillibrand gained a more national profile.

In March 2011, Gillibrand co-sponsored the PROTECT IP Act, which would restrict access to web sites judged to be infringing copyrights, but ultimately announced she would not support the bill as-is due to wide critical public response.

In 2012, Gillibrand authored a portion of the STOCK Act, which extended limitations on insider trading by members of Congress. A version of the bill, merged by Senator Joe Lieberman with content from another bill authored by Senator Scott Brown, was passed by Congress and signed into law by President Obama in April.

In 2013, Gillibrand proposed legislation that would remove sexual assault cases from the military chain of command; the bill was cosponsored by Republican senators Rand Paul and Ted Cruz. Gillibrand's bill failed to gain enough votes to break a filibuster in March 2014; however, her efforts likely improved her standing as a lawmaker in the Senate.

In December 2013, Gillibrand introduced the Family and Medical Insurance Leave Act, which would provide paid family leave.

By 2013, Gillibrand had become known for "skillfully aligned herself with causes with visible, moving human characters who have helped amplified her policy goals." For example, in campaigning for the repeal of the military's "don't ask, don't tell" policy, Gillibrand established a website with videos of gay and lesbian veterans telling their personal stories. She has been less deferential to Senate seniority protocols and more uncompromising in her positions – such as combating sexual assault in the military – than most freshman senators, traits which have sometimes caused friction with her Democratic colleagues. Republican Charles Grassley of Iowa has contrasted her approach with other New Yorkers of both parties, saying she is distinguished by "her determination and knowledge and willingness to sit down one on one with senators and explain what she is up to". Her fund-raising ability – almost $30 million from 2009 through 2013 – helped her become a mentor for female candidates nationwide during that period.
In 2014, Gillibrand was included in the annual "Time" 100, "Time" magazine's list of the 100 most influential people in the world.

In 2015, Gillibrand invited campus activist Emma Sulkowicz to attend the State of the Union Address. Her invitation was intended to promote the Campus Accountability and Safety Act, a bill Gillibrand co-sponsored.

Gillibrand once supported legislation that would criminalize 'boycotts' by individuals or groups seeking to express a disapproval of the actions taken by the government of Israel. Gillibrand's advocacy against protests and 'boycotts' prominently included her co-sponsoring S.720, coined the "Israel Anti-Boycott Act." This legislation would federally criminalize, punishable by a maximum sentence of 20 years in prison, any political 'boycotts' intended to protest actions by the Israeli government. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) denounced S.720, claiming its provisions seeking to "punish U.S. persons based solely on their expressed political beliefs" are "inconsistent" with First Amendment constitutional protections. In July 2017, Gillibrand stated that she no longer supported the bill in its then-current form, adding that she would advocate for changes to it. Gillibrand argued that the bill did not "...have any relevance to individuals at all," and insists she plans to "...urge them to rewrite it to make sure it says...'This is only applying to companies.'"

In a February 2018 "60 Minutes" profile, Gillibrand stated that she was "'embarrassed and ashamed'" of the positions on immigration and guns that she held during her tenure in the House of Representatives.

Gillibrand was named as part of the "Hell-No Caucus" by "Politico" in 2018, along with Senators Kamala Harris, Cory Booker, Elizabeth Warren, and Bernie Sanders, given she voted "overwhelmingly to thwart his [Trump's] nominees for administration jobs", such as with Rex Tillerson, Betsy DeVos, and Mike Pompeo; all of the Senators were considered potential 2020 presidential contenders at this point in time.

While in the Senate, Gillibrand has served on the following committees:


Gillibrand has been mentioned as a possible Democratic nominee for President in 2020, but, when asked about the race in May 2017, she said she was "ruling it out." Gillibrand nevertheless announced in January 2019 that she is launching a presidential exploratory committee, telling Stephen Colbert in an interview that "I am going to run."

Following a common trend that has arisen among Democratic politicians, Gillibrand has pledged that she will not accept campaign donations from Political Action Committees, or PACs.

During her tenure in the House of Representatives, Gillibrand was known as a centrist Democrat. While serving in the House, Gillibrand was a member of the Blue Dog Coalition, a caucus of fiscally conservative Democrats. During her House tenure, Gillibrand voted against the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, spoke against the issuance of driver's licenses to undocumented immigrants and voted for a bill that would withhold federal funds from immigrant sanctuary cities. Gillibrand also voted for a bill that limited information-sharing between federal agencies about firearm purchasers and advocated for civil unions for same-sex couples.

Since she became a Member of the U.S. Senate, Gillibrand's political positions have moved in a liberal direction. In July 2018, "Newsday" stated that Gillibrand "formerly held more conservative views on guns and immigration, but, in her nine years as New York's junior senator, [has] swung steadily to the left on those and other issues". After being appointed to the U.S. Senate, she expressed support for same-sex marriage. Although a supporter of gun rights while in the House, Gillibrand has since moved in the direction of gun control. Gillibrand has said that a conversation with a family who had lost a daughter to gun violence made her realize that she was "wrong" to oppose gun control measures; having once received an "A" rating from the NRA, she received an "F" rating as of 2018. In June 2018, Gillibrand called U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, a "deportation force" and became the first sitting senator to support the call to abolish ICE. She said, "I believe you should get rid of it, start over, reimagine it and build something that actually works" and, "I think you should reimagine ICE under a new agency with a very different mission". In May 2018, City & State reported that she had "moved sharply leftward on economic issues, embracing a number of proposals to expand the social safety net and bolster lower-income families". In July 2018, "The New York Times" stated that Gillibrand had "spent recent months injecting her portfolio with a dose of the kind of economic populism that infused Senator Bernie Sanders’s campaign in the 2016 presidential primary". In a 2019 reversal of a past position, Gillibrand stated her support for driver's licenses for undocumented immigrants.

On social issues, Gillibrand is generally liberal, supporting abortion rights and helping lead the successful repeal effort of "Don't Ask, Don't Tell." A supporter of Medicare-for-all since her first house run in 2006, she co-sponsored a 2017 Medicare-for-all bill introduced by Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and said that health care should be a right. Gillibrand also supports a federal jobs guarantee. Although she used to be one of the top recipients of corporate campaign donations, in 2018, Gillibrand supported rejecting corporate PAC funds and invested heavily in online fundraising. Ninety-seven percent of donations to her 2018 campaign totaled $100 or less. She advocates government transparency, being one of a few members of Congress who release much personal and scheduling information.

Gillibrand has gone against her party on a number of occasions on issues related to women's rights. Declaring a "zero tolerance" doctrine regarding accusations of sexual misconduct by members of Congress, Gillibrand was the first in her caucus to call on Senator Al Franken (D-MN) to resign; Franken left office before a Senate Ethics Committee investigation could review the accuracy of the allegations. In November 2017, amid the MeToo movement, Gillibrand became the first high-profile Democrat to say that Bill Clinton should have resigned when his affair with Monica Lewinsky was revealed. In 2018, Clinton expressed disagreement with Gillibrand's opinion.

Gillibrand met her husband, Jonathan Gillibrand, a venture capitalist and British national, on a blind date. Jonathan planned to be in the United States for only a year while studying for his Master of Business Administration at Columbia University, but he stayed in the country because of his relationship with her. The two were married in a Catholic church in Manhattan in 2001.

The Gillibrands had their first son, Theodore, in 2003, and their second son, Henry, in 2008. She continued to work until the day of Henry's delivery, for which she received a standing ovation from her colleagues in the House the next day.

Gillibrand made national headlines in July 2009 for stating that she and her husband kept two guns under their bed. Her staff later indicated that Gillibrand no longer stored guns under her bed.

Gillibrand lives in the town of Brunswick with her husband and their two sons. Because of the requirements of her office, the family spends most of its time in Washington, D.C. In 2011, the Gillibrands sold their house in Hudson and purchased their home in Brunswick to be closer to Kirsten's family in Albany.

In 2014, Gillibrand published her first book, "Off the Sidelines: Raise Your Voice, Change the World". The candid memoir was notable in the media upon release due to whisperings of a future presidential run as well as Gllibrand's claims of sexism in the Senate, including specific comments made to her by other members of Congress about her weight and appearance. "Off the Sidelines" debuted at number 8 on "The New York Times" Best Seller list for hardcover nonfiction.

<nowiki>*</nowiki>Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families line and Sweeney was also nominated on the Independence and Conservative lines.

<nowiki>*</nowiki>Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families line and Treadwell was also nominated on the Independence and Conservative lines.
<nowiki>*</nowiki>Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families and Independence lines and DioGuardi was also nominated on the Conservative line.

<nowiki>*</nowiki>Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families and Independence lines and Long was also nominated on the Conservative line.

<nowiki>*</nowiki>Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families, Independence and Women's Equality lines and Farley was also nominated on the Conservative and Reform lines.





</doc>
<doc id="6792877" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6792877" title="Gifu">
Gifu

Located on the alluvial plain of the Nagara River, Gifu has taken advantage of the surrounding natural resources to create both traditional industries (including "Mino washi" and agriculture) and tourism opportunities such as cormorant fishing. Mount Kinka, one of the city's major symbols, is home to a nationally designated forest and Gifu Castle, a replica of Nobunaga's former castle. Gifu also hosts many festivals and events throughout the year.

Two major rail lines connect Gifu to Japan's national and international transportation infrastructure. JR Central's Tōkaidō Main Line runs through the city, connecting it with Nagoya, one of Japan's largest cities, and the surrounding area. The city has a direct train route to Chubu Centrair International Airport and facilities capable of hosting international events. Gifu has active relationships with six sister cities.

, the city has an estimated population of 411,722 in 178,246 households, and a population density of about 2,000 persons per km. The total area of the city was .

Two archaeological sites in the city of Gifu have shown that the area around modern-day Gifu has had residents since pre-history because of Gifu's location in the fertile Nōbi Plain. The Ryomonji and Kotozuka sites have produced large burial mounds that are representative of the late-Yayoi period, which is when rice cultivation began in Japan. As civilization in Japan grew, permanent settlements began to appear and, eventually, the village of Inokuchi was established, which would eventually become the modern city of Gifu.

"Control Gifu and you control Japan" was a common phrase during the Sengoku period (15th to 17th century), since Gifu's central location in Japan made it a desirable location for those trying to unify the country. For over 200 years, the Mino Province (including the present-day city of Gifu) was under control of the Toki clan, a powerful regional clan. However, during the Sengoku period, Saitō Dōsan, a Toki vassal, rebelled against his clan and took control of Mino Province in 1542 and built Inabayama Castle atop Mount Inaba, from which he began his quest to unify Japan.

During Dōsan's reign, his daughter Nōhime married Oda Nobunaga, the heir of the fast rising clan in the neighboring Owari Province, with the hopes of an alliance of the two families' would present a powerful front against their competitors. However, it would be Nobunaga that eventually absorbed Dōsan's Saitō clan in the mid-sixteenth century, as Dōsan had done to his retainer. It was during Nobunaga's reign of power that the area finally received its modern name. After consulting with a Buddhist priest, Nobunaga renamed the village and the surrounding Mino Province to Gifu in 1567. He took the first character (岐 "gi") from Qishan (岐山), the legendary mountain from which most of ancient China was unified. The second character (阜 "fu") means "base of the mountain" and comes from Qufu (曲阜), the birthplace of Confucius. Though he was not originally from the area, Nobunaga chose to use Dōsan's castle and mountain as his base of operations, which he renamed Gifu Castle and Mount Kinka, respectively.

Gifu's economy grew immensely during this period, primarily due to its location at the center of Nobunaga's expanding empire. Additionally, Nobunaga established Rakuichi Rakuza (楽市楽座), a free market for his citizens to use, in direct response to the commercial monopoly of the area's temples and shrines. The liveliness of the town caused Luís Fróis, a Portuguese Jesuit Missionary and guest of Nobunaga, to describe Gifu as a "bustling Babylon".

Following the death of Nobunaga, Gifu's growth continued through the Edo period with the establishment of the Nakasendō as one of Tokugawa's five routes. Although the route did not pass directly through Gifu, the nearby post towns of Kanō-juku and Gōdo-juku provided traffic and were later amalgamated into the modern city of Gifu. The area continued to prosper once Gifu became a central location along the Nakasendō.

In the middle of the Meiji period, Gifu was officially established as a city on July 1, 1889, with an original population of 25,750 people and an area of 10 km². On October 28, 1891, two years later, the Mino–Owari earthquake occurred, estimated at 8 magnitude on the Richter Scale. About 37% of the city was lost to fire, resulting in 1,505 casualties (245 dead, 1,260 injured) and 6,336 buildings affected (3,993 of which were completely destroyed). As a result, Gifu erected the first Earthquake Memorial Hall in all of Japan, which holds memorial services for the victims on the 28th of every month.

Gifu recovered from the earthquake damage by the end of the Meiji period, and by 1911 was prosperous enough to establish a municipal street car service throughout the city.

In 1940, Gifu absorbed the former post town of Kanō, greatly increasing its land area. Kanō had many traditional industries, which helped improve Gifu's overall industrial strength. With the neighboring city of Kakamigahara serving as an aeronautics center for Japan, Gifu was a large industrial center during World War II, including a downtown manufacturing sector. As a result, Gifu was the target of heavy firebombing by the United States Army Air Forces, culminating in the Gifu Air Raid of July 9, 1945, which resulted in 1,383 casualties (863 dead, 520 injured) and 20,426 buildings affected. Gifu commemorates these events each year on July 9, with the ringing of the Peace Bell at each temple within the city. Its sister cities also take part in these events.

During World War II, Gifu also served as the base for the creation of Japan's fire balloons. These paper-based, bomb-carrying hot air balloons were used in a failed attempt to cause havoc on American soil. Local high school girls made these fire balloons out of "Mino washi" (a thin but strong Japanese paper) and "konnyaku" paste. Originally, rubberized silk was used to help these bombs use the newly discovered jet stream to traverse the Pacific Ocean, but Gifu's paper was found to be both stronger, lighter, and more airtight.

In the years following the wars, tragedy struck Gifu once again. On September 12, 1976, Typhoon 17 (Super Typhoon Fran) struck the city, killing five people and affecting over 40,000 families. Gifu recovered, however, through the establishment of various local industries. The city's growth reached such a point that it was designated a core city by the national government in 1996. As its fashion industry has declined, however, the city has been looking towards manufacturing to revive the economy. A recent construction boom, much of which has occurred around JR Gifu Station, has improved the city's economy. Both public construction projects (station area renovations and elevated walkways) and private efforts are revitalizing the city of Gifu. Gifu City Tower 43 is an example of cooperation between the public and private sectors, with part of the building belonging to the city and the remainder privately owned. Gifu expanded its size in 2006 by merging with the neighboring town of Yanaizu (from Hashima District) during the great Heisei merger.

The city of Gifu is located in the southern portion of the prefecture and is on the northern edge of the Nōbi Plain. It is also the main city of the Gifu region of the prefecture. Much of Gifu's land area has been gained as the result of mergers, but the city's size grew the most through mergers with the neighboring towns of Kanō (in 1940) and Yanaizu (in 2006). As a result, Gifu's geography is very diverse, ranging from the built-up city center to persimmon orchards and strawberry patches in the outlying areas. The northern part of the city is bordered by tree-covered mountains, whereas most of the city center is spread throughout the southern part. The Nagara River cuts the city in half, running from the northeast to the southwest. Much of the city is part of the Nagara River's alluvial plain and an environmental conservation district. Because of the formation of the river, the area is prone to flooding when typhoons or heavy thunderstorms occur; however, dykes and levies have been built to control the excess water. The rich soil of the area is prime farmland; as of 2005, 6,731 farms were operating on .


Gifu experiences a wide range of weather throughout the year, but in general is characterized by characterized by hot and humid summers, and mild winters (Köppen climate classification "Cfa"). The average annual temperature in Gifu is 15.5 °C. The average annual rainfall is 1799 mm with September as the wettest month. The temperatures are highest on average in August and lowest in January. Gifu recorded a record high of 38.8 °C on August 16, 2007 and record low of minus 14.3 °C on January 24, 1927.

When Gifu was founded in 1889, it was a small city that experienced moderate growth as Japan industrialized at the beginning of the century. During Japan's military buildup in the 1930s, the city became an industrial center and experienced exponential growth. Gifu remained prosperous in the post-war years, until its population started to decline like many Japanese cities in the 1980s and '90s. Though the city has shown a large increase in population in recent years, this trend results largely from the inclusion, for the first time, of the population of Yanaizu, which added about 13,000 people to Gifu's numbers. Foreign residents of the city, who number over 9,000, also factor into this growth. Shortly after this change, however, the city's economic revival strengthened and the population began to show a true increase.

Gifu's estimated population, as of July 2011, is 412,895. The gender breakdown is 196,762 males and 216,133 females, with a total of 162,060 households within the city limits. Similar to many areas in Japan, the percentage of senior citizens over 65 years of age is approximately 21.67%, compared to only 14.13% of the population younger than 15. This is comparable to the population of the prefecture and of Japan as a whole. In the prefecture, 22.1% of the population is over 65 and 14.4% of the population is less than 15 years old. Throughout Japan, only 21% are over the age of 65 and 13.6% are younger than 15. The average age of city residents is 43.37.

As with all Japanese cities, Gifu has a mayor-council form of government with a directly elected mayor and a unicameral city legislature. The mayor serves a four-year term. Supporting the mayor are two vice-mayors and the city treasurer, all of whom are appointed by the mayor. The city legislature has 38 seats.No members of the city council are selected through at-large election. Like the mayor, each member of the city council serves a four-year term and all seats are up for election at the same time. The council chair and vice-chair are elected by members of the city assembly.

The city also supplies nine members of the Gifu Prefectural Assembly, who are also elected for a four-year term.

In terms of the national government, Gifu 1st district ("Gifu-ken dai-ikku") is a single-member electoral district for the House of Representatives, the lower house of the National Diet. The district consists of all of Gifu, excluding the former town of Yanaizu, which falls into the Gifu 3rd District.

The central area of the city serves as a satellite of nearby Nagoya, which has larges offices of many international companies, including Toyota. The ease of commute between the two cities, as well as the plentiful apartment construction underway, has contributed to this distinction. Just west of Gifu Station is Gifu City Tower 43, a 43-story high-rise building developed by Takenaka Corporation that opened on October 13, 2007 as the tallest building in Gifu Prefecture. The upper 30 floors are divided into two- and three-bedroom apartments, including those for senior citizens. The lower floors will be used as offices or shops for targeted services such as medical care. Additionally, public space exists at the top of the building, allowing residents another 360-degree view of Gifu, complementing that offered from Gifu Castle.

The city of Gifu is currently promoting the "Slow Life City Initiative", which is similar to, but more comprehensive than, the slow food initiative. It is designed to encourage residents to lead a slower lifestyles and provide an alternative to the fast-paced life of the modern world. Major elements of this campaign include more dependence on locally grown food; traditional culture and arts; and activities to increase citizens’ participation in their community. In addition to slow food, Gifu also hopes to include slow industry (traditional crafts), slow education (studying quality of life), and slow tourism (represented by cormorant fishing).

Gifu's first major industry was textiles. For a long period of time it rivaled Tokyo and Osaka as a leader of the Japanese fashion industry. The area just north of JR Gifu Station contains a variety of small clothing stores catering to many types of consumers. Furthermore, the city's main downtown covered shopping arcade, Yanagase, features many clothing, shoe, and accessory shops that carry both domestic and overseas goods. Over the past decade, though, as Gifu's fashion industry has declined steeply, the city has begun developing other industries to support the local economy.

One such industry is manufacturing. Because the city is located near Aichi Prefecture and its many major automotive and heavy industry companies, such as Toyota, Gifu has become a prosperous area for many metalworking, mold and die, and parts subcontractors. Its access to neighboring areas using public transportation and highways has allowed companies to set up many factories and facilities in the area.

In addition to the modern industries upon which Gifu's economy rests, the city also has a wide array of traditional industries, which include traditional Gifu Fans, Mino washi and foods created from the "ayu" sweetfish. Many shops throughout the city produce these goods. The most well-known local industries, though, are traditional Gifu Lanterns and Umbrellas. There are approximately 15 businesses that make lanterns in the city, the largest of which is the Ozeki Lantern, Co. In the Kanō area, visitors have the opportunity to take a course and make their own paper umbrellas.

Cormorant fishing is the representative tourist attraction of Gifu. Though it occurs in many places in Japan, cormorant fishing on the Nagara River dates back more than 1,300 years. This is also the largest display of cormorant fishing in all of Japan, with six fishing masters going down the river at the same time, using their birds to catch "ayu" sweetfish. The season lasts from May 11 to October 15 every year and occurs each night, except during high water levels and the harvest moon.

Matsuo Bashō, a renowned haiku poet in the Edo period, spent many months in Gifu, creating "haiku" about many things, including cormorant fishing. Famed comedian Charlie Chaplin also came to view cormorant fishing on the Nagara River twice, reportedly moved by the experience.

The largest of the city-supported museums is the Gifu City Museum of History. It is located in Gifu Park and its permanent exhibit primarily focuses on Gifu's past, containing many hands-on exhibits. It often hosts special exhibits, though, providing a broader field of information to its visitors. Also located in Gifu Park is the Eizō & Tōichi Katō Memorial Art Museum, which is a semi-autonomous branch of the history museum. This art museum is dedicated to the works of the brothers Eizō and Tōichi Katō, famous artists born in Gifu Prefecture. The Nagara River and cormorant fishing feature prominently in a number of their pieces. The Yanaizu Folklore Museum in the Yanaizu-chō area of the city is the other branch of the Museum of History.

There are two other museums in Gifu Park, too. The Nawa Insect Museum, next to the history museum, and the Gifu Castle Archive Museum, next to Gifu Castle atop Mount Kinka. The Nawa Insect Museum was founded by Yasushi Nawa, Japan's "Insect Man," in 1919, and provides a closeup look at insects and their world.

Other museums include the Gifu City Science Museum and the Museum of Fine Arts, Gifu, both located near the prefectural office. In addition to the Science Museum's general exhibits, it also includes a planetarium and a rooftop observatory. The prefectural Museum of Fine Arts was opened in 1982, dedicated to art and artists related to Gifu Prefecture, though it also contains pieces from around the world. In 2006 the city instituted a policy that allows elementary and junior high school students to enter many of the city's museums free of charge.

The first major festivals of the year are the Dōsan Festival and the Gifu Festival, both of which occur on the first Saturday and following Sunday of April. Because the Dōsan Festival is a memorial to Saitō Dōsan, many of the festivities take place near Jōzai-ji, where his remains are buried. The Gifu Festival is a Shinto festival that begins at Inaba Shrine and winds its way through other shrines within the city. Both festivals include street vendors, flea markets, and floats paraded through the city. The Gifu Nobunaga Festival, which takes place on the first Saturday and following Sunday of October, also pays homage to a former lord of Gifu. This festival centers on the downtown area and includes a procession of horses and warriors down the city's main streets.

The city also has festivals representing its cultural heritage. Twice each year, there is a Tejikara Fire Festival. It first occurs on the second Saturday of April at Tejikarao Shrine and it again occurs on the second Sunday of August at Nagara River Park. Half-naked men ring bells, and carry shrines and other devices that shoot off large sparks. Near the end of August, the city sponsors Takigi Noh, a traditional form of Japanese theater that takes place on the banks of the Nagara River, lit only by the surrounding bonfires and the fires of cormorant boats.

Twice a year, Gifu plays hosts to two large fireworks festivals. Large numbers of visitors gather on the banks of the Nagara River between Nagara and Kinka Bridge to see these festivals, among the largest in Japan. The first festival, the "Chunichi Shimbun" Nagara River All-Japan Fireworks Festival, occurs on the last Saturday of July. The second, the Nagara River National Fireworks Display, occurs on the first Saturday of August. Approximately 30,000 fireworks are set off at each festival, with crowds of 400,000 and 120,000 visitors, respectively.

The downtown area serves as the location for Flag Art Exhibitions a few times throughout the year. The flags displayed measure approximately 3 m tall by 1.8 m wide (10 ft by 6 ft). Each set of displays revolves around a different theme (such as the beauty of Gifu or AIDS Awareness) or are created by specific group of persons (for example, local school students or local artists).

The main sporting facility in the city is the Gifu Memorial Center, whose complex includes facilities for athletic and other events. Its athletic facilities include a track and field complex, a baseball stadium, and plazas for tennis and swimming, as well as martial arts and traditional arts facilities. There are also two large multi-purpose domes: the Deai Dome (seats 5,000) and the Fureai Dome (seats 700). All of the facilities are equipped for night events. The soccer field at the Memorial Center serves as the home to FC Gifu, the city's football representative in the J-League. Next to Memorial Center is the Nagaragawa Sports Plaza, a sports science and training center. The facility accommodates up to 300 people and provides access to equipment for improving athletic ability.

Just south of these sports facilities, the Naoko Takahashi Road runs along the northern bank of the Nagara River. This pedestrian pathway is named after the Gifu-born marathoner Naoko Takahashi, who won the gold medal in the event at the 2000 Summer Olympics. This road primarily stretches from Nagara Bridge to Chusetsu Bridge, providing a convenient course for events such as the Terry Fox Run, the Nagaragawa International Inline Skating Competition, and the Gifu Seiryu Half Marathon.

Gifu Park is one of the major tourist attractions of the city because it contains many of the museums and is near many other sightseeing spots. However, it also serves as a gathering place because of its large shaded areas that include ponds, waterfalls, cherry trees and wisteria vines. Next to Gifu Park is Mount Kinka, which serves as one of the main symbols of Gifu. It rises into the sky along the banks of the Nagara River and serves as the home of Gifu Castle, as well as many hiking trails.

Other attractions include Bairin Park, filled with over fifty types of plum trees which bloom in an array of colors, from white to dark pink, each Spring. Nagaragawa Onsen is a popular indoor location. This collection of onsen and ryokan inns is located along the Nagara River in central Gifu. Its many springs have a high iron content, considered beneficial for a variety of ailments. Also, its close location to the Nagaragawa Convention Center and various high-class hotels make it a popular area for guests.

North of the Nagara River is Mount Dodo and Matsuo Pond. Mount Dodo is the tallest mountain in the city, rising . In addition to its numerous hiking trails, it offers hikers views of Mount Haku and the Nagara River. At the southern base of the mountain is Matsuo Pond, which is popular during the fall when all of the foliage is changing colors.

The Yanagase covered shopping arcade was the primary shopping district of Gifu for many years, but recently that part of the downtown area has suffered a downturn in popularity as large modern shopping centers have opened in other areas. In addition to its many smaller retail shops and restaurants, Yanagase is also home to Takashimaya, Muji, and two movie theaters. It was made famous throughout the country when Kenichi Mikawa's hit, "Yanagase Blues", was released in the 1960s.

Gifu's most famous castle is Gifu Castle, located on Mount Kinka. First built by the Nikaidō clan during the Kamakura period, the castle has gone through many forms, with its current version rebuilt in 1956. One of its first residents was Saitō Dōsan, who lived in the castle when it was still called "Inabayama Castle". The next resident, Oda Nobunaga, changed the castle's name at the same time that he changed the name of the surrounding town. From the top of the castle, visitors have a 360-degree view, effectively giving them a view to all of the city's borders. Inside the castle are many artifacts from its past.

Though the two other castles in the city, Kanō Castle and Kawate Castle, only have ruins marking their former presence, they have both had important roles in the city's past. Kanō Castle was built shortly after the Battle of Sekigahara when Tokugawa Ieyasu ordered the Toyotomi family to build it upon the ruins of a former medieval castle. Okudaira Nobumasa was the first person to live in the castle and he was followed by his descendants until the Meiji period. The castle's citadel ruins are designated a National Historic Site. Kawate Castle was used by the Toki clan while they were guarding Owari, Ise and Mino provinces as the Chief Retainer of the shogunate during the Muromachi period. It was also used as a meeting place for the cultural and social elite from Kyoto. A stone monument near Seibi High School marks the castle's location.

The most famous shrines in the city include Inaba Shrine, Kogane Shrine, and Kashimori Shrine. They are considered a family of shrines because the Inishiki Irihiko-no-mikoto god at Inaba Shrine is married to the Nunoshi Hime-mikoto goddess at Kogane Shrine; together, they are the parents of the Ichihaya-no-mikoto God at Kashimori Shrine. Inaba Shrine was originally located on the northern side of Mount Kinka, but was moved to its present location by Saitō Dōsan during his reign over Gifu. Kogane Shrine is located in Kogane Park, behind the Gifu City Culture Center, and a popular legend says that, behind Kashimori Shrine, you can see the footprints of Tenba, a mythical horse.

Kanō Tenman-gū, a shrine located in the former Kanō-juku, was built in concurrence with Kanō Castle shortly after the Battle of Sekigahara. Originally built to serve as a place of worship for the castle's residents, it eventually became a place of prayer for many people within the growing town. Tejikarao Shrine, located in the eastern portion of the city, is famous as the home of the April Tejikara Fire Festival. The city is also home to seven of the Mino Thirty-three Kannon.

Because of the importance of both Saitō Dōsan and Oda Nobunaga, many of Gifu's temples hold strong connections to them. Jōzai-ji, for instance, was built by Saitō Myōchin, an ancestor of Dōsan, under the protection of Toki Shigeyori. Dōsan took advantage of this temple's support as he began his domination of Mino Province. His presence was so strong that his death was mourned at the temple for three generations, and his remains are now interred there. Zuiryō-ji was also built by Myōchin and is currently undergoing restoration. It contains the tombs of Shigeyori, Myōchin, and Gokei Kokushi. Sōfuku-ji contains the "Blood Ceiling"; it was stained with the blood of the vassals of Oda Nobunaga's grandson, Oda Hidenobu, who committed "seppuku" during the Battle of Sekigahara after their leader's defeat. This temple contains the mausoleums of both Nobunaga and his son, Oda Nobutada.

Shōhō-ji is home to the Gifu Great Buddha, which is also referred to as the "Blessed Buddha". Built during the Edo period, it was the first and largest dry-lacquered Buddha in Japan, and remains one of the three largest Great Buddha Images of Japan. The Buddha and its bamboo frame took 38 years to build. The nearby garden offers tea and traditional foods.

Jōdo-ji holds the remains of Hanako, Rodin's only Japanese model, who traveled extensively throughout Europe during her career. A statue of Hanako was erected at the temple in 2004. Hanako spent most of her later years in Gifu's Nishizono-chō, just east of Yanagase.

Gifu has 48 nursery schools and 43 kindergartens available for children. The city government operates 47 public elementary schools, and one additional public elementary school is under the aegis of the national government; there is also one private elementary school. The city also has 22 public junior high schools, with one additional public junior high school and one private junior high school. There are also three private combined junior/senior high schools. After graduating from junior high school, students have the option of attending one of Gifu's 12 public high schools operated by the Gifu Prefectural Board of Education or 5 private high schools. Gifu also has a North Korean school, the .

The city has 19 technical institutions and two public and six private colleges and universities. The largest of these is Gifu University, the city's national university, which includes a hospital. Among the private universities, Gifu Shotoku Gakuen University, located in the area of the former town of Yanaizu offers a four-year program and also has an associated junior college. Gifu Women's University, a private women's university founded in 1968 is also a four-year school. Gifu City Women's College was founded in 1946 as traditional college, but later became a city-supported, public junior college. Gifu Pharmaceutical University, founded in 1932 as the Gifu City Pharmaceutical College, remains a public university offering graduate-level courses.


Gifu's central location and its past connection with the Nakasendō make it one of Japan's central transportation hubs. In addition to being in the center of many rail and bus lines, the city also has nine national highways running through its borders. These include the Meishin Expressway, Tōkai-Kanjō Expressway and Japan National Route 21, 22, 156, 157, 248, 256, and 303.

Two rail companies have major train stations downtown: JR Central (Central Japan Railway Company) and Meitetsu. The JR Tōkaidō Main Line runs through and the Takayama Main Line begins at JR Gifu Station. The JR Tōkaidō Shinkansen, however, does not run through Gifu Station; its nearest stops are Nagoya Station and Gifu-Hashima Station. The Meitetsu lines include the Nagoya Line, the Kakamigahara Line, and the Takehana Line, all of which originate at Meitetsu Gifu Station.



Until April 1, 2005, Meitetsu also operated a streetcar line that ran through Gifu.

Municipal bus service first began in Gifu in 1949. Today, Gifu Bus Co., Ltd. provides service within the city, as well as connections to other cities. Its highway buses connect the city with Gujō, Osaka, Kobe, Kyoto and Shinjuku in Tokyo. Gifu Bus also connects Nagoya with Gujō, Seki, Mino and Shirakawa-gō. In addition to inter-city bus routes, many local routes go throughout the city and neighboring areas. All bus lines pass through JR Gifu Station.

Another option for travel within Gifu is via bicycle. The city has instituted a bike rental program to increase tourism within the city. Bicycles can be rented at JR Gifu Station (second floor), Gifu City Hall (South Branch), Gifu Park (Museum of History), and the Cormorant Fishing Boat Viewing Office.






</doc>
<doc id="6808914" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6808914" title="WhiteWater World">
WhiteWater World

WhiteWater World is a water park situated in the suburb of Coomera on the Gold Coast, Australia. It is owned and operated by Ardent Leisure.

After years of planning and a year of construction, WhiteWater World opened to the public on 8 December 2006. The ten Australian beach culture themed attractions cost approximately A$56 million. These included The Green Room, Super Tubes Hydrocoaster, The Rip, The BRO, Temple of Huey, Cave of Waves, Wiggle Bay, and Pipeline Plunge. Since then, four additional water slides: two called Little Rippers, one called The Wedgie and one called the Triple Vortex, have been added.

WhiteWater World was designed to be very efficient in its water use. Since opening, the quantity of visitors has consistently been above expectations. Ardent Leisure has submitted a development application for the expansion of the water park and plans to add five new attractions.

In 2004, Macquarie Leisure began planning a water park to be located next to the company's existing Dreamworld theme park. Dreamworld's Chief Executive Officer Stephen Gregg and General Manager of Special Projects Bob Tan visited water parks around the world to discover the most thrilling and cutting-edge water rides available. Later Tan was quoted saying "...the drawing board for the new park was a restaurant napkin in a little cafe in the US".

On 28 November 2005, Macquarie Leisure announced it would invest $56 million on the Dreamworld Water Park project, with construction commencing shortly thereafter.

The existing Dreamworld car park was redesigned to accommodate more cars and the addition of a water park in the southern portion. Construction of the water park began in January 2006. In June, two of the three slide towers were complete, with several slides in the early phases of construction. One month later, several attractions were announced by the park with others being speculated upon. Some attractions were nearing completion in September and all the planned attractions had been revealed by October.

WhiteWater World opened three weeks ahead of schedule on 8 December 2006 after a week of previews. The park opened with ten attractions, including The Green Room, The Rip, Super Tubes Hydrocoaster, The BRO, The Temple of Huey (3 individual slides), Pipeline Plunge, Wiggle Bay and the Cave of Waves. At this time, the park featured many Australian and world firsts: The Rip and Super Tubes Hydrocoaster were both Australian firsts; The BRO was a world first; and The Green Room was Australia's biggest Tornado slide. After six months of operation Macquarie Leisure announced that WhiteWater World attracted 247,360 visitors, producing a revenue of $8.7 million and a profit of $4 million.

WhiteWater World performed above expectations after opening with approximately 23,000 guests between 8 December and 31 December 2006. WhiteWater World continued to exceed Macquarie Leisure's expectations during its first year of operation.<ref name="Results - First 3/4"></ref><ref name="Results - First 3/4 Parkz"></ref> The first year saw 493,227 guests, exceeding the 450,000 estimate, earning the park over $8.4 million in revenue. The park continued to perform well in subsequent years with an 18.4% increase in attendance in 2008.

In June 2009, Macquarie Leisure was renamed to Ardent Leisure as part of a corporate repositioning which saw the company split from Macquarie. In August 2010, Ardent Leisure announced a decline in revenue and profits in its theme park division. It stated that a capital expenditure plan had been endorsed which would "...strengthen ride inventory and consumer appeal".

WhiteWaterWorld is currently ranked as one of the world's most water efficient parks because of its sustainable water management and environmentally friendly technology.

In September 2007, the park added two attractions: a pair of ProSlide Cannon Bowls called The Little Rippers and an events venue called The Shell. A month later, WhiteWater World submitted a development application to the Gold Coast City Council to extend the water park. The main feature of the application was a tower featuring three new water slides: two Mammoth slides and a Tornado Tantrum Alley. The expansion proposal also featured a lazy river and a large water play area. After two years, the application was approved by the council. The expansion plans have been delayed due to the 2007-2010 financial crisis.

In December 2009, it was reported that WhiteWater World planned to add a WhiteWater West AquaLoop. However Village Roadshow Theme Parks, owner of competitor Wet'n'Wild Gold Coast, attempted to negotiate an exclusivity agreement with the manufacturer. Three months later in February 2010, it was announced that WhiteWater World would build an alternative attraction built by ProSlide before the April school holidays. The Wedgie, the first ProSlide Superloop, opened on 1 April 2011. It was the first ride in Australia to feature a trap door release and was marketed as Australia's first looping water slide.

In 2011, WhiteWater World's contract with Nickelodeon was terminated and Nickelodeon's Pipeline Plunge was renamed Pipeline Plunge.

In September 2014, the park added 'Triple Vortex', a two-person tube slide by ProSlide.

WhiteWater World features several water slide attractions (all built by ProSlide), a large wave pool and separate children and toddler areas. There are food and beverage outlets, retail stores, a surf school, a function area and numerous shaded areas with seating. The park features three water slide towers, each featuring a collection of slides grouped by the level of thrill. The park also features three family-oriented water attractions separate from the towers. All of the park's attractions have an Australian beach culture theme.
The slide tower near the entrance contains the park's main thrill slides. The Wedgie is a body slide featuring a trap-door release into a near-vertical drop. Riders then enter a fast, downward-spiralling turn and reach speeds of nearly before they are slowed in a run-out chute. The ride was the first ProSlide SuperLOOP in the world. The Green Room consists of four people boarding a cloverleaf-shaped tube in which they traverse a long tunnel followed by a drop into a funnel. Within the funnel, riders oscillate back and forth up the walls at the side and drop into a splash pool. From its opening to 2015, The Green Room has been Australia's largest ProSlide Tornado beating Wet'n'Wild Water World's Tornado in height and tunnel length. On the Super Tubes Hydrocoaster, three people sit on a raft, whose weight is mainly attributable to a large magnet on its underside. Riders experience several steep drops followed by magnet-powered inclines, ending with a splashdown in a small pool. The Super Tubes Hydrocoaster was the second ProSlide Hydro Magnetic Rocket Slide in the world and continues to be Australia's only water coaster.
The second slide tower, along the park's southern border, features two rides with more moderate thrill ratings. On The Rip, riders hop into a four-person, cloverleaf-shaped tube. They descend a dark tunnel before entering a large, open bowl. The raft circles the centre of the bowl then exits down through the centre and into a splashdown pool. The Rip is the first and currently the only ProSlide Behemoth Bowl in Australia. The BRO (Blue Ringed Octopus) is a water slide consisting of eight long lanes. From a height of , riders mount a personal mat and slide head first down an enclosed spiral tunnel before merging into open, parallel lanes to the finish. In 24 seconds, riders can reach speeds of up to . The BRO has a capacity of 1000 riders per hour. When The BRO opened in 2006, it was the largest ProSlide Octopus Racer in the world and is the only one in Australia. A third slide, Triple Vortex, was added to the tower in late 2014. Pairs of riders will slide down an enclosed tube slide with three funnels, similar to miniature versions of the park's Green Room funnel.
The slide tower in the southeast corner of the park contains five slides designed for those who desire a mild thrill. Some of the slides on this tower interact with Dreamworld's Cyclone roller coaster. The Little Rippers are two ProSlide duelling cannon bowl slides. The slides can accommodate guests riding in either one or two person tubes. Riders begin in one of two parallel chutes before entering tunnels and splitting off in opposite directions. Each tunnel has a steep drop into the bowl element of the ride, after which the raft drops down through the centre and into a run-out chute. The other three slides on this tower are collectively known as The Temple of Huey. Guests can ride in a single or double tube. All three slides are ProSlide Pipelines. The three slides are individually named Broken Headz, Cut Snake and Screamin Right Handers and are long respectively. Broken Headz and Cut Snake are enclosed and Screamin Right Handers is an open flume.

Three family-oriented attractions are located on the ground level, detached from the three slide towers. Two of these are children's areas and the third is a wave pool. Pipeline Plunge is a children's area with four flume slides and hundreds of water activities. The area, originally called Nickelodeon's Pipeline Plunge, is a large, multi-level water play structure featuring an tipping bucket which dumps water on guests every few minutes. It played host to two "Slime Fest" events in 2009 that included several live shows, a dunking chair and "Australia's biggest sliming" where of slime was dumped on park guests using green coloured water in the giant tipping bucket twice daily. The mass sliming returned in the 2010/2011 summer holidays as part of the Summer Funomenon. Pipeline Plunge is a WhiteWater West Aqua Play area. Wiggle Bay is a Wiggles themed toddler area featuring musical and interactive water play activities, a shallow pool and four Wiggles-coloured water slides, located at the back of the area. these were manufactured by ProSlide. The interactive features are manufactured by WaterPlay. The Cave of Waves is a themed wave pool which can generate waves of up to high. Built by Murphy's Waves of Scotland, the pool has a constant temperature of 26 degrees Celsius. The Get Wet Surf School makes use of the pool for its lessons outside of normal park operating hours.

In addition to its lineup of attractions, WhiteWater World also has a retail outlet, an events venue, cabanas, and several food and beverage outlets.

The Beyond the Beach shop, located near the park's entrance, sells surf and WhiteWater World branded merchandise. The shop contains a Kodak photo centre that allows guests to purchase on-ride photos taken on the Super Tubes Hydrocoaster and photographs taken inside the park. Beyond the Beach also serves as the exit gates for the park.

WhiteWater World operates three dining outlets in the peak holiday seasons: Bite Me Cafe, Sandman's Cafe and Bar and Salty's Kiosk. The widest range of meals is available from the Bite Me Cafe which operates all year round. Sandman's Cafe and Bar is a licensed bar where guests can purchase alcoholic drinks and food options including Eagle Boys pizza. It is located on the park's western border between the Cave of Waves and the splashdown of The Wedgie. Salty's Kiosk is located next to The BRO and sells slushies, ice creams and other snack foods.

Since September 2007, WhiteWater World has hosted an undercover events venue, the largest at an Australian theme park, The Shell. The venue can cater for up to 2000 guests and is located on the southeast corner of WhiteWater World.

From April 2011, WhiteWater World has offered guests the hire of 12 luxury cabanas, located around the park. Each cabana is designed for up to four guests, who have access to deck chairs, couches, a coffee table, an iPod dock, towels and a mini refrigerator.

Prior to opening, WhiteWater World was criticised for being built during one of Australia's worst droughts and in an area on Level 5 water restrictions. When designing WhiteWater World, Macquarie Leisure implemented measures to ensure that the park was one of the most water efficient water parks in the world through the minimisation of water loss.

In October 2008, staff at WhiteWater World stopped Paralympian Steve Simmonds from riding the slides. Simmonds was angry and stated that he felt like he was discriminated against. WhiteWater World cited manufacturer guidelines and safety concerns as the reasons behind the restrictions.

During the first full year of operation, WhiteWater World attracted more visitors than the expected 450,000 guests. Attendance records show close to 500,000 guests attended the park during that period.

In a review of several Australian entertainment attractions for "The Australian", Scott Podmore rated WhiteWater World 7.5 out of 10, outranking its main competitors Wet'n'Wild Gold Coast and Sea World also on the Gold Coast and UnderWater World on the Sunshine Coast. Podmore stated that "WhiteWater World is a wonderful, diverse park offering something for everyone." and that "WhiteWater World is fantastic for a splash, some R&R or some slippery big rides". Podmore highlighted The Rip, The BRO, Little Rippers and Temple of Huey as the park's top attractions.

Before The Wedgie opened in April 2010, several media reporters experienced the ride. Tanya Westthorp of the "Gold Coast Bulletin" described the ride as "...not for the faint-hearted". She also stated that "...disorientation prevails for a large chunk of the ride, but the thrill is unparalleled to any other waterslide". Phil Lutton of the "Brisbane Times" wrote that the ride "...is not only the fastest, most exhilarating water ride I've ever tried but it lives up to its name in spades".



</doc>
<doc id="6825581" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6825581" title="Mets–Phillies rivalry">
Mets–Phillies rivalry

The Mets–Phillies rivalry or Battle of the Broads is a Major League Baseball (MLB) rivalry between the New York Mets and Philadelphia Phillies. Both clubs are members of MLB's National League (NL) East division. The rivalry between the two clubs is said to be among the most fiercely contested in the NL. The two NL East divisional rivals have met each other recently in playoff, division, and Wild Card races. The Battle of the Broads name is a nod to both cities having the word Broad in their street names: Broadway in New York, and Broad Street in Philadelphia.

Aside from several brawls in the 1980s, the rivalry remained relatively low-key before the 2006 season, as the teams had seldom been equally good at the same time. A notable moment in their early meetings was Jim Bunning's perfect game on Father's Day of 1964, the first perfect game in Phillies history, which happened when the Mets were on a losing streak. The Phillies were near the bottom of the NL East when the Mets won the 1969 World Series and the National League pennant in 1973, while the Mets did not enjoy success in the late 1970s when the Phillies won three straight division championships. Although both teams each won a World Series in the 1980s, the Mets were not serious contenders in the Phillies' playoff years (1980, 1981, and 1983), nor did the Phillies seriously contend in the Mets' playoff years (1986 and 1988). The Mets were the Majors' worst team when the Phillies won the NL pennant in 1993, and the Phillies could not post a winning record in either of the Mets' wild-card-winning seasons of 1999 or 2000, when the Mets faced the New York Yankees in the 2000 World Series.

The rivalry intensified in the mid 2000s, as the teams battled more often for playoff position. The Mets won the division in 2006, while the Phillies won five consecutive division titles from 2007 to 2011. The Phillies' 2007 championship was won on the last day of the season as the Mets lost a seven-game lead with 17 games remaining. The Phillies broke the Curse of Billy Penn to win the 2008 World Series, while the Mets' last title came in the 1986 World Series.

In 2015, the Mets won the National League Championship Series for their fifth pennant while the Phillies entered a rebuild phase. The Mets beat the Phillies 14 times and lost 5 for a lopsided season series. The season still provided contentious moments such as, Mets pitcher Matt Harvey drilling Phillies 2nd baseman Chase Utley in retaliation for Mets players getting hit by Phillies pitchers, a benches clearing argument between Phillies coach Larry Bowa in regards to a quick pitch by Hansel Robles and a bat flip by Daniel Murphy. Phillies star Chase Utley while, traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers mid-season, injured Mets shortstop Rubén Tejada on a legal slide during Game 2 of the National League Division Series.

Bunning's perfect game occurred in the 1964 season, during which the Phillies finished at the top and the Mets finished bottom. Pitcher Jim Bunning, in his first season with the Phillies, entered play on June 21 with a 6–2 record on the season. He was opposed on the mound by Tracy Stallard for the Mets in the first game of a doubleheader. Through the first four innings, Bunning totaled four strikeouts through twelve batters. In the fifth inning, Phillies second baseman Tony Taylor preserved the perfect game with his strong defensive play. A diving catch and a throw from the knees kept Mets catcher Jesse Gonder off of the bases. Bunning also made plays at the plate, hitting a double and driving in two runs in the sixth inning. By the end of the game, even the Mets fans were cheering Bunning's effort; he had only reached a three-ball count on two batters, and retired shortstop Charley Smith on a pop-out, and pinch-hitters George Altman and John Stephenson on strikeouts, to complete the perfect game. Bunning, who at the time had seven children, said that his game, pitched on Father's Day, could not have come at a more appropriate time. He remarked that his slider was his best pitch, just like the no-hitter I pitched for Detroit six years ago. Bunning became the first pitcher to throw a winning no-hitter in both leagues, and posted the first regular-season perfect game since Charlie Robertson in 1922 (Don Larsen's prior perfect game was in the 1956 World Series). The Phillies also won the second game of the doubleheader, 8–2, behind Rick Wise.

The Phillies performed strongly for most of the season, but surrendered a game lead during the last weeks of the season that year, losing 10 games in a row with 12 games remaining and losing the pennant by one game to the St. Louis Cardinals. "The Phold" of 1964 is among the most notable collapses in sports history. The Mets, meanwhile, finished the year in last place, with a 53–109 record—the worst in Major League Baseball.

Tug McGraw pitched for the Mets from 1965 to 1967, and again from 1969 to 1974 after spending all of the 1968 season in the minor leagues. In those nine seasons, he amassed 86 saves and appeared in 361 games. He appeared in the postseason for the 1969 Miracle Mets, pitching three innings against the Atlanta Braves. He was selected to the 1972 All-Star team, and appeared in the Most Valuable Player (MVP) award voting in 1972 and 1973. During the 1973 pennant-winning season, he coined the Mets' rally cry, "Ya gotta believe!" In the 1974 season, McGraw experienced issues with his arm and shoulder. Thus, the Mets traded McGraw, along with outfielders Don Hahn and Dave Schneck, to the Phillies in December 1974 for pitcher Mac Scarce, catcher John Stearns, and outfielder Del Unser.

McGraw became a staple of the back end of the Phillies' bullpen, saving 94 games between 1975 and 1982, and earning a place on the 1975 All-Star team. Under manager Danny Ozark, the Phillies won three consecutive division championships from 1976 to 1978 with McGraw as the closer, while the Mets finished third in 1976 and last in 1977 and 1978. In 1980, McGraw was on the mound against the Kansas City Royals when the Phillies won their first World Series championship, earning his fourth save of that postseason. He struck out Willie Wilson with the bases loaded to preserve the win for Steve Carlton and the Phillies, leaping from the mound to embrace catcher Bob Boone on the field at Veterans Stadium in Philadelphia. Sportswriter Allen Barra recounted that McGraw, in the victory parade after the World Series, told New York fans they could "take this championship and shove it."

The Mets won the National League East by games in 1986, but the Phillies were the only team to post a winning record against them, including winning 7 of 9 at Veterans Stadium. On September 12, up by 22 games, the Mets came to Philadelphia for a three game weekend series needing one win to clinch the division. The Mets brought champagne to Philadelphia. Before the series, Mets manager Davey Johnson told the Associated Press, "It will be nice to clinch in Philadelphia. It gives us a chance to beat the only team in our way...I have a nice warm feeling about this." He told "The Philadelphia Inquirer": "For the fans...it would be nicer to clinch at home. But for the safety...and the livelihood of the players...it's better to do it on the road." In the series opener, Mike Schmidt hit a three-run homer, Phillies rookie Bruce Ruffin out pitched the Mets' Dwight Gooden, and the Phillies won, 6–3. The Phillies won the second game of the series, 6–5; visiting Mets fans became unruly and damaged seats in the upper deck. One Mets fan was arrested after hitting two Philadelphia police officers. The Phillies completed the sweep by beating the Mets, 6–0, behind a shutout from Kevin Gross, who also drove in two runs with a fourth-inning triple. The Mets would clinch the division at Shea Stadium on September 17. After the season, the Phils' Schmidt won the National League MVP Award, ahead of the Mets' Gary Carter and Keith Hernandez who finished third and fourth.

The Phillies played spoiler in 1987. The Mets went 13–5 against the Phillies in 1987 and outscored Philadelphia 94–56. However, the Phillies won two of three in September to hurt the Mets' chances of winning the division significantly.

The Mets' Ron Darling took a no-hitter and 4–0 lead into the eighth inning against the Phillies on June 28 at the Vet before 52,206 fans. Philadelphia's Greg Gross pinch-hit and tripled to lead off the eighth inning, breaking up the no-hitter. Juan Samuel then singled to break up the shutout, and the Phillies came back with nine hits against Jesse Orosco and Roger McDowell, scoring five runs to win 5–4. It would have been the first no-hitter in Mets history. Compounding the loss for the Mets, the Phillies were in last place at the time, and the loss dropped the Mets games behind the first-place Cardinals who they would play the next day. Of the win and the Mets, Mike Schmidt said, "The Mets don't like to give credit when they lose, but they have to do it today."

On September 28, the Mets came into Philadelphia for a three-game series against the Phillies. The Mets were games out of first with six games left: three against the Phillies and the last three against the first-place Cardinals. They had an opportunity to win the division and were playing the Phillies, against whom they had a season record of 12–3. The Mets won the opener, 1–0, to move within two games back with five remaining to play. However, the Phillies effectively ended their season on September 29. As the Cardinals swept a doubleheader from the Montréal Expos, the Phillies' Don Carman pitched a complete-game one-hitter, facing only 28 batters to shut out the Mets. After the game, Mets manager Davey Johnson said, "How does it feel now? Empty? Not yet. But we need to get help. When you play 162 games and you're eliminated, then you feel empty. And sick." He promised reporters, "We're going to win tomorrow night.". The following night, Mets pitcher Dwight Gooden struck out 10, and left after pitching nine innings with the score tied at three runs each, but the Phillies' Luis Aguayo won the game with a 10th-inning pinch-hit home run off of Orosco, clinching at least a tie for first place in the division for the Cardinals.

The 1988 Mets returned to the playoffs, but the Phillies, who finished in sixth place in the division with a 65–96 record, beat the Mets 8 times in 18 games, the third-best record against them of any team in the league. The Mets won their second division title in three years in a game against the Phillies, and like two years before, did it at home. In the postseason, the Mets lost to the eventual champion Dodgers in the 1988 National League Championship Series.

On June 18, 1989, after a Mets–Phillies game, the Phillies traded Samuel to the Mets for McDowell and Lenny Dykstra. Dykstra was a career .278 hitter with the Mets and had not equaled his 1986 season when he hit .295. Dykstra flourished in Philadelphia and went on to be named to three All-Star teams in six full seasons with the Phillies, finish in the top ten in National League Most Valuable Player voting twice, and help lead the Phillies to the 1993 National League pennant. McDowell saved 45 games for the Phillies in parts of three seasons and became a fan favorite. The trade was a bust for the Mets as Samuel hit only .228 for the Mets in 1989 and was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers after the 1989 season. It signaled an ascent of the Phillies which culminated in their 1993 National League pennant and the demise of the Mets in the early 1990s. "Sports Illustrated" writer and Mets fan David Vecsey counts the Dykstra trade as one of the five worst in Mets history, writing, "Never mind that Dykstra was better than Samuel, this trade was devastating to Mets fans on a purely personal level. With one phone call, GM Joe McIlvaine gutted the team of its heart." The trade also ushered in a period of bad blood between the two teams.

On September 27, 1989, the Phillies faced the Mets in their home finale at Shea Stadium in New York after a disappointing Mets season. The Mets had won the East in 1988 but were in third place on September 26 behind the Chicago Cubs and St. Louis Cardinals. McDowell was closing out a 5–3 win for the Phillies when, with two outs in the ninth, he induced former teammate Gregg Jeffries to ground out to second to end the game. As Jeffries was running out the play, McDowell said something to him prompting Jeffries to charge the mound and wrestle McDowell to the ground. The benches cleared and punches were exchanged before the umpires could separate the teams. Jeffries later claimed that McDowell had thrown at him during a 2–1 Phillies victory on September 25.

The brawling continued in 1990. During an August 9 game at Shea, Gooden hit Phillies hitters Dickie Thon and Tommy Herr. When Gooden came to bat in the fifth inning, Phillies pitcher Pat Combs hit Gooden in the knee with a fastball. Phillies outfielder Von Hayes defended Combs after the game, "Gooden better expect retaliation if he keeps hitting guys with fastballs. We've got to protect our players." Gooden charged the mound and tackled Combs. Phillies catcher Darren Daulton followed Gooden and landed a series of punches on the back of Gooden's head. Darryl Strawberry had been in the Mets clubhouse and rushed the field after Daulton but was himself blindsided by Hayes. Of Daulton, Gooden later said, "Daulton was the guy we wanted most. He's a cheap-shot artist. We learned that about him last year", referring to the September 1989 fight. Six players and Phillies coach Mike Ryan were ejected from the game. Eight players were later fined, including the Mets' Tim Teufel, who said, "It was money well spent. Sometimes you just have to defend yourself and your teammates."

The tone of baseball rivalries changed in the early 1990s; fraternization between players who had moved to different teams or knew each other from various ventures kept baseball rivalries to a "friendly" level. However, Major League Baseball's 1994 divisional re-alignment solidified the rivalry between the Phillies and Mets. The Pittsburgh Pirates, former members of the National League East and in-state rivals of the Phillies, moved into the newly created National League Central Division, and the Atlanta Braves, former members of the National League West, entered the division. Prior to the switch, the East Division contained seven teams, spread out over a wider geographical area, including the St. Louis Cardinals and the Chicago Cubs, as well as the expansion Florida Marlins. Members of all 28 teams, including the Phillies and Mets, drew together during the 1994 labor stoppage, but players from both teams were on opposite sides of the argument even then. Dykstra claimed that he was losing $30,000 ($ in current dollars) per day for every day he did not work during the strike. While other players chastised Dykstra for his comments, Mets pitcher and player representative John Franco intimated that if someone crossed the picket line, as Dykstra suggested, once we get back in I'll be the first to kick his [butt] .

The division-rival Braves defeated the Cleveland Indians in the 1995 World Series; on the way to doing so, they left the rest of the division behind them. The Mets and Phillies finished in second and third places in the division, respectively, with identical 69–75 records; the Braves were the only National League East team to finish above .500. The Mets and Phillies staged a close battle for second place, with New York coming out ahead, taking 7 victories from the 13-game season series. Both the Mets and Phillies finished near the bottom of the division in 1996: the Mets ended the season in fourth place, with a 71–91 record, while the Phillies finished last (67–95). The Mets took a second consecutive close season series from the Phillies, with an identical 7–6 record to the prior year. The 1997 Mets improved to 88–74, but that record was only good for third place in the division, as the Braves finished with 101 wins and the Marlins, with a record of 92–70, took the National League wild card and won the 1997 World Series. The Phillies, meanwhile, languished in last place behind the Expos, with a 68–94 record, and only managed to take 5 of 12 games from the Mets that season, including a September 9 game at Shea Stadium that was a moment of peace in the rivalry to remember former Phillies player and broadcaster and original Met Richie Ashburn, who died that morning.

The 1998 Mets finished in second place, with the Phillies right behind them in third. The Braves finished with the best record in the National League (106 wins), but were unable to make it to the World Series. The Mets finished over .500 for the second straight year, aided by their 8–4 record against the Phillies. The standings were identical the next season, as the Mets faced the Braves in the 1999 National League Championship Series; they were defeated, and the Braves lost to the New York Yankees in the ensuing World Series. The Phillies and Mets split the season series, six games each; the Phillies finished under .500 for the sixth consecutive season with a 77–85 record. The Mets won the wild card again in 2000, finishing one game behind the Braves in the division and defeating the Cardinals in the League Championship Series to face the Yankees in the 2000 World Series. Though the Phillies finished in last place in the division with a 65–97 record, they defeated the Mets in the season series, 7–6.

Major League Baseball changed its scheduling format in 2001, further intensifying division matchups throughout the league. The new "unbalanced schedule" allowed for additional games each season between divisional rivals, replacing additional series with teams outside the division. Due to the change, the Phillies and Mets now played each other 17 or more times each season (19 times in 2001). Early on, the unbalanced schedule favored the Mets, who had a winning percentage of .540 (27–23) against the division in the 2000 season, while the Phillies managed a .451 mark (23–28); the trend held true in 2001, when the Mets won the season series over the Phillies, 11–8. The scheduling drew criticism both when it was enacted and after the fact, with some analysts even positing that the unbalanced schedule "hurt" intra-divisional play. This, however, did not affect the Phillies and Mets, as they drew an average of 27,926 fans to their games in 2001. Attendance for the rivalry games increased in 2002, to 29,403 fans per game, as the Phillies bested the Mets in the season series, 10–9, and was strong in 2003, when they drew nearly 28,000 fans per game and the Phillies took their second consecutive season series, 12–7.

The signing of former Phillies closer Billy Wagner by the Mets between the 2005 and 2006 seasons was a factor in the intensification of the rivalry. Pat Burrell and Wagner became embroiled in heated media discussions after Wagner departed the Phillies. For the first time in 2006, both franchises fielded contenders until deep into the season. The Mets steadily led the NL East (finally supplanting the decade-long division champions, the Atlanta Braves), while the Phillies maintained pace as a wild card contender until the very end of the season. The Mets won the head-to-head season matchup, beating the Phillies 11 out of 18 times. The Mets won the division, but lost to the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2006 National League Championship Series.

On January 23, 2007, Phillies shortstop Jimmy Rollins made a statement that may have set the rivalry in a dead heat: "I think we are the team to beat in the NL East… but that's only on paper." Many Mets fans and players laughed at the prediction, especially once the Phillies stumbled out of the gate in April, starting the season at 1–6 and posting an 11–14 record for the month. The Mets, meanwhile, sat firmly in the NL East lead for almost all of the season.

As the season wore on, Philadelphia developed momentum as a wild-card contender. The Phillies dominated the Mets in head-to-head play, posting three separate series sweeps, including a pivotal sweep of a four-game series at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia during late August which included two walk-off hits by Chase Utley and Ryan Howard and comeback victories for the Phillies in three of the four games. During the season, Burrell also hit two home runs off Wagner, resulting in two blown saves. By the time Philadelphia swept the Mets at Shea Stadium in mid-September, the Phillies were threatening to move from wild-card contender to division leader. With 17 games left to play, the Mets led the Phillies by seven games; during that final stretch, the Mets won only five games and lost twelve, while the Phillies went 13–4. On the final day of the season, the Phillies won the division, backing up Rollins' quote. Mets starter Tom Glavine gave up seven runs in the first inning to the Florida Marlins, while the Phillies beat the Washington Nationals (who had made a significant contribution to the Phillies' comeback, having gone 5–1 against the Mets during that span) behind Eastern Pennsylvania native Jamie Moyer to win the division for the first time since 1993. Rollins capped his prediction by adding his first career Most Valuable Player award. According to Baseball Prospectus, the Mets' collapse over the end of the season ranked statistically as the second-worst in baseball history. After the 2007 season, Wagner also said that <nowiki>"[the]</nowiki> collapse didn't come because the Phillies beat us, the collapse came because we played bad".

On February 16, 2008, Mets center fielder Carlos Beltrán made a statement regarding the upcoming season. He stated that Santana, we felt, as a team, that we had a chance to win in our division. With him now, I have no doubt that we're going to win in our division. I have no doubt in that. We've got what it takes. To Jimmy Rollins: We are the team to beat." Inasmuch as Beltran had imitated Rollins' 2007 preseason prediction, Rollins arrived in camp for Spring training and responded: 
"There isn't a team in the National League that's better than us. The pressure's back on them if you ask me. They were on paper the best team in the division last year and they were supposed to win, and they didn’t. One, there are four other teams in our division who are going to make sure that doesn't happen, and two, has anyone ever heard of plagiarism? That was pretty good, especially coming from him. He's a quiet guy, so it was probably shocking when he said it. Not shocking in a bad way, like 'Wow, I can't believe he said that.' More like, 'Wow, he finally said something because he's a leader on that team and you definitely need to be a vocal leader."
Throughout most of the season, the Phillies and Mets battled each other for the NL East lead, along with the Florida Marlins. Going into the final season series between the two teams, former Phillie and special hitting instructor Mike Schmidt fanned the flames of the rivalry with an e-mail to manager Charlie Manuel, later posted for the entire team in the clubhouse. 
"One pitch, one at bat, one play, one situation, think ‘small’ and ‘big’ things result, tough at-bats, lots of walks, stay up the middle with men on base, whatever it takes to ‘keep the line moving’ on offense, 27 outs on defense, the Mets know you’re better than they are… They remember last year. You guys are never out of a game. Welcome the challenge that confronts you this weekend. You are the stars. Good luck. #20."

Mets players reacted quickly; David Wright replied, "To each his own. He's obviously biased in his e-mails or letters. I see a starting pitcher that goes out there and throws like Brett Myers – that works much better than a rally cry from a former player." This response came a day after Myers defeated the Mets 3–0, throwing eight shutout innings and striking out ten. The Mets won the season series 11–7.

After the final season series, the Mets held onto first place until September 16, when a September surge moved the Phillies into first place. On September 19, however, the Phillies lost to the Florida Marlins while the Mets beat the Atlanta Braves to put New York back into the division lead. The results were reversed the following night, and the Phillies regained the top spot, where they would ultimately finish. The Phillies won the National League East on September 27, while the Mets were eliminated from postseason contention the next day with a 4–2 loss to the Florida Marlins in the final game at Shea Stadium. The Milwaukee Brewers defeated the Chicago Cubs that day to clinch the National League wild card. This marked the second year in a row the Mets were eliminated from the playoffs on the last regular-season game. It also marked the first time in baseball history that a team had lost the last game of the season to miss the playoffs after holding a three-game lead in two consecutive seasons. After victories over the Brewers and the Los Angeles Dodgers in the postseason, the Phillies went on to win the World Series over the Tampa Bay Rays.

During the team's post-parade celebration on October 31 at Citizens Bank Park, Jimmy Rollins took verbal shots at the Mets organization. "A lot of things were made in the offseason", Rollins said. "We can talk about the New York Mets. They brought in that great pitcher, Johan Santana, but they forgot that it takes more than one player to bring home a championship."

Nearing the end of 2008 and the thick of the offseason, World Series MVP Cole Hamels was asked by WFAN radio hosts whether he considered the Mets "choke artists". Hamels replied, "For the past two years they've been choke artists." He explained that he considered Mets shortstop José Reyes a showboater for his post-home run displays and that the Phillies had mocked their center fielder Shane Victorino for similar antics during the National League Division Series.

On December 13, newly signed Mets closer Francisco Rodríguez added his sentiments to the fray. "Of course we're going to be the frontrunner. Of course we're going to be the team to beat", Rodriguez told reporters. "I don't want there to be a controversy. I don't want the other team to take it personally, or take it in a bad way. But I'm a really competitive guy. I like to win. If they ask me, 'Oh, which ballclub is going to win the National League East?' It's going to be the Mets. Easy question."

Throughout the first few months of the 2009 season the Mets and Phillies looked as though they would make this year into another close playoff race. By the end of May the Mets had won three out of the four games they played against each other; however, the Phillies retained a half game lead. Both clubs struggled in June as the Phillies slumped and the New York became plagued with injuries. By the end of June the Phillies had increased their division lead, but only to two and a half games.

This closeness would not continue, however, as the Phillies went on to finish with a 93–69 record, winning the division and securing the second seed in the playoffs. The Mets, on the other hand, went 33–53 from July through September and finished fourth in the NL East, 23 games behind. The Phillies would go on to win the National League Pennant for the second year in a row, but would lose the World Series in six-games to the Mets' cross-town rivals, the New York Yankees.

One notable occurrence during the 2009 season was the Phillies adding former Mets pitcher Pedro Martínez. Martinez posted a 3.63 ERA with a 5–1 record. In his one start against the Mets, he threw six innings and gave up four earned runs.

In 2010, after leading the division standing by the end of April, the Mets again began to struggle. The Mets would not hold first place at any point after May 1, although they came close in mid-June. By the end of the season the Mets had finished 18 games behind the first place Phillies. For its part, Philadelphia was mainly engaged in a fierce division race with the Atlanta Braves, trailing them as late in the season as September 6. However, Philadelphia would surge at the end of the month and once again be crowned division champs. 2010 ultimately served as a disappointment for the Mets–Phillies rivalry.

In 2011, the Phillies won the season series against the Mets, winning 11 of 18 games. The Phillies set a record for wins in a season with 102, surpassing the previous record of 101, set back-to-back in 1976 and 1977, while the Mets finished 25 games out of first place at 77–85, in fourth place and missed the playoffs for the fifth straight year.

The game on May 1 in Philadelphia became a moment of peace in the rivalry during the top of the ninth inning. Mets' Daniel Murphy was batting as a pinch-hitter against Phillies' reliever Ryan Madson when the fans started chanting "U-S-A!" The Phillies didn't know the reason for the chants, but in the Mets' dugout, bench coach Ken Oberkfell told Manager Terry Collins that al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, the mastermind of the September 11 attacks, had been killed by United States special operations forces in Abbottabad, Pakistan. Shane Victorino later told the Phillies the news. However, when asked how they learned about it during an on-air telephone call with "Mike and Mike in the Morning" on ESPN Radio the next day, he said that a trainer in the dugout broke the news. Ryan Howard called the news "an uplifting moment," while Victorino said it was "a special moment...for families...who...lost their loved ones...(on) 9/11" and "a big day in American history." On the Mets' side, David Wright called it "just an incredible moment and...you kind of come together...for a common cause", while Collins said that the Mets 2–1, 14-inning win behind Ronny Paulino's game-winning RBI double in his Mets debut was "a good win for us, and obviously a huge win for America tonight", but felt they "could have finished the game two hours ago and celebrated a little bit of it." Mike Lopresti of "USA Today" called the game between the rivals "a perfect fit" when the news broke, while Adam Rubin of ESPNNewYork.com called the peace in the rivalry "fitting" for a Mets fan, and said that it drew parallels to their 3–2 win over rival Atlanta Braves on September 21, 2001 in the first major sporting event in New York City since the attacks.

On September 26, 2011, the day after the teams' final meeting of the season, the National Hockey League formally announced that the rivalry would be played out at Citizens Bank Park during the offseason at the 2012 NHL Winter Classic on January 2, saying it would be a showdown between the teams' hockey counterparts, the New York Rangers and the Philadelphia Flyers. Shane Victorino attended the game, which the Rangers came from behind to win, 3–2, which MLB.com said that "just like the Mets–Phillies rivalry, being able to come back and steal a game on the road was quite sweet," and said of the rivalry being played out: "What better rivalry than this? Both these teams, they're in first place (in the Atlantic Division). I'm excited to see it."

During the season, the Mets beat the Phillies ten times, including a sweep of a three-game series at Citizens Bank Park in early May in which they came from behind to win each game in the late innings. In 2013, the Mets clubhouse store in New York City started selling shirts saying, "My Ex-Wife is a Philles fan", while MLB Network aired a MasterCard/StandUp2Cancer commercial featuring Phille Phanatic and Mr. Met.

In 2014, the Mets and the Phillies met in a rare 5 game regular season series at Citizens Bank Park. The Mets took 4 out of 5 games. Three straight games were decided in extras, with the Phillies walking off 6-5 in 14 in Game 2 and the Mets winning 5-4 in 14 and 4-3 in 11 in Games 3 and 4 respectively.

In 2015, the Phillies entered a rebuilding phase, trading away former stars Cole Hamels and Chase Utley mid-season. The Phillies would go on to a last place finish in the National League East, losing 99 games on the season, while the Mets would go on and win the National League East title.

While the rivalry was somewhat subdued by the lopsidedness of the two teams records, the rivalry did provide some moments. On April 15, Mets pitcher Matt Harvey drilled Chase Utley in the back, after a few Mets pitchers had been hit by the Phillies. On August 25, during a game at Citizens Bank Park Phillies coach Larry Bowa started yelling out of the dugout after a quick pitch by then-Mets reliever Hansel Robles while Darin Ruf was in the box not looking up and not ready for the pitch. Bowa also yelled at Mets 1st baseman Daniel Murphy over a perceived slight by Murphy's bat flip earlier in the game during a home run. Benches cleared as Bowa threatened Murphy with retaliation and was ultimately ejected from the game.

The Mets played in the 2015 National League Division Series against the Los Angeles Dodgers whose roster featured former Phillies players Jimmy Rollins and Chase Utley. The series featured a contentious slide in Game 2 by Utley at 2nd base, injuring Mets shortstop Rubén Tejada. The fallout created controversy on take out slides at 2nd and Utley was suspended for two games. Mets fans booed Utley loudly during the pregame for Game 3 at Citi Field, and chanted "We want Utley" after the Mets took a 10-3 lead during the game. However Utley did not appear again in the series until late in Game 5 and the Mets won the series, and eventually won the 2015 National League Championship Series for the pennant. 




</doc>
<doc id="6826326" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6826326" title="Finetooth shark">
Finetooth shark

The finetooth shark ("Carcharhinus isodon") is a species of requiem shark, in the family Carcharhinidae, found in the western Atlantic Ocean, from North Carolina to Brazil. It forms large schools in shallow, coastal waters, and migrates seasonally following warm water. A relatively small, slender-bodied shark, the finetooth shark can be identified by its needle-like teeth, dark blue-gray dorsal coloration, and long gill slits. It attains a maximum length of 1.9 m (6.2 ft). The diet of this species consists primarily of small bony fishes, in particular menhaden. Like other members of its family, it is viviparous with females giving birth to two to six pups in estuarine nursery areas every other year.

Valued for its meat, the finetooth shark forms an important component of the commercial gillnet shark fishery operating off the southeastern United States. Population assessments suggest that this fishery does not currently pose a threat to U.S. populations of the species. The International Union for Conservation of Nature has therefore listed the finetooth shark under Least Concern, though no fishery data are available for this species off South America. This shark is not known to pose a danger to humans, though it snaps vigorously when captured and should be handled with caution.

The finetooth shark was originally described as "Carcharias (Aprionodon) isodon" by French zoologist Achille Valenciennes, in Müller and Henle's 1839 "Systematische Beschreibung der Plagiostomen". The type specimen is a 65-cm (26-in) juvenile male, possibly caught off New York. This species was later moved to the genus "Carcharhinus". The specific epithet "isodon" means "equal teeth" in Greek, and refers to the similar number of teeth in the upper and lower jaws. This species may also be referred to as the eventooth shark, smoothtooth shark, or night shark (usually used for "C. signatus").

As is the case for most "Carcharhinus" species, attempts to analyze the finetooth shark's phylogenetic relationships have yielded variable results. In 1988, Leonard Compagno grouped this species with the spinner shark ("C. brevipinna"), blacktip shark ("C. limbatus"), graceful shark ("C. amblyrhynchoides"), and smooth tooth blacktip shark ("C. leiodon"), on the basis of morphological characters. Gavin Naylor's 1992 allozyme analysis found that the finetooth shark is the second-most basal member of the genus next to the blacknose shark ("C. acronotus"). Mine Dosay-Akbulut's 2008 study, based on ribosomal DNA, suggested that the closest relative of the finetooth shark is the smalltail shark ("C. porosus"), and that the two species form a clade apart from other "Carcharhinus" species.

The body of the finetooth shark is slender and streamlined. The snout is long and pointed, with the nares preceded by short, broadly triangular flaps of skin. The eyes are large and round, with nictitating membranes (protective third eyelids). The mouth is broad with well-defined furrows at the corners. Twelve to 15 tooth rows occur on either side of the upper jaw and 13–14 tooth rows on either side of the lower jaw. Each tooth is small and needle-like, with a narrow central cusp and smooth to minutely serrated edges. The five pairs of gill slits are long, measuring about half the length of the dorsal fin base.

The first dorsal fin is high and triangular with a pointed apex, originating forward of the free rear tips of the pectoral fins. The second dorsal fin is relatively large and originates over the anal fin. No ridge runs between the dorsal fins. The pectoral fins are small and sickle-shaped, with pointed tips. The dermal denticles are small and overlapping, each bearing three horizontal ridges leading to marginal teeth. Living finetooth sharks are a distinctive dark bluish-gray above and white below, with a faint pale stripe on the flanks and no prominent fin markings. Some individuals from Florida have green eyes. Males average 1.6 m (5.2 ft) in length and females 1.7 m (5.4 ft); the largest shark on record was 1.9 m (6.2 ft) long.

In North American waters, the finetooth shark is common and found from North Carolina to the northern Gulf of Mexico, and very occasionally straying as far north as New York. In Central and South American waters, it is rare, but may occur more widely than presently known, having been reported off Trinidad and Guyana, infrequently from the Caribbean Sea, and off southern Brazil from São Paulo to Santa Catarina. The northwestern Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico, and South America populations are distinct, with little interchange between them. Old records exist of this species in the eastern Atlantic off Senegal and Guinea-Bissau, but these likely represent misidentifications of spinner sharks ("C. brevipinna").

The finetooth shark is often found near beaches and in bays and estuaries. It inhabits extremely shallow waters, no deeper than in the summer and deep in the winter. Historically, it was known to venture into rivers in the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas, though most of paths into this area are now blocked by dams. The northwestern Atlantic population of this species is strongly migratory: juveniles, followed by adults, arrive off South Carolina from late March to early May, when the water temperature rises above . They remain until September to mid-October, until the water temperature drops and they move south to Florida. The movements of other populations are unknown.

Adult and juvenile finetooth sharks form large schools. This energetic, fast-moving predator feeds mainly on small bony fishes, often entering the surf zone during the day to hunt. The most important prey of this species in the northwestern Atlantic is the Atlantic menhaden ("Brevoortia tyrannus"), with sharks of all ages off northwestern Florida eat almost nothing else. The menhaden are swallowed whole after the head has been removed. Other known prey species include spot croaker ("Leiostomus xanthurus"), Spanish mackerel ("Scomberomorus maculatus"), mullet ("Mugil" spp.), shrimp, and in one case a juvenile Atlantic sharpnose shark ("Rhizoprionodon terraenovae"), which may have been scavenged from the bycatch discard of a shrimp trawler. The finetooth shark may be preyed upon by larger sharks. Parasites documented from this species include the tapeworm "Triloculatum geeceearelensis", and unidentified species in the genera "Anthobothrium", "Paraorygmatobothrium", and "Phoreiobothrium".

Like other requiem sharks, the finetooth shark is viviparous: the developing embryos are nourished by yolk for the first 15 weeks, after which the depleted yolk sac develops into a placental connection to the mother. Females produce litters of two to six pups every other year. In the northwestern Atlantic, mating occurs from early May to early June and the young are born at around the same time the following year after a 12-month gestation period. The males bite at the female to hold her for copulation. The semen exuded by the male congeals into a large, spongy mass inside the female's uterus, in which the individual spermatozoa are embedded. Called a "spermatozeugma", the function of this short-lived structure is unknown. Newborn finetooth sharks measure long. Shallow bays and estuaries, such as Bull's Bay in South Carolina, serve as critical nursery areas for newborns and juveniles.

Female finetooth sharks grow much more slowly and to a larger ultimate size than males. Individuals in the northwestern Atlantic population have a larger body size and reach sexual maturation later than those in the Gulf of Mexico population; males in the two populations grow at similar rates, but northwestern Atlantic females grow more slowly than Gulf of Mexico females. In the northwestern Atlantic, males mature at a fork length (length from snout tip to caudal fin fork) of and females at , corresponding to ages of 5 and 6 years, respectively. In the Gulf of Mexico, males mature at a fork length of and females at , corresponding to ages of 4 and 5 years, respectively. The maximum lifespan has been estimated to be at least 9 years for males and 14 years for females.

The finetooth shark has never been implicated in an attack on humans. However, when caught, this shark thrashes and snaps at anything within range, and people have been bitten attempting to handle it. Finetooth sharks are used for human consumption fresh or dried and salted. Other than off the southeastern United States, this species is of little commercial importance: it is small and occurs in water too shallow for most commercial and recreational fisheries, and is generally too fast-swimming to be caught by shrimp trawlers. Small numbers are taken incidentally by floating longlines and on hook-and-line. This species is susceptible to overfishing due to its low reproductive rate, and to habitat degradation due to its inshore habits.

Substantial numbers of finetooth sharks are caught in drift gillnets operated by the shark fishery off southeastern United States, which peaked in 1999 at about 117 tons landed. Stock assessments conducted in 2002 suggested that U.S. populations had not yet been overfished, but that the catch rate was unsustainable, whereas assessments conducted in 2007 concluded that catch rates did not exceed sustainable levels and that populations were stable. Fishing for this species in U.S. waters is regulated by the National Marine Fisheries Service 1993 Fisheries Management Plan for Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico sharks; it is classified as a "small coastal shark" for the purposes of commercial quotas and recreational bag limits. As a result, the IUCN has assessed the finetooth shark as of Least Concern overall and off the U.S. and Mexico. Concern existsfor this species in South America, where its numbers seem naturally low and it is potentially under heavy pressure by widespread, intensive coastal fisheries. However, the IUCN does not have sufficient data to assess its status in the region beyond Data Deficient.



</doc>
<doc id="6869063" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6869063" title="Hurricane Florence (2006)">
Hurricane Florence (2006)

Hurricane Florence was the first North Atlantic hurricane to produce hurricane-force winds on the island of Bermuda since Hurricane Fabian in September 2003. The seventh tropical storm and second hurricane of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season, Florence developed from a tropical wave in the eastern Atlantic Ocean on September 3. Due to unfavorable conditions, the system failed to organize initially, and as a result, the storm grew to an unusually large size. After several days, Florence encountered an area of lesser wind shear and intensified into a hurricane on September 10. It passed just west of Bermuda while recurving northeastward, and on September 13 it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone.

Florence produced wind gusts of up to 115 mph (185 km/h) on Bermuda, which caused several power outages and minor damage. Florence then brought heavy rains across Newfoundland as an extratropical storm, destroying one house and causing minor damage to several others. There were no fatalities as a result of the hurricane.

A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 29. It tracked slowly westward, and first showed signs of development two days later. On August 31, a second tropical wave exited the coast of Africa at a faster speed than its predecessor. The two waves interacted, and by September 2 combined to form a large area of disturbed weather across the eastern Atlantic Ocean. Convection increased within the system, and it developed a concentrated area of convection in conjunction with a well-defined low pressure area. By late on September 3, the system maintained a broad closed circulation and enough convective organization to be classified Tropical Depression Six while located about midway between the Lesser Antilles and Africa.

Upon becoming a tropical cyclone, the depression maintained multiple cloud swirls within a common center. Banding features increased, though southwesterly wind shear and the lack of a well-defined circulation prevented initial strengthening. Dry air encountered the depression, and as such it developed very slowly; forecasters maintained considerable difficulty in determining a center of circulation. It continued its motion to the west-northwest while tracking around the southern periphery of a deep-layer subtropical ridge to its north. Though convection remained focused near the outer periphery of the system, the overall organized continued to steadily increase, and it is estimated the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Florence on September 5 while located about 1,120 miles (1,800 km) east-northeast of Anguilla.
After attaining tropical storm status, the maximum sustained winds fluctuated for three days between 40 mph (65 km/h) and 50 mph (85 km/h). This was due to the large size of Florence; the overall wind field reached a diameter of 460 miles (745 km), and the radius of maximum winds reached about 110 miles (170 km). By September 6, a well-defined cloud swirl became evident, with thin rainbands developing in the southeast and northwest quadrants. As a result, hurricane forecasters anticipated Florence would develop significantly and attain major hurricane status. Though convection gradually migrated closer to the center of the storm, forecasters could not detect a well-defined center of circulation by late on September 6. On September 7, convection developed over and to the west of the center for the first time in its duration. However, Florence failed to intensify further, as its wind field had increased to more than 1,035 miles (1,670 km) in diameter. This led to difficulties in forecasting, as its environment favored further strengthening; the storm tracked through an area of 84° F (29° C) water temperatures and light shear, and the system maintained a large low-level cyclonic envelop with abundant convection. By early on September 8, the storm consisted of an elongated, shapeless cloud pattern atypical of a tropical cyclone. Later that day, as an anticyclone developed over Florence, the storm began to consolidate around a vorticity center on the western side of the large cyclonic envelope. It began to strengthen more steadily as it turned to the northwest. Early on September 10, an eye began developing within a round central dense overcast over the center, and shortly thereafter Florence attained hurricane status while located about 390 miles (630 km) south of Bermuda.

Hurricane Florence turned to the north and north-northeast through a break in the subtropical ridge. Though its eyewall was open on the north side, favorable conditions led forecasters to predict Florence passing near Bermuda as a strong Category 2 hurricane. The inner core of convection became ragged-looking on satellite imagery, and based on reports from Hurricane Hunters it is estimated the hurricane attained peak winds of 90 mph (150 km/h) late on September 10. Subsequent to further erosion of the eyewall, the hurricane weakened, and on September 11 passed about 60 miles (95 km) west of Bermuda with winds of 85 mph (135 km/h). The overall cloud pattern became slightly better organized, and Florence briefly re-strengthened before encountering increased upper-level winds and cooler waters. Dry air wrapping around the southern periphery of the cyclone eroded most of the deep convection by early on September 12. The cloud shield became asymmetrically displaced to the north of the center, and frontal-like features began to form. It continued to lose tropical characteristics, and on September 13 Florence transitioned into an extratropical cyclone about 485 miles (780 km) south-southwest of Cape Race, Newfoundland. Initially maintaining hurricane-force winds, the extratropical remnant passed near Cape Race before turning to the east-northeast, and on September 14 the winds weakened to gale force. The storm executed a broad cyclonic half-loop to the southwest of Iceland over the subsequent days, and after turning to the west the extratropical remnants of Florence were absorbed to the east of Greenland by a developing extratropical cyclone to its south.

The government of Bermuda issued a hurricane watch for the island on September 8, which was followed by a tropical storm warning on September 9. These were replaced by a hurricane warning on September 10, coinciding with the storm's strengthening to hurricane intensity. The government urged the potentially impacted citizens to take preparations for the storm, many of whom bought supplies at local hardware stores. Residents installed storm shutters, while boat owners moved their yachts to safer locations. An emergency shelter was prepared on the island. Prior to the arrival of the storm, officials canceled bus and ferry service, and also closed all schools and government offices on the day of impact. The Bermuda International Airport was also closed.

Hurricane Florence produced strong swells and dangerous surf conditions along the northern Lesser Antilles, Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, Hispaniola, and Bermuda. Later in its duration, the tight pressure gradient between Florence and a high-pressure system over southeastern Canada produced strong winds and rough waves along the East Coast of the United States. The hurricane also caused strong swells and rough ocean conditions, including rip currents, in the Bahamas and Atlantic Canada. In South Carolina, high waves produced severe beach erosion on several beaches.

Passing a short distance west of Bermuda, Hurricane Florence produced strong winds on the island; sustained winds peaked at 82 mph (132 km/h) on St. David's Island at an elevation of 157 feet (48 m), while gusts reached 115 mph (185 km/h) at the Maritime Operations Centre in St. George's Parish at an elevation of 256 feet (78 m). The winds knocked down trees and power lines, leaving over 25,000 homes and businesses without electricity during the peak of the storm. The powerful winds damaged ten houses, including destroying the roofs of three, and blew out windows across the island. A few people were injured by flying glass, though none required hospital care. Rainfall on the island reached 1.32 inches (34 mm) at the Bermuda International Airport.
A possible tornado in Southampton Parish downed trees and caused light property damage. At the Bermuda Zoo and Aquarium, two flamingos died due to falling branches. During the peak of the storm, police officials advised citizens to remain indoors away from harm, though there were several reports of looting throughout the territory. On the island, the storm's damage totaled over $200,000 (2006 USD). Shortly after the storm passed through, BELCO began restoring power, and by six hours after the peak of the storm power had been restored to 7,000 homes and businesses. By the day after the storm, about 3,000 remained without electricity on the island. The storm damaged the causeway between St. David's Island and Hamilton Parish, temporarily limiting traffic to one lane in each direction.

As an extratropical storm over Newfoundland, Florence produced powerful winds peaking at 101 mph (163 km/h) and moderate amounts of rainfall of up to 2.6 inches (67 mm). Flooding and power outages were reported, although they were isolated. The hurricane caused flight interruptions at St. John's International Airport and also to the Trans Canada ferry between Newfoundland and Cape Breton Island in eastern Nova Scotia. Strong winds destroyed a house in the small Newfoundland village of Francois. Residents in Francois agreed to rebuild the wrecked home while the family temporarily resided in a summer home of another family. The winds also caused damage to shingles and sides of homes, while the strong waves damaged roads and boats along the Burin Peninsula.




</doc>
<doc id="6869687" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6869687" title="Forward intelligence team">
Forward intelligence team

Forward Intelligence Teams (FITs) are two or more police officers who are deployed by UK police forces to gather intelligence on the ground and in some circumstances, to disrupt activists and deter anti-social behaviour. They use cameras, camcorders and audio recorders to conduct overt surveillance of the public. An unsuccessful legal challenge has been made against their use of overt surveillance, but in 2009 the Court of Appeal ruled that they must justify retention of photographs on a case-by-case basis. Any retained information is recorded on the Crimint database.

Political activists have criticised FITs and said that they feel the aim of FIT deployment during protests is to prevent legal protests. Journalists have also complained that FITs attempt to stop them photographing protests and that they conduct surveillance of journalists. A campaign group, Fitwatch, formed in 2007 that aim to obstruct FITs and conduct sousveillance on the officers. Two members of the group were arrested at the 2008 Climate Camp on obstruction charges. A similar police surveillance unit, the Video Intelligence Unit is operated by Greater Manchester Police. In June 2010, the Home Office announced it would review the use of FITs during public order policing.

FITs were first formed in the early 1990s, as part of the Public Order Intelligence Unit (CO11), a section of the Public Order Branch of the Metropolitan Police. They initially targeted football fans, hunt saboteurs and political protesters (since at least 1996), using cameras, camcorders and audio recorders to conduct overt surveillance of the public. The police officers wear full uniform, and are intended to be a highly visible presence. Their uniform is sometimes different from normal police officers in that the upper half of their yellow fluorescent jackets is blue. Civilian photographers are also employed by the police to work alongside FITs. According to Scotland Yard, the aim of FIT teams at protests is to record evidence of protesters in case disorder occurs later on at a protest.

More recently the teams' purpose has been extended to routine police work on low-level crime and anti-social behaviour and police forces throughout the UK now have their own FITs. Despite the implication in their name that their function is to merely gather intelligence, they are also intended to have a deterrent effect. This approach has been reported to work in reducing reports of anti-social behaviour at times when FITs are deployed in specific neighbourhoods. Jacqui Smith, then Home Secretary praised Operation Leopard that used FITs to target youths, in Laindon, Essex stating:"Operation Leopard is exactly the sort of intensive policing that can bring persistent offenders to their senses... Relentless filming of them and their associates throughout the day and night"

Linda Catt, an activist, has suggested that their tactics are "designed to intimidate people and prevent lawful dissent". This view is echoed by a police debriefing of their operations at the 2008 Camp for Climate Action which praised FITs at the event for disrupting activists.

In June 2010, the Home Office announced it would review the use of FITs during public order policing. The move was influenced by the discovery that information collected by FITs, included that which was unrelated to suspected crimes, for example recording who made speeches at demonstrations.

In October 2010, FIT officers in plain clothes were spotted by a press photographer at a protest against companies avoiding tax, despite Commander Bob Broadhurst telling a parliamentary committee in May 2009, that only uniformed officers distinguishable by their blue and yellow jackets were involved in gathering intelligence at protests. The Metropolitan Police told "The Guardian" that it was necessary to deploy plain-clothed officers to "gather information to provide us with a relevant and up-to-date intelligence picture of what to expect". It was the first time that FITs are known to have been deployed in plain clothes.

Liberty brought a judicial review of the overt surveillance practices in May 2008, which was decided in favour of the police, however the police were asked to clarify their evidence to the Court of Appeal, following an investigation by "The Guardian" newspaper.

In May 2009, the Court of Appeal ruled that photographs collected by FITs of people who have not committed a criminal offence can no longer be kept. The ruling was made after Andrew Wood, an arms trade activist, was photographed after challenging the management of Reed Elsevier at their AGM over them organising arms trade exhibitions. Wood argued that police had harassed him and infringed his right to privacy by photographing him. Lord Collins of Mapesbury said that the police presence had a "chilling effect" on people who were protesting lawfully. FITs have not been banned but they must now justify the retention of photographs on a case-by-case basis. As a result of the ruling the Metropolitan Police's public order unit, CO11 was forced to delete 40% of the photos of protesters that it held.

In a report about the policing of the 2009 G-20 London summit protests, Denis O'Connor, the chief inspector of constabulary, stated that the routine use of FITs at protests "raises fundamental privacy issues and should be reviewed". He also said that there was "confusion" over the role of FITs and advised that the Home Office should issue guidance over the legality of the surveillance of protesters and the retention of images.

The information that FITs collect is stored on the Crimint database, which is used daily by police officers to catalogue criminal intelligence. People are listed by name allowing police to determine which events individuals have attended. Photographs obtained by FITs are used to produce "spotter cards" consisting of people's photographs which allows officers to identify people at future events that they attend. For £10, people are able to obtain a list of protests that they have attended from the data held on Crimint under laws in the Data Protection Act 1998.

A 2006 report, "The Economics of Mass Surveillance" calculated that the use of FITs at mass gatherings involves gathering intelligence on roughly 1,200 people to record the actions of one person. The report also noted that most of the people on "spotter cards", used by the police photographers, were those involved in the organisation of protests and that FITs also attend meetings where demonstrations are organised.

Fitwatch (formed in early 2007) campaign against FITs by actively obstructing their operations, and by passively opposing their operations by photographing units (a form of sousveillance).

In June 2009,"The Guardian" released video evidence recorded by a FIT at the 2008 Climate Camp of alleged police brutality against two female members of Fitwatch. The women had asked police officers to reveal their shoulder numbers, as at least four officers had not displayed them. The women attempted to photograph the police officers for evidence, but were forced to the ground, restrained with handcuffs, and had their legs bound with straps. They were then placed in restraint positions, arrested, charged and held in custody for four days, including three days in HMP Bronzefield, before they were released on bail. The police later retracted all the charges against the women. The women lodged a complaint with the IPCC over the incident. The journalist George Monbiot commented on this case, saying that "the police are turning activism into a crime" and that "the FITs' methods appear to have been lifted from a Stasi training manual". He claimed that "anybody who is politically active is filmed, identified, monitored, logged, and cross-checked". A police debrief into the operation at Kingsnorth praised the deployment of FITs saying that they were "highly effective and gained good intelligence and disruption".

Three members of Fitwatch were convicted for obstructing FIT officers in June 2008 as they attempted to photograph those attending a No Borders meeting in London. In July 2010 the Inner London Crown Court overturned the men's convictions, with the judge stating that the protesters' human rights may have been violated by the FIT officers.

On 15 November 2010, the hosts of the Fitwatch blog were asked by the Police National E-Crime Unit to take down the website due to it "being used to undertake criminal activities". The request came after a post on the blog after the 2010 student protest in London, which advised students of actions they should take if they were concerned that they were photographed at the demonstration, such as cutting their hair and disposing of clothing they were wearing. Emily Apple, one of the founders of the site told "The Guardian", "Nothing in that post [giving guidance to student protesters] has not been said before on our blog or on other sites". On 17 November 2010, the Fitwatch website returned, hosted on a web server outside of the UK.

The National Union of Journalists (NUJ) has criticised FITs for their surveillance and sometimes violent harassment of working journalists. Marc Vallee, who was hospitalised by police after documenting a protest, has said that the teams limit freedom of the press and called on the Home Office to confirm that the police had no right to restrict the work of photojournalists. Bob Broadhurst, who is in charge of public order policing at the Metropolitan Police, said in a statement to the NUJ in 2008 that journalists, "on the production of a valid form of accreditation will be able to continue with their work". The NUJ are to make a formal complaint to the Information Commissioner due to the Metropolitan Police failing to provide details on the surveillance of journalists under the Freedom of Information Act. Bob Broadhurst told photographers at an NUJ conference that he had no faith in the National Press Card (a form of press pass) despite journalists needing to prove that they are bona-fide newsgatherers to an independent authority before they are issued.

The BBC TV series "Panorama" produced an episode entitled "What ever happened to people power?" in July 2009 which discussed the use of FITs in targeting activists and journalists.

Greater Manchester Police operate a Video Intelligence Unit, whose plainclothes officers confront and video certain freed prisoners as they leave prison after serving their sentences. They also record footage of people involved in anti-social behaviour on the streets. The aim is to give other police officers up to date information on the appearance of people who have broken the law. Video footage thus collected is constantly replayed on TV screens in rooms where officers complete their paperwork. Footage that they have recorded has also been uploaded onto YouTube in an attempt to catch people they believe have reoffended.
This has resulted in several offenders being sent back to prison after breaching licence conditions. Since the unit was launched in 2006 more than 900 people have been filmed by the unit. Not all of these people are suspects in crime however, people can be filmed if they are thought to associate with prolific offenders or if they have been stopped in an area of high crime under suspicious circumstances. Kieran Walsh, a civil liberties lawyer, said the unit's work "could have implications" for the force under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights - the right to privacy. He believes that filming must be a "proportionate and reasonable" response to a crime and that this does not appear to be the case as people are being targeted over what they might do in the future. It is uncertain as to how long data collected by the unit is to be kept but GMP currently anticipate it will be stored for five years.




</doc>
<doc id="6871345" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6871345" title="The Obvious Child">
The Obvious Child

"The Obvious Child" is a song recorded by American singer-songwriter Paul Simon. It was the lead single from his eighth studio album, "The Rhythm of the Saints" (1990), released by Warner Bros. Records. Written by Simon, its lyrics explore mortality and aging. The song is accompanied by a performance from Brazilian drumming collective Olodum in a live recording. 

The single, released in September 1990, was commercially successful, performing well on charts worldwide. In the United States, it was mainly successful on the Album Rock Tracks chart, where it peaked at number 21. Outside the US, "The Obvious Child" was a top 15 hit in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The song received highly positive reviews upon its release. Simon promoted the song alongside Olodum in a performance on "Saturday Night Live". The song also influenced popular culture; it is the namesake of the 2014 film "Obvious Child".

The rhythm tracks are performed by Grupo Cultural Olodum, a drumming collective ("bloco afro") directed by "Neguinho do Samba" (Alves de Souza) and also signed to Warner Bros. It, like many songs on "The Rhythm of the Saints", was recorded live in the streets of Pelourinho Square of Salvador, Brazil in February 1988. Microphones were hung from windows or on telephone poles to capture the performances. According to Simon, "Hundreds of people gathered. It was an amazing day — an amazing recording experience." The vocal track was recorded at the Hit Factory in New York City.

The song's drum introduction is indebted to "Madagascar", a song by Olodum from their 1987 LP "Egito Madagáscar". Writer Steve Sullivan writes that the figure is a "standard device" for the group, who also employ abbreviated versions of it elsewhere on the album: "Salvador Nao Inerte" and "Vinheta Cuba-Brasil". Following this, the song breaks into an instrumental fragment that, according to Stephen Holden of "The New York Times", echoes the Silhouettes' 1957 doo-wop hit, "Get a Job". Holden also compared the song's conclusion to another doo-wop song, The Charts' "Desirie" (1957).

The song's lyrics thematically relate to a fear of aging and leaving behind the "boldness of youth," according to Sullivan. Holden considered it a story of an everyman pondering the uncertainty of life whilst navigating his high school yearbook. "Rolling Stone" John Mcalley too found it an everyman battling the fact that his "days have become defined by their limitations and dogged ordinariness." For "The Rhythm of the Saints", Simon was inspired by poet Derek Walcott, and would base first-draft lyrics on his poems. Simon attempted to match the rhythmic quality of the composition with his lyrics, whether that meant a lyric was meaningless or not. A lyric relating to "the cross is in the ballpark," for example, has no meaning; Simon said, "I found [it] to be a satisfying rhythmic phrase against the drums." There have been interviews, however, that have quoted him as explaining it just hit him when he sang it, that we all have a "cross to bear", and "its in the ballpark." Meaning whatever we are struggling with, the answer/resolution is nearby/accessible.

"The Obvious Child" performed well on singles charts in several territories worldwide. In the United States, the song reached a peak of number 92 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 on January 5, 1991; it spent five weeks on the chart as a whole. It performed better on the magazine's Mainstream Rock Tracks chart, where it placed at number 21 on November 10, 1990, and on the Modern Rock Tracks chart, where it reached a peak of number 24 a week earlier on November 3. It had more longevity on the former chart, where it spent ten weeks total. In Canada, the song debuted on the "RPM" 100 on October 20, 1990 at position 98. It peaked at number 28 during the week of December 8, 1990, and remained at that peak for two weeks.

Internationally, the single performed better. In the United Kingdom, the song premiered on the UK Singles Chart on September 30, 1990 at number 61, and rose over the following weeks to a peak of number fifteen on November 4, 1990. It charted best in the Netherlands' Nationale Top 100, where it reached a peak of number 12. On Belgium's Ultratop 50, it hit number 29. In Australasian territories, it charted right outside the top 40: in Australia, the song reached number 42, and in New Zealand, it peaked at number 46.

Upon its release, "The Obvious Child" received positive reviews from music critics of the time. Stephen Holden of "The New York Times" was perhaps the most effusive:

Greg Sandow of "Entertainment Weekly" praised the song's "confident drums that resound with special exuberant zing." A reviewer for "People" felt that "the more exotic musical elements are subsumed by Simon's pretty pop structures [...] You never get the impression that Paul has truly gone native or even considered it. He's more like a kid camping under the stars in his own backyard."

Reviews have continued to be very positive over time. Writer Steve Sullivan, in his book "Encyclopedia of Great Popular Song Recordings, Volume 1" (2013), calls the song "an extraordinary work that surpasses any individual song Paul Simon had ever produced as a solo artist." Cameron Scheetz, in a 2014 article for "The A.V. Club", examined the song; he called it "the perfect confluence of the wild, frenetic drumming and Simon's folksy melodies."

Simon performed the song, accompanied by Olodum and Neguinho do Samba, on "Saturday Night Live" on November 17, 1990.

The song is the namesake for the 2014 film "Obvious Child"; it appears in a scene in which two characters drunkenly dance together. Director Gillian Robespierre titled the film with hope that its meaning would be ambiguous.

All songs written by Paul Simon, except where noted.






</doc>
<doc id="6873293" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6873293" title="Raskovnik">
Raskovnik

In Slavic folklore, the raskovnik or razkovniche (Serbian Cyrillic and , , pronounced , , ) is a magical herb. According to lore, the raskovnik has the magical property to unlock or uncover anything that is locked or closed. However, legends claim it is notoriously difficult to recognize the herb, and reputedly only certain chthonic animals are able to identify it.

The herb is known by a multitude of names among the South Slavs, and the names vary significantly by region. While "razkovniche" and "raskovnik" are the customary names in Bulgarian and Serbian respectively and the root is also preserved in the Leskovac dialect as "raskov", in some parts of Macedonia it is known as "ež trava" ("hedgehog grass"). In the vicinity of Bar (southeastern Montenegro), the term is "demir-bozan", a Turkish borrowing meaning "iron breaker". In Syrmia, the plant is referred to as "špirgasta trava "(a hapax legomenon), in Slavonia it is known as "zemaljski ključ" ("earth key"), and in Slovenia's Savinja Valley as "mavričin koren" ("rainbow root").

Traditionally, it is considered that few people, if any, could actually recognize the herb. However, in Bulgarian sources the raskovnik is sometimes described as a grass resembling a four-leaf clover. It grows in meadows and may be picked either while green and blooming or in hay, when it is already dry. While it is not necessarily rare, nor does it thrive only in remote locations, it is nevertheless impossible to recognize by the uninitiated. In the words of Serbian linguist and folklorist Vuk Stefanović Karadžić, “It is some (may be imaginary) grass for which it is thought that thanks to it (when brushed by it) every lock and every other closure would open by itself.”

According to the legend, the raskovnik could unlock any gate or padlock, regardless of its size, material or key. It could also uncover treasures buried in the ground: in Bulgarian beliefs, it could split the ground at the place where a treasure lay so that people could locate it. In some regions of Serbia, the treasure itself was a black man in chains who requested that a raskovnik be brought to him. The raskovnik would break the chains and the man would disappear into the ground to be replaced by a cauldron filled with gold coins. Other supernatural properties attributed to the herb by Bulgarians include the alchemic ability to transmute iron into gold, the more general ability to make the one who picked it forever happy or wealthy. In some interpretations, the raskovnik is a wonderful plant that makes true whatever its owner desires.

The raskovnik is believed to have been sought after by treasure hunters, sorcerers and herbalists who desired its magic powers for personal benefit. In Serbia, it was believed that there exist certain treasures, such as the Treasure of Tsar Radovan, which could not be unlocked in any other way but employing a raskovnik.

As, according to Bulgarian folklore, tortoises were the only beings who knew the appearance of the herb and the location where it grows, such people would try to obtain the raskovnik by deceiving a tortoise. They would find a tortoise nesting site and hem it in with a fence while the tortoise is away. When it returns, the tortoise would be unable to access its eggs, so it would return with a raskovnik in order to breach the fence. Thus, the tortoise would reveal the herb and people would acquire it from the tortoise, which does not need it anymore.

While the tricking of a tortoise was the most popular method in Bulgarian mythology, in Dalmatia the legend refers to snakes, and among Serbs another version involves the locking of young hedgehogs in a box for their mother to unlock. In Serbia, one would also have to be quick to take the raskovnik, as the hedgehog would swallow it after use. In any case, turtles, snakes and hedgehogs are all animals with chthonic characteristics which were often variously associated with the underworld in South Slavic tradition.

Karadžić also mentions another Serbian method to obtain the raskovnik. He recorded a story from the town of Zemun about a merchant who desired to find the herb. The merchant locked an old woman into leg irons and let her wander in a field during the night; if the irons unlocked by themselves at a certain place, that would be a place where the raskovnik grows.

The legendary herb has entered the modern Bulgarian vocabulary as a metaphor for a magic key or a panacea in the wider sense. The phrase “to find the razkovniche” („да намериш разковничето“ "„da namerish razkovnicheto“") means to find the solution to a certain problem, usually a complex or difficult one. "Razkovniche" is also the common Bulgarian name for the plant European waterclover ("Marsilea quadrifolia") which, in its appearance, has many similarities with the descriptions of the mythical raskovnik. In eastern Serbia, "raskovnik" also refers to a specific plant used in vernacular medicine, namely "Laserpitium siler".


</doc>
<doc id="6892738" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6892738" title="New York State Route 227">
New York State Route 227

New York State Route 227 (NY 227) is a state highway in the Finger Lakes region of New York in the United States. The highway extends for in a northeast–southwest direction from an intersection with NY 79 south of the hamlet of Reynoldsville in the town of Hector to a junction with NY 96 in the village of Trumansburg. In between, NY 227 intersects NY 228 in Perry City by the east town line of Hector and passes through the town of Ulysses. Part of NY 227 straddles the Schuyler–Tompkins county line.

When NY 227 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York, it extended from just east of Watkins Glen to Perry City. The route was extended northward to Trumansburg in the early 1940s, replacing part of NY 79; however, it was replaced by NY 79 from Watkins Glen to Reynoldsville in the early 1960s. Prior to 1930, the sections of NY 227 near Reynoldsville and north of Perry City were part of Route 46, an unsigned legislative route.

NY 227 begins at a fork off NY 79 in the town of Hector. The route bends northward, passing the eastern extremities of Finger Lakes National Forest before turning eastward into the hamlet of Reynoldsville. It serves as the main east-west road through Reynoldsville, remaining two lanes wide as it runs through the small community. After leaving the hamlet, the route keeps its gradual northeastern progression, running parallel with the nearby Updyke Road, which forks off toward NY 228. Not far from the junction, NY 227 bends eastward for a short distance near a farm, the first in a series of eastward and northeastward turns over the next . It finally heads due east into the hamlet of Perry City, where it passes some houses ahead of the northern terminus of NY 228. At this intersection, NY 227 turns to the north on NY 228's right-of-way while NY 227's alignment continues eastward as County Route 3 (CR 3), a short connector to CR 142 at the nearby Tompkins County line.

Continuing north from Perry City, NY 227 straddles the Schuyler–Tompkins county line, with the northbound lane in Tompkins County. After , NY 227 turns northeastward, leaving the border and completely entering Tompkins County in the town of Ulysses. Here, directional signage along the route switches from east–west to north–south. The backdrop remains rural for another mile to an intersection with Mayo Road, where the land surrounding the highway begins to become more populated. NY 227 continues its northeastern progression into the village of Trumansburg, initially passing the local golf course and intersecting with the eastern terminus of CR 149 (Searsburg Road). The area around the road becomes primarily residential, a trend that follows the route to its northern end at a junction with NY 96 (West Main Street) in downtown Trumansburg.

In 1911, the New York State Legislature created Route 46, an unsigned legislative route extending from Coopers Plains in Chemung County to Trumansburg in Tompkins County via Watkins Glen. East of Watkins Glen, Route 46 proceeded generally northeastward through Burdett, Reynoldsville and Mecklenburg on its way to Trumansburg. On March 1, 1921, the Route 46 designation was reassigned to another highway in Allegany and Steuben counties as part of a partial renumbering of the legislative route system. The segment of pre-1921 Route 46 that ran alongside Seneca Lake became part of NY 78 ; however, the remainder of old Route 46 between Watkins Glen and Trumansburg went unnumbered until 1930.

NY 78 was replaced by NY 44 (now NY 414) in the vicinity of Watkins Glen as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York. At the same time, two parts of the pre-1921 routing of Route 46 east of Seneca Lake were assigned posted route numbers for the first time. From just northeast of Watkins Glen to Reynoldsville, the old road became part of NY 227, which initially extended from NY 44 (now NY 414) near Watkins Glen to NY 79 in Perry City. While Route 46 veered southeast from Reynoldsville to serve Mecklenburg, NY 227 proceeded northeast from the former to connect to Perry City. The portion of old Route 46 north of Perry City became part of NY 79.

NY 227 was extended north to Trumansburg in the early 1940s, replacing NY 79, which was truncated south to its junction with NY 227 in Perry City. NY 79 was rerouted west of Mecklenburg in the early 1960s to end at NY 414 near Watkins Glen. The realignment supplanted NY 227 from Watkins Glen to Reynoldsville and utilized the old Route 46 corridor from there to Mecklenburg. NY 227 was truncated to its junction with NY 79 south of Reynoldsville at this time.


</doc>
<doc id="6911623" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6911623" title="The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits">
The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits

The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits is the first greatest hits album of English-Irish girl group Girls Aloud. It was first released in the United Kingdom through a limited edition on 23 October 2006, while the standard version was released on 30 October 2006. "The Sound of Girls Aloud" features twelve of the group's singles, two of which reached number one in the UK. The album features three new tracks, with "Something Kinda Ooooh" and "I Think We're Alone Now" being released as singles and peaking inside the top five on the UK Singles Chart.

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" received positive reviews from critics, who praised it as a reflection of the group's success. The album entered the UK Albums Chart at number one, making it Girls Aloud's first album to do so. It also peaked at number nine on the Irish Albums Chart. In 2009, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) recognised "The Sound of Girls Aloud" as one of the nine albums that year to sell at least 1 million units in Europe.

On 6 October 2006, Girls Aloud announced that they would release their first compilation album, following rumours that they would split after "Chemistry" (2005). A limited edition of "The Sound of Girls Aloud" was released in the United Kingdom on 23 October. The limited edition included a bonus disc with alternate edits of the group's previous singles "No Good Advice" and "Wake Me Up", and unreleased tracks, including a cover of "Sacred Trust", originally recorded by fellow "" contestants One True Voice. The bonus disc was also going to include a cover of Chris Isaak's "Wicked Game", however, the track did not make onto the final track listing.

The standard version of the compilation album was released the following week, on 30 October. The regular track listing includes three new tracks: "Something Kinda Ooooh", "Money" and a cover of Tommy James and the Shondells's 1967 single "I Think We're Alone Now". Originally, a cover of "What A Feeling" from the film "Flashdance" was included on the track list instead of "I Think We're Alone Now", but Girls Aloud contacted the record label three days before the album was manufactured to say they would rather record the Tommy James and the Shondells song. The group recorded the song the following morning and the album was mastered three days later. Apart from the new tracks, the album contains twelve of the group's previous singles, two of which reached number one in the UK: "Sound of the Underground" and "I'll Stand by You".

According to Irish bandmate Nadine Coyle, the first draft of the artwork included only the Union Jack, but she demanded the addition of the flag of Ireland. However, the flag appears upside-down on the cover, resembling the flag of Ivory Coast.

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" received positive reviews from critics. Talia Kraines of BBC Music called the album "a journey through the most exciting and daring pop music of recent times" and went on to add that "this reality band has surpassed all expectations," while Paul Scott of "Stylus Magazine" described it as "an irreverent party through the last 30 odd years of pop, taking inspiration from the most unexpected of places" and hailed Girls Aloud as "the finest singles band Britain [sic] has produced this decade." Allmusic reviewer Andy Kellman noted the album for making "an ideal introduction" to the group, and said that the three new songs would most likely "keep the group's remarkable streak of dominance afloat." Dan Cairns of "The Times" gave the album 4 out of 5 stars, stating that Girls Aloud's personality flows "through unimpeachable, sugar-rush pop singles" such as "Something Kinda Ooooh", "The Show" and "Sound of the Underground".

Pitchfork Media critic Tim Finney described the album as "a whirlwind trip through bizarre but lovable pop gadgetry that may leave the uninitiated reeling." He complimented the songs' "deathless hooks and multi-genre pyrotechnics" and noted that they are diverse, varying from different genres while embracing "elements of electroclash, big beat, and even skiffle." Leonie Cooper of "The Guardian" characterised the album as "slick ... near-faultless high-octane pop all the way"; however, she felt that the ballads were not really necessary, as "Girls Aloud sound far more exciting when they're simply having fun". In 2007, "The Guardian" included the greatest hits collection in their list of "1000 albums to hear before you die". Dorian Lynskey wrote, "Years from now, when someone wants to know how bold and brilliant mainstream British pop could get in the noughties, play them this."

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" became Girls Aloud's first album to debut at number one in the United Kingdom, and stayed on the UK Albums Chart for a total of 38 weeks. On 24 November 2007, Mark Sutherland of "Billboard" reported that the album had already sold a total of 767,000 units in the country. On the week ending 2 November 2006, the album debuted at number 13 on the Irish Albums Chart, rising to a new peak of number nine the following week. It was certified Platinum by the Irish Recorded Music Association, denoting shipments of 15,000 units in the country alone. On 29 January 2009, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) recognised "The Sound of Girls Aloud" as one of the nine albums that year to sell at least 1 million units in Europe. As of 21 March 2013, the album has sold over 1,2 million units in Europe.

"Something Kinda Ooooh" was released on 16 October 2006 as the lead single from "The Sound of Girls Aloud", one week prior to the album's release. The track debuted at number five on the UK Singles Chart on download sales alone, before reaching its peak position at number three on the week ending 4 November 2006. The accompanying music video was directed by Stuart Gosling and produced by Jon Adams, and features the group "singing and dancing glamorously". "I Think We're Alone Now" was chosen as the second and final single from the album, being released on 18 December. The song peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart during Christmas week. The music video was directed by Alex Hemming and Nick Collett, and portrays Girls Aloud in an attempt to rob a Las Vegas casino.

In 2007, Girls Aloud went on a tour to further promote the album. The announcement of the tour and the recording of their fourth studio album helped to stop rumours that the band were splitting up, which had surfaced due to the release of their greatest hits album. The show received mixed reviews from music critics, with Dave Simpson of "The Guardian" saying that the group "fare best when they are playing their own songs," while a critic for "Daily Mail" deemed it the group's "raunchiest tour ever [...] there was singing and dancing, but the stand out element of Girls Aloud's latest tour: sex appeal a-go-go."

All tracks were produced by Xenomania. Credits adapted from the liner notes of "The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits".

Credits adapted from Allmusic.


</doc>
<doc id="6936020" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6936020" title="Thomas R. Kline School of Law">
Thomas R. Kline School of Law

The Drexel University Thomas R. Kline School of Law (previously the "Earle Mack School of Law") is the law school of Drexel University located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. The School of Law opened in the fall of 2006 and was the first new law school in Philadelphia in over thirty years, and is the newest school within Drexel University. It offers Juris Doctor, LLM and Master of Legal Studies degrees and provides the opportunity for all students to take part in a cooperative education program.

In 2005, Drexel University announced its plans to create a new law school adjacent to the Drexel University Main Campus W. W. Hagerty library in West Philadelphia. That same year Drexel received approval from the Pennsylvania Department of Education to start the school. The decision to launch a law school with cooperative education in a city with five other law schools was based on a demand for graduates with immediate experience, with the president of Drexel University, Constantine Papadakis, saying that employers "like to hire a graduate and have them immediately be useful." The School of Law joins Temple University, University of Pennsylvania, Villanova University, Rutgers University, and Widener University to become the sixth law school in the Delaware Valley. The School of Law is the first new law school to be opened by a doctoral university in a 25-year period nationwide.
The School of Law's inaugural class began classes on August 16, 2006. Due to a shortage of construction materials in 2006, caused in part by the need in the gulf coast due to Hurricane Katrina, construction on the building was delayed, resulting in classes being held on Drexel University's Main Campus and within the Jenkins Law Library and the auditorium of the National Constitution Center. The first class was expected to be composed of 120 students; ultimately, the inaugural class consisted of 183 students with an incoming median GPA of 3.4 and a median LSAT score of 156. The newest admitted class, the class of 2014, consists of 147 students with an incoming GPA of 3.38 and a median LSAT score of 159. On May 1, 2008, the Drexel University College of Law was renamed the Earle Mack School of Law in honor of Earle I. Mack, a Drexel University alumnus, after a donation of $15 million dollars.

In 2013, the school's name was changed from Earle Mack School of Law to Drexel University School of Law to create new fund-raising opportunities by opening the naming rights.

In 2014, it received a $50 million gift from Thomas R. Kline, a trial lawyer in Philadelphia, and was renamed after him. The gift, which was the single largest in Drexel University's history and the fifth largest received by a law school, was designated for the support of scholarship and to enhance the school's Trial Advocacy Program. The gift includes the conveyance of an historic building designed by Horace Trumbauer. Thomas R. Kline Institute of Trial Advocacy will move into the building and be used for courtroom simulations, Continuing Legal Education (CLE) programs, and development of the Master of Laws (LLM) program.

The school offers Juris Doctor, LLM and Master of Legal Studies degrees, as well as joint-degree programs for those pursuing a degree through Drexel University's LeBow College of Business, School of Public Health, Department of Psychology and Center for Public Policy.
It received provisional accreditation from the American Bar Association in February 2008 enabling the first graduating class, 2009, to take the bar exam upon graduation. The school offers optional concentrations in business and entrepreneurship law, criminal law, health law, and intellectual property law and has 49 full and part-time faculty members. The School of Law is the first to have enrolled all of its students in the Philadelphia Bar Association's Young Lawyers Section. The students also have automatic membership to the Jenkins Law Library. In addition to admittance to the Law Library students also publish a Law Review, "Drexel Law Review", which is published semiannually. In August 2011, after three years of being provisionally accredited, the American Bar Association granted the School of Law full accreditation.

As of 2013, the school has 75 full and part-time faculty members.

Like Drexel University's cooperative education program, the School of Law offers cooperative education for its students. The School of Law is the second law school in the country to have a co-op program for law students, the first being Northeastern University. The first co-op cycle for the school started in September 2007 and over ninety area corporations, law offices, judiciary positions, non-profit organizations, and government offices offered internship positions.

During their first year at school students concentrate on basics such as legal writing and contracts before starting their first six-month co-op cycle. In order to be eligible to participate in the program students must complete their first year with a minimum GPA and satisfy any job orientation that is required. While on co-op students are required to work at least 20 hours a week at their position and take an additional 3 credit hours in either a class or an approved academic program.

Beginning with the class that enrolled in 2014, all students are required to complete at least one co-op placement or a clinical placement in addition to providing a minimum of 50 hours of pro bono service.

From 2006–2011 the School of Law was "unranked" on the "U.S. News & World Report" as provisionally accredited law schools cannot be ranked. On the 2019 list of "Best Law Schools" by the "U.S. News & World Report" the School of Law was ranked 101 out of 145 schools. The law school's Trial Advocacy program was ranked 15th; the Health Law program was ranked 18th and the Legal Writing program was ranked 12th. In July 2013, the School of Law had an 81.9% Pennsylvania Bar Examination passage rate for 1st time test takers. In July 2014, the School of Law had an 87.5% Pennsylvania Bar Examination passage rate for 1st time test takers.

According to Drexel's official 2016 ABA-required disclosures, 75.5% of the Class of 2016 obtained full-time, long-term, JD-required employment nine months after graduation. The school was scored among the top 25 law schools in the U.S. for job outcomes, based on employment outcomes for the Class of 2016 by Law School Transparency. The National Law Journal ranked the school 30th in the U.S. for its employment outcomes, based on its placements for graduates in the Class of 2016.
The total cost of attendance (indicating the cost of tuition, fees, and living expenses) at Drexel for the 2014–2015 academic year is $62,842. The website "Law School Transparency" estimated debt-financed cost of attendance for three years is $234,910. Based on cost of attendance and financial aid data (that the law school is required by the American Bar Association to disclose to prospective students), the average accumulated debt for students who graduated in 2013 was $98,820.

In 2005, the Philadelphia Planning Commission approved Drexel's then estimated $13 million temporary law school. Construction on the temporary law school building began in the fall of 2006 and was completed during the winter term. The $14 million building opened for classes on January 8, 2007.

The complex features a moot courtroom, a two-floor library, a two-story atrium for meetings and casual conversation, faculty/staff offices, and several rooms available for students to meet and work. The building also shares Drexel's campus-wide wireless Internet access.


</doc>
<doc id="6945818" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6945818" title="Gary Hooper">
Gary Hooper

Gary Hooper (born 26 January 1988) is an English professional footballer who plays as a forward for club Sheffield Wednesday.

Hooper started his career at non-League Grays Athletic in 2003. While there he won the 2004–05 Conference South, as well as the FA Trophy twice in 2005 and 2006. After this Championship club Southend United signed him on a free transfer in 2006. He was loaned out twice by the club, on a three-month loan to League One club Leyton Orient in 2007 and a six-month loan to League Two club Hereford United in 2008. Scunthorpe United signed him in 2008, for a fee of £175,000. After two years he was signed by Scottish Premier League club Celtic for £2.4 million. In his first season with the club he was the top scorer and also won the 2011 Scottish Cup.

Hooper has scored in the Premier League, Championship, League One, League Two, FA Cup, League Cup, Football League Trophy, FA Trophy, UEFA Champions League, UEFA Europa League, Scottish Cup, Scottish League Cup and the Scottish Premier League, the first and only player to achieve this feat. On top of this, he has also scored in the Conference National and the Conference South.

Hooper was born in England but has not represented the national team at any level. In March 2011 it was thought that he may be eligible to represent Scotland. However, this possibility was later closed off. Since his move to Celtic he has been considered for England duty and was called up to the under-21 squad for a friendly but had to pull out due to injury. He was then included in the provisional squad for the 2011 UEFA European Under-21 Championship but did not go to the tournament.

Hooper was born in Harlow, Essex and grew up in Loughton. He joined the Tottenham Hotspur youth team at the age of seven. When he was 14 he played 20 minutes of a trial match and was then released by the club. After this he had trials with Northampton Town and Luton Town. These proved unsuccessful and he started playing Sunday league football. He then had a short spell with Maldon Town.

Hooper joined Isthmian League Premier Division club Grays Athletic in the 2003–04 season, being named as an unused substitute in an Essex Senior Cup match against Braintree Town on 11 November 2003 whilst he was still 15 years old.

His debut came the following season when Grays were promoted into the newly formed Conference South, helping them to win the league by scoring 12 goals in 30 league appearances. He started for Grays in the 2004–05 FA Trophy Final against Hucknall Town, but was substituted towards the end of extra-time. The match went to penalties and Grays won the shoot-out 6–5.

The following season in the Conference National, Hooper scored eight times in 40 league appearances. He was an unused substitute in Grays Athletic's 2–0 triumph over Woking in the final of the 2006 FA Trophy. At the end of the 2006 season he was released by Grays. Hooper said that he was only getting substitute appearances for the last few minutes of matches and that he wanted to move.

In July 2006, after his release by Grays, Hooper went on two trials. Firstly to League Two club Barnet, then to Championship club Southend United, where he was given a one-year contract by manager Steve Tilson the following month. On 24 October, Hooper scored twice in a 3–1 League Cup win over Leeds United. He went on to make 18 appearances for Southend in the Championship, although only two were starts. On 15 March, Hooper joined League One club Leyton Orient on loan for the rest of the season. Tilson said that this loan would allow him to assess whether Hooper merited a new contract and would give the young striker experience. Hooper was recalled from loan on 1 May before, already relegated, Southend's last match of the season. A number of players were out injured for the match and, five days after his recall, Hooper started in the 4–1 defeat to Southampton.

Hooper made 18 appearances in League One for Southend during the first half of the 2007–08 season, scoring twice. On 28 January 2008, Hooper signed a new 18-month contract to extend his stay with the club. He then moved on loan to League Two club Hereford United.

At the start of the 2008–09 season. Hooper, along with three other strikers, was listed for transfer as Tilson looked to re-build his attack. Hereford had a bid accepted for Hooper after his successful loan spell, but could not afford to match the larger transfer fees offered by other teams. Several other League One clubs were interested in him. Cheltenham Town had a bid accepted but Hooper eventually decided to move to Scunthorpe United. He scored just four goals in 44 appearances during his time at Southend. Although he did have two successful loan spells.

On 15 March 2007, Hooper moved on loan to League One club Leyton Orient. Two days after joining the club he scored in a 2–2 draw with Oldham Athletic after coming on as a substitute. A week later, he scored against League One leaders Scunthorpe United in another 2–2 draw. Hooper made two more appearances for Orient, before being recalled to Southend on 1 May, when the club activated a 24-hour return clause in his contract. Orient manager Martin Ling said that he thought Hooper had done well during his loan spell with the club and that he would monitor the progress of the young striker.

On 28 January 2008, Hooper signed a one-month loan deal with League Two club Hereford United. He made his debut two days after signing for them, starting in a 2–1 loss to Barnet. He scored in his next match for the club, a 1–0 win over Rotherham United. He played five more times, scoring four goals, before his loan deal was due to expire on 28 February. However, manager Graham Turner agreed a deal to keep him until the end of the season. Southend manager Steve Tilson agreed to this despite having two strikers out injured at the time. Hooper's 11 goals in 19 appearances for Hereford helped them finish third in League Two and secure promotion.

On 14 July 2008, Scunthorpe United signed Hooper for a fee of £125,000, rising to £175,000. Hooper signed a three-year contract with the League One club. In the first match of Scunthorpe's league campaign, Hooper scored in a 2–1 defeat at Glanford Park against Leeds United. He scored his first ever hat-trick against, Brighton, on 6 September and netted seven goals in his first seven matches to help Scunthorpe's promotion push. After this teammate Izzy Iriekpen paid tribute to Hooper saying that "As soon as he started training you could see there was something special there." On 28 October, league leaders, Scunthorpe suffered their first defeat in 12 matches as they lost 3–0 to Oldham Athletic. Hooper came off with an injury in this match and it was feared he had broken his foot and may have been out for up to six months. However, scans later revealed that his foot was just badly bruised. He was labelled in the media as the latest from Scunthorpe's "production line for talented young forwards." He scored both goals in a win over promotion rivals Millwall on 31 January 2009. Scunthorpe reached the final of the Football League Trophy and faced League Two Luton Town. Hooper scored the opener but Luton pulled it back to win the match 3–2 in extra-time. At the end of the season Hooper won Scunthorpe's Player of the Year award. He said he was delighted with the team's performance during the season, in which he scored 24 league goals to help Scunthorpe gain promotion. He then set himself a target of 15 Championship goals for the next season. He scored 30 goals in all competitions throughout the 2008–09 season, just three goals short of Billy Sharp's record 33 goals in a season for Scunthorpe.

At the start of the 2009–10 season, Queens Park Rangers had a £1 million rejected for Hooper. Coventry City were also rumoured to be interested in the striker. On 15 August, Hooper scored twice in a 3–2 win over Derby County. Scunthorpe manager Nigel Adkins said that he thought Hooper was a "massive threat" to the opposition and that he was worried that other teams would try to sign him before the end of the transfer window. On 22 February, captain Cliff Byrne, described Hooper as the kind of striker who could "create something out of nothing". He also stated that he hoped Hooper would stay at the club but if he did leave it would be for a lot of money. This was just after Hooper had scored in a 2–2 draw with Watford, taking his seasonal tally to 13. He scored a hat-trick against Bristol City on his return from a groin injury on 17 April 2010, and added a further two goals at Doncaster Rovers a week later. He scored 20 goals in 39 appearances in all competitions in the 2009–10 season, including 19 in 35 in the league, where he finished as third-top goal scorer behind Peter Whittingham and Nicky Maynard who both scored 20.

In 2012, Scunthorpe United fans voted Hooper as the club's best ever player.

On 26 July 2010, Scottish Premier League club Celtic signed Hooper for £2.4 million. The move provided him with great experience, despite his young age of 22 when joining and kept him grounded. On 4 August 2010, Hooper scored on his debut for the club, against Portuguese Primeira Liga club Braga in the Champions League third qualifying round. Hooper tore his calf muscle in a friendly against Blackburn Rovers just four days later on 8 August, keeping him out of action for almost six weeks.

On 22 September 2010, Hooper made his return from injury in the League Cup, scoring in a 6–0 victory over Inverness Caledonian Thistle. On 25 September 2010, Hooper made his Scottish Premier League debut in a 2–1 victory over Hibernian at Celtic Park. Hooper scored his Scottish Premier League goal on 2 October, in a 3–1 win over Hamilton Academical. and then scored a double against Dundee United at Tannadice on 17 October. One week later, he scored the opening goal in a 3–1 defeat to Rangers at Celtic Park. On 6 November, Hooper and strike partner Anthony Stokes each scored hat-tricks in a league record 9–0 win over Aberdeen. The following week, he scored the winner against St Mirren.

After recovering from an injury that kept him out of action during the Christmas period, Hooper returned to the team against Hibernian on 15 January 2011 and scored the opening goal in a 3–0 win. On 1 February, Hooper scored the first goal in a 3–0 win against Aberdeen. He netted twice in Celtic's 3–0 victory over Rangers on 20 February. He grabbed another brace on 6 April 2011, in a 3–1 victory over Hibernian. Two weeks later, Hooper had a man of the match performance against Kilmarnock, scoring a goal and setting up another three in a 4–0 SPL victory. On 1 May 2011, Hooper scored in a 4–1 victory over Dundee United. He then scored a brace against Hearts, and the opener in a 4–0 win over Motherwell, in the final Scottish Premier League match of the season. Hooper was nominated for the PFA Player of the Year award, but lost out to teammate Emilio Izaguirre and was also picked in the PFA Scotland Team of the Year. Hooper won his first medal for Celtic in the Scottish Cup after a 3–0 win over Motherwell in the final on 21 May 2011. During the 2010–11 season, Hooper had the best strike rate of any player in Britain, scoring 20 goals in 26 matches with a strike rate of 0.77 goals per match. This was also the fourth best strike rate in Europe, behind Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi and Antonio Di Natale.

On 24 July 2011, Hooper had a penalty saved by Graham Stack in Celtic's first match of the 2011–12 season, a 2–0 win over Hibs. On 13 August, he scored his first goal of the season in a 5–1 win over Dundee United. He also picked up an ankle injury which ruled him out for the next two matches. On 25 August he made his return in Celtic's 3–1 loss to FC Sion. Three days later, he scored both goals in a 2–0 win over St Mirren. English Premier League clubs Queens Park Rangers and Wolverhampton Wanderers expressed interest in signing Hooper on transfer deadline day of summer 2011, however Celtic rejected their enquiries about his availability. Hooper's regular strike partner Anthony Stokes said "He's a top, top player. I have no doubt one day he could play at the very top level but we want to keep him here as long as possible."

Hooper scored in Celtic's 4–2 loss to rivals Rangers on 18 September 2011. This was his fourth goal in seven Old Firm matches. He then started Celtic's first Scottish League Cup match of the season against Ross County, scoring one goal in a 2–0 win for Celtic. On 29 September he played in Celtic's 1–1 draw with Italian team Udinese. After three minutes he won a penalty which Ki Sung-Yueng scored. He then gave away a penalty, which was converted, after 83 minutes when he fouled Neuton. A month later, he scored in Celtic's 4–1, League Cup quarter-final, victory over Hibernian. On 3 November, Hooper scored his first European goal of the season, netting the final goal of Celtic's 3–1 Europa League group stage win against Rennes, after coming on as a 78th-minute substitute for James Forrest. Three days later, he again came on as a substitute and scored the winner in a 2–1 win over Motherwell. On 26 November, he scored a hat-trick in a 5–0 win over St Mirren. After scoring five goals in November, he won the SPL Player of the Month award. On 15 December, Hooper scored in Celtic's final Europa League group match, a 1–1 draw against Udinese which meant Celtic finished third in the group and didn't qualify for the knock-out stages. During the January transfer window, Championship league leaders Southampton made several bids for Hooper. However, they were rejected by Celtic and Hooper reiterated his desire to stay with the club. On 14 January, Hooper scored in a 2–1 win over Dundee United. He then scored in Celtic's 4–0 win against Hearts on 8 February. On 29 April 2012, Hooper scored the final goal as Celtic beat Rangers 3–0 at Celtic Park. This was his fifth goal in 10 appearances against Rangers. On 13 May, Hooper scored all five goals for Celtic as they beat Hearts 5–0 in the final SPL match of the season, securing his position as the top scorer in the Scottish Premier League with 24 goals and winning the Golden Boot.

After Southampton had won promotion to the Premier League there was speculation linking them with a £7m for Hooper at the start of the 2012–13 season. However, Hooper stated that he was happy at Celtic and was looking forward to playing Champions League football. On 1 August 2012, Hooper started the season in scoring form, in Celtic's 2–1 victory against HJK Helsinki in the first leg of the Champions League Third Qualifying Round. On 25 September 2012, Hooper scored all 4 goals in Celtic's Scottish League Cup tie against Raith Rovers at Celtic Park, the match finished 4–1. On 29 September 2012, Hooper scored the first goal in a 2–0 victory over Motherwell at Fir Park, this resulted in Celtic going to first spot in the Scottish Premier League. Hooper scored his seventh goal in four matches, against Spartak Moscow in the UEFA Champions League; Celtic won the match 3–2 at Spartak Stadium, recording their first ever away victory in the UEFA Champions League proper. During January 2013, Hooper scored braces against Hearts and Dundee United in high scoring wins at home for Celtic, and also scored the only goal in a 1–0 away win at Motherwell. That run of goalscoring saw him win the SPL Player of the Month Award. Celtic clinched their second successive Scottish Premier League title on 21 April 2013 with a 4–1 win over Inverness Caledonian Thistle at Parkhead. Hooper scored twice in the match. On 26 May 2013, Hooper scored twice for Celtic in their 3–0 win over Hibernian in the Scottish Cup Final.

On 12 June 2013, English Premier League club Hull City made an undisclosed bid, believed to be about £4.5m, for Hooper which Celtic rejected. As transfer speculation increased over the summer, Hooper played what proved to be his final match for Celtic on 23 July when he came on a second-half substitute in a Champions League qualifier against Cliftonville. He replaced Anthony Stokes on 65 minutes and almost scored nine minutes later with an overhead kick that hit the post.

On 26 July 2013, Hooper signed a three-year contract with English Premier League club Norwich City for an undisclosed fee, believed to be £5m, with Norwich having the option of a further year to Hooper's contract. Hooper made his competitive début for Norwich on 21 September 2013 in a Premier League 1–0 home loss to Aston Villa as a 63rd-minute substitute. In his first start for the club, Hooper scored a brace to secure a 3–2 victory over Watford in the third round of the League Cup on 24 September.

On 9 November 2013, Hooper scored his first Premier League goal from the penalty spot against West Ham United at Carrow Road to level the scores at 1–1. Norwich City won the match 3–1, with Hooper being voted as Man of the Match. Due to this goal, he became the first player to score in the top 4 divisions of the English league, the top division of the Scottish League and two cup competitions in each country, as well as the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League. Hooper scored his second Premier League goal and fourth goal in all competitions in just his seventh start for Norwich City, on 30 November 2013 against Crystal Palace, which Norwich City won 1–0 for a vital 3 points. On 7 December, Hooper scored his fifth Norwich City goal and third Premier League goal against West Bromwich Albion at The Hawthorns, a first time angled shot across goalkeeper Boaz Myhill into the corner after a through ball from Leroy Fer, the match ended in a 0–2 Norwich City victory. On 15 December, Hooper scored in consecutive Premier League matches, the one-time Scunthorpe United frontman took one touch on his chest after a Johan Elmander lay off, before hitting a superb volley 30 yards out over Michel Vorm and into the roof of the net, levelling the score at 1–1. Hooper would score again on the Boxing Day fixture against Fulham as his shot deflected off of Aaron Hughes and past goalkeeper David Stockdale, thus making Hooper the first ever Norwich City player to score in four successive Premier League matches at Carrow Road.

Hooper finished his first season at Norwich as the club's top scorer with eight goals, but was unable to prevent his team's relegation from the Premier League to the Championship. A calf injury then saw Hooper miss the first couple of months of the following season. After returning to the team in October, he finally scored his first goal of the season on 22 November 2014 in a 3–3 draw at home against Brighton. The goals then began to flow for Hooper; the striker scoring twice in a 6–1 win over Millwall on Boxing Day where he was described as "outstanding" by manager Neil Adams, then after being dropped from the team, he returned to score a hat trick on 7 February 2015 in a 4–0 win over Blackpool, taking his total for the season to date up to nine goals. Hooper eventually scored 12 goals in the league, and helped Norwich to third place in the league. Hooper only appeared briefly as a substitute during the promotion play-off ties against Ipswich Town and was an unused substitute in the play-off final at Wembley against Middlesbrough. Norwich, however, won the final 2–0 to regain their place in the Premier League.

With Norwich back in the Premier League, Hooper was struggling to hold down a place in the team. By September 2015 he had only played ten minutes in the opening league match against Crystal Palace, and an 89th-minute substitute appearance against Southampton. A loan move to Sheffield Wednesday fell through despite the Yorkshire club agreeing to pay Norwich £500,000 and match Hooper's £32,000 weekly wage. Hooper denied press reports that the move collapsed due to his demand for Sheffield Wednesday to provide him with a VIP box at their stadium for his family and friends. He remained at Norwich for a few more weeks, but sustained an ankle injury in training. Sheffield Wednesday made a further attempt to sign Hooper on loan, and on 27 October he agreed to join them until January 2016.

Hooper made his first appearance for Sheffield Wednesday on 31 October 2015, coming on as a late substitute in a 1–0 win at home against Nottingham Forest in the Championship. In his seventh appearance in all competitions for the club, Hooper scored his first goal for Sheffield Wednesday in a 2–1 defeat at away against MK Dons. In Hooper's final two matches for Sheffield Wednesday before his loan expired, he managed to score four goals which contributed hugely in Wednesday's victories against Bolton Wanderers and Leeds United.

On 22 January 2016, Hooper signed for Wednesday permanently, on a three and a half-year deal. The fee was undisclosed but believed to be around £3 million.

Hooper has not represented England at any level. His paternal grandfather William Hooper was raised in the Scottish Borders, and this led to hopes that Hooper could be eligible to play for Scotland. Then Scotland head coach Craig Levein sought clarification as to the place of birth his grandfather's birth certificate recorded, as he had been born in a hospital in the English border town Berwick-upon-Tweed. The possibility was closed off when it was confirmed that his grandfather was included in the English Births Index. On 13 March 2011, Hooper was included by Stuart Pearce in his 31-man squad for the England under-21 team to play Denmark and Iceland. However, Hooper pulled out of the squad due to injury. On 3 May 2011, he was named in the 40-man provisional squad for the 2011 UEFA European Under-21 Championship, but did not make the final selection.

In February 2012, BBC Sport reported that the Football Association of Wales were investigating his eligibility, but Hooper was unaware of having any Welsh ancestry. Hooper declared his desire to play for Great Britain at the 2012 Summer Olympics, but was not selected.

In November 2012, Hooper was set to join teammate Fraser Forster in the England squad for their upcoming friendly against Sweden in Stockholm, after it was revealed The Football Association had contacted Celtic about the fitness of Hooper. They were handed a bleak prognosis by Celtic's medical team, meaning Hooper couldn't make the squad through injury.

Hooper has all the main attributes to play as a striker, he is strong and can hold up the ball well. He is also a good finisher, he has been described as being a 'penalty box striker'. However, he can also pass the ball well and this allows midfielders to play-off him. He has received praise since moving to Scotland. Newspaper "The Daily Record" described him as being one of the most skilled attackers in the SPL. They also said that he had shown that he could deal with the physical nature of the Scottish game, due to his ability to ride a challenge well.

One criticism that Steve Claridge had when analysing Hooper's game was that "[he often] played at either breakneck speed when involved in play or at walking pace when not", Claridge noted that Hooper needed to work harder to make himself available to his teammates for passes, especially long balls out from defence.

While at Celtic, Hooper struck up an excellent partnership with fellow striker Anthony Stokes. They scored over 40 goals between them in their first season together and were considered to be Celtic's best strike partnership, although on many occasions, especially for big matches, Georgios Samaras was often used alongside Hooper. Hooper expressed his disappointment at this because he felt that he worked very well with Stokes. In their partnership Hooper usually had a more advanced role, playing off the shoulder of the last defender, or in the box, and making runs in behind. His strength, pace, finishing ability and awareness made him suitably adapted to this role. Stokes usually played a deeper role, coming short to get the ball and creating space through his dribbling skill and passing. Although Hooper is more suited to an advanced role, and Stokes to a deeper one, they were capable of switching and both have the skills required to play in either role. This made it very hard for defenders to mark them.

During his time as manager at Rangers, Ally McCoist showed his players footage of a goal Hooper scored against them at Celtic Park. "He makes a run from the halfway line on the left hand side. I watched it and I showed our players it", said McCoist, adding that "he [Hooper] just has a desire to run and run and just get on the end of a cross. You can't buy that, you can't teach that".

Grays Athletic

Hereford United

Scunthorpe United

Celtic

Norwich City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="6965797" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6965797" title="Pennsylvania Route 12">
Pennsylvania Route 12

Pennsylvania Route 12 (PA 12) is a state highway located in Berks County in eastern Pennsylvania. The western terminus of the route is at U.S. Route 222 (US 222) and US 422 in Wyomissing. Its eastern terminus is PA 662 in Ruscombmanor Township. In the Reading area, PA 12 is a four-lane freeway called the Warren Street Bypass that heads northeast through urban areas, coming to interchanges with several roads including PA 183, PA 61, and US 222 Bus. In Alsace Township, the route becomes a two-lane undivided surface road called Pricetown Road and continues northeast through rural areas, intersecting PA 73 before ending at PA 662.

Pricetown Road originally existed in the 18th century as a road to link farmers in Pricetown to markets in Reading. The Warren Street Bypass was first planned in 1949 as a widening of Warren Street in Reading leading to a new bridge over Tulpehocken Creek to Wyomissing. In the 1950s, the Warren Street Bypass was completed from Wyomissing northeast to US 222 (Allentown Pike, now 5th Street Highway) north of Reading, providing a bypass of Reading. US 222 was routed onto this bypass by 1976, with the Warren Street Bypass extended northeast to Pricetown Road in 1980. The part of the Warren Street Bypass northeast of US 222 along with Pricetown Road became State Route 2026 (SR 2026) when the Location Referencing System was established. In 1998, PA 12 was assigned to its current alignment following the rerouting of US 222 onto a new bypass of Reading.

PA 12 begins at an interchange with US 222 and US 422 in the borough of Wyomissing. Southwest of this interchange, the Warren Street Bypass continues as part of southbound US 222 and westbound US 422. US 222 northbound continues northwest and US 422 eastbound continues southeast on the West Shore Bypass. PA 12 does not have access to or from the northbound direction of US 222 at this interchange. From US 222/US 422, the route heads northeast on the four-lane divided Warren Street Bypass. PA 12 crosses Tulpehocken Creek into the city of Reading and heads through commercial areas. Along this stretch, the route has no cross traffic, with access to some local streets as well as businesses while access to other local cross streets is blocked by barricades. The road comes to an interchange with PA 183, with access provided from right-in/right-out ramps to Butler Street and Lehigh Street in the eastbound direction and to Carbon Street and Lackawanna Street in the westbound direction. The PA 183 interchange provides access to Reading Regional Airport, an airport with charter flights that is also home to the Mid-Atlantic Air Museum. Following this interchange, the route becomes a freeway and heads near residential neighborhoods and turns north, running to the west of Norfolk Southern's Reading Line. PA 12 crosses the Schuylkill River and comes to a partial cloverleaf interchange with River Road.

From here, the freeway curves to the northeast and passes under the Reading Line, heading into commercial areas within Muhlenberg Township and coming to a partial cloverleaf interchange with PA 61 that has an eastbound exit and a westbound entrance along with an eastbound entrance from northbound PA 61. The PA 61 south exit provides access to FirstEnergy Stadium, the home ballpark of Minor League Baseball's Reading Fightin Phils. The route passes under Norfolk Southern's Pottsville Branch and comes to a partial cloverleaf interchange with US 222 Bus.; this interchange provides access from westbound PA 12 to PA 61 and northbound US 222. Past this interchange, the freeway passes near more development, reaching a diamond interchange with 11th Street. PA 12 heads into more wooded surroundings and curves northeast. The route comes to a partial cloverleaf interchange with Spring Valley Road and continues into Alsace Township, where the freeway ends.
After the freeway ends, PA 12 becomes a two-lane undivided surface road called Pricetown Road, continuing northeast through forested areas with some homes and businesses. The road passes through the community of Alsace Manor before crossing into Ruscombmanor Township, where it intersects PA 73 in the community of Breezy Corner. Past this intersection, the route continues through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes. PA 12 ends at an intersection with PA 662 in the community of Pricetown, where Pricetown Road continues northeast as SR 2026, an unsigned quadrant route, to a five-way intersection with Lobachsville Road, Lyons Road, Henry Road, and Deysher Road in the community of New Jerusalem in Rockland Township.

In 2016, PA 12 had an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 59,000 vehicles between the US 222/US 422 and PA 183 interchanges to a low of 8,600 vehicles between PA 73 and Walnuttown Road. The portion of PA 12 along the Warren Street Bypass is a part of the National Highway System.

Pricetown Road dates back to the 18th century as a road linking the village of Pricetown to Reading. The road was used by farmers in the Pricetown area who traveled to Reading to buy and sell wares. Pricetown was settled in 1754 and grew into a village with three taverns and a general store that served the trade to and from Reading. In the 19th century, Pricetown Road was used to transport Montana horses from Temple to country auctions in the area. Pricetown Road was originally an unpaved road. Warren Street in Reading was constructed by 1920, running from Fayette Street near the Tulpehocken Creek east to a dead end near the Schuylkill River. In 1927, Pricetown Road was paved in concrete. The road was straightened at the Walnuttown Road intersection by 1940.

In 1949, plans were made to build a four-lane bridge across Tulpehocken Creek at Warren Street. As part of this plan, Warren Street was to be widened from the proposed bridge to Schuylkill Avenue. This widened Warren Street was envisioned to become part of a bypass route of Reading. The bridge and widening were approved with the provision that Warren Street only be widened as far as Schuylkill Avenue as not to build a bypass route through a residential area. Construction on the bridge and the Warren Street Bypass between US 422 (Harrisburg Pike, now Penn Avenue) and PA 83 (now PA 183, Schuylkill Avenue) began in 1950. In 1953, the Park Avenue Extension (which extended Park Avenue in Wyomissing to the bypass) and the Warren Street Bypass from US 422 in Wyomissing to Tulpehocken Creek, along with the Tulpehocken Creek bridge, was finished, with a continuation of the Warren Street Bypass northeast from PA 83 to US 222 (Allentown Pike, now 5th Street Highway) proposed. Construction on the extension of the Warren Street Bypass to US 222 began in 1956 with the process of widening of the existing Warren Street. The PA 83 bridge over the bypass was built in 1957. In 1959, the Warren Street Bypass extension to US 222 was opened to traffic with the portion of Warren Street between Tulpehocken Creek and PA 83 widened to four lanes. The Warren Street Bypass included an interchange with the under-construction Reading Bypass (now US 422, West Shore Bypass) southwest of Tulpehocken Creek when it opened in 1959.

An extension of the Warren Street Bypass from US 222 to Pricetown Road was proposed in 1962. Two routes for the extension were proposed: one following a more southerly route as it does today and another following a more northerly route along Spring Valley Road, passing near the Bernhart Reservoir. The extension of the bypass was intended to provide access to a growing industrial park. In 1966, plans were made to make the portion of the Warren Street Bypass through the Glenside neighborhood of Reading limited-access by eliminating at-grade intersections with local streets, resulting in the streets coming to a dead end at the bypass. The more southerly route for the Warren Street Bypass extension between US 222 and Pricetown Road was selected by 1969. On November 15, 1975, the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) approved for US 222 to be routed to bypass Reading, with the route following the Warren Street Bypass between US 422 in Wyomissing and Allentown Pike. In 1976, construction began on the extension of the Warren Street Bypass between US 222 and Pricetown Road. The portion of the Warren Street Bypass between Spring Valley Road and Pricetown Road was completed in July 1979 while the portion between 11th Street and Spring Valley Road was completed in December 1979. In 1980, the remainder of the Warren Street Bypass extension between US 222 and 11th Street was completed.

With the establishment of the Location Referencing System for state roads in 1987, the Warren Street Bypass between US 222 and Pricetown Road, along with the entire length of Pricetown Road northeast to New Jerusalem, became SR 2026. In 1998, US 222 was rerouted to a freeway alignment northwest of Reading following the completion of the Park Road Corridor in October of that year; the PA 12 designation was given to the Warren Street Bypass northeast of US 222/US 422 in Wyomissing as well as to SR 2026 up to the intersection with PA 662 in December of that year.



</doc>
<doc id="6987489" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6987489" title="Avalanche Studios">
Avalanche Studios

Fatalist Development AB, doing business as Avalanche Studios, is a Swedish video game developer based in Stockholm. Founded by Linus Blomberg and Christofer Sundberg in March 2003, Avalanche Studios focuses on developing open world projects and bases them on their proprietary Apex game engine (formerly known as Avalanche Engine). The company is best known for developing the "Just Cause" game series.

Formed after the collapse of Rock Solid Games, the studio gained early success with the first "Just Cause" title. The team then began "Just Cause 2"s development, but the company suffered from financial problems due to the cancellations of two contracted projects. Despite missing the release window twice, "Just Cause 2" was both a critical and financial success for Avalanche Studios. The company then opened a New York City studio to work on "Just Cause 3", while the Stockholm team began working on "Mad Max" in collaboration with Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment. The company announced three titles in 2017, "Rage 2" with id Software, "Just Cause 4", and a self-published title named Generation Zero. Nordisk Film also acquired the company in the same year.

In addition to the Swedish headquarters and the New York City office, Avalanche opened a new office in Malmö, Sweden, in May 2018. A casual gaming subsidiary, Expansive Worlds, was established in March 2010 to work on "theHunter". The company aims to begin self-publishing new original intellectual properties in the future.

Avalanche Studios was founded by Linus Blomberg and Christofer Sundberg in 2003. Prior to the establishment of the studio, Sundberg had worked in video game publishing as well as "FIFA Soccer" for Electronic Arts. Both of them joined Paradox Interactive, a video game publisher that had published games such as "Europa Universalis". Eventually, Sundberg and Blomberg left and founded their own company called Rock Solid Studios during the second quarter of 2001. The company partnered with Conspiracy Entertainment to develop a video game adaptation of "Tremors", a movie series from Universal Pictures. Titled "", it was set to be released for personal computers, PlayStation 2, Xbox and Nintendo GameCube in 2003. During that period, another Stockholm-based video game development studio, Starbreeze Studios, announced that they would acquire Rock Solid. The agreement between the two companies was ultimately broken by Starbreeze, and the acquisition was stopped. In addition, Universal decided to cancel "Tremors: The Game", which led Rock Solid to declare bankruptcy. With the failure and collapse of Rock Solid, Sundberg and Blomberg became unemployed and in debt. They eventually decided to start over in 2003, establishing Avalanche Studios with six other employees. Reflecting on the founding in 2015, Sundberg stated that the studio was born in "pure chaos", and attributed their failure with Rock Solid to trusting "the wrong people".

When naming the company, Sundberg, Blomberg and the other employees brought up a list of military code words used during World War II. They ultimately decided upon "Avalanche" as the company's name. The company worked on a prototype project called "Rico: Terror in the Tropics" in 2003. The project, designed by Sundberg himself, would eventually become Avalanche's first title, "Just Cause". He pitched the game's concept to publisher Eidos Interactive, which was accepted. According to Sundberg, he wanted to develop a game "where you could skydive onto the roof of a car and keep on going". The game was released in 2006 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2 and Xbox 360. Sundberg considered "Just Cause" to be the 'DNA' and 'center point of the studio', since it was the first game they developed.

Following "Just Cause", Avalanche began to provide technical assistance to "theHunter". Originally developed and published by Emote Games, the franchise was acquired by Avalanche on 18 February 2010. As "theHunter" is an online-activated game, Avalanche established a subsidiary studio called Expansive Worlds on 24 March 2010 to provide support to the continuous development of "theHunter". The new studio will also work on new online games.

Also in development during Avalanche's work on "theHunter" was "AionGuard" and "Just Cause 2". "AionGuard" is a fantasy video game that was ultimately put on hold. "Just Cause 2" was announced in January 2008. Powered by the Apex Engine 2.0, Avalanche Studios' in-house engine, the game included several new and improved features. Originally set to be released in 2008, the game subsequently missed its target release window. In 2008, the studio suffered from layoffs; Avalanche dismissed 77 staff members after the company lost approximately due to the loss of two contracted projects. One of them was later leaked as "Arcadia", a game that once was to be published by THQ. After the incident, Sundberg claimed that the company would remain as a small studio in the future. "Just Cause 2" was not released in 2009, which was regarded as "a bad year for most companies including ourselves" by Sundberg. In May 2009, 20 more employees were laid-off. Despite Avalanche's layoffs, development of "Just Cause 2" was completed, and the game was launched in March 2010 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.

Upon the completion of "Just Cause 2", Avalanche teased a new project. A new downloadable title, called "Renegade Ops", was announced on 30 March 2011. The team was approached by Sega to develop a new downloadable intellectual property using the Apex Engine. Compared to their past titles, the game's production and development periods were much shorter. "Renegade Ops" was released on 14 October 2011.

On 15 June 2011, Avalanche announced that the company would establish a new division in New York City. The studio was officially opened on 17 November 2011, and the first title set to be developed by the New York division was revealed. Codenamed "Project Mamba", the title was a AAA video game set to be released for "next-gen" consoles and PC in 2014. The new studio is located in SoHo, Manhattan, and is led by David Grijns, who was a former employee of Activision and Atari, SA. According to Grijns, Avalanche Studios chose New York City as their location due to less competition. They also aimed to change the "inhospitable" environment of the game industry there.

In 2012, Avalanche began the development of "Mad Max". Prior to the game's development, Avalanche had pitched several projects that were set in a post-apocalyptic environment to different publishers. While the original projects never came to fruition, an opportunity was presented to Avalanche Studios by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment to develop a video game set within the "Mad Max" universe. Film director and creator of the "Mad Max" franchise, George Miller, was consulted during the game's pre-production period. Cory Barlog, the game director of "God of War II", joined the studio in 2010 and left in 2012. Prior to his arrival, he had already been working on a "Mad Max" game with Miller, leading to a confusing relationship between the two projects. In August 2014, Avalanche Studios announced that they were developing several new projects, calling 2015 "the biggest year since the inception of Avalanche Studios more than a decade ago". In addition, the company announced that the Stockholm-based studio would be moved to a larger building for further expansion in the third quarter of 2015. "Mad Max" was originally set to be released in 2014, but was delayed to September 2015.

While "Mad Max" was being developed by Avalanche's studio in Stockholm, the New York division was working on "Just Cause 3". The development of "Just Cause 3" also began in early 2012. While the previous "Just Cause" games were developed by the Swedish studio, the development of "Just Cause 3" was transferred to the New York studio to give the title a fresh start. The game was the first title published by Square Enix after their acquisition of Eidos Interactive. Avalanche Studios sent a team to visit a jungle in Costa Rica to inspect the local landscapes and environments to help them create the game worlds for both "Mad Max" and "Just Cause 3".

In addition to "Mad Max" and "Just Cause 3", a standalone expansion of "theHunter" featuring dinosaurs, titled "theHunter: Primal", was released on Steam's early access on 15 December 2014. The full game was launched on 31 March 2015. The company also released their first mobile title called "Rumble City". It is a turn-based strategy game and was released on 7 July 2015.

In October 2015, the company announced that both the New York office and the Stockholm office suffered minor lay-offs as the studio was undergoing major transition between projects and that it was unable to maintain multiple large teams during this period. In June 2016, the Sweden office announced that they had hired Cameron Foote, the lead designer of "Just Cause 2"'s multiplayer mod, to work on both Avalanche's "present and future projects".

In May 2018, Avalanche Studios announced that they had established a second satellite studio in Malmö, Sweden.

Avalanche was announced in May 2018 to be co-developer of "Rage 2" along with id Software. In a video interview with "Game Informer", Sundberg revealed that the company will focus on developing new original intellectual property in the future and, despite continuing to work with other larger publishers, the company's focus will be shifted to self-publishing.

On 30 May 2018, Nordisk Film announced that they had wholly acquired Avalanche Studios for . In June 2018, Avalanche announced a first-person shooter game, titled "Generation Zero", scheduled for release on 26 March 2019. On 10 June 2018, "Just Cause 4" was announced at the Xbox Briefing at E3 2018, scheduled for release on 4 December 2018. On June 25, 2018, Avalanche announced that it had 6 projects currently in development.

Starting from Avalanche Studios' inception, the company's primary focus is to create open world sandbox games, citing "Elite" as their inspiration. According to Blomberg, the studio has always been interested in creating open world games, and they aimed to be "the best" in developing them. The company seeks to remain flexible to market changes and tries not to limit themselves to one business model. Avalanche also focuses on developing games with long gameplay length and high replay value. Sundberg considers Avalanche Studios to be an independent company, and often keeps the rights to their intellectual properties. Sundberg also stated that video game developers should not put too much weight in income; as a result, the company seldom develops "forced" multiplayer modes, as they believe that approach "makes absolutely no sense" and does not add any value to the game. When seeking future projects, the studio chooses projects that they are passionate about and allow creative freedom. They only make games that "[they] love to play" or games that "can bring a smile to people's faces".

Sundberg described the company as "family-driven". Sundberg and Blomberg do not have their own offices in the studio, as they want to maintain a close relationship with their staff members. The two also seek to be closely involved with all their ongoing projects.

"Just Cause" is a series of open world action-adventure games starring Rico Rodriguez as the protagonist, an operative from "The Agency", a military organization in "Just Cause" and "Just Cause 2". The series is known for allowing players to create chaos and providing players freedom in exploring the game's world. Gameplay revolves around gunplay and the use of the grappling hook and parachute. While the original "Just Cause" was not particularly well received by critics, its sequel, "Just Cause 2", received critical acclaim. The PC version of the game received an 84 out of 100 from Metacritic, a review aggregator. Some reviewers also regarded the game as "one of the most entertaining sandbox shooters ever created". Upon release, "Just Cause 2" was proven to be more popular than its predecessors; over 2 million players played the game's demo, and over 6 million players purchased the final game. As the game did not ship with any multiplayer feature, a multiplayer PC mod, which can accommodate more than one thousands players in a single map, was created by a modder. Avalanche Studios supported the mod, made the mod official on 16 December 2013, and released the mod on Steam as free downloadable content for players who had purchased the game. "Just Cause 3", then the latest title in the series, was released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on 1 December 2015. Sundberg considered the collaboration with Square Enix as "a long-term partnership". During Square Enix's E3 2015 press conference, Square Enix of America CEO, Phil Rogers, stated that he considered "Just Cause" a major franchise that can stand "side by side" with other iconic Square Enix franchises.

"Mad Max" was the first AAA title developed by Avalanche Studios outside of the "Just Cause" series. It was also the company's first licensed video game. The game follows the series' titular character as he ventures into a wasteland to search for his lost car, the Interceptor. The title was initially slated for a 2012 reveal, but was later announced at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2013. Originally set to be released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360 and Xbox One, the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game were cancelled due to hardware restrictions. A Linux port was also announced.

The team also worked on "theHunter", a free-to-play hunting video game. The game is a commercial success for Avalanche, with Sundberg claiming that the title "contribute[s] quite a lot to [Avalanche's] financial success". Avalanche considered "theHunter" to be an experiment for them to see whether the free-to-play business model suited the company or not. "Renegade Ops" is another original title from Avalanche. It is a top down shooter which had drawn inspirations from 1986's "Jackal", 1992's "" and 1993's "Cannon Fodder". The team aimed to "recreate classics" with "Renegade Ops", similar to 2010's "Shadow Complex". The game received generally positive reviews upon release. Avalanche Studios' first mobile game, titled "Rumble City", is a strategy board game which takes inspiration from the American bike culture during the 1960s. It was released in July 2015 for iOS and Android devices. Avalanche Studios was set to be collaborating with Square Enix on the development of the airship segment of "Final Fantasy XV". However, it was later revealed that the company only provided information to them, instead of working directly with them.

The studio also worked on several cancelled projects. In 2009, Avalanche announced "AionGuard", a "God of War"-style open world fantasy game which features World War I fighters, samurai and knights for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. Influences for the game were drawn from "Star Wars" and works from Frank Herbert and Michael Moorcock. However, the project was eventually put on hold indefinitely in 2010. In 2012, the company announced a non-Superman comic book game, which was eventually cancelled in 2014. The studio almost collaborated with LucasArts to develop an open world video game based on the "Star Wars" universe. A steampunk-themed game was also reported to be in development, but was later put on hold.

On 14 May 2018 Bethesda announced Avalanche (along with id Software) as developers of "Rage 2" for release on Windows PC, Xbox One and PlayStation 4.


</doc>
<doc id="7032315" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7032315" title="Hurricane Helene (2006)">
Hurricane Helene (2006)

Hurricane Helene was the ninth tropical storm, fourth hurricane, and strongest hurricane of the 2006 Atlantic hurricane season, tied with Gordon.

Helene was a long-lived Cape Verde hurricane that formed in the extreme southeastern part of the North Atlantic Ocean, peaking as a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale as it traversed the central Atlantic. It never affected land until the very end of its lifespan as a weak extratropical system, which had minor impact in the northern British Isles.

In the second week of September, a strong tropical wave began to emerge off the coast of Africa. It was well-organized from the start, and on September 11, even before it emerged off the coast, the National Hurricane Center predicted that it could quickly develop into a tropical depression. That is indeed what happened, and it became Tropical Depression Eight on the morning of September 12. The enormous size of the depression made it fairly slow to develop, combined with some easterly wind shear in the eastern Atlantic and influence of the Saharan Air Layer to the north as it tracked south of the Cape Verde islands. Convection was also slow to build in, with little banding at first. The initial strengthening was delayed as a result. However, on September 13, the organization improved as banding became better defined, and that evening, the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Helene.

The storm slowly strengthened over the warm waters of the eastern Atlantic thereafter as it tracked west-northwest. Some dry air from the Saharan Air Layer continued to slow development on September 14 as Helene remained a low-end tropical storm. However, a bout of intensification took place on September 15 as shear diminished. The storm became much better organized with well-defined banding, and leveled off that evening at just under hurricane intensity. On the morning of September 16, the storm began to develop a ragged eye, and the storm strengthened to hurricane status. The intensity leveled off for a while as a marginal Category 1 hurricane, as the intensification was slowed by the presence of moderate wind shear despite the absence of significant dry air. Late that evening, the storm began to slowly intensify once again.
On September 17, the intensification became more rapid and Helene quickly became a Category 2 hurricane that morning as the eye became clearer and surrounded by deep convection. Helene also turned more northward and slowed down in the central Atlantic, which was in response to a weakness in the subtropical ridge farther north created by Gordon to the north. The northward turn shifted the course away from any land areas. The intensification continued through the afternoon, and that evening, Helene strengthened into a major hurricane with 115 mph (185 km/h) and a minimum central pressure of 962 mbar. As shear remained low and the oceans remained warm, Helene intensified slightly more, peaking as a solid Category 3 hurricane with 120 mph (195 km/h) winds early on September 18. At that time, Helene and Gordon were at roughly the same longitude in the open ocean. Operationally, Helene was estimated to have had 125 mph (205 km/h) winds, but the post-storm analysis downgraded it slightly. As Gordon moved eastward on the afternoon of 18th, a narrow ridge built in, forcing Helene westward. The eyewall collapsed somewhat, and Helene weakened slightly to a Category 2 hurricane, where it leveled off for about 48 hours until September 20 due to a lengthy eyewall replacement cycle and an elongated cloud pattern. On the 20th, Helene turned back to the northwest and weakened slightly due to a slight increase in wind shear. That afternoon, it was downgraded to a Category 1 hurricane, which Helene remained until becoming extratropical.

Early on September 21, the motion shifted to the north as it moved along the northwest periphery of the subtropical ridge. That general motion continued throughout the day, however, Helene began to turn more northeastward that evening along the edge of the subtropical ridge, east of Bermuda. A decrease in wind shear and relatively warm water around 81°F (27°C) kept the intensity mostly stationary, keeping Helene as a Category 1 hurricane. The intensity held around 80 mph (130 km/h) before strengthening slightly late on September 22, despite losing some tropical characteristics (it was operationally downgraded to a tropical storm for a brief period) as it accelerated northeast in the north Atlantic. A QuikSCAT analysis early on September 23 confirmed a high-end Category 1 hurricane with 90 mph (145 km/h) winds.

Helene transitioned into a "hybrid" storm with both tropical and extratropical characteristics that afternoon, with both a deep warm core and an asymmetric, frontal-like appearance. After that, increased shear weakened Helene once again, although it remained a hurricane-strength storm until it was fully extratropical on the morning of September 24. After becoming extratropical, the storm weakened as it tracked eastward, becoming a gale center west of Ireland early on September 27. It eventually merged with a larger extratropical low near the northern end of the British Isles late on the 27th.

While a tropical system, Helene never approached land. Three ships were caught in the outer bands of Helene; the strongest of which reported 56 mph (91 km/h) sustained winds early on September 23 in the north Atlantic. Though it remained far away from the island, the hurricane produced rough waves in Bermuda. As a weakened extratropical system, strong wind gusts were reported in Ireland and northern Scotland. The strongest reported wind gust in Ireland was at the Valentia Observatory, where 56 mph (91 km/h) gusts were reported. In Scotland, the strongest gust was on South Uist Island in the Outer Hebrides, where 74 mph (118 km/h) gusts were reported. No damage or fatalities were reported as a result of Helene.




</doc>
<doc id="7048767" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7048767" title="Ottoman ironclad Mesudiye">
Ottoman ironclad Mesudiye

Mesudiye (Ottoman Turkish: Happiness) was a central-battery ironclad of the Ottoman Navy, one of the largest ships of that type ever built. She was built at the Thames Iron Works in Britain between 1871 and 1875. "Mesudiye" had one sister ship, though she was purchased by the Royal Navy and commissioned as . Her primary armament consisted of twelve guns in a central armored battery.

"Mesudiye" was poorly maintained for most of her career, including a twenty-year long period between the Russo-Turkish War in 1877–78 and the Greco-Turkish War of 1897. As a result, she was in very poor condition by the late 1890s, which prompted a major reconstruction of her into a pre-dreadnought design type vessel in Genoa. The ship's armament was overhauled, though the gun turrets that were to have mounted guns never received the weapons. A new propulsion system was also installed, which significantly improved performance.

The ship saw extensive action during the First Balkan War in 1912–13, including the battles of Elli and Lemnos in December 1912 and January 1913, respectively. During the latter engagement, she was badly damaged by a Greek shell and forced to withdraw. Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914, "Mesudiye" was moored at Nara to protect the minefields that blocked the entrance to the Dardanelles. On the morning of 13 December, the British submarine passed through the minefields and torpedoed "Mesudiye", which quickly sank. Most of the crew survived, however, and many of her guns were salvaged and used to strengthen the defenses of the Dardanelles. A battery of these guns, named Mesudiye in honor of the ship, helped to sink the French battleship in March 1915.

In the aftermath of the Crimean War, where an entire Ottoman squadron was destroyed by a Russian fleet at Sinop, the Ottoman Empire began a naval construction program, limited primarily by the chronically weak Ottoman economy. Several ironclad warships were ordered in the 1860s and 1870s, primarily from British and French shipyards. Despite the shortage of funds, by the late 1870s, the Ottomans had acquired a fleet of thirteen large ironclads and nine smaller armored warships. "Mesudiye" was designed by Edward Reed, who based the design on the recently build British ironclad .

"Mesudiye" was long, and she had a beam of and a draft of . She displaced as originally built. Her hull was constructed with iron, and was fitted with a ram bow. She had a crew of 700 officers and enlisted men.

The ship was powered by a single horizontal, two-cylinder compound engine, with steam provided by eight coal-fired box boilers. The boilers were trunked into a pair of funnels located amidships. The engines were rated at and produced a top speed of . By 1884, decades of poor maintenance had reduced her top speed to . She carried of coal. Although intended to operate primarily via her steam engine, "Mesudiye" was also fitted with three masts and a barque rig.

"Mesudiye" was armed with a main battery of twelve RML 10 inch 18 ton guns, all mounted in a central battery. Six were on each side, with four on the broadside, one angled forward and the other angled rearward. She was also equipped with three RML 7 inch guns, all on the upper deck, with two forward and one aft. In 1891, six quick-firing guns (QF) and six QF guns were installed.

Armor protection consisted of iron plate; the armored belt had a maximum thickness of in the central portion of the ship, where it protected machinery and ammunition magazines, and was reduced on either end, first to and then to 76 mm. The thickest part of the belt extended below the waterline and above the line, and was composed of three strakes. The middle strake was the thickest, the upper strake was reduced slightly to , and the lower one was and tapered to . The gun battery was protected by another two strakes of armor, the lower being 254 mm thick and the upper reduced to .

"Mesudiye" was ordered in 1871 and was laid down at the Thames Iron Works shipyard in London the following year. She was launched on 28 October 1874 and was commissioned in December 1875 for sea trials. She had one sister ship, "Mahmûdiye", which was renamed "Hamidiye" while under construction. She was purchased by the Royal Navy before completion and commissioned as . "Mesudiye" and "Superb" were the largest casemate ironclads ever built. In September 1876, "Mesudiye" became the flagship of the Ottoman Black Sea Squadron, though she did not see action in the Russo-Turkish War that broke out in April 1877.

After the Ottoman defeat, the fleet was laid up at the Golden Horn and left largely unattended for the following twenty years. During this period of inactivity, "Mesudiye" received a minor modernization at the Tersâne-i Âmire shipyard on the Golden Horn. At the start of the Greco-Turkish War in February 1897, "Mesudiye" was found to be unfit for combat, as were most of the other major warships of the fleet. On 15 May "Mesudiye" and several other warships attempted to hold a training exercise, which only highlighted the poor state of training of the ships' crews.

Following the end of the war, the government decided to begin a naval reconstruction program. The first stage was to rebuild the older armored warships, including "Mesudiye". Requests for proposals were sent to foreign shipyards, and in October 1898 the Gio. Ansaldo & C. shipyard in Genoa requested permission to survey the ship and the ironclad . Both vessels were accordingly sent to Genoa in January 1899, arriving on the 28th, though Ansaldo only received the contract for "Mesudiye". "Mesudiye" was rebuilt into a pre-dreadnought type vessel.

The modernization involved radical reconstruction of the hull; the bow and stern were cut down to make room for a pair of gun turrets, each mounting a single 40-caliber gun manufactured by Vickers. The turrets had 230 mm thick armored faces, though they never received their guns; wooden dummy guns were installed in their place. A battery of twelve 45-caliber QF guns was installed in place of the old rifled muzzle-loaders, and sixteen 76 mm QF guns were added in an upper battery. "Mesudiye" also received ten guns and a pair of guns.

A large superstructure was built amidships, with a new conning tower, which was given of armor plating. Displacement rose to normally and at full load. The ship's propulsion system was also completely replaced. Two triple-expansion engines were installed, along with sixteen coal-fired Niclausse boilers. The two screw propellers overlapped, so the port side screw was placed slightly ahead of the starboard one. Performance improved to and . Her crew increased to 800 as a result of the modifications. On 15 March 1904, "Mesudiye" completed sea trials and thereafter returned to Constantinople.

In 1909, she participated in the first fleet maneuver conducted by the Ottoman Navy in twenty years, part of a reform program initiated by a British naval mission to the Ottoman Empire. Starting in July 1911, "Mesudiye" joined the two pre-dreadnoughts and , four destroyers, and a torpedo boat for a series of exercises that culminated in the routine summer cruise to Beirut. The fleet was returning to Constantinople when Italy declared war, starting the Italo-Turkish War on 29 September 1911. "Mesudiye" and the rest of the fleet moored at Nagara Point on 2 October and returned to Constantinople the following day. "Mesudiye" was thereafter assigned to the Reserve Division, which also included the rebuilt ironclad "Âsâr-ı Tevfik" and the torpedo cruiser . She did not see action during the conflict, since the Ottoman fleet spent the war in port. This was in part due to the rising tensions in the Balkans that presaged the Balkan Wars; the Ottomans kept their fleet in port so it could be prepared for the inevitable conflict.

In October 1912, the Balkan League declared war on the Ottomans, a month before the Italo-Turkish War ended. At the time, "Mesudiye" was moored off Büyükdere, a neighborhood in Constantinople, with the torpedo boats and , stationed as a guard ship. In December, the Ottoman fleet was reorganized, with "Mesudiye" joining the newly formed Battleship Division, under the command of Ramiz Naman Bey. The division also included "Barbaros Hayreddin", "Turgut Reis", and "Âsâr-ı Tevfik". The ship was moved to Büyükçekmece on 15 November, where she joined the rest of the fleet. Two days later, "Mesudiye" and "Barbaros Hayreddin" conducted shore bombardments in support of the Ottoman troops holding the Çatalca Line; the bombardments did not cause particularly significant material damage to the attacking Bulgarians, but it did boost Ottoman morale.

The ships took part in the Battle of Elli, the first Ottoman surface action involving major warships since the Russo-Turkish War, on 16 December 1912. The Ottoman fleet sortied from the Dardanelles at 9:30; the smaller craft remained at the mouth of the straits while the battleships sailed north, hugging the coast. The Greek flotilla, which included the armored cruiser and three s, sailing from the island of Lemnos, altered course to the northeast to block the advance of the Ottoman battleships. The Ottoman ships opened fire on the Greeks at 9:40, from a range of about . Five minutes later, "Georgios Averof" crossed over to the other side of the Ottoman fleet, placing the Ottomans in the unfavorable position of being under fire from both sides.

At 9:50 and under heavy pressure from the Greek fleet, the Ottoman ships completed a 16-point turn, which reversed their course, and headed for the safety of the straits. The turn was poorly conducted, and the ships fell out of formation, blocking each other's fields of fire. "Barbaros Hayreddin", "Turgut Reis", and "Mesudiye" took several hits during the battle, though only "Barbaros Hayreddin" was significantly damaged. By 10:17, both sides had ceased firing and the Ottoman fleet withdrew into the Dardanelles. When they approached the straits, "Mesudiye" and "Âsâr-ı Tevfik" took up positions to cover the withdrawal of the damaged pre-dreadnoughts. The ships reached port by 13:00 and transferred their casualties to the hospital ship "Resit Paşa".

In late December, the Ottomans began a campaign of raids and patrols in the Aegean Sea against the islands that had been recently conquered by the Greeks. The Ottoman Army began planning to make a landing on Tenedos in late December, which had been captured by Greece earlier in the war. "Mesudiye" and the rest of the Battleship Division sortied from the Dardanelles on the morning of 4 January 1913, but the operation was called off after the Greek fleet appeared. On 10 January, the fleet embarked on another offensive operation, this time to raid the island of Imbros. After a brief, inconclusive clash with Greek destroyers, the fleet again withdrew to the safety of the Dardanelles. Eight days later, another fleet operation began, which produced the Battle of Lemnos, the second major naval engagement of the war. Ottoman plan to lure the faster "Georgios Averof" away from the Dardanelles. The protected cruiser evaded the Greek blockade and broke out into the Aegean Sea in an attempt to draw the Greek cruiser into pursuit. Despite the threat posed by the cruiser, the Greek commander refused to detach "Georgios Averof".

The Ottoman fleet departed the Dardanelles at 8:20 on the morning of 18 January, and sailed toward the island of Lemnos at a speed of . "Barbaros Hayreddin" led the line of battleships, with a flotilla of torpedo boats on either side of the formation. A long range artillery duel that lasted for two hours began at around 11:55, when the Ottoman fleet opened fire at a range of . They concentrated their fire on the Greek "Georgios Averof", which returned fire at 12:00. At 12:50, the Greeks attempted to cross the T of the Ottoman fleet, but "Barbaros Hayreddin" turned north to block the Greek maneuver. At around that time, "Mesudiye" took a serious hit that disabled three of her 150 mm guns; this damage, coupled with boiler trouble, led the Ottoman commander to detach the ship and send her back to port.

On 5 February, "Mesudiye" supported operations off Şarköy in the Sea of Marmara, bombarding Bulgarian troops that had occupied the town. This was the last wartime operation conducted by the ship; she did not participate in the amphibious assault on Şarköy three days later. The Ottoman fleet then spent the remaining months of the war in port, until the armistice ended the conflict in April.

In late July 1914, World War I broke out in Europe, though the Ottomans initially remained neutral. On 6 September 1914, "Mesudiye" was sent to Nara to protect the minefields guarding the entrance to the Dardanelles. She was supported by the minelayer and the tug . Tensions between the Ottomans and a British fleet patrolling the entrance to the Dardanelles increased until 5 November, when Britain and France declared war on the Ottoman Empire.

On the morning of 13 December, the British submarine , commanded by Lieutenant Norman Holbrook, entered the Dardanelles. At around 11:30, she spotted "Mesudiye" at anchor and fired a single torpedo from a distance of . The torpedo hit the ship's stern and caused serious damage; "Mesudiye"s guns briefly fired at "B11"s periscope before the ship capsized and sank in shallow water. Casualties were light, with only 10 officers and 27 enlisted men killed in the attack. A salvage effort removed the 150 mm and 76 mm guns, which were used to strengthen the defenses of the Dardanelles. In the meantime, "B11" successfully passed back through the Dardanelles and returned to port; Holbrook was awarded the Victoria Cross for sinking "Mesudiye".

"Mesudiye"s salvaged 150 mm guns were installed as "Battery Mesudiye" in the Dardanelles. These guns played a role in the sinking of the French battleship on 18 March 1915, having hit the ship eight times—one of which disabled her forward turret—before she struck a mine and sank with very heavy loss of life.



</doc>
<doc id="7108181" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7108181" title="Further Instructions">
Further Instructions

"Further Instructions" is the third episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series "Lost". It first aired on October 18, 2006, on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), making it the 52nd episode of the series. The episode was written by showrunner Carlton Cuse and supervising producer Elizabeth Sarnoff and was directed by Stephen Williams.

The series follows the survivors of the crash of a commercial passenger jet flying between Sydney and Los Angeles, on a mysterious tropical island somewhere in the South Pacific Ocean. In this episode, John Locke (Terry O'Quinn) recovers from the Hatch implosion and rescues Mr. Eko (Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje) from a polar bear. Locke is featured in the episode's flashbacks.

The episode featured the return of previous main cast member Ian Somerhalder. It also introduced the characters of Nikki and Paulo (Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro), who were added in the wake of some criticism that the series focused too much on the same fifteen survivors. An estimated 16.31 million Americans watched the episode upon its original broadcast. "Further Instructions" received mixed to positive reviews from television critics.

Locke is a member of a commune in Humboldt County, California. He considers its members his new family. One day Locke picks up a young hitchhiker, named Eddie Colburn (Justin Chatwin), who tells him he is leaving home. Eddie joins the commune, but after six weeks, he asks Locke why he is never allowed to know what is going on in a greenhouse (into which he sees an exceptional amount of fertilizer going). Eddie expresses his discontent with being kept out of the secret and affirms to Locke his desire to be in on "whatever you guys are trying to blow up". Locke laughs and says he will talk to the commune leaders, Mike (Chris Mulkey) and Jan (Virginia Morris).

Upon entering the greenhouse some time later, in which marijuana is grown, Locke finds Mike and Jan in the midst of a frantic preparation to flee. They blame Locke for bringing Eddie, who they have discovered is an undercover police officer. Locke promises to fix the situation. He takes Eddie hunting and holds Eddie at gunpoint. Eddie says that Locke was chosen because his psych profile said he would be "amenable for coercion". Eddie walks away, stating that Locke will not shoot him because he is "a good man," though Locke insists that he is a hunter, not a farmer.

John Locke wakes up in the jungle and sees a naked Desmond Hume (Henry Ian Cusick) run by, but Locke cannot speak. Mr. Eko's (Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje) stick falls from above nearly hitting him. In the frame of Eko's church, he builds a sweat lodge and convinces Charlie Pace (Dominic Monaghan) to stand guard. Locke takes a hallucinogenic drug and enters the lodge in order to "speak with the Island". There, Boone Carlyle (Ian Somerhalder) appears to help him "find [his] way again, so that [he] can bring the family back together". Locke (mutely) apologizes for the day Boone died, and he accepts the apology, however, in a taunting and seemingly sarcastic manner. Locke's hallucination takes him to Sydney airport. Boone wheels Locke through the airport where he tells him someone is "in serious danger". Locke sees his fellow survivors, and is told by Boone that he must "clean up [his] own mess". Locke finds Eko's stick covered in blood and Boone tells him "they have him, you don't have much time". Upon exiting the sweat lodge he sees a flash of a polar bear. He recovers his ability to speak and tells Charlie that he is going to save Eko.

Locke and Charlie track Eko, who Locke believes has been captured by a polar bear. They pause at a large pit in the ground where imploded. They encounter Hugo "Hurley" Reyes (Jorge Garcia), who tells them that Jack, Kate, and Sawyer were kidnapped by the Others, and that "Henry Gale" is their leader. While continuing back to the camp alone, Hurley finds Desmond naked and lends him a tie-dyed t-shirt. Desmond says the electromagnetic anomaly may have been destroyed, and Hurley questions why Desmond was not destroyed. Desmond mentions Locke's speech and his plan to save Jack Shephard, Kate Austen, and James "Sawyer" Ford. However, Hurley responds, "What speech?", as Locke has yet to give any such speech. Desmond seems confused, and drops the whole matter.

Locke finds the polar bear's cave and rescues Eko from the polar bear. While Charlie fetches water from a stream, Locke apologizes to an unconscious Eko for his lack of faith. Eko appears to briefly awaken and tells Locke that he must rescue Jack, Kate and Sawyer. Upon arriving at camp, Hurley informs the camp that Jack and the others have been captured. As an explanation, Locke announces to the survivors that he plans to rescue Jack, Kate, and Sawyer, as Desmond indicated to Hurley earlier. Hurley mentions to Charlie a sense of déjà vu.

"Further Instructions" was written by showrunner Carlton Cuse and supervising producer Elizabeth Sarnoff; Stephen Williams served as the director. As the third episode of the season, "Further Instructions" was the first episode to feature the fate of the main cast camped on the beach, as well as the first to begin resolving the Hatch storyline from the season two finale. Leading up to the third season's broadcast, ABC attempted to reveal as few details as possible to the public. Ian Somerhalder's return was one piece of information that press releases included. Somerhalder, a former series regular, was credited as a guest actor to play his character Boone Carlyle in Locke's hallucinations, as his character died during the first season. Guest star Justin Chatwin made his first and only appearance in the episode. Other guest stars included Virginia Morris and Chris Mulkey as the commune leaders Jan and Milke, and Dion Donahue as Kim. The polar bear was mostly depicted by having stuntman Jonathan Arthur inside a bear suit.

Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro make their first appearances as Nikki and Paulo in this episode. Prior to the third season, the producers of the show were often asked what the rest of the plane-crash survivors were doing because the show only focused on approximately fifteen of the survivors, and the characters of Nikki and Paulo were created in response. Reaction to the characters was generally negative because of their abrupt introduction onto the show. Nikki and Paulo's original introduction onto the show was deleted for time from the final cut of the episode. They were supposed to be accidentally found by Claire Littleton in Jack's tent having sex in the middle of the episode. They were instead introduced at the end of the episode when Locke makes a speech. The deleted scene was included on the third season DVD. The DVD also contained another deleted scene of Locke returning to the commune and seeing Mike and Jan getting arrested.

Hurley worries that the Hatch implosion turned Desmond into the Hulk, a Marvel Comics character who turned large and green upon being exposed to Gamma rays. The Bible verses seen on Mr. Eko's stick include Romans 6:12, which says "Do not obey the lusts of sin" and John 3:5, which says "Jesus answered, 'I tell you the truth, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless he is born of water and the Spirit'." Hurley's numbers are also partially visible. Dominic Monaghan as his character Charlie, says, while trying to figure out who Locke needs to speak to: "Trees? Yea I heard they are wonderful conversationalists", a reference to Monaghan's work in "The Lord of the Rings", in which he talks to trees.

"Further Instructions" was originally scheduled to air October 11, 2006 as the second episode of the show's third season, but swapped with another "Lost" episode, "The Glass Ballerina". Upon its original broadcast on October 18, 2006 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), "Further Instructions" was watched live by an estimated 16.31 million viewers. In the 18-49 demographic, "Lost" received a 6.5/16 ratings share, helping ABC place first for the night when compared to the other major networks.

The episode has received mixed to positive reviews from television critics. Chris Carabott of IGN wrote that "Further Instructions" was "an entertaining hour of television. The episode certainly offers its fair share of excitement, but as with any typical "Lost" episode we are presented with more questions than answers". Carabott also called it an improvement over the preceding episode, "The Glass Ballerina." Andrew Dignan of "Slant Magazine" expressed relief in having Locke "back to the way we fondly remember him--as a wide-eyed, knife-wielding, face-smeared madman", but disliked his flashbacks, calling them a "largely under-developed affair". Dignan was also pleased to have Hurley back at the camp and referred to him as "someone [who] will keep the show grounded", but concluded his review by unhappily noting the sudden emergence of Nikki and Paulo as "a colossal misjudgment on the producers' part" and "a dangerous precedent that bears keeping an eye on."

Writing for "Entertainment Weekly", Christine Fenno believed the episode had "false starts" but still "enjoyed the trippy places the writers took us." While disliking the initial scenes with Charlie and Locke, Fenno thought the episode "found its groove" after Locke entered into the trance, and called the final scene between Eddie and Locke the episode's "strongest moment." "The Record" gave a negative review, noting that "Unfortunately, 'Instructions' seemed devoid of everything that made 'The Glass Ballerina' hum. It was disjointed, it was graceless, and it seemed filled with gaping holes and not terribly helpful information." In a 2008 review, Ryan McGee of Zap2It gave the episode another negative review and considered it the weakest of the season's first three episodes. He explained that after watching it for a second time, it "just feels off to me in hindsight. Maybe it's the lack of forward movement, maybe it's the lackluster flashback, maybe because the central plot is rendered moot in just two more episodes...I can't quite say."



</doc>
<doc id="7137476" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7137476" title="Andreas Tegström">
Andreas Tegström

Andreas Ulrik Tegström (born 18 January 1979) is a Swedish football manager and former player who played as a striker. He is currently the manager of Swedish Football Division 3 side Assyriska IK. Tegström is best known for playing with Norwegian Tippeligaen clubs Sandefjord and Fredrikstad.

Tegström wanted to become a professional ice hockey player while growing up, but he quit playing ice hockey and played football as an amateur for Tenhults IF and Husqvarna FF. He was brought to Sandefjord in 2005 and scored 14 goals in his first season; the club won promotion to Tippeligaen. In Sandefjord's first season in the top-flight, Tegström scored ten goals in the league and played in the 2006 Norwegian Football Cup Final. The next season, he moved to Fredrikstad, where he was not a regular player on the first team. He spent time on loan with Hønefoss in 2009, and he returned to Sweden after the 2010 season when his contract with Fredrikstad expired. After two seasons with the Superettan side Jönköpings Södra, he rejoined Husqvarna FF before the 2013 season.

As a child, Tegström dreamed of becoming a professional ice hockey player in the NHL and for the Swedish national ice hockey team, "Tre kronor". He played for HV71, attended the hockey school in Jönköping, and played football as a hobby. After he quit playing hockey, he worked at the local Intersport store while playing football for Tenhults IF. He later joined Swedish Football Division 2 side Husqvarna FF.

Tegström scored 22 goals in as many matches in 2004, and was named Player of the Year in the 2004 Swedish football Division 2. The same season, Husqvarna qualified for the promotion play-off where they met Superettan side Mjällby. This match was attended by scouts from the Norwegian First Division side Sandefjord Fotball. Even though the Sandefjord envoys came to watch Mjällby's Marcus Ekenberg, they were more impressed by Tegströmwho was playing as a striker. Tegström was also wanted by Superettan sides Trelleborgs FF and Östers IF, but joined Sandefjord ahead of the 2005 season and signed a three-year contract with the club.

Tegström became an instant success at Sandefjord and contributed greatly to the club's first-ever promotion to the Tippeligaen, with a total of 14 goals when the club finished second in the 2005 Norwegian First Division. Tegström scored a hat-trick in the decisive match, beating promotion-challengers Moss 4–2; Tegström's teammate Andreas Augustsson scored one goal. Tegström also impressed at the top-flight in Norway, and after scoring five goals in the five first matches of the season he was the leading goalscorer in Tippeligaen, while his team was in fourth place despite being predicted to be in last place by every media outlet in Norway. When Sandefjord played Viking on 24 September 2006, both teams were fighting against relegation and Tegström scored the match-winning goal on a counter-attack after dribbling past half the Viking defencecomparable to Diego Maradona's goal in the 1986 World Cup. Tegström scored ten goals and made five assists in the Tippeligaen, helping Sandefjord avoid relegation in their first year in the top-flight. He also scored the first goal in the semi-final of the 2006 Norwegian Football Cup, which Sandefjord won 5–2 against Rosenborg at Lerkendal Stadion and played in the 2006 Norwegian Football Cup Final, in which the team lost 3–0 to Fredrikstad.

After his performance for Sandefjord in 2006, "Expressen" said that Tegström was wanted by several Norwegian, Danish and Dutch clubs, but signed a new contract with Sandefjord in December 2006 to the end of the 2009 season. "Verdens Gang" predicted that the Sandefjord team would finish 11th in the 2007 Tippeligaen, but stated that Tegström had to perform at the same level as in the previous season for Sandefjord to avoid relegation. Tegström scored one goal for Sandefjord in the 2007 season; the team struggled throughout the season until it was relegated to the second tier. Tegström left Sandefjord half-way through the season, when he was sold to Fredrikstad in August 2007 for 4 million Norwegian krone (NOK), according to "Sandefjords Blad".

The same day his second child was born, Tegström scored a goal in his debut for Fredrikstad, a 2–0 victory against Stabæk on 3 September 2007. He scored against Strømsgodset in October 2007. The following season, Tegström played as a substitute and scored one goal in the 2–0 victory against Bodø/Glimt, with Fredrikstad leading the 2008 Tippeligaen after four matches. Tegström did not play much for Fredrikstad in the 2008 season because Tarik Elyounoussi and Garðar Jóhannsson were the preferred strikers in the starting lineup. Tegström secured the club's first silver medals since 1972 when he scored two goals against Molde on 26 October 2008; he came on as a substitute in the 63rd minute of the match, which Fredrikstad won 2–1.

Before the 2009 season, Fredrikstad told Tegström that he was not part of the club's long-term plans and that he was welcome to find another club. Fredrikstad turned down an offer from Stabæk to buy the striker. He did not start a single match in the pre-season, but he came on as a substitute and scored a goal against Strømsgodset in the second match of the 2009 season. Tegström spent most of the 2009 season on the bench, but in the 2009 Norwegian Football Cup tie against Ranheim, he came on as a substitute and scored two goals in the extra time.

In August 2009, he was loaned out to the First Division side Hønefoss until the end of the season, with an option to buy. In his first match for Hønefoss, Tegström scored a goal against Alta; the game ended with a 2–0 victory. He scored a four goals in 12 matches for Hønefoss. After the season, he returned to Fredrikstad, which had been relegated to the First Division. He was troubled by injuries in his last season with Fredrikstad, and he started only nine matches. Jönköpings Södra wanted to buy Tegström during the summer, but he did not join the club until his contract with Fredrikstad expired after the 2010 season. After playing two seasons for the Superettan side, Tegström returned to Husqvarna ahead of the 2013 season, where in addition to playing for the team, he was hired as chief of marketing.

In December 2015, Tegström was unveiled as the new manager of Assyriska IK in the Swedish Football Division 3.



</doc>
<doc id="7170515" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7170515" title="New York State Route 321">
New York State Route 321

New York State Route 321 (NY 321) is a state highway in Onondaga County, New York, in the United States. The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with U.S. Route 20 (US 20) in the village of Skaneateles. Its northern terminus is at an intersection with NY 5 in Bennetts Corners, a hamlet within the town of Camillus. NY 321 is predominantly a north–south highway; however, a portion of the route through the towns of Elbridge and Camillus follows an east–west alignment. The portion of NY 321 in Camillus between Forward Road and NY 5 is maintained by Onondaga County as part of County Route 66 (CR 66), a route that continues north of NY 5 to Memphis.

The majority of NY 321's routing was originally designated as part of NY 26 in 1924. NY 26 continued east to the village of Camillus by way of Forward Road and modern NY 174. All of NY 26 north of Skaneateles was renumbered to NY 321 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York. It initially overlapped NY 174 from Forward Road to Camillus; however, this concurrency was eliminated in the 1960s. NY 321 was rerouted to follow Bennetts Corners Road in the 1980s.

NY 321 begins at an intersection with US 20 (West Genesee Street) in the Onondaga County village of Skaneateles. The highway, at first, heads northward, intersecting with local streets in the village. After leaving the village and entering the town of the same name, the highway intersects with the Old Seneca Turnpike (CR 133). NY 321 continues northward, then veers east as it crosses into the town of Elbridge.

In Elbridge, NY 321 intersects with several county routes, including Halfway Road (CR 107; former NY 368), a connector highway leading to the hamlet of Halfway. Soon afterwards, NY 321 turns to the northeast, heading towards NY 5. The highway intersects Forward Road (unsigned NY 931F) just inside the Camillus town line soon after the turn. Forward Road, a local road that passes through a mixture of open fields and forests, serves as a connector between NY 321 and NY 174.

Past Forward Road, NY 321 becomes concurrent with CR 66 as maintenance of the roadway shifts from the New York State Department of Transportation to Onondaga County. The state designation comes to an end at NY 5 in the hamlet of Bennetts Corners west of the village of Camillus shortly after; however, CR 66 continues onward.

The town of Skaneateles was incorporated in the 1800s to help build highways in the area. The highways that were proposed were to be built with stone and other materials. Construction began in 1911 on a highway between the Skaneateles–Elbridge town line and the hamlet of Martisco within the town of Camillus. It was accepted into the New York state highway system on September 17, 1912. An extension of the road south into the town of Skaneateles to the village of the same name was constructed in late 1912 and early 1913 and added to the state highway system in September 1913.

When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924, the Skaneateles–Martisco highway was included as part of NY 26, a route extending from Ithaca to Syracuse by way of Skaneateles. North of Martisco, NY 26 followed Ninemile Creek to the village of Camillus, where it intersected NY 5A (later NY 5).

NY 26 was split into several different routes as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York. The segment of former NY 26 between US 20 in Skaneateles and NY 5 in Camillus was renumbered to NY 321. It initially overlapped with NY 174 from Martisco to Camillus. The overlap remained in place until the 1960s when NY 321 was truncated to the southern end of the concurrency in Martisco.

In the early 1950s, the portion of NY 321 south of Forward Road was co-designated as part of NY 20SY, a largely alternate routing of US 20 between Skaneateles and Manlius via Syracuse. Past Sweets Corners, NY 20SY continued north on a previously unnumbered roadway to NY 5 at Bennetts Corners, where it joined NY 5 east into Camillus. The NY 20SY designation was removed in 1961, leaving Bennetts Corners Road from Forward Road to NY 5 as an unnumbered roadway once again.

NY 321 was rerouted in the late 1980s to follow Bennetts Corners Road to NY 5. This part of NY 321 overlapped CR 66, a highway that began at the junction of Forward and Bennetts Corners Roads and ended in the hamlet of Memphis, and thus became maintained by Onondaga County. The former routing of NY 321 along Forward Road is now designated as NY 931F, an unsigned reference route in length.



</doc>
<doc id="7209296" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7209296" title="Amlaíb Conung">
Amlaíb Conung

Amlaíb Conung (; died c. 874) was a Viking leader in Ireland and Scotland in the mid-late ninth century. He was the son of the king of Lochlann, identified in the non-contemporary "Fragmentary Annals of Ireland" as Gofraid, and brother of Auisle and Ímar, the latter of whom founded the Uí Ímair dynasty, and whose descendants would go on to dominate the Irish Sea region for several centuries. Another Viking leader, Halfdan Ragnarsson, is considered by some scholars to be another brother. The Irish Annals title Amlaíb, Ímar and Auisle "kings of the foreigners". Modern scholars use the title "kings of Dublin" after the Viking settlement which formed the base of their power. The epithet "Conung" is derived from the Old Norse "konungr" and simply means "king". Some scholars consider Amlaíb to be identical to Olaf the White, a Viking sea-king who features in the "Landnámabók" and other Icelandic sagas.

During the late 850s and early 860s Amlaíb was involved in a protracted conflict with Máel Sechnaill, overking of the Southern Uí Néill and the most powerful ruler in Ireland. The cause of the conflict is uncertain, but it may have been sparked by competition for control of Munster and its resources. Amlaíb allied successively with Cerball, King of Ossory and
Áed Findliath, overking of the Northern Uí Néill against Máel Sechnaill. Máel Sechnaill died in 862 and his lands were split, effectively ending the conflict. Following this Amlaíb and his kin warred with several Irish leaders in an attempt to expand their kingdom's influence. In later years Amlaíb conducted extensive raids in Scotland, though these were interrupted by a war in 868 against his former ally Áed Findliath when several Viking longphorts along the northern coast were razed. Amlaíb disappears from contemporary annals in 871. Later accounts say he returned to Lochlann to aid his father in a war, and the "Pictish Chronicle" says he died in battle against Constantine I of Scotland. This event is usually dated to 874.

The earliest recorded Viking raids in Ireland occurred in 795. Over time, these raids increased in intensity, and they overwintered in Ireland for the first time in 840–841. Later in 841 a longphort was constructed at Áth Cliath (Irish for "hurdled ford"), a site which would later develop into the city of Dublin. Longphorts were also established at other sites around Ireland, some of which developed into larger Viking settlements over time. The Viking population in Ireland was boosted in 851 with the arrival of a large group known as "dark foreigners" – a contentious term usually considered to mean the newly arrived Vikings, as opposed to the "fair foreigners", i.e. the Viking population which was resident in arrival prior to this influx. A kingdom in Viking Scotland was established by the mid ninth-century, and it exerted control over some of the Vikings in Ireland. By 853 a separate kingdom of Dublin had been set up which claimed control over all the Vikings in Ireland.

The earliest mention of Amlaíb Conung is in the "Annals of Ulster", which in 853 describe his arrival in Ireland:

Amlaíb is named in the annals as a "king of the foreigners", but in modern texts he is usually labelled the first king of Dublin, after the Viking settlement which was the base of his power. His brothers arrived in Ireland later, and they ruled together as co-kings. The "Fragmentary Annals" go into more detail regarding Amlaíb's arrival:
Lochlann, originally Laithlinn or Lothlend, the land where Amlaíb's father was king, is often identified with Norway, but it is not universally accepted that it had such a meaning in early times. Several historians have proposed instead that in early times, and certainly as late as the Battle of Clontarf in 1014, Laithlinn refers to the Norse and Norse-Gael lands in the Hebrides, the Isle of Man, the Northern Isles and parts of mainland Scotland. Whatever the original sense, by the twelfth century, when Magnus Barefoot undertook his expedition to the West, it had come to mean Norway.

If he did indeed leave Ireland, Amlaíb had returned by 857 at the latest when he and Ímar fought against Máel Sechnaill, overking of the Southern Uí Néill, and a group of Vikings sometimes known as the Norse-Irish. Máel Sechnaill was the most powerful king in Ireland at the time and his lands lay close to the Viking settlement of Dublin. The fighting began in the previous year: "Great warfare between the heathens and Mael Sechnaill, supported by Norse-Irish" is reported by the Annals of Ulster.

The fighting was focused on Munster; Máel Sechnaill sought to increase his influence over the kings there. He took hostages from the province in 854, 856 and 858, and the power of the over-kings had been weakened in 856 by a Viking raid on the royal centre at Lough Cend, when Gormán son of Lonán, a relative of Munster's over-king, was killed alongside a great many others. This weakness likely drew the gaze of both Máel Sechnaill and the Vikings, and their competition for Munster's resources may have been the cause of the war. Early battles seem to have gone the way of the Vikings: Amlaíb and Ímar "inflicted a rout on Caitill the Fair and his Norse-Irish in the lands of Munster". Although there is no certain evidence to suggest that this Caitill is the same person as the Ketill Flatnose of later sagas, Anderson and Crawford have suggested that they are the same person.

In 858 Ímar, allied with Cerball, King of Ossory, routed a force of Norse-Irish at Araid Tíre (east of Lough Derg and the Shannon in modern-day County Tipperary). Ossory was a small kingdom wedged between the larger realms of Munster and Leinster. At the beginning of his reign in the 840s, Cerball's allegiance was pledged to the over-king of Munster, but as that kingdom grew weaker Ossory's strategic location allowed opportunities for his advancement. Cerball had previously fought against the Vikings, but he allied with them to challenge the supremacy of Máel Sechnaill and his Norse-Irish allies. The following year Amlaíb, Ímar and Cerball conducted a raid on Máel Sechnaill's heartlands in Meath, and in consequence a royal conference was held at Rathugh (modern-day County Westmeath). Following this meeting Cerball shed his allegiance to the Vikings and formally submitted to Máel Sechnaill in order to "make peace and amity between the men of Ireland".

With their ally turned against them, Amlaíb and Ímar sought a new alliance with Áed Findliath, overking of the Northern Uí Néill, and rival of Máel Sechnaill. In 860 Máel Sechnaill and Cerball led a large army of men from Munster, Leinster, Connacht and the Southern Uí Néill into the lands of Áed Findliath near Armagh. While the southern forces were encamped there, Áed launched a night attack, killing some of the southern men, but his forces took many casualties and were forced to retreat. In retaliation for this invasion Amlaíb and Áed led raids into Meath in 861 and 862, but they were driven off both times. According to the "Fragmentary Annals" this alliance had been cemented by a political marriage:

In later years, alliance between the Northern Uí Néill and the Vikings of Dublin became a regular occurrence: the Northern and Southern Uí Néill were frequent competitors for supremacy in Ireland, and the uneasy neighbourhood between Dublin and the Southern Uí Néill made the Vikings natural allies for the Northerners.

Máel Sechnaill died in 862, and his territory in Meath was split between two rulers, Lorcán mac Cathail and Conchobar mac Donnchada. Amlaíb and Ímar, now joined in Ireland by their younger brother Auisle, sought to make use of this change to extend their influence in the lands of the Southern Uí Néill. In 863 the three brothers raided Brega in alliance with Lorcán, and the following year Amlaíb drowned Conchobar at Clonard Abbey. Muirecán mac Diarmata, overking of the Uí Dúnchada, was killed by Vikings in 863, probably by Amlaíb and his kin trying to expand into Leinster.

Beginning around 864 the three brothers halted their campaigns of conquest in Ireland, and instead campaigned in Britain. Ímar disappears from the Irish Annals in 864, and does not reappear until 870. Downham concludes he is identical to Ivar the Boneless, a Viking leader who was active in England during this period as a commander of the Great Heathen Army. According to O Croinin "Ímar has been identified with Ívarr Beinlausi (the boneless), son of Ragnar Lodbrok, but the matter is controversial". In 866 Amlaíb and Auisle led a large army to Pictland and raided much of the country, taking away many hostages.

The native Irish kings took advantage of this absence to fight back against the growing Viking power in Ireland. In 866 a number of longphorts along the northern coast were destroyed by Áed Findliath, overking of the Northern Uí Néill. It is possible that Áed was still allied with Amlaíb at this point, and that the longphorts which were razed belonged to Vikings not affiliated with the Dubliners, but by 868 at the latest Amlaíb and Áed were at war. In 865 or 866 a battle was won by Flann mac Conaing, overking of Brega, against the Vikings, possibly in retaliation for the raids on his land by Amlaíb and his brothers in 863. Numerous further setbacks for the Vikings occurred in 866–867 when their camps at Cork and Youghal were destroyed, an army was routed in Kerry, two battles were lost against the native Irish in Leinster, and Amlaíb's fort at Clondalkin was destroyed.

Amlaíb returned to Ireland in 867, probably to try to stop this string of defeats. His return is attested to in the "Annals of Inisfallen", which mention an "act of treachery" committed against the church of Lismore (modern-day County Waterford). Around this time his brother Auisle was murdered by a kinsman, possibly by Amlaíb himself. In 868 another of Amlaíb's kinsmen was killed, this time his son Carlus, who died in battle at Killineer (near the Boyne, County Louth), fighting against the forces of Amlaíb's former ally Áed Findliath. This battle was a significant victory for the Northern Uí Néill and is recorded in many Irish chronicles. In retaliation for this defeat Amlaíb raided the monastery at Armagh, which was one of the most important religious sites patronised by the over-kings of the Northern Uí Néill.

In 870 the situation of the Vikings was improved by infighting amongst the ruling Irish of Leinster. Another victory came that year when a previously unknown "dark foreigner" known as Úlfr killed a king of southern Brega. The situation had evidently stabilised enough for Amlaíb to go raiding in Britain again: in 870 Amlaíb and Ímar (once more appearing in the Irish Annals after an absence of six years) laid siege to Dumbarton Rock, the chief fortress of the Kingdom of Strathclyde, and captured it following a four-month siege. The pair returned to Dublin in 871 with 200 ships and they "brought with them in captivity a great prey of Angles, Britons and Picts".

Amlaíb's return to Dublin in 871 is the final time he is mentioned in contemporary annals, but according to the "Fragmentary Annals" he returned to Lochlann that year to aid his father Gofraid in a war. According to the "Pictish Chronicle", he died around 874 during a protracted campaign against Constantine I in Scotland:
The Viking sea-king Olaf the White, who features in several Nordic sagas, is positively identified with Amlaíb by Hudson. According to Holman, "Olaf is usually identified with the Amlaíb that is the first recorded king of the Vikings in Ireland. The "Landnámabók" says that Olaf the White landed in Ireland in 852 and established the kingdom of Dublin, closely corresponding to the Irish annals' account of Amlaíb. Amlaíb's lineage according to this saga is as follows:

The "Laxdæla saga" offers a slightly different genealogy, naming Olaf the son of Ingjald, the son of King Frodi the Valiant. Both of these options are problematic since according to the Irish annals (albeit the non-contemporary "Fragmentary Annals") Amlaíb was the son of Gofraid, King of Lochlann. The sagas identify Aud the Deep-minded, daughter of Ketill Flatnose, as Olaf's wife, but the Irish annals name a daughter of Áed Findliath as the spouse of Amlaíb in one account, and the daughter of "Cináed" in another. They also disagree on Amlaíb/Olaf's children, the sagas naming Thorstein the Red, and the annals naming Oistin and Carlus. Todd in his translation of "Cogadh Gaedhel re Gallaibh" suggests that Thorstein and Oistin are the same person, but later historians have rejected this due to "the obvious discrepancy of their dates".

A further complication is that the "Pictish Chronicle" says Amlaíb was killed in battle in Scotland, whereas the sagas say Olaf was killed in battle in Ireland. Hudson proposes a solution for this apparent contradiction—the Vikings did not distinguish between the Gaelic peoples of Scotland and Ireland.

Amlaíb's father is identified as Gofraid by the "Fragmentary Annals". He was joined in Ireland by his brother Ímar sometime in or before 857 and by his brother Auisle sometime in or before 863. The three are identified as "kings of the foreigners" by the "Annals of Ulster" in 863, and as brothers by the "Fragmentary Annals":

The "Annals of Ulster" say that Auisle was killed in 867 by "kinsmen in parricide". The "Fragmentary Annals" state explicitly that Amlaíb and Ímar were responsible for their brother's death:
Some scholars identify Halfdan Ragnarsson as another brother. This identification is contingent upon Ímar being identical to Ivar the Boneless: Halfdan and Ivar are named as brothers in the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle". According to the "Annals of Ulster" Amlaíb's son Oistin was slain in battle by "Albann" in 875. This figure is generally agreed to be Halfdan. If that is correct, then it may explain the reason for the conflict: it was a dynastic squabble for control of the kingdom. One potential problem is that according to Norse tradition Ivar and Halfdan were the sons of Ragnar Lodbrok, whereas Ímar and Amlaíb are named as sons of Gofraid in the "Fragmentary Annals". However, the historicity of Ragnar is uncertain and the identification of Ragnar as the father of Ivar and Halfdan is not to be relied upon.

Two wives of Amlaíb are mentioned by the annals. The first, an unnamed daughter of Áed Findliath is mentioned in passing by the "Fragmentary Annals" with regards to an alliance between Amlaíb and Áed. Elsewhere the "Fragmentary Annals", when reporting the death of Auisle, refer to "the daughter of Cináed" as Amlaíb's wife. It has been suggested that the reference to Áed is mistaken, and that Amlaíb's wife was a daughter of Cináed mac Conaing, who had been drowned by Máel Sechnaill in 851. Another possibility is that the Cináed in question is Cináed mac Ailpín (i.e. Kenneth MacAlpin, which would make Amlaíb a brother-in-law of his killer Constantine I, a son of Kenneth). Two sons are noted by the annals: Oistin and Carlus, each of whom is mentioned a single time. Both died violently; Carlus died in 868 fighting against Áed Findliath and Oistin was "deceitfullly killed by Albann" in 875.





</doc>
<doc id="7245493" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7245493" title="Touchet Formation">
Touchet Formation

The Touchet Formation or Touchet beds consist of large quantities of gravel and fine sediment which overlay almost a thousand meters (several thousand feet) of volcanic basalt of the Columbia River Basalt Group in south-central Washington and north-central Oregon. The beds consist of between 6 and 40 distinct rhythmites - horizontal layers of sediment, each clearly demarcated from the layer below. These Touchet beds are often covered by windblown loess soils which were deposited later; the number of layers varies with location. The beds vary in depth from at lower elevations where a number of layers can be found to a few extremely thin layers at the maximum elevation where they are observed ().

The Touchet beds are one element in a chain of evidence which helped identify and define the progression of the Missoula Floods, which occurred around 16,450 to 13,750 years BCE. During the floods, flow through the Wallula Gap was slow enough such that water pooled in a temporary lake, Lake Lewis. Lake Lewis back-flooded up the Yakima, Walla Walla, Touchet and Tucannon River Valleys. In these relatively calm arms of the lake, the slack waters deposited the suspended materials eroded from the scabland regions north of Lake Lewis, and redeposited them in pronounced layers before receding.

Although visible along the Walla Walla and Touchet rivers, the Touchet Beds were not subjected to study until the early 20th century. They remain at the center of scientific analyses to characterize the Missoula Floods.

The type locality for the Touchet Formation is the confluence of the Touchet River with the Walla Walla River, originally noted by Richard Foster Flint in 1938. Numerous other exposures were subsequently identified throughout the basins of the former Lake Lewis and Lake Condon. Touchet-equivalent slackwater deposits are also present in the Willamette Valley near Portland (former Lake Allison).

In 1923, J Harlen Bretz published a paper arguing that the channeled scablands in Eastern Washington were caused by massive flooding in the distant past. This view, which was seen as arguing for a Catastrophic explanation for the geologic development, which ran counter the then prevailing view of uniformitarianism, and Bretz's views were initially decried. Bretz defended his theories, setting off a forty-year debate over the Missoula Floods before Bretz’s view of a catastrophic flood finally prevailed. Waitt extended Bretz's argument, arguing for a sequence of multiple Missoula Floods — 40 or more. Waitt's proposal was based mainly on analysis from glacial lake bottom deposits in Ninemile Creek and the Touchet Formation deposits in Burlingame Canyon. This represented a move away from a single catastrophic flood toward a series of catastrophic floods, but with the flood source still ascribed to Glacial Lake Missoula.

The controversy whether the Channeled Scabland landforms were formed mainly by multiple periodic large floods or by a single grand-scale cataclysmic flood from either late Pleistocene Glacial Lake Missoula or an unidentified Canadian source reappeared in 1999. Shaw’s team reviewed the sedimentary sequences of the Touchet beds and concluded that the sequences do not automatically imply multiple floods separated by decades or centuries. Rather, they proposed that sedimentation in the Glacial Lake Missoula basin was the result of jökulhlaups draining into Lake Missoula from British Columbia to the north. Shaw's team proposed that the rhythmic Touchet beds are the result of multiple pulses, or surges, within a single larger flood. In response, Atwater’s team observed that there is substantial evidence for multiple large floods, including evidence of mud cracks and animal burrows in lower layers of the Touchet beds, which were filled by sediment from later floods.

Recent scientific investigations support Waitt's proposed separation of layers into records of sequential flood events. Although the various sources support temporal separation of floods, they do not definitively identify the source of water for all of the floods, though they all agree that Lake Missoula was source for at least some of them.

The Touchet beds are formed of sediment which deposited during the various Missoula Floods, around 16,450 to 13,750 BCE, and during the Bonneville Flood that occurred in approximately 12,500 BCE. Another potential source for periodic flooding, still somewhat controversial, is flood release by jökulhlaups from subglacial lakes in British Columbia, but no specific source for these jökulhlaups has yet been identified.

During the floods, flow through the narrow Wallula Gap was restricted such that water pooled in a temporary lake, Lake Lewis, which formed in the lowlands of the Columbia Plateau. Lake Lewis back-flooded up the Yakima, Walla Walla, Touchet and Tucannon River valleys. This flooding lasted for a period of 4–7 days. In the relatively calm arms of the lake, the slack waters were thick with suspended materials eroded from the scablands above. Some of the suspended materials settled out, creating thick Touchet Formation layers, or rhythmites, which are found throughout these valleys. The larger clasts settled out first, followed by the finer ones. This resulted in layers with graded bedding, or bedding in which the larger particles are at the bottom and the smaller ones are at the top.

In 1980, R. B. Waitt studied the Touchet Formation in the wall of the Burlingame Canyon west of Walla Walla, Washington, where he counted at least 41 distinct flood deposit layers. He postulated that these floods could occur only when glacial Lake Missoula existed, which estimates place at 16,450 to 13,750 BCE. More recent studies have used radiocarbon dating to establish the approximate ages of deposition for the various layers.

The side valleys were protected from the violent currents of the main channel; as a result the flood strata laid down by earlier floods were not eroded away by subsequent floods, but were buried and preserved. The average period between flood episodes is estimated to be 20 to 60 years. The periodicity estimates are based on a number of constraints:

The Touchet Formation was originally identified at the confluence of the Touchet River with the Walla Walla River. It is also found at some distance up the Touchet River Valley. The number of layers observed decreases as one progresses up-valley, indicating that the floodwater lakes varied in depth and distance upstream from the various flood dams. Clastic dike intrusions are observed in some locations penetrating the layers vertically; the dikes are infilled with uniform-size fine-grained materials and are indications that the period between floods was long enough that the deposits dried, forming vertical cracks and allowing wind-blown eroded materials to infill the cracks.

The Walla Walla River Valley is a closed basin. The river passes through a narrow gap near its confluence with the Columbia River and then widens into a broad open valley floor about above the confluence with the Columbia. This area was filled to varying depths by the successive Missoula Floods, and sediments settled out to form the Touchet beds over much of the basin, creating what is today a fertile farmland region. In the lowest part of the broader valley, to the east of the Columbia River and west of the city of Walla Walla, Washington, soils commonly form on Touchet beds. In several locations erosion has exposed these beds. One outcrop, the Gardena Terrace segment of the rhythmites, can be seen along the highway west of Walla Walla. The Touchet Formation is also extensively exposed at Burlingame Canyon, just southwest of the town of Touchet near the confluence of the Touchet and Walla Walla Rivers. The deposits are also found along tributaries to the Walla Walla, extending some distance south into Oregon.

Lake Lewis extended up the Yakima Valley, flooding an area of about of the valley and covering the area now occupied by the city of Yakima by about . The valley extends for , widening westwards above the Chandler Narrows and then narrowing again at Union Gap just below Yakima. The Toppenish Basin and Benton Basin of the lower Yakima River both contain large amounts of Touchet Formation deposits. Rhythmites are extensively exposed north of Mabton and at Zillah. Ice rafted erratics are also commonly found in these beds.

The Tucannon River and its tributary, the Pataha Creek also have valleys partially filled with alluvial deposits from the Missoula and Bonneville floods. Although they lie some distance up the Snake River drainage, the flood waters of Lake Lewis backed up this drainage far enough to deposit sediments. Floodplain deposits consist of up to six distinct Touchet Beds, as well as loess silt and fine sand. These alluvial and loess deposits narrow as they approach the basalt valley walls, and thicken into the central valley, with a maximum sediment thickness of between . Due to the elevation of the valley, only six of the flooding events caused water to back into the Tucannon Valley in sufficient volume to deposit distinct layers.

Rhythmites from the Missoula Floods have also been observed in the Columbia River valley. One notable location is the White Bluffs, which are made up of more thickly bedded deposits from the eddy that formed in the floodwaters behind the Saddle Mountains. Another location is at Trinidad, WA located approximately 8 miles west of Quincy (Crescent Bar Road).
The Touchet Formation is also found in Oregon, in areas flooded by Lake Condon. This lake back-flooded into the Umatilla and John Day River Valleys as well as other tributaries. As one example, silt-sand rhythmites associated with the Missoula Floods are present along Willow Creek, a valley tributary to the Columbia River. Willow Creek conflues with the Columbia a few miles west of Boardman, Oregon. Excellent exposures of the unit (which contains abundant clastic dikes) can be found in roadcuts along Hwy 74 (Heppner Highway) near the ranching community of Cecil, Oregon. These deposits are associated with former Lake Condon.


</doc>
<doc id="7275486" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7275486" title="Cumberland station (CTA)">
Cumberland station (CTA)

Cumberland is a station on the Chicago Transit Authority's 'L' system. It is situated on the Blue Line between Rosemont and Harlem. The station is located in the median of the Kennedy Expressway at Cumberland Avenue in the O'Hare neighborhood on Chicago's Northwest Side, and it is in close proximity to both the Norwood Park neighborhood and the city of Park Ridge. The area surrounding the station consists of mixed commercial and residential development.

The Cumberland station was first proposed in 1972 as part of an extension of the Blue Line from Logan Square to O'Hare International Airport. The station opened on February 27, 1983, along with Harlem and Rosemont. The three new stations brought 6,000 new riders to the northwest CTA line in the following month, and Cumberland became especially attractive to suburban commuters. The station at Cumberland consists of a single island platform; a pedestrian overpass connects the platform to a station building to the south and an exit stairway to the north. The station also includes a bus terminal and a park and ride lot. Trains serve Cumberland 24 hours a day every day; the headway between trains is 10 minutes during peak periods, with less frequent service at other times. In addition to trains, Cumberland also serves CTA buses, Pace buses, Burlington Trailways buses, and Greyhound buses.

Cumberland is located at the junction of Cumberland Avenue and the Kennedy Expressway (I-90, exit 79). The station is located in the O'Hare neighborhood of Chicago on the border of the Norwood Park neighborhood. It is the closest 'L' station to the city of Park Ridge, which borders Chicago along Higgins Road north of the station. The area surrounding the station consists of a mixture of planned development, commercial, and residential areas. Citicorp Plaza, an office building which houses the headquarters of telecommunications provider U.S. Cellular, is located to the south of Cumberland at 8410 W. Bryn Mawr. The Renaissance Chicago O'Hare Suites Hotel is also located near the station at 8500 W. Bryn Mawr.

The extension of the CTA line in the median of the Kennedy Expressway from Jefferson Park to O'Hare Airport, which included the construction of the Cumberland station, was first proposed by Mayor Richard J. Daley in 1972 by the Chicago Public Works Commission. The cost of this project was initially estimated at $80 million. The Chicago Plan Commission approved the project on August 8, 1974; by this point, the estimated cost of the project had risen to $174 million. The federal government approved the project and agreed to provide 80 percent of the funds for its construction in 1978, and construction on the extension began in March 1980. The extension was originally planned to open in 1982; however, its opening was delayed after a series of incidents including two strikes by workers on the line. The section of the extension from Jefferson Park to River Road, including Cumberland, opened on February 27, 1983; the CTA ran free shuttle trains between the new stations at River Road, and Harlem, the day before their opening so riders could "get acquainted" with the new line. The final cost of the extension was $198.9 million, with the Cumberland station costing approximately $10 million.

In the month following the opening of the three new stations 6,000 additional commuters used the northwest service. The Cumberland station became particularly attractive to suburban commuters from Des Plaines and Park Ridge; a study commissioned shortly after the station's opening found that only 12.4% of commuters parking in the Cumberland and Rosemont stations were Chicagoans. The influx of suburban commuters to the new Blue Line stops led to a fall in ridership on the Chicago & Northwestern's Northwest Line, which traditionally served the northwest suburbs near the new stops.

The Cumberland station was designed by Wojciech M. Madeyski of the architectural firm Perkins and Will. Cumberland's island platform is located in the median of the Kennedy Expressway to the west of Cumberland Avenue. It serves the Blue Line's two tracks; the northern track serves trains to O'Hare, while the southern track serves trains to Forest Park. Electronic signs on the platform offer real-time information about train arrivals and service alerts; Cumberland is one of four 'L' stations with these signs, which were installed in 2002 as part of a pilot program. A pedestrian overpass connects the platform to entrances on the north and south sides of the expressway. The north side of the overpass leads to an exit stairway, while the south side leads to the main station building. The station building houses a public art sculpture, "Rock Bow" by Charles Ross; the sculpture consists of a high metal-cased prism set in a limestone base. Cumberland's bus terminal and park and ride lot are also located south of the platform. The park and ride lot has 1633 spaces and is operated by CPS Parking; the lot originally had 706 spaces and expanded to its current capacity in 1992. The facilities at Cumberland are handicapped accessible.

Cumberland is part of the CTA's Blue Line, which runs from O'Hare Airport to downtown Chicago and Forest Park. It is the third inbound station from O'Hare on the Blue Line and is situated between the Rosemont and Harlem stations. Blue Line trains serve Cumberland 24 hours a day every day; trains operate roughly every 7 to 10 minutes during rush hour and midday operation, with longer headways of up to 30 minutes at night. The station is approximately seven minutes from O'Hare, 31 minutes from Clark/Lake in the Loop, and 52 minutes from Forest Park. 1,304,280 passengers boarded at Cumberland in 2011.

Cumberland services several bus routes in addition to 'L' trains. One CTA bus route terminate at the station, the 81W West Lawrence; this route provides service to Cumberland Avenue, Lawrence Avenue, East River Road, and the Jefferson Park Transit Center. Four Pace bus routes also terminate at Cumberland: the 240 Dee Road, the 241 Greenwood-Talcott, the 290 Touhy Avenue, and the 331 Cumberland-5th Avenue. These routes connect to the Golf Mill Shopping Center, the Howard 'L' station, and the communities of Park Ridge, Niles and Brookfield. Intercity bus routes operated by Greyhound and by Burlington Trailways also make stops at this station.



</doc>
<doc id="7282230" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7282230" title="The Cost of Living (Lost)">
The Cost of Living (Lost)

"The Cost of Living" is the 5th episode of the third season of "Lost", and the 54th episode overall. It aired on November 1, 2006, in the US, averaging 16.07 million viewers, and on December 5, 2006, in the UK, being watched by 1.15 million viewers. The episode was written by Monica Owusu-Breen and Alison Schapker and directed by Jack Bender. The plot centers on the character of Mr. Eko (Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje), who in flashbacks shows how he became a priest replacing his dead brother Yemi (Adetokumboh M'Cormack), and in the present day events is haunted by visions of Yemi while other castaways decide to visit a Dharma Initiative station.

The episode was written to finish Eko's character arc as Akinnuoye-Agbaje had requested to leave the show while finishing the second season. Reviewers subsequently praised "The Cost of Living" while considering that the departure of Eko made "Lost" lose one of its best characters.

Shortly after the death of his brother Yemi, Eko is driven back to Yemi's village. Inside the church, Eko announces to the altar boy Daniel and his mother Amina that he will be taking his brother's place at the church. When Amina also inquires about Yemi's upcoming trip to London, a surprised Eko states that he would also replace him there.

Some time later, after Eko has become established in his new role as priest, he is confronted by militiamen, who Amina reveals that had a deal with Yemi to get most of the clinic's vaccines. Eko soon develops a plan to sell the vaccine on the black market before he leaves the country that coming weekend.

As the militiamen learn of Eko's deal, they attack him inside the church, but end up getting killed. The villagers respond by closing the church as they felt it was desecrated. Amina calls out Eko, saying she had been aware of the vaccine deal, and advises him to repent and make his peace with God, telling Eko that he "owes" Yemi one church.

A delirious Eko has a vision of his brother Yemi (Adetokumboh M'Cormack) holding a cigarette lighter, who says it was Eko's time to confess his sins and, he knew where to find him. Afterwards, Eko's shelter catches fire, and Eko is rescued by Charlie Pace (Dominic Monaghan) and Hugo "Hurley" Reyes (Jorge Garcia). As John Locke (Terry O'Quinn) arrives to ask what happened, Eko has vanished.

The next morning, Locke suggests to Desmond Hume (Henry Ian Cusick) that he visit the station. Joined by Charlie, Sayid Jarrah (Naveen Andrews), Nikki and Paulo (Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro), the group finds Eko on their way to the Pearl. Upon arrival, Eko does not find Yemi's body on the airplane atop the entrance, and decides to remain outside while Locke and the others enter the hatch. Inside the Pearl, Sayid tinkers first with the communication lines and, following a suggestion from Nikki, the monitors. Then one of the screens gets a live video feed of what appears to be another hatch, revealing a man with an eyepatch (Andrew Divoff) who then turns off the camera.

Meanwhile, outside the Pearl, Eko sees Yemi and follows him into an open field, where Yemi tells him it is time for Eko to confess his sins. Eko says he has not sinned, having not chosen the life he was given and that Eko had only done what he needed to do to survive. An angry-looking Yemi replies, "You speak to me as if I were your brother" as he retreats into the jungle. Eko follows him asking "Who are you?!", and then finds the smoke monster. An arm of smoke attacks Eko, beating him into trees before he is slammed into the ground. Locke and the others rush out of the station to find a bloodied Eko. Locke approaches Eko, who whispers his dying words into Locke's ears. Sayid asks what he said, and Locke replies, "We're next."

At , Jack is invited by Ben Linus (Michael Emerson) to attend a memorial service being held for Colleen. On the way, Jack asks about the symptoms of Ben's spinal tumor, particularly pointing out that it will kill him. Ben professes not to know what Jack is talking about. Privately, Ben asks Juliet Burke (Elizabeth Mitchell) why she showed his X-rays to Jack. Juliet replies that she never told Jack whose X-rays they were, and remarks that Ben must have inadvertently confirmed Jack's guess.

The following day, Ben tells Jack that they had a perfect plan to convince Jack to operate on Ben's spine, but it failed when Jack saw the X-rays. Afterwards, Juliet brings to Jack's cell a movie, which consists of Juliet speaking through cue cards. As Juliet discusses how the surgery will proceed, on the tape she tells Jack that Ben is a liar and very dangerous, and thus the surgery should be intentionally botched to kill Ben, and that she will protect Jack if he does so.

Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje signed to "Lost" on a one-year contract, as he did not want to make a long-term commitment to the series. As Michelle Rodriguez signed under similar conditions that lead to her character Ana-Lucia Cortez only appearing in the show's second season, show runners Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse negotiated with Akinnuoye-Agbaje to make his character, Mr. Eko, to appear in the third season as well, adding some space between the two character deaths to develop Eko's closure better. As filming of season 2 ended, conversations between the actor and the writers ended setting Eko's departure during the first six episodes, prior to mid-season break, with "a shocking and emotional death". To make sure the sequence was "big and impressive", effects supervisor Kevin Blank decided to set the death at the Jackass Ginger in Kalihi, a large space that allowed to make the Smoke Monster "flip him around in weird physical positions". A stunt double was dragged through cables, and along with the digital monster and wire removal, fast editing made the scene akin to "a magician's trick", in Blank's opinion. The episode was written by Monica Owusu-Breen and Alison Schapker, who had previously worked in another series by "Lost" production company Bad Robot Productions, "Alias".

Cuse and Lindelof stated that Nikki and Paulo served as a red herring as rumors were raised of an incoming character death, and the fanbase would expect this to happen to the newcomers "who were sort of just there all along" instead of a prominent and popular character as Eko. Juliet's message to Jack is an homage to Bob Dylan's video for "Subterranean Homesick Blues", where the musician flips cue cards while looking at the camera.

This episode attracted 16.07 million American viewers in its original broadcast on November 1, 2006, standing as the tenth most watched program of the week. In the United Kingdom, the episode had 1.247 million viewers, ranking third in multichannel shows after "Ford Super Sunday" and "The Simpsons". In Canada, "The Cost of Living" had 1.15 million viewers, ranking as the 26th highest-rated program of the week.

Reviews were positive, though most critics found that the character of Eko was killed too soon in the show. Writing for Zap2it, Rick Porter said that while "The Cost of Living" was the best episode of season 3 thus far with "an illuminating flashback, some heavy island juju and a nice mix of the campers and the Others", the death of Eko removed from "Lost" "one of its most compelling characters and best actors, which just flat-out sucks." Kristin dos Santos of "E! Online" called Mr. Eko "the best character of the show", and was therefore very disappointed with his death. Christine Fenno of "Entertainment Weekly" stated that she would miss Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, and found Juliet's message to be the best part of the episode, that like the rest of season three "answered a few questions (whose tumor?), raised a few questions (who's the eye-patch guy?), and ignored many long-standing questions (how did Yemi and Eko crash on the same island?)."

IGN's Chris Carabott ranked the episode 9.3 out of 10, saying it was "one of the series' best efforts" exploring the series' mythology and providing new paths, while also featuring Eko in "one of the most refreshing flashbacks that the series has produced thus far" and "a shocking confrontation" with the Smoke Monster. The reviewer still complained about Nikki and Paulo's participation, considering them "poorly developed" and giving "the sense that they are being shoehorned in". The website later ranked "The Cost of Living" as the 25th best episode of the series, saying that while early Season 3 "might have dragged a bit", "The Cost of Living" "saw the excitement and drama ramp up considerably. The only thing marring this otherwise excellent episode was the presence of Nikki and Paolo." On the other hand, a similar list by the "Los Angeles Times" ranked it 96th, considering that despite being "actually a pretty good piece of TV", the episode was "just marred by the fact that the show was forced into killing Mr. Eko, a character whose story was far from over."



</doc>
<doc id="7291336" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7291336" title="18th Engineer Brigade (United States)">
18th Engineer Brigade (United States)

The 18th Engineer Brigade (Theater Army) is an engineer brigade of the United States Army. It is currently a subordinate unit of 21st Sustainment Command (Theater) and is headquartered at Conn Barracks in Schweinfurt, Germany. Soldiers of the 18th Engineer Brigade provide various supportive duties to other Army units, including construction, engineering, and mechanical work on other Army projects.

The brigade served in Europe during World War II, a fact which was included on its Distinctive Unit Insignia when the 20th Engineer Brigade received one on 10 February 1966. The four corners of the crenelated square allude to their four campaigns in World War II, Normandy, Northern France, Rhineland and Central Europe.

The 18th Engineer Brigade later deployed to Vietnam, during the Vietnam War, where its battalions saw six years of combat service and supported fourteen campaigns, building infrastructure for both military and civilian projects. The brigade participated in a massive number of road construction projects and airfield constructions, supporting numerous infantry units and operating all over Vietnam. After serving in Vietnam, the brigade became attached to Seventh United States Army. It has since undertaken and completed numerous projects in support of US Army, Europe, and participated in Operation Desert Storm, Operation Enduring Freedom, and Operation Iraqi Freedom.

The US Army's 18th Engineer Brigade is a subordinate unit of 21st Sustainment Command (Theater). The brigade has been assigned to Europe since February 2007. The brigade is headquartered at Conn Barracks in Schweinfurt, Germany. The brigade's current commander is Colonel Scott A. Petersen, while its Command Sergeant Major is Lauro F. Obeada.

In addition to Headquarters and Headquarters Company and the 243d Engineer Detachment (Construction Management), which is located in Grafenwhoer, Germany two subordinate engineer battalions are permanently attached: the 15th Engineer Battalion headquartered at Grafenwöhr, Germany, and the 54th Engineer Battalion headquartered at Bamberg, Germany.

The lineage of the 18th Engineer Brigade can be traced to 29 July 1921, when its predecessor, the 347th Engineers (General Service), was constituted as an Organized Reserves unit. The 347th Engineers would not be activated for almost twenty years, until the military buildup after the United States entered World War II. The unit was ordered into active military service on 6 May 1942 at Camp Claiborne, Louisiana.

On 1 August 1942, the unit was reorganized and re-designated as the 347th Engineer General Services Regiment. The Regiment deployed to England in February 1944. It entered combat in France on 29 June 1944 and participated in the Normandy, Northern France, Rhineland and Central Europe campaigns of World War II, earning its first Meritorious Unit Commendation. After V-E Day, the regiment remained on occupation duty in Germany until its inactivation on 1 June 1946.

On 15 June 1947, the regiment was reactivated in the organized reserves headquartered in Salt Lake, Utah, and remained there until it was again inactivated on 16 March 1949. On 25 October 1954, the 347th Engineer General Services Regiment was re-designated the 18th Engineer Brigade for the first time and activated as a Regular Army unit at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, where it remained until inactivation on 26 March 1963.

The 18th Engineer Brigade was reactivated on 16 July 1965 at Fort Bragg, N.C. and prepared for deployment to Vietnam. The 18th Engineer Brigade entered Vietnam in September 1965 with the responsibility for overseeing all Army Engineering operations in Vietnam until the establishment of the U.S. Army Engineer Command, Vietnam, in late 1966.

Under the command of Colonel C. Craig Cannon, the Brigade prepared for deployment to Vietnam. The Advance Party of the 18th Engineer Brigade arrived at Saigon's Tan Son Nhut Air Base on 3 September 1965. Three days later, Brigadier General Robert R. Ploger assumed command of the Brigade. Within two weeks, the Brigade Headquarters at Tan Son Nhut was fully operational. It had been preceded by the 35th Engineer Group, which built Cam Ranh Bay on a peninsula of sand and in a hostile environment. The brigade assumed responsibility for I Corps and II Corps in the northern part of South Vietnam. The 937th Engineer Group (Combat) at Qui Nhơn was assigned to the Brigade in June 1966.

Its initial activities centered around rapid development of the port facilities, ammunition dumps, base camps and airfields necessary to support the build-up of US combat forces deploying to Vietnam. During the initial construction phases its combat engineer battalions also provided support for search and destroy missions and defensive operations with the 101st Airborne Division near Ninh Hoa and the 4th Infantry Division at Pleiku.

On 18 January 1969, an ammunition storage area was completed at Cam Ranh Bay. It had taken two years to build this complex, which covered over . English Airfield was completed on 21 March 1969 near Qui Nhơn. The runway was long, wide, and included a 150—foot by 150—foot turn around area.
On 3 May 1969, Brigadier General John W. Morris assumed command of the Brigade. Soon afterwards, Brigade engineers finished construction of a cold storage warehouse at the Qui Nhơn Support Command, the first of its kind in Vietnam. Construction of the Tandem Switch Building at Vung Chau Mountain was also completed about this time. This building housed almost US$1 million of communications equipment. During the summer months of 1969, Brigade engineers completed the capacity Air Force tank farm at Cam Ranh Bay, after laying over of pipe to complete the project.

The beginning of 1970 saw the initiation of the 18th Engineers Brigade's Operation Last Chance, a program of command emphasis and organization for motivation and success of that year's engineer operations. The goals of the program were to maintain primary missions of the combat support as well as insure the completion of the many projects planned for the 1970 construction operations.

February 1970 saw the completion of a project begun in the summer of the previous year at Qui Nhơn that replaced a temporary floating steel dock with a more permanent structure which could accommodate six ammo barges at once. The port of Qui Nhơn became one of the few supply points where ammunition for the First and Second Military Regions could be handled in bulk quantities simultaneously. Prior to the completion of this new facility, the handling of ammunition there had to take place in other areas, near public housing and fuel storage depots.

On 3 May 1970, Brigadier General Henry C. Schrader assumed command of the 18th Engineer Brigade. Shortly after this, the most difficult stretch of the roadway that the Brigade had ever undertaken—the 27-kilometer stretch of National Highway QL-11 South in the central highlands region known as Tây Nguyên, commonly referred to as the "Good View Pass", was completed. This road had been carved out from a dangerous mountain pass to a national road in less than one year.

The Lines of Communication Program, which represents the most significant contribution that the 18th Engineer Brigade had made to the economic growth of Vietnam, consisted of about 1,500 kilometers of road upgrade from 1967 to 1972. After a slow start in the beginning of this work, the Brigade finished some 560 kilometers of highway reconstruction, and improvement in 1970 and another 450 kilometers were scheduled for completion in 1971 by Brigade units.

In conjunction with the Brigade efforts on the Lines of Communication Program, 18th Brigade engineers was involved in a program of affiliation with ARVN (Army of the Republic of Vietnam) engineers. In addition to continuous training programs which the Brigade established to train ARVN equipment operators, the engineers of the 18th provided technical assistance and logistical support to several projects undertaken by the Vietnamese Army, most notably in the construction of the bridge at Tuy Hòa. Upon its completion and opening on 13 February 1971, this bridge became the longest overpass of its type ever constructed in the Republic of Vietnam. It would be one of 77 such bridges that the Brigade would construct in the country.

In support of the XXIV Corps, the 18th Brigade mounted what was described as the "most ambitious engineering effort in Vietnam" at the end of January 1971. The Brigade engineers pushed a roadway across the rugged terrain of the northern Quảng Trị Province to the Laotian border and constructed a by airfield in little more than a month at Khe Sanh. This construction effort was part of Operation Dewey Canyon II.

On 20 September 1971 the Brigade was inactivated. Over the six years that it served in Vietnam, the 18th Engineer Brigade was involved in 14 of 17 campaigns, earning four Meritorious Unit Commendations.

On 21 October 1977 the 18th Engineer Brigade was reactivated at Karlsruhe, Germany. For 15 years, the Brigade served as the principal construction brigade for the United States Army, Europe and 7th Army. During this period, the Brigade performed numerous construction, rehabilitation and renovation missions in military communities and training areas of the 7th Army. These included an extensive range upgrade of the Grafenwohr Major Training Area in the early 1980s and the construction of the Range 23 complex at the Wildflecken Major Training Area in 1989 and 1990. Additionally, the Brigade was responsible for providing topographic support to the European Theater.
In 1990 and 1991, during Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm, the 18th Engineer Brigade provided rail and sea deployment support to the VII Corps and, in addition, deployed a Combat Heavy Battalion and Topographic Company to support VII Corps operations in Southwest Asia. In April 1991, the Brigade Headquarters, along with elements of the 94th Engineer Battalion (Combat) (Heavy), deployed to Zakho, Iraq in support of Operation Provide Comfort. While there, the Brigade coordinated all engineer efforts of a Joint and Combined engineer force providing construction and relief support to the Kurdish refugees. The 18th Engineer Brigade was awarded the Joint Meritorious Unit Award for its action during Operation Provide Comfort. As part of the reduction of forces in Europe, the Brigade was inactivated on 15 October 1992.

On 18 October 2002 the Vice Chief of Staff of the Army approved the USAREUR and 7th Army Concept Plan to activate the Theater Army Engineer Brigade (TAEB). Today, the 18th Engineer Brigade (Theater Army) marks the return to service of the only active duty TAEB. The unit was officially reactivated on 6 June 2004.

The 18th Engineer Brigade was deployed to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom in April 2005. Its primary areas of operation were in and around Bagram, Kandahar, and Sharana, among other locations.
In 2007, the 18th Engineer Brigade was reassigned to V Corps, taking the place of the 130th Engineer Brigade, which returned to the United States. Some of the 130th's units either merged or were reassigned to the 18th Brigade. During this time, the unit participated in road work, construction of Forward Operating Bases, and other activities that enhanced training readiness in and around Campbell Barracks.

In 2008, the unit was notified of another upcoming deployment to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. It commands three to five engineer battalions in Multinational Division – North. The battalions support individual Brigade Combat Teams of other units in "Task Force Iron", a combat group led by the 1st Armored Division. They are working to rebuild Iraqi infrastructure, with the cooperation of Iraqi engineers, including construction of roads, airfields, and land moving. The unit cased its colors on 29 April 2008, formally signifying the beginning of its deployment to Iraq.

The Brigade spent the first six months of its deployment to Tikrit in central Iraq, working on projects there for Multinational Division-Center under the 10th Mountain Division. On 6 November, the brigade relocated to Kirkuk, unfurling its colors at Forward Operating Base Warrior. The brigade conducted route clearance and construction projects in northern Iraq, while partnered with Iraqi engineers. It replaced the 1st Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division in Kirkuk and will was under the area of responsibility of Multinational Division-North led by the 1st Armored Division. In February 2009, the brigade again moved, this time to Ninewa Province to focus on construction projects in areas in and around Mosul. It was relieved by 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 1st Cavalry Division. On 17 July 2009, the brigade handed over responsibility of Mosul to the 130th Engineer Brigade. The brigade subsequently returned to Schwetzingen, Germany after its 15-month deployment was finished.

The Brigade deployed to Afghanistan for its second deployment to the country since 2001.

Three soldiers from the 18th Engineer Brigade have gone on to serve as Chief of Engineers, the head of the US Army's Corps of Engineers, this is the highest number to come from a single engineer brigade. These three are Lieutenant Generals Joe N. Ballard, John W. Morris, and Walter K. Wilson, Jr..
In addition to commanding the brigade from 1987 to 1990, while it was stationed outside of Karlsruhe in Germany, LTG Ballard had also commanded a company in one of the brigade's subordinate battalions, the 864th Engineer Battalion, during its earlier years in Vietnam.



</doc>
<doc id="7308811" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7308811" title="John Nutter">
John Nutter

John Robert William Nutter (born 13 June 1982) is an English former professional footballer who played as a defender.

Nutter began his career at Blackburn Rovers' youth academy in 1998, spending two years on the books with the club before being released. In early 2001, he joined Wycombe Wanderers, and later signed for Aldershot Town in May 2001. He enjoyed a promotion with Aldershot during the 2002–03 campaign, helping the club secure the Isthmian League Premier Division title. During his time at Aldershot, Nutter spent time out on loan at St Albans City and Gravesend & Northfleet respectively.

Nutter then enjoyed a fruitful two-year spell at Grays Athletic, and was part of the side that won the Conference South title, as well as two FA Trophy successes. In May 2006, he signed for Stevenage Borough, and again tasted FA Trophy success during the 2006–07 season. Nutter moved back into the Football League in November 2007, signing for Gillingham. He spent three-and-a-half seasons there, with the club moving between League One and League Two during his tenure. He was released when his contract expired at the end of the 2010–11 campaign, subsequently signing for Lincoln City of the Conference National in July 2011. He was loaned out to Woking in November 2012, a move that was later made permanent in January 2013. He spent two years at Woking, retiring from playing at the end of the 2014–15 season to enable him to focus further on his career as a teacher.

Nutter began his career on the books at Blackburn Rovers' youth academy, joining the club's YTS programme in 1998 at the age of 16, before later becoming a first-year scholar. During his time at Blackburn, he was part of the side that won the Under 17s Academy Cup as they beat Manchester City in the final. He was released by Blackburn in 2000, and was subsequently signed by Wycombe Wanderers in the early part of 2001. Nutter made one first-team appearance for the club, making his Football League debut in the club's 3–2 away defeat to Peterborough United on 24 February 2001.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2000/2001 "></ref> He was also part of the squad that travelled to the FA Cup semi-final against Liverpool at Villa Park, although did not feature. His time at Wycombe was hampered by an ankle injury, which resulted in "limited opportunities". He subsequently left Wycombe at the end of the 2000–01 season.

In May 2001, Nutter joined Aldershot Town, then of the Isthmian League Premier Division. He made his debut in Aldershot's 3–1 home victory over Enfield on 18 August 2001, and scored his first goal for the club shortly after in a 2–1 away win over Heybridge Swifts. Nutter made 19 appearances for Aldershot during the 2001–02 season, scoring twice. He also made eight appearances for divisional rivals St Albans City during a two-month loan spell. Nutter remained at Aldershot the following season, making sporadic appearances throughout the campaign. He spent a month on loan at Conference National side Gravesend & Northfleet in November 2002, making four appearances.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2002/2003 "></ref> During the campaign, he scored three times in 21 appearances for Aldershot, in a season that saw the club earn promotion to the Conference National after winning the Isthmian League Premier Division. Nutter featured regularly during Aldershot's return to the highest tier of non-League football, making 28 appearances in all competitions and netting once in a 4–2 away victory over Bishop's Stortford in the FA Trophy in January 2004. Aldershot narrowly missed out on back-to-back promotions, losing on penalties in the play-off final to Shrewsbury Town. Although Nutter did not play in the final, he did feature in both legs of the semi-final as Aldershot defeated Hereford United on penalties.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2003/2004"></ref> During his three years at Aldershot, Nutter made 68 appearances in league, FA Cup and FA Trophy fixtures, scoring six times.

Ahead of the 2004–05 season, in July 2004, Nutter signed for Conference South side Grays Athletic, managed by Mark Stimson. He made his Grays debut on the opening day of the season, playing the first 57 minutes in a 1–1 away draw against Hayes on 14 August 2004. Three days later, he scored his only goal of the season as Grays beat Redbridge comfortably at the New Recreation Ground. In Nutter's first season with Grays, the club secured the Conference South title in comprehensive fashion, winning the division by 23 points. During the same season, Grays also won the FA Trophy, beating Hucknall Town on penalties in the final at Villa Park, with Nutter playing the whole match. As a result of Grays' promotion, the 2005–06 season gave Nutter another opportunity to play in the Conference National. He was almost ever-present during the season as Grays finished third in the league. His only goal of the season came in the Conference play-off semi-final second leg, as Grays eventually lost to Halifax Town 5–4 on aggregate. Shortly after the play-off defeat, Nutter was part of the side that secured back-to-back FA Trophy titles courtesy of a 2–0 win against Woking at Upton Park. It was to be Nutter's last game for the club.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2005/2006 "></ref> On securing successive FA Trophy victories with Grays, Nutter stated — "The FA Trophy wins for Grays Athletic were great, a fantastic achievement for the club, we had some terrific players at the time".

With his Grays contract expiring in May 2006, Nutter opted to sign for Conference National side Stevenage Borough at the end of the month. He joined on a free transfer and on a two-year contract. The move reunited him with Stimson, who made Nutter his first signing following his switch from Grays to Stevenage. Nutter revealed that he had rejected the offer of a contract extension at Grays, as well as an offer from Peterborough United. He made his Stevenage debut against Altrincham on 12 August 2006, playing the whole match in a 2–1 away defeat. Nutter scored his first goal for Stevenage in a 3–2 home win against Woking on 3 October 2006, a late penalty to restore parity in the match, before Stevenage went on to score a winner in injury-time. He went on to score further penalties in home victories against Gravesend & Northfleet and Cambridge United, and also scored against Burton Albion with a long-range drive in a 2–1 win. He added to his most fruitful season in front of goal by scoring twice in April 2007, both from the penalty spot, against Forest Green Rovers and Rushden & Diamonds respectively. He was ever-present during his first season with the club, playing in all 46 leagues matches, as well as making a further ten appearances in cup competitions, scoring six times.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2006/2007 "></ref> Nutter was part of the squad that reached the FA Trophy final in May 2007, the first competitive match at the new Wembley Stadium. He played the whole match in Stevenage's 3–2 win over Kidderminster Harriers, a game in which Stevenage trailed by two goals, meaning he had won the FA Trophy for three successive years.

Nutter scored his first goal of the 2007–08 season in Stevenage's 3–0 home victory over Weymouth in August 2007, scoring a free kick that found the top corner of the goal. He was part of the defence that broke a club record and equalled a Conference National record when Stevenage went eight games without conceding a goal, spanning from August to October 2007. Following the departure of manager Mark Stimson to Gillingham in November 2007, it was revealed that Stevenage rejected several offers for Nutter from Gillingham. He remained at Stevenage for a further three weeks; his last game for the club a 3–2 home loss to Halifax Town. He scored eight times in 73 appearances for the club in all competitions.

Later that month, Nutter joined Gillingham, along with Stevenage midfielder Adam Miller, for a combined fee of £65,000. The move was initially on loan until January 2008, when the deal was made permanent. He made his debut for Gillingham in a 1–1 home draw with Southend United on 26 December 2007, playing the whole match.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2007/2008 "></ref> Nutter went on to make 25 appearances for the club during the second half of the 2007–08 campaign, a season that witnessed Gillingham suffer relegation to League Two. He scored one goal during the campaign, netting in a 1–1 draw against Bristol Rovers at the Memorial Stadium in April 2008. The 2008–09 campaign brought about Nutter's first full season at Gillingham. He had been joined by former Stevenage players Barry Fuller, Alan Julian, and Stuart Lewis, as well as Dennis Oli, who he played alongside at Grays. Nutter made 54 appearances during the campaign,<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2008/2009"></ref> a season in which Gillingham earned promotion back to League One following a 1–0 win over Shrewsbury Town in the play-off final at Wembley Stadium in May 2009. Although he failed to find the scoresheet during the campaign, he did provide the assist for eleven goals. The promotion meant that it was the third of Nutter's career, having also tasted league success at Aldershot and Grays.

Nutter started in the club's first game of the 2009–10 season; as Gillingham marked their return to the third tier of English football with a 5–0 victory over Swindon Town at Priestfield. He scored his only goal of the campaign, the second of his Gillingham career, in a 3–1 win over bottom-placed Stockport County in December 2009, marking his 100th appearance for the club with an "angled volley" that beat Owain Fôn Williams in the Stockport goal. Gillingham were relegated at the end of the season, finishing in 21st place. A 3–0 away loss to one of Nutter's former employers, Wycombe Wanderers, cemented their fate. Nutter made 41 appearances during the campaign.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2009/2010"></ref> Stimson left the club by mutual consent days after the Wycombe match, and was replaced by Andy Hessenthaler. This meant that Nutter would be playing under a manager other than Stimson for the first time in six years (aside from a three-week spell under Peter Taylor at Stevenage). Nutter's contract was extended for a further year in June 2010 after he had "played sufficient games last season to trigger a new deal". During the campaign, Nutter received the first red card of his career in a 2–0 home defeat to Dover Athletic in the FA Cup, earning the dismissal for a "professional foul". He made 37 appearances during the 2010–11 season, scoring once, as Gillingham narrowly missed out on a play-off position.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2010/2011"></ref> In May 2011, Nutter left Gillingham when his contract expired at the end of the month. During his three-and-a-half-year spell with the Kent side, he made 157 appearances and scored three goals.

Nutter joined Conference National side Lincoln City on a free transfer in July 2011. Signing a two-year deal with Lincoln, Nutter stated — "I think it will benefit me to have a fresh start, play in front of new people and show what I can do. I feel I'm better than this level but I've got to show that and we have to show that as a team". His Lincoln debut came on the opening day of the 2011–12 season, playing the whole match as Lincoln twice squandered a lead to draw 2–2 with Southport at Haig Avenue. He scored his first goal for the club in November 2011, netting Lincoln's third with a shot from outside the area in a 3–0 home win over Ebbsfleet United. Nutter would add to his goal tally once more during the campaign when he scored a 20-yard free-kick in an important 2–0 win against relegation rivals Newport County on 24 March 2012. Nutter played in all 51 of Lincoln's matches during the season, with the club struggling to adapt during their first season back in non-league, finishing just above the relegation places.

He was made club captain ahead of the 2012–13 season, and continued to play regularly during the early months of the new campaign. He opened his goalscoring account courtesy of free-kick in a 3–3 home draw against Stockport County in October 2012. Shortly after, Nutter admitted that his family struggled relocating to Lincolnshire, and a move down south was a much more suitable location given his personal circumstances. He scored three times in 66 appearances for Lincoln. On his time at Lincoln, Nutter stated — "Lincoln is a really nice, friendly club with very patient and loyal supporters. But with my personal circumstances, it was time to move on – I wish them well".

In November 2012, he joined fellow Conference National side Woking on a two-month loan deal. He made his first appearance for Woking two days after signing, playing the whole match in a 2–1 loss to Alfreton Town at Kingfield, and went on to make a further four appearances during the loan agreement.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2012/2013"></ref> He briefly returned to Lincoln, before it was agreed that he would leave the club by mutual consent at the end of 2012. Nutter subsequently signed for Woking on a permanent basis on 6 January 2013. He was ever-present at left-back for the remainder of the season, adding 17 further appearances to his five loan appearances as Woking finished their first season back in the Conference in mid-table. Nutter remained at Woking for the 2013–14 campaign, making his first appearance of the season against his former employers, Lincoln City, in a 0–0 draw at Kingfield on 10 August 2013. He scored his first and only goal for Woking in the club's 2–0 away win at Gateshead on 15 February 2014, converting Kevin Betsy's cross after just two minutes to give Woking the lead and help the club on their way to their first away win of the year. He was once again a mainstay in the side throughout the whole of the season, making 50 appearances in all competitions and scoring once.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2013/2014"></ref>

Nutter was out of contract heading into the 2014–15 season, but after discussions with manager Garry Hill and coach Steven Thompson, he signed a contract extension with Woking, on non-contract terms, in August 2014. The contract was non-contract terms because Nutter was combining playing football alongside his new job as a teacher and therefore had to take on a part-time playing role. He also thanked the club for their understanding in his new role, especially given the recent death of his mother. Nutter started in the club's first game of the season, a 3–1 away victory at Alfreton Town on 9 August 2014. He played a largely peripheral role during the season, making seven appearances in all competitions as his new job commitments meant first-team opportunities were sparse.<ref name="Games played by John Nutter in 2014/2015"></ref> Nutter retired at the end of the season to focus fully on his teaching job.

Nutter played for the England C team, who represent England at non-league level, three times in 2007. He has also made several appearances for the England futsal side.

Nutter predominantly played as a left-sided full-back, although he did play on the left wing in the early stages of his career. He is left-footed. Gillingham manager Mark Stimson described him as "an attacking full-back with plenty of technical ability", and stated that Nutter would "offer plenty of width down the left hand side", in-turn being "a constant attacking threat". He expressed a passion to pass the ball along the floor, and always prefers to pass the ball out as opposed to hitting it long. Talking about his time at Stevenage, Nutter stated he would like to be remembered as a player "who tried to play football the right way, passing the ball, technically good to watch and an honest player".

He also provided an attacking outlet from set-pieces. Throughout his career, Nutter scored from several long-range free-kicks, and also regularly took corner kicks. During his time at Stevenage, he was the club's penalty taker, and scored six out of seven penalties.

Nutter is married to Hayley and as of 2011 had two sons, Walter and Benedict. He has a brother and a sister. His brother, Tom, has played football for Burnham and Beaconsfield SYCOB, and won a number of awards during a four-year stint in America playing for West Texas A&M University. He has stated that his closest friend in football is Adam Miller, whom he played alongside at Stevenage and Gillingham. Nutter studied Sports Psychology and Coaching at the University of Buckingham. He took up a position teaching physical education, science and history at the Papplewick School in Ascot in the summer of 2014.

Aldershot Town

Grays Athletic

Stevenage Borough

Gillingham


</doc>
<doc id="7352180" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7352180" title="Johnson Senior High School (Saint Paul, Minnesota)">
Johnson Senior High School (Saint Paul, Minnesota)

Johnson Senior High School is a comprehensive high school for grades 9 to 12 in Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States. Originally named Cleveland High School, the school was renamed after Minnesota governor John A. Johnson in 1911. Johnson is the second oldest high school in the Saint Paul Public Schools district and is only surpassed in age by Central High School. The school has operated in three different buildings since 1897, all located on the East Side of Saint Paul.

Johnson is the third largest high school in the district, and enrolls 1647 students. The school offers Advanced Placement classes as well as the University of Minnesota-affiliated College in the Schools program. In 2002 the school received a grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation which led to the introduction of eight Small Learning Communities.

Johnson offers over 40 extracurricular clubs and organizations including an Air Force Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps (AFJROTC) unit, one of only three in the state. The school was a founding member and currently competes in the Saint Paul City Conference. The school's hockey team has had success, winning four state titles.

Johnson High School was established in 1897, making it the second oldest high school in the Saint Paul Public Schools district and the oldest on the East Side of Saint Paul. The school was originally named Cleveland High School, after the U.S. President Grover Cleveland, although some sources state the school was named after Horace Cleveland, a local landscape architect.

In 1910 increasing enrollment and overcrowding led to the construction of a second school building at 740 York Avenue. The school was renamed John A. Johnson High School in honor of the recently deceased Minnesota governor John Albert Johnson (18611909). Students attended class at the second location from 1911 to 1963.

By 1959 overcrowding as a result of the post-World War II baby boom forced the construction of a third school building. Land was purchased in 1960 at the former site of Hastings Pond, which had been filled in during construction of Interstate 94 through Saint Paul, and the building was completed at a cost of $3,663,529. Johnson High School has been located at the third school building since the fall of 1963.

Students may enroll from throughout the city, but most live on the East Side. Johnson is the third largest high school in the Saint Paul Public Schools district, with 1647 students attending in the 2006–2007 school year. The plurality of students identified as Asian, with 46%, while students identifying as Black and White composed 29% and 14% of the student body respectively. 10% of students identified as Hispanic and 2% American Indian. 81% qualified for free or reduced price lunch and 34% of students had limited English proficiency.

Johnson participates in the Advanced Placement (AP) program, offering college-level courses in twelve subject areas. Students can also earn college credit through College in the Schools (CIS) classes offered by the University of Minnesota, and Post Secondary Enrollment Options (PSEO) classes at area colleges and universities. Language classes in Spanish and French are offered.

In 2002 Johnson received $1.1 million in grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the U.S. Department of Education. Johnson used the money to create eight smaller learning communities for the 2003–2004 school year. In the first five years the graduation rate at Johnson increased 19%, with state-required 10th grade reading and writing tests also seeing double digit increases. The money from the grants ran out before the 2006–2007 school year. 

Currently, there are eight smaller learning communities within the school. All students start in the Freshmen FOCUS Academy and then choose one of seven other academies for the remainder of their high school career, based on their interests. 

Beginning with the class of 2006, graduating seniors are required to engage in the Senior Project, a program designed to showcase the skills students have developed during their stay at Johnson and as a practice for building a résumé or portfolio. The project consists of four main Ps: project, paper, portfolio and presentation. The students are required to work on a project outside of class that takes at least 15 hours. Their paper has to relate to their project, so if the project is creating a birdhouse, the paper could be about the best type of birdhouse. The portfolio then brings everything together with evidence to prove that the project was completed. The presentation is given at least three times and ties all of the items together. The projects are judged throughout the year, and the top four students receive a partial college scholarship.

Johnson athletic programs competed in class AAAA of the Minnesota State High School League until the 2007-08 school year, when the school was moved to class AAA. The school was a founding member of the Saint Paul City Conference in 1898, when the school was still Cleveland High School.

The Governors have won the Saint Paul City Conference title for football 13 times, their last conference title coming in 2006. 

Johnson's chief rival is Harding Senior High School, and the two football squads play each other annually for the Hatchet trophy. The rivalry is the oldest continuous one in the Saint Paul City Conference with the teams meeting each year since 1932.

In 2010, the Governors won their first boys' basketball state title, beating out Grand Rapids High School and capping off an undefeated season. Johnson made another state tournament appearance in 2006, but lost in the semi-finals to eventual state AAAA champion Hopkins.

Johnson also has a history of success in ice hockey, including four state championships (1947, 1953, 1955, 1963), three second-place finishes, and three third-place finishes in 22 state tournament appearances. Johnson was the only Twin Cities high school to win the Minnesota high school boys' hockey tournament for the first 25 years. 

Herb Brooks and Warren Strelow, who coached the Miracle on Ice gold medal-winning team, played on the school's 1955 state championship-winning team. Brooks' number five jersey was retired following his death in 2003. 

During the 1950s the team played at Phalen Playground. 

Most of the bantam hockey team players from the East Side attend either Johnson or Hill-Murray School. During the 1950s and 1960s Johnson was considered a feeder school for the University of Minnesota's ice hockey team. 

Recently the school's sports teams have suffered from lack of enrollment. Along with Como Park, Johnson is the only Saint Paul City Conference school to field a hockey team.

Johnson's literary magazine the "Gleam" was first published in 1912 but stopped publishing in 1926. In 1992 the magazine began again to help students improve scores on writing tests. The current literary annual is titled the "Mirror". 

Johnson is one of only three high schools in Minnesota to have an Air Force Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps (AFJROTC). There are over 40 extracurricular clubs or organizations for students.






</doc>
<doc id="7525422" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7525422" title="Ellwood House">
Ellwood House

The Ellwood House was built as a private home by barbed wire entrepreneur Isaac Ellwood in 1879. It is located on First Street in DeKalb, Illinois, United States, in DeKalb County. The Victorian style home, designed by George O. Garnsey, underwent remodeling in 1898-1899 and 1911. The house was originally part of 1,000 acres (4 km²) which included a large stable complex known as "Ellwood Green." Isaac Ellwood lived here until 1910 when he passed the estate to his son, Perry Ellwood.

After Perry Ellwood inherited the home he remodeled the interior and exterior, drastically altering the home's appearance. Thus, the Ellwood House incorporates elements from several architectural styles. In 1964 the home was donated to the city of DeKalb and converted into a museum. The house was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places in 1975. The Ellwood House Museum site contains six structures in addition to the main house. A 50-foot (15 m) tall water tower dominates the west side of the property while a 14-foot (4.3-m) tall miniature Stick style house is located nearer the main house. There is also a Visitor Center, built as an addition to the Perry Ellwood family's original garage, and a museum house that was once used to hold Harriet Ellwood's (Isaac's wife) collection of "curiosities." The property also includes the "Ellwood-Nehring House," the home given to Perry and May Ellwood as a wedding gift in 1898. From 1940 until 2011, the house was privately owned by Paul Nehring, owner of DeKalb's Nehring Electrical Works, and his wife Shirley. 

Construction on the original mansion began in April 1879, George O. Garnsey, a Chicago architect, designed the Ellwood Mansion for DeKalb barbed wire entrepreneur Isaac Ellwood. At the time, Garnsey had designed other structures in DeKalb and Sycamore. By November 1879 the Ellwood family occupied the home. Newspaper accounts of the day put the cost somewhere between US$40,000 and $50,000. The original Ellwood House had a number of elements common to Victorian designed homes and combined several styles. Its mansard roof remains one of the home's most striking features. In addition, the home still incorporates Gothic columns, pitched gables, and a cast iron roof cresting with a trefoil design.

While Isaac Ellwood lived in the home large dinner parties, popular during the 19th century, were commonplace. The Ellwood House hosted prominent visitors throughout Isaac Ellwood's residence there. Theodore Roosevelt dined in the Ellwood House dining room while he was a candidate for Vice President of the United States in 1900. The dining room has also hosted U.S. Senators and U.S. state governors among other notable guests. Dinner parties at the Ellwood House followed customs typical to 19th century dinner partie. Guests "dressed" for the party, followed proper etiquette and were expected to know how to use the silverware properly.

The first remodeling work on the Ellwood Mansion took place as the 19th century drew to a close. The changes, commissioned by Isaac Ellwood, were meant to reflect more popular architectural styles including the Georgian and Colonial Revival. Many of the building's original Gothic features were replaced with more Classical elements. On the home's exterior, some of these changes can be observed in the addition of the portico and porte-cochere. Inside the home, the dining room was enlarged with the addition of the semicircular bay on the mansion's north facade.

Perry Ellwood inherited the house in 1910, and, together with his wife, May Ellwood (née Gurler), altered the mansion once again. The biggest changes were the addition of the terrace on the home's south face, a sunroom wing, and the relocation of the porte-cochere to the north side of the portico. This is the mansion that is visible today.

During World War II, and after Perry Ellwood died in 1943, May Ellwood again altered the home; to save on fuel oil, she had the upper floors of the house closed off. During this period, the library functioned as a guest room and a bathroom was added across the library's west wall. The bathroom was removed before the house opened as a museum in 1967. The library's plaster cornice and other architectural details have been restored based on a 1912 photograph. In 1964 the home was donated to the city of DeKalb and converted into a museum.

The three-story brick house includes a full elevated basement and a mansard roof with steeply pitched gabled dormers. Projecting from the roofline are plain corbeled chimneys and iron gillwork, the original roofing material was slate. The 1879 version of the Ellwood House featured dormer ornamentation with finial work. The original windows were all double-hung and of modest size, occurring both singly and in pairs while showing a variety of lintel designs. The original front (east) facade appeared much different than it does at present. The front entryway has been completely altered, due to Perry Ellwood's 1911 remodeling. The original entryway featured a one-story stone porch supported with two pilasters and two granite columns. The square projecting porch bay was connected to the ground via 12 stone stairs. In the southeast corner of the house was a full three-story projecting tower set at a 45° angle to the rest of the front facade.

Isaac Ellwood's 1898-1899 renovations were superficial, especially when compared to the alterations his son made to the original design a decade later. He had the bracketed cornice replaced with a Classical cornice with dentils and a projecting molding. The window lintels were altered in a style similar to the new cornice. On the tower, the two windows on the first floor were replaced with one larger window while the projecting bay over the east portico was removed and made flush with the rest of the house. The windows over that portico were replaced with a heavy double door that opened onto the roof over the veranda, which had been built over the entire front of the house. It was during this time that the first porte-cochere was built on the south side of the home.

Perry Ellwood undertook major renovations which added and changed rooms in 1910. On the home's exterior the porte cochere was moved from the south facade to its present position on the north facade. On the south side of the home a large brick terrace was added and the conservatory moved from the southwest side of the house to the rear (west). The full-length tower on the home's southwest corner was entirely removed during this renovation.

The general layout of the home's interior has remained basically the same throughout the remodelings; the rooms on each floor are accessed via a large central hallway which ends in an elegant rotunda. However, some of the changes made in 1910 and 1911 did alter the interior appearance. The parlor was converted into the library and the library was converted into the dining room after an extension was added on. In the home's northwest corner a large kitchen was added, on the second-floor, the room above the kitchen became servant's quarters.

Upon entering the Ellwood House, guests of Isaac or Perry Ellwood would have been greeted or formally welcomed by members of the family. After Perry Ellwood inherited the house in 1910 the entry parlor began to become known as the library. Prominent among the library's features is a carved Italian marble mantle with a large gilt mirror hung above it. The library's bookshelves are cast in a Neo-Italian Renaissance style and constructed of fine mahogany. Presently filling the shelves in the Ellwood House are a large collection of books with Ellwood family nameplates. Near the library window, which is adorned with its original walnut shutters, is an 1890s French statue. The statue was donated to the Ellwood House Association from someone in Sycamore who bequeathed it to the museum.

The dining room's underwent an extensive remodel in 1898 because of Ellwood's rise to national prominence through his barbed wire partnership with Joseph Glidden. The room was enlarged through the addition of a semi-circular bay. Beyond the addition, the room was refurnished and redecorated to reflect the Georgian Revival alterations that were occurring on the home's exterior. Elements of Georgian Revival architecture that were incorporated into the Ellwood dining room remodel include, mahogany paneling with dentil molding around the windows and doors, a cornice with Classical details, and brackets. Almost all of the dining room's 1898 furniture and woodwork was custom made by Tobey & Company of Chicago and each piece is affixed with a dated brass plate. The main dining room table and chairs were cast in an early Georgian style and the table has twelve extra leaves which can extend it the length of the room. The dining room's smaller table, situated within the bay addition, was used for Ellwood family breakfasts.

The Ellwood House living room did not exist until Perry Ellwood's 1911 remodeling. The original living room space was laid out as two rooms with pocket doors joining them. In the living room, a wall between the sitting room was removed which created a large, open space to which a vaulted ceiling was added. Perry Ellwood's living room was designed to function with the newly added sunroom and south terrace as one large living and entertaining space. The terrace can be accessed through French doors from both the living room and sunroom. The living room was designed to reflect English country houses c. 1650, during the Stuart period. The room was designed by Roy Terwilliger, an interior designer with Marshall Field & Company in Chicago and May Ellwood's cousin. The living room features a "pargework" ceiling constructed of molded plaster and designed with a geometric theme. The large, Caen stone fireplace was carved in Chicago in 1911. The sunroom was designed in the late 19th century and early 20th century Arts and Crafts style causing it to stand in stark contrast to the living room. The room was originally furnished with Mission style furniture to complement the oak woodwork.

Shortly before her death in 1964 May Ellwood donated the house to the DeKalb Park District for use as a historic house museum. The Ellwood House site is about which includes a wooded area to the north of the house; all that remains of the original 1,000 acres (4 km). The house is now a museum, operated jointly by the Ellwood House Association and the DeKalb Park District and they offer guided tours for a fee. The museum offers tours seasonally beginning in late spring and ending after the annual holiday celebration in December. The Ellwood House Museum has a visitor's center, which includes a barbed wire gallery, carriage gallery, special exhibits gallery, and a gift shop. The museum offers tourists a chance to glimpse what life was like for the Ellwoods. As part of the DeKalb Park District, the grounds are open to the public, and available for rental for use on public and private events. The DeKalb Area Garden Club hosts an annual Flower Show, community members hold weddings in the garden or visitors center, and the Ellwood House Association holds an annual Art Show, Ice Cream Social, and other events.

The Ellwood House grounds hold several extant outbuildings as well: the museum house, the carriage house, the water tower, and the Little House.
On the west (rear) of the Ellwood House, the circular limestone water tower is about 50 feet (15.2 m) tall and has a diameter of 18 feet (5.5 m). The tower has windows occurring at different levels, which are arched and include keystones in their design. The water tower was built in 1879, the same year as Ellwood House, and at that time the structure was topped with a wooden water tank with a conical roof. Between 1897 and 1910 the wooden tank was removed and replaced with an additional 30 courses of stone which matched the original structure. The arched door at the base of the water tower was replaced with a larger square-shaped double door. The roof remained conical and of wood construction until about 1950 when it was replaced with sheet metal.

The water tower is the only surviving structure from what was once a large horse stable facility owned by Isaac Ellwood. The complex, known as "Ellwood Green," was affiliated with the family's Percheron horse business. Two major structures within the complex, were the 1879 brick stable buildings, both of which featured mansard roofs. Those buildings, along with all other original stable buildings (save the water tower and including the home stable) were demolished through the years.

Another of the property's buildings, commonly called the carriage house, never lived up to its popular name. The building never housed any carriages; it was, in fact, built to house automobiles. The southern section of the carriage house was constructed sometime between 1908 and 1912 and features a mansard roof. The building is sheathed in stucco and presently houses a collection of antique carriages and sleighs as well as a barbed wire history museum.

The carriage house, today the Ellwood House Museum's Education and Visitors Center, was built by Perry Ellwood as a multi-car garage. It had a grease pit for automobile repair work. On the second floor was an apartment for the Ellwood family chauffeur. The building originally had garage doors on both sides so cars could drive in one side and out the other side of the structure. The original doors are on display inside the Ellwood House Visitors Center.

The one-story red brick Museum House, another of the site's outbuildings, stands to the south of the main house and was built in 1905 for Isaac Ellwood's wife Harriett. The Ellwood's grandchildren and other family members referred to the museum house as the "Curiosity Shop." She used the building to store the many curiosities and items she collected while traveling throughout the world. Some of these items included Native American artifacts, minerals, seashells, and other specimens. The museum house measures almost exactly 25 feet (7.6 m) on all four sides and has two doorways, one on the east and one on the north side. On its interior some of the museum house's original oak display cases are still intact.

The Museum House is cast in Classical Revival style and was the last outbuilding constructed for Isaac Ellwood on the property. Today the Museum House's exterior appears much the same as it did when it was newly constructed but for many years the structure was badly deteriorated. After Harriet Ellwood died in 1910 the objects remained inside the building while it began to decline. By 1934 the building was in serious need of repair and by the 1970s both porches were gone and the only way into the building was through the north door. The museum house restoration was undertaken more than ten years later. Prior to the addition of the Visitors Center to the Carriage House, the Museum House served as the visitors center and housed staff offices.

On the west (rear) side of the home, near the carriage house, is a miniature Stick style house known as Little House. Little House is 13 feet (4 m) by 15 feet (4.6 m) and stands 14 feet (4.3 m) above its concrete foundation. The Little House's roof is an exact replica of the original roof of the Ellwood House. Little House was built in 1892 with assistance from every carpenter in DeKalb; the house was to be used as a float in a local parade. After the parade Isaac Ellwood's son, Will, bought the house and had it placed on the Ellwood House property in the same location it stands today. The house was used by Will's two daughters and later by Perry Ellwood's children.

Between that time and 1973 the house had four or five other owners and it was moved several times. Eventually, the Little House wound up at the property of Mr. and Mrs. Burt Oderkirk, on Annie Glidden Road, where it again served as a playhouse for the couple's children. At this point it was painted white, with green shutters. In 1973 Mrs. Oderkirk donated Little House to Ellwood House Association and it was returned to its place on the Ellwood property. In 1986 the Little House was restored to a Victorian .paint scheme.

The house is most significant for its connection to Isaac Ellwood, who has been given credit, in part, for Joseph Glidden's invention of barbed wire. Glidden's patent was earlier, thus Ellwood's connection with the actual invention is vague. He did, however, play a chief role in organizing the barbed wire industry into a viable and profitable business. Isaac Ellwood lived in the home throughout his later years and made his home in DeKalb through all of his years in barbed wire. The Ellwood House, including the four contributing properties on its site, were added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places on June 13, 1975.





</doc>
<doc id="7547832" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7547832" title="Hurricane Klaus (1984)">
Hurricane Klaus (1984)

Hurricane Klaus was a North Atlantic hurricane that hit the Leeward Islands from the west in November of the 1984 Atlantic hurricane season. Forming from a broad area of low pressure on November 5, Klaus maintained a northeast movement throughout much of its path. After making landfall on extreme eastern Puerto Rico, it passed to the north of the Leeward Islands, resulting in strong southwesterly winds and rough seas. Klaus attained hurricane status and reached peak winds of 90 mph (145 km/h) before becoming extratropical over cooler waters on November 13. The storm dropped heavy rainfall in Puerto Rico, causing minor flooding and light damage. Klaus caused heavy marine damage in the Leeward Islands, including wrecking at least three ships. The Virgin Islands experienced heavy damage as well.

A broad area of low pressure gradually developed over the extreme southeastern Caribbean Sea on November 1. It moved slowly westward and steadily organized. By November 4, the system stalled to the north of Curaçao, which was followed by a turn to the northeast. Convection slowly organized as a surface circulation formed, and on November 5 the system developed into Tropical Depression Fifteen. Initially weak with only 20 mph (32 km/h) winds, the depression steadily organized as it moved northeastward, and a Reconnaissance Aircraft mission confirmed the existence of the cyclone on November 6 as it was located midway between Puerto Rico and the Netherlands Antilles. Late on the 6th, the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Klaus while located a short distance south of Puerto Rico.

Tropical Storm Klaus continued northeastward, and made landfall on extreme eastern Puerto Rico early on November 7. The storm passed a short distance north of the Lesser Antilles, and became the first tropical cyclone in recorded history to affect the islands from the west. Favorable conditions allowed the storm to continue strengthening, and Klaus attained hurricane status early on November 8. The hurricane accelerated to the northeast, and reached its peak intensity of 90 mph (145 km/h) late on November 8. After maintaining its peak strength for 30 hours, Klaus weakened slightly. Interaction with an upper-level low turned the hurricane westward on November 11, though an approaching trough of low pressure turned Hurricane Klaus to the northeast. Cold air and cooler waters weakened the convection around the center on November 12, and Klaus degenerated to a subtropical storm. It accelerated to the northeast and degenerated to an extratropical storm on November 13 while located about 440 miles (700 km) south-southeast of Cape Race, Newfoundland. Six hours later, it was absorbed by another extratropical system.

Shortly after forming, gale warnings were issued for Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Netherlands Antilles of the Leeward Islands, Saint Kitts and Nevis, and Anguilla. Klaus was the first tropical cyclone on record to hit the Leeward Islands from the west, and as a result many were unprepared for the strong winds and rough seas from the southwest.

While moving past Puerto Rico, Tropical Storm Klaus dropped heavy rainfall peaking at in Guavate Camp in the southeastern part of the island. Much of the southern half of Puerto Rico reported over (178 mm). Vieques received around 7 inches of precipitation, while Culebra experienced over . The heavy rainfall resulted in freshwater flooding. The strongest winds of the storm remained offshore, and wind gusts peaked at in Roosevelt Roads Naval Station. Winds and rainfall on the island resulted in downed trees and power lines, though damage was minimal. Klaus struck the island on election day, causing slight disruptions to the process.

Saint John in the United States Virgin Islands reported over of rainfall in association with Tropical Storm Klaus. Both Saint Thomas and Saint Croix received around 10 inches, while rainfall in the British Virgin Islands remained below 10 inches. Tropical Storm Klaus caused severe flooding and extensive damage throughout the U.S. Virgin Islands. Strong southwesterly winds resulted in gale force winds and rough seas along the southwestern portions of the Leeward Islands. The rough waves caused considerable damage to marine interests in the area. In Anguilla, three ships were wrecked. off of Saint Martin, the rough seas wrecked a cruise ship. The 60 passengers and 23 crew members swam safely to shore, though one person was hospitalized. Rough seas also damaged local coral reefs. 10,000 people were affected on the island of Dominica. There, the storm caused $2 million (1984 USD, $3.9 million 2006 USD) in damage and resulted in two fatalities. In Antigua, strong waves from the hurricane produced severe beach erosion, which endangered a highway behind an eroded beach. Beach erosion was reported in nearby Barbuda, as well. The British Virgin Islands sustained moderate damage totaling to $152 million (1984 USD, $315 million 2008 USD). St. Kitts and Nevis also saw much Leeward coastal damage resulting from the storm, the worst impact being the destruction of the Sandy Point town port in Saint Kitts.

In Anguilla, nine ships, including three that were wrecked from the hurricane, were intentionally sunk in 1990 to create an artificial reef. About a month after the storm passed, President Ronald Reagan declared the U.S. Virgin Islands a major disaster area. The declaration permitted use of federal funds for recovery. The Federal Emergency Management Agency provided an average relief fund of $2,128 (1984 USD, $4,147 2006 USD) per affected person, the smallest return rate for a declared disaster in the Virgin Islands.

Because damage was not significant, the name Klaus was not retired after this year. However, the name was later retired after Hurricane Klaus in 1990 (which, unusually, was less damaging), and was replaced by Kyle in 1996.




</doc>
<doc id="7598504" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7598504" title="Hurricane Fern">
Hurricane Fern

Hurricane Fern was the sixth named storm and fourth hurricane of the 1971 Atlantic hurricane season. It formed from a tropical wave which interacted with a large trough of low pressure to form Fern, as well as Hurricane Ginger, Tropical Storm Heidi, and a system later designated as Tropical Depression Sixteen, which moved into South Carolina. Fern crossed southeastern Louisiana as a tropical depression on September 4 before swinging back out over the Gulf of Mexico. Fern reached hurricane status on September 8, reaching a peak intensity of 90 mph (140 km/h) before making landfall near Freeport, Texas, two days later.

Fern's path was erratic since it made 90° turns three times during its duration, making it difficult for forecasters to track.
The second Atlantic tropical cyclone to make U.S. landfall that year, Fern produced heavy rainfall across Louisiana and Texas, causing flash flooding that left 2 indirect fatalities and damage totaling over $30 million (1971 USD, $  USD).

A northwestward moving tropical wave moved out the Caribbean Sea on September 1 and became a tropical depression on September 2 after crossing southern Florida. Still moving northwestward, the tropical depression made landfall in southeastern Louisiana on September 4. A building high pressure system over the Central United States forced the tropical depression to move southwest over the Gulf of Mexico. The warm waters then cause the depression to reach tropical storm strength and the storm was given the name "Fern" by the National Hurricane Center on September 7.

The following day, Fern reached hurricane status as it neared the Texas coastline. The hurricane reached a peak intensity of 90 mph (140 km/h) and its barometric pressure dropped to 979 millibars. An incoming mid-latitude trough caused Fern to stall east of Texas for twelve hours. After the trough moved by, Fern turned southwest, paralleling the Texas coastline before making landfall on September 10 between Freeport and Matagorda.

At landfall, Fern had weakened to a strong tropical storm as it moved further inland. Because the center of Fern was elongated, it was still able to receive moisture from the Gulf of Mexico and as a result, weakening was slow. Between September 10 and September 11, Fern bypassed Corpus Christi, Texas, before dissipating as a tropical depression after crossing the Rio Grande into northern Mexico.

At the time of its formation, forecasters determined that Fern might loop around in the Gulf of Mexico and it was more threatening to land than Hurricane Edith which was also projected to hit the Gulf Coast. On September 9, as Fern was becoming organized, forecasters issued a hurricane watch along the Texas coast, anticipating that Fern might strengthen into a hurricane. In addition, small boats were warned to stay in port and residents were advised to be aware of storm conditions brought by Fern. The next day, the hurricane watches were changed to warnings, forcing residents living on the Texas coast to board up and evacuate. In preparation for the storm's impact, Civil Defense workers and the American Red Cross were put on alert. In Galveston, eight emergency shelters were planned to open but five were closed when officials learned that they were not needed as most residents chose to ride out the storm in their homes. When Fern moved inland, the National Weather Service issued 21 tornado warnings and numerous flood warnings. In North Beach, city buses were used to transport evacuees inland and local officials were concerned about what to do with the relief trailers used to house survivors of Hurricane Celia a year earlier.

The precursor disturbance which later became Fern dropped rainfall up to of rainfall across South Florida. Central and Northern Florida received of rain. In Louisiana, after making landfall as a tropical depression, Fern produced rainfall up to across the southeastern part of the state, including up to in New Orleans. The outer bands of the tropical depression brought of rain across the coastal sections of Mississippi and Alabama. There were no reports of damage or fatalities in either Florida or the eastern U.S. Gulf Coast.

As Fern made its final landfall, a weather station in Port O'Connor, Texas recorded a sustained wind speed of . In Corpus Christi, winds up to were reported. In coastal Texas, storm tides of above normal were reported from Galveston to Freeport. One spotter reported seeing a flock of swallows in the eye of the storm during landfall. Heavy rainfall from the hurricane fell across eastern and central Texas. A total of of rain was measured in a stripe from Bee to San Patricio County. Other locations in Texas reported rainfall of , while areas from Galveston to Rockport received of rain. The heavy rainfall caused severe flash flooding that isolated numerous small towns in eastern and central Texas. An outbreak of five tornadoes was reported during Fern's landfall, two of which caused minor tree and roof damage in Texas City. In addition, lightning from the hurricane caused six reported house fires on Galveston Island while 7,500 homes and business were damaged (mainly by flooding) near Corpus Christi. Two indirect fatalities were reported, both from drowning incidents, while on Mustang Island, the hurricane caused four Cuban fishing boats to run aground. In all, the storm left $30.2 million (1971 USD, $  USD) in damage and two deaths.



</doc>
<doc id="7623370" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7623370" title="Fishing Creek (North Branch Susquehanna River tributary)">
Fishing Creek (North Branch Susquehanna River tributary)

Fishing Creek is a long tributary of the Susquehanna River in Columbia County, Pennsylvania, in the United States. It joins the Susquehanna River near the census-designated place of Rupert and the town of Bloomsburg. The watershed has an area of .

Nomadic Native Americans arrived in the lower reaches of Fishing Creek around 8000 BCE, and some were spending winters in the upper reaches of the valley by 3000 to 2000 BCE. In the past few centuries, the Fishing Creek area has been home to many industries, mills, and dams. It drains parts of five Pennsylvania counties: Columbia, Montour, Sullivan, Luzerne, and Lycoming. The creek's main tributaries include Hemlock Creek, Little Fishing Creek, Green Creek, Huntington Creek, West Branch Fishing Creek, and East Branch Fishing Creek.

Public recreation activities include canoeing, birdwatching, and fishing. The creek is known for its trout population, which includes brook, brown and rainbow trout; it also contains many other species of fish. Northern hardwood trees and ruffed grouse live in the surrounding area.

Some stretches of Fishing Creek contain significant amounts of algae because of leaking septic systems in the watershed. The area around the tributary West Creek is the least habitable part of the Fishing Creek area, according to a 2011 study. The water quality of Fishing Creek can vary. Its pH ranges from 4.9 to 8.5, while the concentration of dissolved oxygen ranges from 5 to 17.5 mg per liter. The creek's average discharge is 615 cubic feet per second (17.4 m/s); its watershed contains gravel, shale and various loams—in particular the Albrights soil series and the Leck Kill soil.

Fishing Creek's source is above sea level in Sugarloaf Township, south of State Game Lands Number 13 and Pennsylvania Route 118, where East Branch and West Branch Fishing Creeks of southern Sullivan County meet in northern Columbia County. The creek heads approximately south with a few bends through Sugarloaf Township for about . In the southern part of the township, it turns east for less than a mile and picks up Coles Creekits first named tributary after the confluence of the East and West Branches. It empties into Fishing Creek from the northeast, upstream of its mouth.

Around this point, Fishing Creek turns sharply south into Benton Township and starts flowing parallel to Pennsylvania Route 487. Here it flows four or five miles, including about a mile in Benton, where West Creek parallels Fishing Creek and empties into it from the west just south of Benton and upstream of the mouth. Fishing Creek crosses under Pennsylvania Route 239 and continues approximately south, passing through the community of Maple Grove and flowing into Fishing Creek Township and Stillwater. In Stillwater, Raven Creek empties into the creek from the northeast, above the mouth. About south, the creek turns and picks up Huntington Creek, and then flows past the communities of Zaners, Forks, and Pealertown. The mouth of Huntington Creek is above the mouth of Fishing Creek.

Upon leaving Fishing Creek Township, about after picking up Huntington Creek, Fishing Creek flows southwest past Knob Mountain and into Orange Township. It passes near the northern edge of Knob Mountain downstream, then by Orangeville, and makes a 90° turn to the northwest. Shortly after this turn it picks up Green Creek above its mouth and turns west. After some distance, it turns south again, passing Bowman Bridge and a gauging station. From this point, the creek flows along the border between Orange and Mount Pleasant Townships for almost . While on the border between these two townships, it flows past Kocher Park. The creek stays considerably nearer to the western edge of the river valley than the eastern edge at this point. Near Lightstreet, it turns west into Mount Pleasant Township, passing several lakes and the Turkey Hill Oxbow. Upon entering Mount Pleasant Township, the creek stops paralleling Pennsylvania Route 487 and flows in the vicinity of Interstate 80 for .

Along the border of Mount Pleasant Township and Bloomsburg, Fishing Creek picks up Little Fishing Creek at a distance of upstream of its mouth before turning south and paralleling the western border of Bloomsburg. As it flows between Bloomsburg and Fernville, it turns sharply westward, paralleling U.S. Route 11, and picks up Hemlock Creek, which is above the mouth. Shortly after picking up Hemlock Creek, Fishing Creek turns southeast under U.S. Route 11 and flows parallel to Pennsylvania Route 42 for slightly over , picking up Montour Run from the right, then empties later into the Susquehanna between Bloomsburg and Rupert. The Rupert Covered Bridge No. 56 crosses the main stem of the creek. Its mouth is above sea level lower than, and downstream of, the source.

Fishing Creek has several major tributaries and numerous minor ones. The major tributaries are Hemlock Creek, Little Fishing Creek, Green Creek, Huntington Creek, and the East and West Branch Fishing Creeks. West Branch Fishing Creek rises on North Mountain and flows east into Fishing Creek. East Branch Fishing Creek is a tributary that starts on North Mountain in Sullivan County and is approximately long. Huntington Creek starts in State Game Lands number 57 and heads southwest through Luzerne County until it reaches the north side of Knob Mountain, which it runs parallel to until it merges with Fishing Creek. Huntington Creek drains the eastern and northeastern parts of the Fishing Creek watershed. Four covered bridges cross Huntington Creek; these are the Twin Bridges–East Paden Covered Bridge No. 120, the Twin Bridges–West Paden Covered Bridge No. 121, the Josiah Hess Covered Bridge No. 122, and the Huntington Mills Bridge.

Green Creek rises near Waller and heads roughly south to Rohrsburg and on to Orangeville, where it joins Fishing Creek. It drains the central part of the Fishing Creek watershed. Little Fishing Creek starts just in Lycoming County near the Columbia County Line. It winds through rural areas before reaching Pennsylvania Route 42, which it runs parallel to for the remainder of its length. It drains the western part of the Fishing Creek watershed. Four covered bridges cross Little Fishing Creek; these are the Wanich Covered Bridge No. 69, the Sam Eckman Covered Bridge No. 92, the Jud Christie Covered Bridge No. 95, and the Creasyville Covered Bridge.

Other tributaries of the main stem include Coles Creek and West Creek near Benton, Raven Creek in Fishing Creek Township, Hemlock Creek in Hemlock Township, Montour Run in Montour Township, and Deerlick Run and Stony Brook, both near Orange Township.

Fishing Creek drains most of Columbia County north of the Susquehanna River except for an area in the eastern part of the county, which is drained by Briar Creek. It also drains southern Sullivan County and western Luzerne County. Minor tributaries drain small portions of Montour County and southeastern Lycoming County. The upper part of the watershed is 85 percent forest and 13 percent farmland. Near its source, the other two percent is residential; closer to Benton, the remainder is urban. The creek's drainage basin consists of a number of sub-watersheds. The largest ones are the Huntington Creek watershed, with an area of 114 square miles; the Little Fishing Creek watershed, with an area of 68.1 square miles; the Green Creek drainage basin, with an area of 36.9 square miles; and the West Branch Fishing Creek drainage basin, with an area of 32.9 square miles.

Northern Bloomsburg and Scott Township include a small oxbow lake of Fishing Creek; the area around this lake is known as the Turkey Hill Oxbow. The lake is located between Interstate 80 and the forests on the side of Turkey Hill. The oxbow is on a flood plain and includes grasses, forested wetlands, and areas of open water. In wet periods of the year, the Turkey Hill Oxbow lake receives overflow from the waters of Fishing Creek while during dry periods it contains water in only a few places.

Most land around the oxbow is steep. It is covered by hemlock and hardwood forests, as well as skunk cabbage seeps. The forests around the lake also contain black birch, yellow birch, white oak, red oak, sugar maple, tulip poplar, and Norway maple, while the understory contains slippery elm, European privet, Japanese barberry, American elderberry, wild hydrangea, witch hazel, mountain laurel, ironwood, and the rare American yew. The American yew population was in significant decline by 2004 due to heavy grazing by deer.

There are numerous wildflower species in the uplands and rock outcroppings of the Turkey Hill Oxbow. These include white baneberry, northern maidenhair fern, spikenard, blue cohosh, foamflower, false Solomon's seal, purple trillium, and wild columbine. Animals inhabiting the areas surrounding the pools include pickerel frogs, green frogs, wood ducks, and snapping turtles. Plants in this location include broadleaf arrowhead, northern blueflag, manna grasses, water starwort, and several varieties of sedges. Japanese knotweed has been seen near Interstate 80 on the northern edges of the Turkey Hill Oxbow.

Having first inhabited Pennsylvania between 16,000 and 10,000 BCE, nomadic Native Americans reached the area near the mouth of Fishing Creek by 8000 BCE. By 3000 to 2000 BCE, some of them were going into the Fishing Creek valley during the winter to hunt deer and bears and returning to the Susquehanna River in the summer, creating trade routes. There was no permanent habitation until 1000 BCE when some Native American villages were built at the mouth of Fishing Creek. The Native Americans who settled in this area included the Shawnee and Susquehannock Indians. A Native American path ran along the creek from Bloomsburg to Orangeville before turning away in the direction of Tunkhannock Creek. Since at least 1769, there has also been a path between the mouths of Huntington and Green Creeks.

The first lots at the mouth of Fishing Creek were surveyed in 1769 when European settlers began moving into the area, and in the same year, the Penn family purchased 1060 acres (430 hectares) of land upstream of Benton. In 1778, Moses Van Campen built a fort of logs covered with earth with a small swivel cannon on Fishing Creek to protect settlers on the frontier. There were settlers on the creek in Orange Township in 1780, and the Fishing Creek valley north of Orangeville, in what is now Stillwater, was first settled in 1783 by Daniel McHenry. The headwaters of the creek were settled in the late 1780s and early 1790s. Leonard Rupert established a ferry on the creek in 1786. The first sawmill on the upper portion of Fishing Creek was built in the late 1790s; it was destroyed in a flood in 1848.

The first mill in Sugarloaf Township was built alongside Fishing Creek in 1802, and another mill in the same township was noted for its buckwheat flour. A schoolhouse had been built by 1806. In 1818, John Barton built a flour and grist mill on Fishing Creek. It was destroyed by fire in 1855 and again in 1905. Although rebuilt, it burned down again in 1932. Another gristmill stood on the creek until 1830 when it was converted into a paper mill. Iron ore was discovered in the area of Fishing Creek in 1822, and in 1844, an anthracite-burning furnace was built on the creek near Bloomsburg. In the 19th century, an aqueduct was built across the creek. From around 1840 to 1900, the wagon-making industry was important to the upper Fishing Creek area. Another historic industry was the Susquehanna Slate Company, which operated in the late 19th century. The Fishing Creek Confederacy (August–November 1864) during the American Civil War was a suspected uprising of a high number of deserters and draft evaders. A thousand soldiers occupied and searched the Fishing Creek valley and the mountains of its headwaters but were unable to find any deserters. Nevertheless, 100 residents of Columbia County were arrested and imprisoned for desertion and draft evasion although most were later released. Starting in 1877, the Bloomsburg Water Company used Fishing Creek as its water supply. The Bloomsburg and Sullivan Railroad, which paralleled the creek, was built in 1888.

There were limestone mines at the junction of Fishing Creek and Little Fishing Creek, but these have not been used since at least 1887. During the Great Depression, a beach was constructed on the creek near Fernville by the Works Progress Administration. After the creek flooded in 1972 from Hurricane Agnes, a flash flood warning system was installed there. In 2002, a tract of land from the Custer/Kocher homestead on Fishing Creek near Lightstreet was converted into a park called the Frank W. Kocher Memorial Park, which was later expanded to cover . In the 21st century, the only significant industry in the watershed is the Benton Foundry.

Approximately downstream of Orangeville a gauging station was established on the creek in 1938. Other monitoring of the creek has included detailed studies at a stream-gauging station near Bloomsburg, which operated from 2002 to 2012.

Just downstream of Orangeville, Fishing Creek's discharge averages , with a median of . The lowest recorded discharge was while the highest was . Further upstream in Benton, it is almost always less than , and usually approaches zero during the summer. The typical discharge is around . In years of drought, the streambeds of West Branch and East Branch Fishing Creeks typically run dry for 105 days over summer; even in wet years they are dry for an average of 5 days. Near Bloomsburg, Fishing Creek's discharge has ranged between and .

Near Benton, Fishing Creek's pH ranges from around 5.6 to 7.25, while near Bloomsburg, a wider range has been recorded, from 5.8 to 8.5. Near Camp Lavigne, it ranges from 5.5 to 7.1. East Branch Fishing Creek is the only stream in the watershed whose pH drops below 5.5; it can fall as low as 4.9. West Creek and Coles Creek are the least acidic streams in the watershed, with pH levels usually above 6.3 and often above 7. Typically, the creek and its tributaries are not at risk of becoming too acidic for the optimal health of fish, but in early spring during snowmelts, the levels approach the limit that brook trout can tolerate. Fishing Creek's waters are acidic because of acid rain.

The concentration of dissolved oxygen in Fishing Creek ranges from approximately 5 to 17.5 mg/L at Benton. A site near Camp Lavigne had slightly less variability, ranging from 8 to 17 mg/L. The concentration near Bloomsburg ranged between 4.1 and 17.1 mg/L, with an average of 10.9 mg/L. The amount of carbon dioxide near Bloomsburg ranged from 0.3 to 34 mg/L, with an average of 2.04 mg/L.

The total concentration of nitrogen near Bloomsburg between 2002 and 2012 ranged from 0.52 to 2.8 mg/L. The average concentration was 1.212  mg/L. The ammonia levels in the creek ranged from less than 0.02  mg/L to 0.06  mg/L, while the concentration of nitrates was always less than 0.04 mg/L. The total concentration of phosphates ranged from less than 0.031 mg/L to 0.11 mg/L, while for phosphorus the figures ranged from less than 0.01 mg/L to 0.575  mg/L.

The total concentration of dissolved solids near Bloomsburg ranges from less than 2 to 166 mg/L.

In most places on Fishing Creek, there is not enough dissolved aluminum to be toxic, although East Branch Fishing Creek has aluminum concentrations of over 100 μg per liter, approaching a lethal level for fish. Fishing Creek itself and all its other tributaries have concentrations of less than 70 μg per liter. The concentration is seasonal: aluminum trapped in frozen ground is released into the streams when the soil thaws. As a result, aluminum levels in the creek peak in March and April and drop to almost zero in the summer.

The concentration of calcium at the gauging station near Bloomsburg has ranged from 5.5 mg/L to 26 mg/L, averaging 7.532 mg/L. The concentration of magnesium has ranged from 1.5 mg/L to 6.7 mg/L, with an average of 1.748 mg/L.

There are five dams on Fishing Creek. The lowhead dam called Boone's Dam is the furthest downstream, in Montour Township. It is high and long. Further upstream is the Diverting Dam, a 2-foot (0.6-meter) high and 100-foot (31-meter) long dam in Bloomsburg. It was built to power the nearby Irondale furnaces. A wide and high unnamed dam is on the creek further upstream, in Mount Pleasant Township. The uppermost dams are the wide and high Benton Dam and the wide and high Mill Dam, which are in Benton Township and Benton. Additionally, the Jonestown Dam is on the tributary Huntington Creek in Jonestown. This dam is high and wide.

The highest water temperature is at West Creek, which can reach in the summer. In Benton, Fishing Creek can reach in the summer while Coles Creek only reaches . In the winter, the water in the main stem is around , while in West Branch Fishing Creek it can drop to in the winter, making it the coldest stream in the watershed. At the gauging station near Bloomsburg, the temperature has ranged from ; it was at its lowest on January 10, 2011. The highest temperature occurred on August 3, 2006. The average temperature in August was and the average water temperature in January was . The temperature has averaged approximately .

The Fishing Creek watershed has been affected by glaciation, which has left a glacial till near the source and glacial outwash in the lower parts of the watershed. The watershed lies in two major geological regions: the Deep Valley section of the Allegheny Plateau and the Susquehanna Lowlands Section. The Allegheny Plateau lies in the upper reaches of the watershed and is characterized by deep valleys and rounded mountains with elevations of around . The Susquehanna Lowlands section is characterized by linear ridges of moderate elevation and valleys less steep than those of the Deep Valley region. There are also flood plains along the creek. Near its mouth, it cuts through Montour Ridge, and a basalt-containing section of the Catskill Formation extends to the creek's banks in Hemlock Township. Other rock formations along the banks include the Clinton Formation, the Selena Formation, the Lower Helderburg Formation, and the Hamilton Formation. There is a terminal moraine, which crosses the creek near Benton.

The bed of Fishing Creek contains red and brown shale in some places. Other parts of the watershed lie over gray sandstone or conglomerates. There are numerous deposits of iron ore, limestone and marble in the watershed of Fishing Creek. Most of the rock in the watershed, including the Trimmers Rock Formation and Catskill Formation, is from the Devonian Period, but some of the northernmost tributaries have watersheds on rock from the Mississippian Period, such as the Huntley Mountain Formation and Burgoon sandstone. The creek is a freestone stream although its water is colder than that of most eastern freestone streams.

Areas along Fishing Creek contain pools followed by riffles, which are further followed by more pools. This configuration of pools and riffles creates an ideal situation for fly-fishing. The lower part of the creek forms one side of a triangle of low-lying land in western Bloomsburg, which floods severely during heavy rains.

The main soil in the area of Fishing Creek belongs to the Albrights series, which contains a layer of sticky, reddish-brown, gravelly silt loam. Below this is a layer of yellowish-red, gravelly, silty clay loam, which extends to approximately below ground and lies over a layer of equal portions of gravel and silty clay loam. Bedrock occurs several feet below the surface. The top of the Leck Kill-Meckesville-Calvin series in the watershed is dark brown silt loam with small pieces of sandstone and shale. A subsoil of reddish-brown silt loam from below ground is followed by a layer of sticky clay loam, below which is a bedrock of red shale.

The Barbour series occurs near the source of the creek. It is topped with a crumbly, layer of brownish-red silt loam over a loose subsoil of reddish-brown loam with some gravel. The top layer can easily be penetrated by roots and water. Further down is a layer of reddish-brown gravel and sand, which extends to or more underground. The Basher series also occurs along upper Fishing Creek. The top layer is a loose, crumbly, reddish-brown sandy loam extending to underground, and the subsoil is a loose, porous, reddish-brown sandy loam with some gravel, extending to underground. Lower down, there is a layer of red sandy loam with some gravel that extends from underground.

The Pekin series is found along Fishing Creek and its tributary Huntington Creek. The uppermost layer, a dark brown silt loam that extends to underground, lies over a layer of brown silt loam with 10 percent gravel extending underground. The subsoil is mottled, brown, silty clay loam with cobbles and extends to underground. Bedrock occurs at a depth of underground. The Pekin soils near the creek contain more cobbles than typical Pekin soils. Soils of the Chen1ango-Pope-Holly series have also been found along it.

In 1914 the soils of the Fishing Creek watershed were found to yield large quantities of farm crops. Potatoes yielded 100 to 200 bushels per acre, corn 70 to 90 bushels per acre, oats 40 bushels per acre, wheat 20 to 30 bushels per acre, and hay one to two tons per acre. J. H. Battle's 1887 "History of Columbia and Montour Counties, Pennsylvania" stated that the Fishing Creek valley was fertile.

Benthic algae densely cover the bed of Fishing Creek, their preponderance attributed to leaking septic systems. At one location on the main stem downstream of Grassmere Park, coverage exceeds 60 percent. The dominant algal organism on West Branch Fishing Creek near the village of Elk Grove is "Cladophora". The green algae "Tetraspora" dominates the stretch of Fishing Creek for downstream of Grassmere Park, where it covers 80 percent of the riverbed. South of Pennsylvania Route 239's crossing of the creek, the dominant algal organisms are "Microspora", "Mougeotia", and "Spirogyra". In the fall, decomposing algae covers 50 percent of the riverbed.

Thirty-six species of macroinvertebrates live in Fishing Creek. The highest level of macroinvertebrate biodiversity on upper Fishing Creek is near Grassmere Park while the lowest is in Benton. The number of these organisms per square meter on Fishing Creek ranges from under 200 in Benton to nearly 400 halfway between Coles Creek and Benton. The highest density of them in the watershed occurs at West Creek where there are between 600 and almost 900 per m and the lowest density occurs at a site on East Branch Fishing Creek, where there are approximately 100 per m.

Some of Fishing Creek is stocked by the Fishing Creek Sportsman's Association and contains populations of brook trout, rainbow trout, and brown trout. Many of them are sizable; the largest one caught in Fishing Creek weighed and was long. All streams in the watershed are suitable for trout habitation according to the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission. An 1887 book stated that Fishing Creek and its tributaries may have once been "alive with trout". In the upper part of the watershed, wild brook trout are most common in West Branch Fishing Creek and fish in general are least common in East Branch Fishing Creek. West Creek has higher fish diversity than any other stream in the upper part of the watershed and is also the only place that is inhabited by wild brown trout. In addition, sculpin and cutlips minnow have been observed in large numbers in the creek and its tributaries. Less commonly observed fish in the upper part of the watershed include johnny darters, white suckers, and black-nosed dace. It is difficult for fish to spawn in the creek because of poor water quality near Benton, a lack of food, and dry headwaters for part of the year. The fish diversity in East Branch Fishing Creek and West Branch Fishing Creek is also significantly affected by episodic acidification, which is caused by acid rain falling in areas with no limestone in the bedrock. The main stem experiences similar problems but to a lesser extent, and the tributaries Coles Creek and West Creek experience the problems even less.

Northern hardwood trees are common in the Fishing Creek watershed. Ruffed grouse are common along Little Fishing Creek and its tributaries north of Iola. There are populations of Japanese knotweed, an invasive plant, along the creek and its tributaries south of Pennsylvania Route 118.

In 2011, the habitat quality of upper Fishing Creek and its tributaries were rated on a scale of 1 to 200 (with a higher rating indicating better habitability) by Point Park University and the Fishing Creek Sportsmans' Association. Most of this part of the creek and its tributaries were rated 166 or higher, which was considered optimal. The waters near the mouths of West Branch and East Branch Fishing Creeks, and Fishing Creek near Benton, were rated 113 to 160, considered suboptimal. A portion of West Creek was rated 60–112, considered marginal.

The highest Shannon Diversity Index of any stream in the Fishing Creek watershed is around 2.75, for West Branch Fishing Creek. This value is closely followed by that of West Creek, which has an index of 2.5 to 2.6. The lowest value in the watershed is that of East Branch Fishing Creek, which is around 1.2. The main stem has a Shannon Diversity Index of 2.1 to 2.4, depending on the site.

The Fishing Creek Sportsmans' Association has proposed a number of methods to conserve Fishing Creek and its tributaries. These include planting riparian buffers, eliminating leaky septic systems, and protecting the area from hydraulic fracturing.

The Fishing Creek Watershed Association plans to open a public section of the creek that stretches for 6500 feet (1980 meters), with a park of . There are other tracts of public property along the creek, one of which, called the Power Dam, is upstream of Benton. It covers and stretches for 2900 feet (880 meters) of Fishing Creek, and contains the remains of a concrete dam. Another public area is the Benton Overlook into Benton, which covers and stretches for 2600 feet (790 meters) near the creek. A public site at the Zaners Bridge in Zaner downstream from Stillwater covers along about 1000 feet (300 meters) of the creek and contains an abandoned railroad grade.

The Grassmere Park Campground was established in the early 1900s on Fishing Creek. Further downstream, near Lightstreet, is Kocher Park, which occupies more than . Typical activities there include canoeing, dog walking, birdwatching and fishing.

The western part of Pennsylvania State Game Lands Number 13 is in a gorge cut by West Branch Fishing Creek. These state game lands have an area of 50,000 acres and feature many forest roads and old grades. The hiking trail Waterfall Wonderland, which affords views of Big, Twin, Lewis, and Sullivan Falls, is described as "a place of almost mystical beauty" by Jeff Mitchell in his book "Hiking the Endless Mountains: Exploring the Wilderness of Northeastern Pennsylvania". The state game lands are less crowded than the nearby Ricketts Glen State Park.

The Jakey Hollow Natural Area is on a small tributary of Little Fishing Creek. It is near Mordansville and features old-growth forests. The natural area is one of the smallest in Pennsylvania.



</doc>
<doc id="7667957" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7667957" title="Pygmy three-toed sloth">
Pygmy three-toed sloth

The pygmy three-toed sloth ("Bradypus pygmaeus"), also known as the monk sloth or dwarf sloth, is a sloth endemic to Isla Escudo de Veraguas, a small island off the coast of Panama. The species was first described by Robert P. Anderson of the University of Kansas and Charles O. Handley Jr., of the Smithsonian Institution in 2001. The pygmy three-toed sloth is significantly smaller than the other three members of its genus, but otherwise resembles the brown-throated three-toed sloth. According to Anderson and Handley Jr., the head-and-body length is between , and the body mass ranges from .

This sloth, like other sloths, is arboreal (tree-living) and feeds on leaves. It is symbiotically associated with green algae, that can provide it with a camouflage. Details of mating behavior and reproduction have not been documented. The pygmy three-toed sloth is found exclusively in the red mangroves of Isla Escudos de Veraguas, restricted to an area of . A 2012 census of pygmy three-toed sloths estimated the total population at 79. The IUCN lists the pygmy three-toed sloth as critically endangered and they are listed on the world's 100 most threatened species.

The pygmy three-toed sloth was first described by Robert P. Anderson of the University of Kansas and Charles O. Handley Jr., of the Smithsonian Institution in 2001. The researchers noted that the three-toed sloths endemic to Isla Escudo de Veraguas, a small island off the coast of Panama, are significantly smaller than those that occur on the nearby outer islands of Bocas del Toro Province. Moreover, they differ from other populations in terms of pelage and cranial characteristics. Hence, they considered the three-toed sloths in Isla Escudo de Veraguas to be an independent species and formally described it from the skin and skull of an adult female. The researchers further pointed out that Isla Escudos de Veraguas is the oldest island and located farthest from the mainland, that began breaking up into small islands due to rises in sea levels 10,000 years ago. They proposed that this species evolved from an isolated population that had originated from the mainland population of brown-throated three-toed sloths; it gradually differentiated enough to become an independent species through insular dwarfism. In another study the following year, the researchers observed that the mean body size of three-toed sloths on an island decreases linearly as the age of the island increases; the area of the island and the distance from the mainland, however, do not appear to significantly affect dwarfing.

The pygmy three-toed sloth is one of the four members of the genus "Bradypus", and is classified under the family Bradypodidae. A 2004 phylogenetic analysis suggested that "Bradypus" is sister to all other folivorans. The generic name "Bradypus" is the combination of two Greek words: "brady" ("slow") and "pous" ("foot"). The specific name "pygmaeus" comes from the Greek "pugmaios" ("as small as a fist"). 'Monk sloth' and 'dwarf sloth' are two other names for this sloth.

The pygmy three-toed sloth is significantly smaller than the other members of its genus, but otherwise resembles the brown-throated sloth. According to Anderson and Handley Jr., the head-and-body length is between , and the body mass ranges from . The brown-throated sloth is nearly 40% heavier and 15% smaller in head-and-body length than the pygmy three-toed sloth. Moreover, the brown-throated sloth is lighter on the crown. The face is buff to tan; a dark band runs across the brow, surrounded by an orange patch. The throat is gray to brown, lighter than the underbelly; the dark brown back is spotted and has a dark stripe along the midline. Facial hair is short, while the long, rough hair on the crown and shoulders forms a hood. The grayish limbs have three claws each. The tail is long.

They have a relatively small and slender skull, with a large external auditory meatus, narrow squamosal and mandibular processes, a minuscule stylomastoid foramen, and usually lack foramina for the external carotid artery and anterodorsal (meaning in front and toward the back) nasopharynx. The dental formula of three-toed sloths is: Two of the teeth in each jaw are incisor-like, although those in the upper jaw are small or may be absent. Many of the features found in pygmy sloths are thought to be indicative of a relatively rapid evolution of a new species in an isolated, island habitat.

The pygmy three-toed sloth is unique in that it is found exclusively in the red mangroves of Isla Escudo de Veraguas; the island has a small area of approximately . A 2012 census of pygmy three-toed sloths estimated the total population at 79 – of which 70 occurred on mangroves and 9 in the surroundings. The population density was calculated as . The total area occupied by mangroves on the island was estimated to be around . While their population has presumably always been low due to their restricted range, the 2012 census found far lower numbers than had been estimated (less than 500) by the IUCN in 2010.

The IUCN lists the pygmy three-toed sloth as critically endangered; it is also listed in CITES Appendix II. According to the IUCN, conservation efforts are being hampered by conflict between local peoples and the government. Threats to the sloth's survival include timber harvesting and human settlement, that might lead to habitat degradation. A study in 2011 showed that there were 79 pygmy sloths in the wild. Studies in 2010 and 2013 suggested a recent population bottleneck and decline in genetic variability.

The pygmy three-toed sloth, like others in its genus, is an arboreal (tree-living) animal. This sloth can spend as many as 15 to 20 hours per day on trees. It moves at an extremely slow speed of , making it one of the slowest animals. The pygmy three-toed sloth is symbiotically related to green algae; a 2010 study investigated this in detail. Different sloths harbour different types of algae – only "Tricophilus" species were found on the brown-throated and pygmy three-toed sloths. These algae discolor the fur of the sloth, giving it a greenish hue – this serves as an efficient camouflage. Some of these algae might be transferred to offspring through the mother, others may be picked up from the surroundings over time. The smaller size of pygmy sloths reduces their energy requirements for survival and reproduction, making them an apparent example of insular dwarfism. A BBC documentary, in which English naturalist Chris Packham recognizes the pygmy three-toed sloth as the first in his list of the top ten discoveries in the 2000s, shows a rare clip of a swimming pygmy three-toed sloth.

Like other sloths, the pygmy three-toed sloth feeds on leaves. It feeds on red mangrove leaves, which are relatively poor in nutrients and coarser than the tender leaves of "Cecropia" species eaten by brown-throated sloths on the mainland. Details of mating behavior and reproduction have not been documented.




</doc>
<doc id="7720686" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7720686" title="Hurricane Bonnie (1992)">
Hurricane Bonnie (1992)

Hurricane Bonnie was a long-lived storm in the 1992 Atlantic hurricane season. It was the third tropical storm (including the April subtropical storm) and second hurricane of the 1992 season. Bonnie formed at high latitudes in the central Atlantic on September 17. Devoid of any real steering currents for much of its lifespan, it was nearly stationary for over a week in the central Atlantic Ocean. On September 27, it began to slowly track east and northeast towards the Azores. Just before becoming extratropical, it affected the Azores on September 30, although no damage was reported.

The origins of the system was a cold front that moved off the U.S. East Coast on September 11. The front moved gradually off the coast and into the subtropical Atlantic Ocean before becoming stationary just east of Bermuda on September 15. Over the next two days, the cloud cover slowly detached itself from the front and form into a tropical low in its own right. On the afternoon of September 17, the system was organized enough to be declared Tropical Depression Four.

The depression organized steadily that evening and into the morning of September 18. Later that day, it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Bonnie and it began to move slowly to the northeast. Like most storms that develop in higher latitudes, Bonnie was embedded in a larger-scale cyclonic circulation at first, which minimized shear (allowing it to develop) and provided weak steering currents. The low shear allowed Bonnie to rapidly develop and a small but well-defined eye formed late that morning. The storm was upgraded to a hurricane later that day while meandering in the open ocean. The intensification rate slowed down after becoming a hurricane. In addition, Bonnie began to slowly move more to the northeast on September 19 as steering currents slowly developed. Bonnie strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale that morning as well, peaking at 105 mph (165 km/h) with a 970 mbar central pressure. The general track and intensity maintained itself throughout the day and into September 20, when the eye became less distinct and Bonnie weakened slightly, although remaining a Category 2 hurricane. Early on September 21, the eye became better defined once again and Bonnie restrengthened slightly while continuing its slow northeast motion. That afternoon, the storm gradually strengthened some more and reached its peak intensity of 110 mph (175 km/h) and a central pressure of 965 mbar, just under Category 3 intensity. Bonnie maintained its strength through the evening and into the early morning of September 22, when it began to weaken very gradually and level off. Bonnie also began to turn more eastward at that point before it became held up by a blocking mid-latitude ridge of high pressure, which stalled the motion.

Bonnie remained virtually stationary until the morning of September 23 when it drifted very slowly to the west-southwest in response to the ridge. It also began to gradually weaken as the low-level center became exposed and the storm became poorly organized. Convection also diminished, and on the afternoon of September 24, Bonnie was downgraded to a tropical storm as it drifted over cooler waters. Bonnie continued to lose most of its deep convection during the day on September 25 as it began to make a turn back around to the south. That evening, Bonnie was downgraded to a tropical depression.
The weakening trend ended early on September 26 and Bonnie regained tropical storm status that afternoon as deep convection re-established itself. Bonnie continued its change in direction, turning to the southeast at this point as it slowly redeveloped despite being in a high-shear environment. It had also briefly showed signs of becoming extratropical on September 27 as it made the turn to the northeast as a weak tropical storm, and was operationally declared extratropical at that point until the afternoon of September 28. During that period, Bonnie actually strengthened back into a high-end tropical storm. Bonnie roughly followed Hurricane Charley's path towards the Azores thereafter. The storm became entrenched in an environment with greater wind shear, although it only weakened slightly on September 29 as it accelerated towards the northeast. The storm crossed over the Azores on September 30 as a strong tropical storm with 65 mph (100 km/h) winds. After that, Bonnie quickly lost its tropical characteristics and was declared extratropical late that afternoon, just east of the Azores. The extratropical low drifted back to the southwest in a clockwise loop, actually approaching the Azores once again while dissipating. It dissipated on October 2.

When Bonnie passed over the Azores only four days after Charley, it resulted in tropical storm-force winds across much of the island chain. Lajes Air Base reported sustained winds of 40 mph (64 km/h) with gusts to 59 mph (94 km/h). In addition, one man was killed by a rock fall on the island of São Miguel. No damage was reported in the Azores.




</doc>
<doc id="7751528" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7751528" title="Stadion (Malmö)">
Stadion (Malmö)

Stadion is a football stadium in Malmö, Sweden and the home of Allsvenskan club Malmö Fotbollförening, commonly known as Malmö FF. In UEFA competitions, the stadium has also been known as Malmö New Stadium and formerly known as Swedbank Stadion for sponsorship reasons. The stadium was named after Swedish based banking group Swedbank, which owned its naming rights between 2008 and 2017. Apart from being the home of Malmö FF, Stadion has also hosted senior and youth international matches.

The stadium is the third largest used by a Swedish football club, behind AIK's Friends Arena and Djurgårdens IF's and Hammarby IF's Tele2 Arena, both located in Stockholm. In league matches, the stadium has a capacity of 22,500, of which 18,000 are seated, and 4,500 are standing. In European matches, the 4,500 standing places are converted to 3,000 seats, making the stadium a 21,000-capacity all-seater. Stadion opened in April 2009, and replaced Malmö Stadion, where Malmö FF had been based since 1958. The new ground was originally budgeted to cost 398 million kronor, but ultimately cost 695 million kronor (€79.7). It is a UEFA category 4-rated stadium, and is thus able to host all UEFA club competition matches, except for finals. The ground's record attendance, 24,148, was set in an Allsvenskan match between Malmö FF and Mjällby AIF on 7 November 2010: in this match, Malmö FF won 2–0 and clinched that year's national championship.

Malmö FF's board of directors initiated the search for a new stadium in the mid-1990s. Malmö Stadion, where Malmö FF had played since its construction in 1958, was starting to deteriorate by this time, and was also too large for the club, which often struggled to fill it for Allsvenskan matches. In 1995, club chairman Bengt Madsen began to raise money for the renovation of Malmö IP, the club's former home between 1910 and 1957, into a modern football stadium. Malmö IP was practical and economical for the club as it was already an extant site, and was smaller than Malmö Stadion, which was expensive to maintain. The renovation of Malmö IP was finished in August 1999, and Malmö FF moved in soon after. However, the renovated ground failed to live up to expectations, proving to be very basic by modern standards; the paltry capacity of 7,600 was also deemed a security issue. The club therefore moved back to Malmö Stadion in 2001.

The club's directors now considered constructing an entirely new stadium in Malmö. Plans for such a ground were first mooted in 2001, but were not fully considered until the end of 2004, when the team won Allsvenskan for the first time since 1989. Malmö Municipality announced on 25 April 2005 its intention to either help the club renovate Malmö Stadion, or build a new stadium in the same area. Four days later, five different scenarios were laid out by the City of Malmö: the first proposed the construction of an entirely new, football-specific stadium to the south of Malmö Stadion, while the second suggested the demolition of Malmö Stadion, and the erection of a new ground for football and athletics on the same site. The third, fourth, and fifth ideas all proposed the building of two stadiums, one for football and one for athletics, on various local plots. The municipality chose the first option on 3 December 2005: the new football ground would be built south of Malmö Stadion, with a capacity of 20,000 to 25,000, on a 399 million kronor budget. Malmö Stadion, meanwhile, would be renovated into an athletics stadium for 50 million kronor.

Construction of the new stadium commenced on 23 April 2007, with the first sod being turned by Malmö FF chairman Bengt Madsen, Malmö Municipality chairman Ilmar Reepalu, club captain Daniel Andersson, and two former players: Daniel's brother Patrik, and their father Roy. The ground was designed by FOJAB Arkitekter, in collaboration with Berg Arkitektkontor, which also designed Friends Arena, the Swedish national stadium, which is in Solna. The main constructor for the new Malmö FF stadium was Peab. Its budget was ultimately heavily exceeded: Peab announced in 2009 that it would cost 695 million kronor instead of the original 399 million. The extra amount was explained as being down to miscalculations in the original budget, as well as additions made to the plans since the start of construction, which Peab reasoned made the original budget no longer entirely valid. Malmö FF announced on 12 July 2007 that they had sold the naming rights for the stadium to Swedish bank Swedbank, for a ten-year period, starting on the ground's opening. Between 2009 and 2013 the naming rights to stands inside the stadium were sold to different sponsors. At the start of the 2014 season the sponsor names of the stands were removed and the advertisement placements in front of each stand were sold to the club's largest sponsors. The graphical profile of the advertisement was also given a light blue background with white text to adhere to the club's colours. The ground's inauguration game was played several months before, on 13 April 2009, against Örgryte IS. Malmö FF won the game 3–0, and the first goal was scored by midfielder Labinot Harbuzi. All facilities related to football were completed by this time, but the office space and some exterior work was yet to be done. This was finished in late 2009. The completed building was 27 meters tall, 150 meters wide, and 215 meters in length.

On 9 May 2009, weeks after the stadium opened, part of the ground's away section was earmarked for conversion into terracing. This was because of high demand from away supporters, who had previously had to pay for a seating ticket, even though they preferred to stand. Even before this remodelling was complete, Malmö FF lowered the away ticket prices to match the price of a home terracing ticket. This restructuring was completed before the 2010 season. The terracing for the home supporters was also modified to ease mobility, and combat safety issues in the stands. The old pitch was removed and a new one was installed in preparation for the 2015 Allsvenskan season. The new surface was produced from the same Dutch grass producer who will provide the pitch for the 2015 UEFA Champions League Final at Olympiastadion Berlin. UEFA had previously criticized the surface at the stadium following the 2014–15 UEFA Champions League group stage.

The naming sponsorship rights deal with Swedish based banking group Swedbank ran out at the end of 2017. This meant that the club temporarily renamed the stadium "Stadion" until a new sponsorship deal could be reached.

Stadion has an overall capacity of 22,500 spectators. It comprises four stands: the Western Stand; the Eastern Stand and the Southern Stand, both of which have two tiers; and the Northern Stand, which is terraced. The lower-right part of the Southern Stand also features terracing for away supporters, but the rest of the stand is seated. The lower tier has 10,000 seats, and the upper tier has 8,000 seats. The Northern Stand has a capacity of 4,500 standing supporters, which can be transformed into an all-seated section with a capacity of 3,000 if required. This is done for matches played by Malmö FF in Europe.

The Northern Stand holds the most season ticket-holders. It is a single-tier terracing section, with railing in various places across the stand for security and comfort. It can hold up to 100 wheelchair users and their companions in a dedicated section. The stand also houses conference facilities with views of the pitch, as well as the 2,000-capacity "Restaurang 1910" in the inside area, behind the terraced area of the stand, and a health club run by Friskis & Svettis. Malmö FF's official souvenir shop is on the outside of the stand, alongside an O'Learys sports bar, which holds up to 250 guests. The Eastern and Western Stands house 54 VIP boxes between them, which is more than any other football stadium in Sweden. Including all sports, is the second most after the multi-purpose indoor arena Malmö Arena, which has 72 boxes. The Eastern and Western Stands also have 2,000 club seats along their upper tiers. These seats are more comfortable than the regular seats, and come with half-time meals and snacks in "Restaurang 1910". The Western Stand includes seating for the press, as well as a large press room inside the stand. The president's box, which holds up to 60 people, is also in the Western Stand.

There are 24 vending stands in the corridor area behind the stands, with a selection of different snacks, light meals, and beverages. Other facilities include exhibition space, 330 toilets for men, 120 for women, and six for the disabled. Pre-match and half-time activities take place behind the terracing of the Northern Stand. This area is called Ståplatstorget ("The terracing square"), and includes eight vending stands and MFF Support's supporter centre. At the supporter centre, fans can buy souvenirs, and tickets to away matches. The square also contains publicly accessible benches and tables. Access between the different areas of the stadium was limited by a system of security gates until the end of the 2011 season, when Malmö FF announced that supporters would be able to roam the stadium freely, except for the areas occupied by away supporters. This was done to create a more free and friendly atmosphere, and to encourage fans to arrive earlier for matches. To further motivate spectators to come early, pre-match activities are often held at Ståplatstorget.

The lower tier of the Southern Stand is reserved for away supporters, with most of the stand being seated. The western part of the stand, however, is converted into terracing for domestic league games. The area reserved for away supporters varies from game to game depending on how many away fans are expecting: the allocation's size is altered by restricting access to and from the area with large safety nets, which are laid across the seating and supervised by stewards. The away section is small for most Allsvenskan matches, with the most notable exceptions being matches against Helsingborgs IF, AIK, Djurgårdens IF, and IFK Göteborg. These matches tend to draw larger away attendances, and the away area is therefore accordingly expanded across the entire lower tier of the Southern Stand.

In tribute to former manager Roy Hodgson and his successful time at Malmö, the club's fans have unofficially named the upper corner of the Eastern Stand closest to the Northern Stand "Roy's Hörna" (Roy's Corner). The corresponding corner of the Western Stand on the other side of the Northern Stand is named "Bob's Hörna" (Bob's Corner) in tribute to Bob Houghton. These sections are known as "Sjungande sittplats" (Singing seating) since the two sections are fitted with seats but where the majority of the spectators are standing fans that sings in correlation with the fans on the terracing at the Northern Stand between the two sections. Both Hodgson and Houghton had successful managerial careers at Malmö FF, they both won multiple league and cup titles while at the club.

Stadion is owned by MFF Event AB, a company fully owned by Malmö FF.

Originally, three parties owned the stocks in the stock company, Peab who owned 50% of the stocks, Malmö FF who owned 25%, and Erling Pålsson Teknik & Fastighets AB who owned the remaining 25%. Malmö FF early expressed their desire to buy the stocks of Peab and Erling Pålsson to reduce rent on the stadium and increase profits. On 27 April 2012, it was announced that Malmö FF were close to buying the full 25% of stocks owned by Erling Pålsson and 25% of the stocks owned by Peab, increasing their own share to 75% and leaving Peab with a 25% share. On 1 May 2012, Malmö Stad granted the bailment needed for Malmö FF to buy the stocks. The deal, worth 90 million kronor, was finalised on 13 June 2012. The long-term goal for Malmö FF was to buy the remaining 25% of the stocks to fully own Stadion. Malmö FF bought a further 6,25% of the stocks after they successfully qualified for the group stage of the 2014–15 UEFA Champions League. After the club qualified for a second consecutive time in 2015–16, it was announced that the remaining 18,75% of the stadium would be purchased by the club. The remaining stocks were bought by Malmö FF during 2016, leaving them with the sole ownership of the stadium.

Stadion hosted the finals of the 2009 UEFA Under-21 Championships, along with three group stage games. After this, the all-seater away section was refitted with terracing for away fans. The stadium hosted its first full national team game on 7 September 2010, when Sweden played against San Marino in a qualifier for the 2012 UEFA European Football Championship. Sweden won 6–0. The stadium hosted Svenska Supercupen in 2011, after Malmö FF won the Swedish league championship the previous year. The most recent international match at the stadium was a friendly fixture between Sweden and Macedonia on 3 June 2013. The possibility of the stadium hosting 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification fixtures for Iraq was raised after a friendly between Iraq and Brazil on 11 October 2011.

The stadium hosted its first concert on 16 April 2011, when Swedish ska group Hoffmaestro & Chraa performed. The concert was held at Ståplatstorget, the large area behind the Northern Stand terraces. The concert was attended by 3,000, and there were some concerns regarding the suitability of the venue after the concrete floor started rocking. However, safety checks the next day showed that the structure had not been damaged, and was suitable to host similar events in the future. On 1 November 2016, the stadium hosted a public mass led by Pope Francis as part of his two-day visit to Scania.

The ground's present attendance record was set on 7 November 2010, when Malmö FF beat Mjällby AIF 2–0 in Allsvenskan before 24,148 fans. The game was the last of the season, and the victory secured that year's league championship for Malmö FF. The record crowd for the stadium as an all-seater was recorded when Sweden beat San Marino 6–0 in a Euro 2012 qualifying game on 7 September 2010. The match was attended by 21,083. The first match played at Stadion, a 3–0 Allsvenskan victory for Malmö FF against Örgryte IS on 13 April 2009, attracted 23,347 spectators. The highest average attendance for Malmö FF at Stadion was in the 2013 Allsvenskan championship winning season when the average attendance was 16,093, the second highest attendance in the league during that year.

The stadium was awarded Stålbyggnadspriset, an award given for innovative use of steel in constructions, by Stålbyggnadsinstitutet in 2009.
 Triangeln is the closest railway station to Stadion is served by Malmö bus lines 3, 5, 6, and 34, all of which stop in the vicinity of the stadium. Local transit authority Skånetrafiken also operates dedicated match-day buses, branded as line 84, which run to the stadium from different areas of Malmö. Due to the central location of the stadium within the city, parking space is limited, and spectators are advised to use public transportation, particularly for more prominent matches. The stadium is also located close to the underground railway station Triangeln, which opened in December 2010 as a part of Citytunneln. The station is served by Pågatåg and Öresund Trains, and is reachable non-stop from many parts of the Öresund Region.

The closest parking location to Stadion is "P-huset Stadion", a parking garage with 440 parking spaces, which was purpose-built for the ground and opened in September 2009. It is located from the stadium, just beside the club's training ground. There are also various other local parking spaces, and a large number of bicycle stands surrounding the western edge of the stadium.



</doc>
<doc id="7755892" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7755892" title="Jamaica at the 1988 Winter Olympics">
Jamaica at the 1988 Winter Olympics

Jamaica competed in the Winter Olympic Games for the first time at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. They competed in one sport, Bobsledding, in both the two-man and four-man events and finished outside the medal places in both competitions. Athletes were recruited from the Jamaica Defence Force, which saw Dudley Stokes, Devon Harris and Michael White become the first members of the team. Caswell Allen was the fourth man, but was injured prior to the start of the Olympics and was replaced by Chris Stokes, who was only in Canada to support his brother and new teammate Dudley.

The two-man event took place first, with Dudley Stokes and White finishing in 30th position overall. American television stations aired footage of the four-man Jamaican team, and despite crashing during the third run and finishing last overall, went on to inspire the 1993 film "Cool Runnings".

The Jamaica Olympic Association was formed in 1936, but due to the cancellation of the 1940 and 1944 Olympics due to the Second World War, the first Games they competed in was the 1948 Summer Olympics in London. They have appeared at every Summer Games since, including at the 1960 Games in which they appeared as part of the combined team of the British West Indies. They have won medals at every Summer Games they have competed at, with the exception of the 1956 and 1964 Summer Olympics.

Businessmen George B. Fitch and William Maloney proposed the idea of a Jamaican bobsleigh team after seeing a local pushcart derby in Jamaica. The President of the Jamaica Olympic Association at the time supported the idea, and so preparations were made to hire athletes. Advertisements were placed describing "dangerous and rigorous" trials which would form the basis of the country's first bobsleigh team. However, recruitment proved to be problematic and so the Jamaica Defence Force was asked for volunteers. This resulted in the first team of Dudley Stokes, Devon Harris and Michael White. These three were selected as part of the team in October 1987, with teammate Casewell Allen added later.

With funding provided by the Fitch and the Jamaica Tourist Board, training was conducted in Canada and Austria in preparation for the 1988 Winter Olympics. Sepp Haidacher was recruited as a coach, and the team began to be featured in North American media with a comical angle. An agreement was reached with the Fédération International de Bobsleigh et de Tobogganing in order to allow for entrance in both the four-man and the two-man events at the Games. Once in Calgary, the team conducted test runs on a frozen lake in order to get used to the conditions, but Allen fell and was injured. Chris Stokes, who was only in Canada in order to support his brother Dudley, was added to the four-man team three days before the first run having never been in a bobsleigh before.

The first event which Jamaica competed in was the two-man bobsleigh, where Dudley Stokes and Michael White became Jamaica's first Winter Olympians. In their first run, they finished in 34th position, ahead of the second New Zealand team, both of the pairs from Portugal, U.S. Virgin Islands and Mexico. They improved in the second run, moving up to 22nd place, but were in 31st place on the third run and finished only one place higher in 30th place during the fourth and final run. Overall the duo finished in 30th place out of the 41 teams competing.

Following the elimination of the United States ice hockey team, American television stations needed to fill airtime and chose to focus on the Jamaican bobsleigh team in the four-man event. The first run ended poorly, as when Dudley Stokes jumped into the bobsleigh, the push-bar in the sleigh broke, resulting in the team coming in third from last in 24th place. On their second attempt, the team ranked second to last, due in part to White struggling to crouch down properly in his seat, remaining almost upright through the first corner.

It was the events of the third run for which the team became best known. Stokes injured his shoulder prior to the race, but decided to continue with the run. The team set the seventh-fastest start for all competitors. At the turn called the "Kreisel", Stokes lost control of the bobsleigh and it careened into the wall of the track, and flipped over on top of the four athletes. The four team members climbed out and pushed the bobsleigh to the end of the track, before they carried it off. The team did not compete in the fourth run of the event, and subsequently were listed as not finishing the event and therefore were placed in the last place overall.

The story of the Jamaican bobsleigh team at the 1988 Winter Olympics was turned into the 1993 movie "Cool Runnings". However, the film was only loosely based on actual events, with real life coach Pat Brown later saying that the team had never experienced any of the animosity from the other teams as depicted in the movie.

All of the team members returned for the 1992 Winter Olympics, however Harris only competed in the two-man event, with his place in the four-man team taken by newcomer Ricky McIntosh. Harris and the Stokes brothers would continue to compete at the Winter Games in the bobsleigh events until the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano.



</doc>
<doc id="7815059" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7815059" title="Sunday Bloody Sunday">
Sunday Bloody Sunday

"Sunday Bloody Sunday" is a song by Irish rock band U2. It is the opening track from their 1983 album "War" and was released as the album's third single on 21 March 1983 in Germany and the Netherlands. "Sunday Bloody Sunday" is noted for its militaristic drumbeat, harsh guitar, and melodic harmonies. One of U2's most overtly political songs, its lyrics describe the horror felt by an observer of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, mainly focusing on the 1972 Bloody Sunday incident in Derry where British troops shot and killed unarmed civil rights protesters, bystanders and children. At the same time, the lyrics reject hate and revenge as a response, as noted in the line "There's many lost, but tell me who has won." Along with "New Year's Day," the song helped U2 reach a wider listening audience. It was generally well received by critics on the album's release.

The song has remained a staple of U2's live concerts. During its earliest performances, the song created controversy. Lead singer Bono reasserted the song's anti-sectarian-violence message to his audience for many years. Today, it is considered one of U2's signature songs, and is one of the band's most performed tracks. Critics rate it among the best political protest songs, and it has been covered by over a dozen artists. It was named the 272nd-greatest song by "Rolling Stone" on their list of "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time."

"Sunday Bloody Sunday" grew from a guitar riff and lyric written by the Edge in 1982. While newlyweds Bono and Ali Hewson honeymooned in Jamaica, the Edge worked in Ireland on music for the band's upcoming album. Following an argument with his girlfriend, and a period of doubt in his own song-writing abilities, the Edge—"feeling depressed... channelled [his] fear and frustration and self-loathing into a piece of music." This early draft did not yet have a title or chorus melody, but did contain a structural outline and theme. After Bono had reworked the lyrics, the band recorded the song at Windmill Lane Studios in Dublin. During the sessions, producer Steve Lillywhite encouraged drummer Larry Mullen, Jr. to use a click track, but Mullen was firmly against the idea. A chance meeting with Andy Newmark of Sly & the Family Stone – a drummer who used a click track religiously – changed Mullen's mind. The opening drum pattern soon developed into the song's hook. A local violinist, Steve Wickham, approached the Edge one morning at a bus stop and asked if U2 had any need for a violin on their next album. In the studio for only half a day, Wickham's electric violin became the final instrumental contribution to the song.

The direct impetus for the lyrics was an encounter with IRA supporters in New York City. As a promotional gimmick, U2 manager Paul McGuinness had made arrangements for the band to appear in the 1982 St. Patrick's Day parade. However, he later found that there was a possibility that Bobby Sands, an IRA hunger striker who had starved to death the previous year, would be the parade's honorary marshal. As they felt that the IRA's tactics were prolonging the fighting in Northern Ireland, McGuinness and the band members mutually decided they should withdraw from the parade. McGuinness met with one of the parade's organizers in a New York bar to arrange the cancellation, and ended up in a heated debate about the IRA. McGuinness recalled, "He kept telling me to keep my voice down. The place was full of New York policemen - Irish cops - and he thought I was going to get us killed."

Drummer Mullen said of the song in 1983:

We're into the politics of people, we're not into politics. Like you talk about Northern Ireland, 'Sunday Bloody Sunday,' people sort of think, 'Oh, that time when 13 Catholics were shot by British soldiers'; that's not what the song is about. That's an incident, the most famous incident in Northern Ireland and it's the strongest way of saying, 'How long? How long do we have to put up with this?' I don't care who's who – Catholics, Protestants, whatever. You know people are dying every single day through bitterness and hate, and we're saying why? What's the point? And you can move that into places like El Salvador and other similar situations – people dying. Let's forget the politics, let's stop shooting each other and sit around the table and talk about it... There are a lot of bands taking sides saying politics is crap, etc. Well, so what! The real battle is people dying, that's the real battle.

"Sunday Bloody Sunday" is played at a tempo of 103 beats per minute in a 4/4 time signature. The song opens with a militaristic drumbeat and electric violin part; the aggressive snare drum rhythm closely resembles a beat used to keep a military band in step. The distinctive drum sound was achieved by recording Mullen's drumwork at the base of a staircase, producing a more natural reverb. It is followed by the Edge's repeating arpeggios (see notation at left). The riff, which follows a Bm–D–G chord progression, establishes the minor chord territory of the piece. As the song progresses, the lyrics and guitar become more furious. The guitar riff has been described as the "bone-crushing arena-rock riff of the decade" by "Rolling Stone". A bass drum kick on every beat provides the musical foundation until the first chorus, when Adam Clayton's bass guitar enters.

In contrast to the violent nature of the verses, the emergence of major chords creates a feeling of hope during Bono's "How long, how long must we sing this song?" refrain. During the chorus, the Edge's backing vocals further develop this tread, using a harmonic imitative echo. The snare drum is absent from this section, and the guitar parts are muted. This part of the song deviates musically from the raw aggression seen in the song's verses and gives the song a more uplifting structure. Bono once commented that "love is...a central theme" of "Sunday Bloody Sunday"

The band have said the lyrics refer to the events of both Bloody Sunday in 1972 and Bloody Sunday in 1920, but are not specifically about either event. The song takes the standpoint of someone horrified by the cycle of violence in the province. Bono rewrote the Edge's initial lyrics, attempting to contrast the two events with Easter Sunday, but he has said that the band were too inexperienced at the time to fully realise that goal, noting that "it was a song whose eloquence lay in its harmonic power rather than its verbal strength."

Early versions opened with the line "Don't talk to me about the rights of the IRA, UDA." U2's bassist, Adam Clayton, recalls that better judgment led to the removal of such a politically charged line, and that the song's "viewpoint became very humane and non-sectarian...which, is the only responsible position." The chosen opening line, "I can't believe the news today" crystallises the prevailing response, especially among young people, to the violence in Northern Ireland during the 1970s and 1980s. In successive stanzas, the lyrics paraphrase religious text from Matthew ("mother's children; brothers, sisters torn apart") and bring a twist to 1 Corinthians ("we eat and drink while tomorrow "they" die", instead of "let us eat and drink; for tomorrow "we" die"). The song finishes with a call for the Irish to stop fighting each other, and "claim the victory Jesus won...on [a] Sunday bloody Sunday."

U2 were aware when they decided to record "Sunday Bloody Sunday" that its lyrics could be misinterpreted as sectarian, and possibly place them in danger. Some of the Edge's original lyrics explicitly spoke out against violent rebels, but were omitted to protect the group. Even without these lyrics, some listeners still considered it to be a rebel song—even one which glorifies the events of the two Bloody Sundays to which the lyrics refer.

Commercially, the single had its biggest impact in the Netherlands, where it reached number 3 on the national charts. In the US, the song gained significant album-oriented rock radio airplay, and together with the earlier "New Year's Day" helped expose U2 to a mainstream American rock audience.

Critical reception to the song was positive. In the Irish magazine "Hot Press", Liam Mackey wrote that "Sunday Bloody Sunday" "takes the widescreen view...a powerful riff and machine-gun drumming [is] crisscrossed by skipping violin." Denise Sullivan commented for "Allmusic" that Mullen's opening drumwork "helps set the tone for the unforgiving, take-no-prisoners feel of the song, as well as for the rest of the album."

In 2010, "Rolling Stone" ranked "Sunday Bloody Sunday" 272nd on its list of "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time." In 2006, "Q" named "Sunday Bloody Sunday" the 18th-greatest song of the 1980s. The staff of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame selected "Sunday Bloody Sunday" as one of 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll. The "New Statesman" listed it as one of the Top 20 Political Songs, and similarly, "Time" named it one of the Top 10 Protest Songs.

"Sunday Bloody Sunday" has been performed more than 600 times by U2. It was first heard by a live audience in December 1982 in Glasgow, Scotland, on a twenty-one show "Pre-War Tour." The band were particularly nervous about playing the song in Belfast, Northern Ireland. Introducing the song there at the Maysfield Leisure Centre, Bono stated "It's not a rebel song.", attempted to further clarify this point by reciting the entire second verse ("Broken bottles under children's feet ..."), and added as a final note, "If you don't like it, you let us know." The crowd overwhelmingly enjoyed the song; the Edge recalls that "the place went nuts, it drew a really positive reaction.", also saying that "We thought a lot about the song before we played it in Belfast and Bono told the audience that if they didn't like it then we'd never play it again. Out of the 3,000 people in the hall about three walked out. I think that says a lot about the audience's trust in us." The band remained apprehensive, however. Even by the song's sixth performance, Bono was introducing the song with the statement "This song is "not" a rebel song."

Throughout 1983's War Tour, Bono continued to reassure audiences that "This song is not a rebel song, this song is 'Sunday Bloody Sunday'" highlighting the non-partisan intentions of the lyrics. The live performances on this tour featured a routine during which Bono would set a white flag in the front of the stage while the band vamped three chords—B minor, D major, and G major. (though the band traditionally tune their instruments down a half step so the chords are B flat minor, D flat and G Flat). As the band vamped, Bono would sing "no more!" with the audience. These performances were highly effective with U2's audience (at the time, U2 were most popular as a college rock act). Live performances of the song subsequently appeared on their 1983 live album "Under a Blood Red Sky" and their concert film "". In the Unforgettable Fire Tour of 1984 and 1985, "Sunday Bloody Sunday" continued to be a prominent midpoint of each U2 concert—as did the "no more!" interlude. Along with a performance of "Bad," the song was performed at Live Aid in July 1985.

As U2 reached new levels of fame in 1987 with "The Joshua Tree", "Sunday Bloody Sunday" continued to be a focal point of concerts. Some performances featured slower, more contemplative versions of the song; other concerts saw the wilder, more violent version. This tour marked the first time "Sunday Bloody Sunday" was played in Northern Ireland since 1982, and it was not performed in Northern Ireland again until the 2015 Innocence + Experience Tour.

The 1988 rockumentary "Rattle and Hum" includes a particularly renowned version of the song, recorded on 8 November 1987 at McNichols Sports Arena in Denver, Colorado. On this version Bono's mid-song rant angrily and emphatically condemns the Remembrance Day Bombing that had occurred earlier that same day in the Northern Irish town of Enniskillen:

After the Joshua Tree Tour, Bono was heard saying the band might never play the song again, because the song was "made real" with the performance in Denver, and it could never be matched again. Following their original intent, "Sunday Bloody Sunday" was not played during any of the forty-seven shows on the Lovetown Tour in 1989. The song reappeared for a brief period during the Zoo TV Tour, and late during the second half of PopMart Tour (1997–1998), U2 played an emotional concert in war-ravaged Sarajevo that included a solo performance of the song by the Edge. "Sunday Bloody Sunday" was subsequently played live in this style until the end of the tour in March 1998.

"Sunday Bloody Sunday" was played at every concert on the 2001 Elevation and 2005–2006 Vertigo tours. Performances in 2001 frequently included parts of Bob Marley's "Get Up, Stand Up" and "Johnny Was". A memorable mid-song message referencing the Omagh bombing of 1998 ("Turn this song into a prayer!") is captured on the live DVD "". In concerts in New York City after the September 11, 2001 attacks, the "no more!" interlude was replaced by Bono holding an American flag.

"Sunday Bloody Sunday" was used during the Vertigo Tour of 2005 and 2006, often alongside "Bullet the Blue Sky" and "Love and Peace or Else" as a trio of politically driven songs performed during the middle part of the band's set. Bono extended the "no more!" interlude to explain a headband he had donned in the previous song. The headband depicted the word "coexist" (written to depict a crescent, a Star of David, and a Christian cross). The Coexist symbol is trademarked in the United States by an LLP in Indiana, and the original artwork was created in 2001 by a Polish artist. As with the 2001 shows, the Vertigo tour saw the song applied to subjects further afield than The Troubles in Northern Ireland. During 2006 Australian shows, in Brisbane, Bono asked for Australian Terrorism suspect David Hicks to be brought home and tried under Australian laws. In subsequent Australian concerts he dedicated the song to the victims of the 2002 Bali bombingswhere 88 of the fatalities were Australianssaying 'This is your song now!'. The song was also performed at every concert on the U2 360° Tour, paying tribute to the 2009 Iranian election protests on each occasion by projecting scenes from the protests and Persian writing in green on the video screen.

"Sunday Bloody Sunday" has been played as the opening song at shows on the Joshua Tree Tour 2017.

Although a promotional music video had not been produced for the original release, the band used footage from a 5 June 1983 live performance filmed for the concert film "" to promote the song. Directed by Gavin Taylor, the video displays Bono's use of a white flag during performances of the song. The video highlights the intensity and emotion felt by many audience members during U2's concerts, while the rainy, torch-lit setting in Colorado's Red Rocks Amphitheatre further adds to the atmosphere. In 2004, "Rolling Stone" cited the performance as one "50 Moments that Changed the History of Rock and Roll" and noted that "the sight of Bono singing the anti-violence anthem 'Sunday Bloody Sunday' while waving a white flag through crimson mist (created by a combination of wet weather, hot lights and the illumination of those crags) became the defining image of U2's warrior-rock spirit and—shown in heavy rotation on MTV—broke the band nationwide."

The album version of "Sunday Bloody Sunday" was originally included on "War", but it can also be heard on a number of promotional releases, including the compilations "The Best of 1980-1990" and "U218 Singles". Several live versions have been released; the video available on "Live at Red Rocks: Under a Blood Red Sky" is from a performance at Red Rocks Amphitheatre in June 1983, but the version on the live album "Under a Blood Red Sky" is from a performance on August 20, 1983 during the Rockpalast Open Air music festival at the Lorelei, (West) Germany. Audio from the Sarajevo concert of 1997 is featured as a b-side on 1997's single "If God Will Send His Angels." The song also appears on "Rattle and Hum", "", "", "", "", "Live from Paris", "U2 3D", "U2 360° at the Rose Bowl" and in the closing credits of the 2002 TV film "Bloody Sunday". The only concert films that "Sunday Bloody Sunday" does not appear on are "" and "".

In 2000, Ignite covered the song on "A Place Called Home"; The Roots covered "Sunday Bloody Sunday" in 2007 in a medley with "Pride (In the Name of Love)" for an NAACP dinner honouring Bono. While the band played the song, Black Thought rapped lines from the band's own "False Media" and bits of Edwin Starr's "War".

In 2008, Jay-Z sampled "Sunday Bloody Sunday" in a version of "Heart of the City" performed at the Glastonbury Festival. During a version of "Sunday Bloody Sunday" performed by the band at the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards, Jay-Z improvised lyrics over the breakdown in the song before including a snippet of "Get Up, Stand Up."

"Sunday Bloody Sunday" was commercially released throughout most of Europe in support of U2's album "War". Its cover art is the same as that of "Two Hearts Beat as One," except on the Japan release. The B-side on the single, "Endless Deep," is one of the few U2 songs that features bassist Adam Clayton singing.



Footnotes
Bibliography




</doc>
<doc id="7900819" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7900819" title="Peter Holmes (footballer)">
Peter Holmes (footballer)

Peter James Holmes (born 18 November 1980) is an English former professional footballer who played as a midfielder. He is a coach at club Hemel Hempstead Town.

Holmes started his career with Sheffield Wednesday and after failing to make any first-team appearances he joined Luton Town. He was released by the club due to financial reasons in the summer of 2003, but was eventually handed a new contract in November. After being loaned out to Chesterfield and Lincoln City during the 2006–07 season, Holmes left Luton, having made over 100 appearances for the club. He was signed by Rotherham United, who loaned him out to Conference Premier club York City in 2008. He was released by Rotherham in 2009 and was signed by Harrogate Town, before joining Ebbsfleet United. Following Ebbsfleet's relegation, he signed for Hayes & Yeading United.

Born in Bishop Auckland, County Durham, Holmes graduated through The Football Association's School of Excellence. He started his career with Premier League club Sheffield Wednesday as a trainee in their youth system before signing a professional contract on 2 December 1997, and was promoted to the first team for the 1999–2000 season. After failing to appear for the team, Holmes was signed by Luton Town on 1 August 2000 on a three-year contract for a nominal fee. Luton manager Ricky Hill had been impressed by the player while working as a coach at Wednesday. Holmes made his debut for Luton after being introduced as a 58th-minute substitute in a 1–0 defeat at home to Notts County in the Second Division on 12 August 2000. He scored his first goal for Luton with their second goal in a 3–2 home victory over Peterborough United on 26 December 2000, and played his final match of 2000–01 at Oldham Athletic on 23 January 2001, where he was substituted for Liam George in the 55th minute. He was transfer listed in April 2001 by manager Joe Kinnear and completed his first season at the club with 22 appearances and one goal, after which Luton were relegated to the Third Division.

Holmes suffered from soreness in his leg after collapsing in a match against Rushden & Diamonds in December 2001. He returned to action to score from the edge of the penalty area in a 3–1 away victory against Swansea City on 30 March 2002; this goal secured Luton's promotion to the Second Division at the first attempt. Holmes' 2001–02 season was ended with 10 appearances and one goal after suffering a knee ligament injury during Luton's 4–0 victory at Hull City on 6 April 2002. He suffered a groin strain during the 2–1 home defeat to Cambridge United in the Football League Trophy on 10 December 2002. He made his return to Luton's first team in a 3–2 away defeat to Mansfield Town on 4 March 2003 after coming on as a 74th-minute substitute. He then scored in the following match against Huddersfield Town, being assisted by an Ian Hillier cross in the 71st minute to help Luton to a 3–0 victory on 8 March 2003. He finished 2002–03 with 23 appearances and two goals, but missed Luton's final match of the season after picking up a hamstring injury during a 1–1 draw with Stockport County on 26 April 2003.

Holmes was released by Luton in July 2003 after the offer of a new contract was withdrawn because of financial difficulties at the club, but he continued to train with the team and eventually signed a contract in November. His first appearance of the season came after starting in Luton's 0–0 draw at Holmes' former club Sheffield Wednesday, before scoring his first goal on 10 January 2004 with a header in a 2–2 draw with Rushden & Diamonds. Holmes was the oldest central midfielder in the team after starting in the FA Cup match against Tranmere Rovers, due to other players being injured, during which he gave away the possession for Micky Mellon to score the winner for Tranmere in the 81st minute. He finished 2003–04 with 20 appearances and scored three goals. Luton won promotion to the Championship in 2004–05 after winning the League One title, while Holmes made 20 appearances and scored three goals. Following this achievement, he signed a new one-year contract with the club in June 2005.

The winning goal for Luton in a 2–1 victory over Cardiff City in October was scored by Holmes from close range, which brought an end to the opposition' eight match unbeaten run. He suffered from a twisted knee during a match against Derby County on 26 December 2005, eventually returning to action from a hamstring injury in February 2006 by playing in a reserve match against Southend United. His competitive return was in a 3–3 draw against Cardiff, where he came on as a substitute for Dean Morgan on 82 minutes. He completed 2005–06 with 25 appearances and scored two goals, when Luton finished 10th in the Championship. Following the conclusion of the season, he signed a new one-year contract in June 2006. He joined League One club Chesterfield on a one-month loan on 12 January 2007, making his debut the following day in a 1–0 away victory over Rotherham United, in which he forced goalkeeper Neil Cutler into making a good save. Chesterfield were given the lead by Holmes in a match away to Huddersfield Town with a header from a Kyle Critchell cross, which eventually finished a 1–1 draw. The loan was extended for a second month on 8 February 2007, and Holmes said he would consider signing for the club permanently when the loan expired. He eventually finished his spell at Chesterfield with 10 appearances and scored one goal. He joined Lincoln City of League Two on loan until the end of 2006–07 on 22 March 2007. His debut came in a 3–2 home defeat to Swindon Town and he completed the loan spell with five appearances.

Luton released Holmes on 8 May 2007 following their relegation to League One, after he had spent nearly seven years with the club. He eventually signed for Rotherham United of League Two on a two-year contract on 14 June 2007. His debut for Rotherham was in a 0–0 draw against Hereford United on 10 August 2007 and he scored his first goal for the team against Notts County on 22 September with a 25-yard shot into the far corner. Holmes finished 2007–08 with 27 appearances and two goals.

After making only one appearance during 2008–09, he joined York City in the Conference Premier on 22 September 2008 on a one-month loan and made his debut a day later in a 2–0 defeat to Kidderminster Harriers. He scored for the team in the following match with a six-yard shot from a Craig Farrell pass, which finished as a 3–3 draw with Stevenage Borough. He suffered from a hip injury, which resulted him in missing York's 3–1 defeat against Wrexham. His final match for York was a 2–0 victory against Rushden & Diamonds and he finished the loan spell with five appearances and one goal, before returning to Rotherham on 18 October 2008 after being recalled by the club. Weeks after returning to Rotherham, it was suggested that Holmes might be loaned out again after failing to break back into the team. It was over a month before Holmes eventually made his first appearance for Rotherham since returning, after starting in the 2–0 defeat at home to Bradford City on 21 November 2008.

He was released by Rotherham at the end of the season, after not being offered a new contract by the club, and he was signed by Conference North club Harrogate Town on 25 September 2009. Holmes made his first and only appearance for Harrogate in a 4–0 away defeat to Bradford Park Avenue in the FA Cup second qualifying round on 26 September 2009. He joined Conference Premier club Ebbsfleet United on 9 October 2009, making his debut a day later in a 4–0 defeat to Cambridge United. His first goal was with the winner in a 2–1 victory over Mansfield Town on 28 November 2009, scoring from close range from a Magno Vieira pass. He made 29 appearances and scored two goals for Ebbsfleet during the 2009–10 as they were relegated to the Conference South.

Holmes received a contract offer from Hayes & Yeading United in July 2010 and signed for the club on 2 August. He made his debut in the opening match of 2010–11, a 2–1 home victory over Bath City on 14 August 2010. His first goal for the club came a curling shot from a Jamie Hand assist in a 2–1 defeat at Kettering Town on 2 October 2010. Holmes finished the season with 47 appearances and five goals.

Holmes signed for Dunstable Town of the Spartan South Midlands Football League Premier Division in August 2011. He spent 2011–12 with Dunstable before signing for Southern League Premier Division club Hemel Hempstead Town in May 2012. He made 28 appearances in 2012–13 before joining the club's coaching staff.

Holmes made his debut for the England national under-16 team in a 1–0 home defeat to France on 28 September 1996. His final appearance came in a 5–1 away defeat to Scotland on 6 March 1997, meaning he finished his England under-16 career with four caps.

Holmes was a hard working midfielder who possessed skill and could make neat passes, although he had been criticised for lacking in physical strength and tackling. He preferred to play as a central midfielder, although was able to play on the left side of midfield and was equally comfortable playing with either foot.

Luton Town


</doc>
<doc id="7927053" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7927053" title="Spider-Man in film">
Spider-Man in film

The fictional character Spider-Man, a comic book superhero created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko and featured in Marvel Comics publications, has currently appeared in ten live-action films since his inception, not including fan made shorts and guest appearances in other Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) films. Spider-Man is the alter-ego of Peter Parker, a talented young freelance photographer and aspiring scientist imbued with superhuman abilities after being bitten by a radioactive/genetically-altered spider.

The first live-action film based on Spider-Man was the unauthorized short "Spider-Man" by Donald F. Glut in 1969. This was followed by "Spider-Man", an American made-for-television film that premiered on the CBS network in 1977. It starred Nicholas Hammond and was intended as a backdoor pilot for what became a weekly episodic TV series.

The rights to further films featuring the character were purchased in 1985, and moved through various production companies and studios before being secured by Sony Pictures Entertainment (Columbia Pictures) for $10 million (plus 5% of any movies' gross revenue and half the revenue from consumer products), who hired Sam Raimi to direct "Spider-Man" (2002), "Spider-Man 2" (2004), and "Spider-Man 3" (2007) starring Tobey Maguire. The first two films were met with positive reviews from critics, while the third film received a more mixed response. In 2010, Sony announced that the franchise would be rebooted. Marc Webb was hired to direct, with Andrew Garfield starring, and "The Amazing Spider-Man" (2012) was released to positive reviews. "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" (2014) saw mixed reviews.

In February 2015, Disney, Marvel Studios and Sony announced a deal to share the Spider-Man film rights, leading to a new iteration of Spider-Man being introduced and integrated into the MCU. The deal allows Sony to distribute and have creative control over MCU films where Spider-Man is the main character, while Disney distributes the ones where he is not. Tom Holland portrays this younger version of Spider-Man, appearing in "" (2016), "" (2017), "" (2018) and "" (2019), as well as a sequel to "Homecoming", "" (2019). All of Spider-Man's MCU appearances have received positive reviews thus far.

Plans for an animated Spider-Man film were officially announced by Sony in April 2015. "" (2018) combines Sony Pictures Imageworks' computer animation pipeline with traditional hand-drawn comic book techniques, inspired by the work of Miles Morales's co-creator Sara Pichelli. Completing the animation required up to 140 animators, the largest crew ever used by Sony Pictures Animation for a film. "Into the Spider-Verse" received universal acclaim, winning the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature and becoming the highest-rated film in the Spider-Man franchise, surpassing "Spider-Man 2".

Raimi's trilogy grossed $2.5 billion worldwide on a $597 million budget, while Webb's films grossed over $1.4 billion on a $480 million budget. "Homecoming" grossed over $880 million on a $175 million budget and "Into the Spider-Verse" has grossed over $372 million on a $90 million budget. The "Spider-Man" films have grossed over $5.2 billion collectively at the global box office.

In 1977, the pilot episode of "The Amazing Spider-Man" television series was released by Columbia Pictures as "Spider-Man" outside of the United States. It was directed by E. W. Swackhamer, written by Alvin Boretz and stars Nicholas Hammond as the titular character, David White as J. Jonah Jameson and Jeff Donnell as May Parker. The film premiered on CBS on September 14, 1977, and received a VHS release in 1980.

In 1978, the two-part episode "Deadly Dust" from the television series "The Amazing Spider-Man" was re-edited and released outside of the United States as a feature film titled "Spider-Man Strikes Back". Nicholas Hammond reprises his role as Peter Parker / Spider-Man while Robert F. Simon replaces David White in the role of J. Jonah Jameson. The film was theatrically released on 8 May 1978.

In 1981, a film made from "The Amazing Spider-Man" television series finale "The Chinese Web" using the same method used to make "Spider-Man Strikes Back" was released as "Spider-Man: The Dragon's Challenge" in European territories. Nicholas Hammond and Robert F. Simon respectively reprise their roles as Peter Parker / Spider-Man and J. Jonah Jameson. It was directed by Ron Satlof, written by Robert Janes and stars Nicholas Hammond as the titular character, Rosalind Chao, Robert F. Simon, Benson Fong, and Ellen Bry

On July 22, 1978, Tōei released a theatrical spin-off of their "Spider-Man" TV series at the Tōei Cartoon Festival. The film was directed by Kōichi Takemoto, who also directed eight episodes of the TV series. The week after the film's release, a character introduced in the film, Jūzō Mamiya (played by Noboru Nakaya), began appearing in episodes of the TV series. Like the rest of the series, the film was made available for streaming on Marvel's official website in 2009.

The low box office performance of 1983's "Superman III" made feature-film adaptations of comic book properties a very low priority in Hollywood until the 1990s. In 1985, after a brief option on "Spider-Man" by Roger Corman expired, Marvel Comics optioned the property to Cannon Films. Cannon chiefs Menahem Golan and his cousin Yoram Globus agreed to pay Marvel Comics $225,000 over the five-year option period, plus a percentage of any film's revenues. However, the rights would revert to Marvel if a film was not made by April 1990.

Tobe Hooper, then preparing both "Invaders From Mars" and "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2", was mooted as director. Golan and Globus misunderstood the concept of the character ("They thought it was like The Wolf Man", said director Joseph Zito) and instructed writer Leslie Stevens, creator of "The Outer Limits", to write a treatment reflecting their misconception. In Stevens' story, a corporate scientist intentionally subjects ID-badge photographer Peter Parker to radioactive bombardment, transforming him into a hairy, suicidal, eight-armed monster. This human tarantula refuses to join the scientist's new master-race of mutants, battling a succession of mutations kept in a basement laboratory.

Unhappy with this perceived debasement of his comic book creation, Marvel's Stan Lee pushed for a new story and screenplay, written for Cannon by Ted Newsom and John Brancato. The variation on the origin story had Otto Octavius as a teacher and mentor to a college-aged Peter Parker. The cyclotron accident which "creates" Spider-Man also deforms the scientist into Doctor Octopus and results in his mad pursuit of proof of the Fifth Force. "Doc Ock" reconstructs his cyclotron and causes electromagnetic abnormalities, anti-gravity effects, and bilocation which threatens to engulf New York City and the world. Joseph Zito, who had directed Cannon's successful Chuck Norris film "Invasion USA", replaced Tobe Hooper. The new director hired Barney Cohen to rewrite the script. Cohen, creator of TV's "Sabrina the Teenage Witch" and "Forever Knight", added action scenes, a non-canonical comic for the villain, gave Doc Ock the catch phrase, "Okey-dokey", and altered his goal from the Fifth Force to a quest for anti-gravity. Producer Golan (using his pen name "Joseph Goldman") then made a minor polish to Cohen's rewrite. Zito scouted locations and studio facilities in both the U.S. and Europe, and oversaw storyboard breakdowns supervised by Harper Goff. Cannon planned to make the film on the then-substantial budget of between $15 and $20 million.

While no casting was finalized, Zito expressed interest in actor/stunt man Scott Leva, who had posed for Cannon's promotional photos and ads, and made public appearances as Spider-Man for Marvel. The up-and-coming actor Tom Cruise was also discussed for the leading role. Zito considered Bob Hoskins as Doc Ock. Stan Lee expressed his desire to play "Daily Bugle" editor J. Jonah Jameson. Lauren Bacall and Katharine Hepburn were considered for Aunt May, Peter Cushing as a sympathetic scientist, and Adolph Caesar as a police detective. With Cannon finances siphoned by the expensive "" and "Masters of the Universe", the company slashed the proposed "Spider-Man" budget to under $10 million. Director Zito opted out, unwilling to make a compromised "Spider-Man". The company commissioned low-budget rewrites from writers Shepard Goldman, Don Michael Paul, and finally Ethan Wiley, and penciled in company workhorse Albert Pyun as director, who also made script alterations.

Scott Leva was still associated with the character through Marvel (he had appeared in photo covers of the comic), and read each draft. Leva commented, "Ted Newsom and John Brancato had written the script. It was good but it needed a little work. Unfortunately, with every subsequent rewrite by other writers, it went from good to bad to terrible." Due to Cannon's assorted financial crises, the project shut down after spending about $1.5 million on the project. In 1989, Pathé, owned by corrupt Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti, acquired the overextended Cannon. The filmmaking cousins parted, Globus remaining associated with Pathé, Golan leaving to run 21st Century Film Corporation, keeping a number of properties (including "Spider-Man") in lieu of a cash buy-out. He also extended his "Spider-Man" option with Marvel up to January 1992.

Golan shelved the low-budget rewrites and attempted to finance an independent production from the original big-budget script, already budgeted, storyboarded and laid out. At Cannes in May 1989, 21st Century announced a September start date, with ads touting the script by "Barney Cohen, Ted Newsom & John Brancato and Joseph Goldman." As standard practice, Golan pre-sold the unmade film to raise production funds, with television rights bought by Viacom and home video rights by Columbia Pictures, which wanted to establish a studio franchise. Stephen Herek was attached as director at this point. Golan submitted this "new" screenplay to Columbia in late 1989 (actually the 1985 script with an adjusted "1989" date) and the studio requested yet another rewrite. Golan hired Frank LaLoggia, who turned in his draft but grew disenchanted with 21st Century. Neil Ruttenberg was hired for one more draft, which was also "covered" by script readers at Columbia. Columbia's script analysts considered all three submissions "essentially the same story." A tentative production deal was set. Said Stan Lee in 1990, "21st Century [is] supposed to do "Spider-Man" and now they're talking to Columbia and the way it looks now, Columbia may end up buying "Spider-Man" from 21st Century."

21st Century's Menahem Golan still actively immersed himself mounting "his" "Spider-Man", sending the original "Doc Ock" script for production bids. In 1990, he contacted Canadian effects company Light and Motion Corporation regarding the visual effects, which in turn offered the stop-motion chores to Steven Archer ("Krull", "Clash of the Titans").

Toward the end of shooting "True Lies", "Variety" carried the announcement that Carolco Pictures had received a completed screenplay from James Cameron. This script bore the names of James Cameron, John Brancato, Ted Newsom, Barry [sic] Cohen and "Joseph Goldmari", a typographical scrambling of Golan's pen name ("Joseph Goldman") with Marvel executive Joseph Calamari. The script text was identical to the one Golan submitted to Columbia the previous year, with the addition of a new 1993 date. Cameron stalwart Arnold Schwarzenegger was frequently linked to the project as the director's choice for Doctor Octopus.

Months later, James Cameron submitted an undated 57-page "scriptment" with an alternate story (the copyright registration was dated 1991), part screenplay, part narrative story outline. The "scriptment" told the Spider-Man origin, but used variations on the comic book characters Electro and Sandman as villains. This "Electro" (named Carlton Strand, instead of Max Dillon) was a megalomaniacal parody of corrupt capitalists. Instead of Flint Marko's character, Cameron's "Sandman" (simply named Boyd) is mutated by an accident involving Philadelphia Experiment-style bilocation and atom-mixing, in lieu of getting caught in a nuclear blast on a beach. The story climaxes with a battle atop the World Trade Center and had Peter Parker revealing his identity to Mary Jane Watson. In addition, the treatment was also heavy on profanity, and had Spider-Man and Mary Jane having sex on the Brooklyn Bridge.

This treatment reflected elements in previous scripts: from the Stevens treatment, organic web-shooters, and a villain who tempts Spider-Man to join a coming "master race" of mutants; from the original screenplay and rewrite, weird electrical storms causing blackouts, freak magnetic events and bi-location; from the Ethan Wiley draft, a villain addicted to toxic super-powers and multiple experimental spiders, one of which escapes and bites Peter, causing an hallucinatory nightmare invoking Franz Kafka's "The Metamorphosis"; from the Frank LaLoggia script, a blizzard of stolen cash fluttering down onto surprised New Yorkers; and from the Neil Ruttenberg screenplay, a criminal assault on the NYC Stock Exchange. In 1991, Carolco Pictures extended Golan's option agreement with Marvel through May 1996, but in April 1992, Carolco ceased active production on Spider-Man due to continued financial and legal problems.

When James Cameron agreed to make "Spider-Man", Carolco lawyers simply used his previous "Terminator 2" contract as a template. A clause in this agreement gave Cameron the right to decide on movie and advertising credits. Show business trade articles and advertisements made no mention of Golan, who was still actively assembling the elements for the film. In 1993, Golan complained publicly and finally instigated legal action against Carolco for disavowing his contractual guarantee credit as producer. On the other hand, Cameron had the contractual right to decide on credits. Eventually, Carolco sued Viacom and Columbia to recover broadcast and home video rights, and the two studios countersued. 20th Century Fox, though not part of the litigation, contested Cameron's participation, claiming exclusivity on his services as a director under yet another contract. In 1996, Carolco, 21st Century, and Marvel went bankrupt.

Via a quitclaim from Carolco dated March 28, 1995, MGM acquired 21st Century's film library and assets, and received "...all rights in and to all drafts and versions of the screenplay(s) for "Spider-Man" written by James Cameron, Ted Newsom & John Brancato, Menahem Golan, Jon [sic] Michael Paul, Ethan Wiley, Leslie Stevens, Frank Laloggia, Neil Ruttenberg, Barney Cohen, Shepard Goldman and any and all other writers." MGM also sued 21st Century, Viacom, and Marvel Comics, alleging fraud in the original deal between Cannon and Marvel. In 1998, Marvel emerged from bankruptcy with a reorganization plan that merged the company with Toy Biz. The courts determined that the original contract of Marvel's rights to Golan had expired, returning the rights to Marvel, but the matter was still not completely resolved. In 1999, Marvel licensed "Spider-Man" rights to Columbia, a subsidiary of Sony Pictures Entertainment. MGM disputed the legality, claiming it had the "Spider-Man" rights via Cannon, 21st Century, and Carolco.

In the meantime, MGM/UA chief executive John Calley moved to Columbia Pictures. Intimately familiar with the legal history of producer Kevin McClory's claim to the rights to both "Thunderball" and other related James Bond characters and elements, Calley announced that Columbia would produce an alternate 007 series, based on the "McClory material", which Calley acquired for Columbia. (Columbia had made the original 1967 film spoof of "Casino Royale", a non-Eon production).

Both studios now faced rival projects, which could undercut their own long-term financial stability and plans. Columbia had no consistent movie franchise, and had sought "Spider-Man" since 1989; MGM/UA's only reliable source of theatrical income was a new James Bond film every two or three years. An alternate 007 series could diminish or even eliminate the power of MGM/UA's long-running Bond series. Likewise, an MGM/UA "Spider-Man" film could negate Columbia's plans to create an exclusive cash cow. Both sides seemed to have strong arguments for the rights to do such films.

The two studios made a trade-off in March 1999; Columbia relinquished its rights to create a new 007 series in exchange for MGM's giving up its claim to "Spider-Man". Columbia acquired the rights to all previous scripts in 2000, but exercised options only on the "Cameron Material", i.e., both the completed multi-author screenplay and the subsequent "scriptment." After more than a decade of attempts, "Spider-Man" truly went into production and since then all of the Spider-Man films were distributed by Columbia Pictures, the primary film production holding of Sony. The first three were directed by Sam Raimi, and the reboot and its sequel were directed by Marc Webb. Laura Ziskin served as producer until her death in 2011.
"Spider-Man" follows Peter Parker (Tobey Maguire), an orphaned high schooler who pines after popular girl-next-door Mary Jane Watson (Kirsten Dunst). While on a science class field trip, Peter is bitten by a genetically-engineered "super spider." As a result, Peter gains superhuman abilities, including increased strength, speed, and the abilities to scale walls and generate organic webbing. After his beloved Uncle Ben (Cliff Robertson) is murdered, the teenager realizes that he must use his newfound abilities to protect New York City. Meanwhile, wealthy industrialist Norman Osborn (Willem Dafoe), the father of Peter's best friend Harry Osborn (James Franco), subjects himself to an experimental performance-enhancing serum, which creates a psychotic and murderous split personality. Donning a military battlesuit, Norman becomes a freakish "Green Goblin", who begins to terrorize the city. Peter, as Spider-Man, now must do battle with the Goblin, all while trying to express his true feelings for Mary Jane.

Two years after the events of the first film, Peter struggles to balance his superhero and private lives and still pines after Mary Jane Watson, who is now engaged. Harry Osborn continues to believe Spider-Man is responsible for his father Norman Osborn's death. Spider-Man contends with scientist Otto Octavius (Alfred Molina), a.k.a. Dr. Octopus, who has four mechanical tentacles fused to his spine and sets out to recreate a fusion-based experiment that could destroy much of New York City.

"Spider-Man 3" picks up one year after the events of the second film. Peter is still seeing Mary Jane Watson, while Harry Osborn succeeds his father as the new Green Goblin. Eddie Brock (Topher Grace), who, like Peter, is a photographer for the "Daily Bugle", sets out to defame Spider-Man and incriminate him. Flint Marko (Thomas Haden Church), an escaped convict, falls into a particle accelerator and becomes a shape-shifting sand monster later known as Sandman. Peter later learns that Marko is the one that killed Uncle Ben, causing Peter's own dark intentions to grow. This vendetta is enhanced by the appearance of the mysterious black alien symbiotic substance that bonds to Peter, resulting in the formation of a new black costume. Once Peter separates himself from the alien, it finds a new host in the form of Brock, resulting in the creation of Venom.

In 2007, "Spider-Man 4" entered development, with Raimi attached to direct and Maguire, Dunst and other cast members set to reprise their roles. Both a fourth and a fifth film were planned and at one time the idea of shooting the two sequels concurrently was under consideration. However, Raimi stated in March 2009 that only the fourth film was in development at that time and that if there were fifth and sixth films, those two films would actually be a continuation of each other. James Vanderbilt was hired in October 2007 to pen the screenplay after initial reports in January 2007 that Sony Pictures was in contact with David Koepp, who wrote the first "Spider-Man" film. The script was being rewritten by David Lindsay-Abaire and Gary Ross in November 2008 and October 2009. Sony also engaged Vanderbilt to write scripts for "Spider-Man 5" and "Spider-Man 6".

In 2007, Raimi expressed interest in portraying the transformation of Dr. Curt Connors into his villainous alter-ego, the Lizard; the character's actor Dylan Baker and producer Grant Curtis were also enthusiastic about the idea. Raimi also discussed his desire to upgrade Bruce Campbell from a cameo appearance to a significant role, later revealed to be Quentin Beck / Mysterio. It was reported in December 2009 that John Malkovich was in negotiations to play Vulture and that Anne Hathaway would play Felicia Hardy, though she would not have transformed into the Black Cat as in the comics. Instead, Raimi's Felicia was expected to become a new superpowered figure called the Vulturess. However, several years later, in 2013, Raimi stated that Hathaway was going to be Black Cat if "Spider-Man 4" had been made. Concept art revealed in June 2016 showed the inclusion of an opening montage of Spider-Man going up against C and D-list villains, such as Mysterio, the Shocker, the Prowler, and the Rhino, with the Vulture serving as the main antagonist.

As disagreements between Sony and Raimi threatened to push the film off the intended May 6, 2011 release date, Sony Pictures announced in January 2010 that plans for "Spider-Man 4" had been cancelled due to Raimi's withdrawal from the project. Raimi reportedly ended his participation due to his doubt that he could meet the planned May 6, 2011 release date while at the same time upholding the film creatively; he admitted that he was "very unhappy" with the way "Spider-Man 3" had turned out, and was under pressure to make the fourth film the best that he could. Raimi purportedly went through four iterations of the script with different screenwriters and still "hated it".

In July 2007, Avi Arad revealed a Venom spin-off was in the works. The studio commissioned Jacob Aaron Estes to write a script, but rejected it the following year. In September 2008, Paul Wernick and Rhett Reese signed on to write. Stan Lee signed on to make a cameo in the film. Rhett Reese later revealed that they had written two drafts for the film and that the studio was pushing the film forward. In 2009, Gary Ross, who was then rewriting the latest draft of the unproduced "Spider-Man 4", was assigned to rewrite the "Venom" script and direct the film, in which Venom would be an antihero rather than a supervillain. In March 2012, "Chronicle" director Josh Trank negotiated his interest in directing the film with Sony, after Ross left development to direct "The Hunger Games". In June 2012, "The Amazing Spider-Man" producer Matt Tolmach, speaking of his and fellow producer Avi Arad's next project, a "Venom" film, suggested it could follow the shared-universe model of the film "The Avengers": "What I'm trying to say to you without giving anything away is hopefully all these worlds will live together in peace someday."

Sony announced that the franchise would be rebooted with a new director and new cast. "The Amazing Spider-Man" was released on July 3, 2012 in 3D and IMAX 3D, and focused on Peter Parker (Andrew Garfield) developing his abilities in high school and his relationship with Gwen Stacy (Emma Stone). He fights the Lizard, the monstrous form of Dr. Curt Connors (Rhys Ifans), his father's former partner and a scientist at OsCorp.

The film takes place two years after the first film's events. Peter Parker graduates from high school, continues his crime-fighting duties as Spider-Man, while combating the electricity-manipulating Electro (Jamie Foxx), rekindling his relationship with Gwen Stacy, and encounters his old friend Harry Osborn (Dane DeHaan), who is slowly dying from a genetic disease.

In June 2013, Sony Pictures announced it had set release dates for the next two "Spider-Man" films. The third film was scheduled to be released on June 10, 2016, and the fourth was scheduled to be released on May 4, 2018. Paul Giamatti confirmed that Rhino would return in the third film. That November, Sony Pictures Entertainment chief Michael Lynton told analysts, "We do very much have the ambition about creating a bigger universe around Spider-Man. There are a number of scripts in the works." Andrew Garfield stated that his contract was for three films, and was unsure of his involvement for the fourth film. In February 2014, Sony announced that Webb would return to direct the third "Amazing Spider-Man" film. In March 2014, Webb stated that he would not be directing the fourth film, but would like to remain as a consultant for the series. On July 11, 2014, Roberto Orci told IGN that he was not working on the third film due to the third "Star Trek" film. Alex Kurtzman stated in a 2014 interview that the third film was still continuing production and that there was a possibility of seeing a Black Cat film. On July 23, 2014, Sony Pictures announced that "The Amazing Spider-Man 3" had been delayed to 2018. After the announcement in February 2015 of a new franchise with Marvel Studios, the sequels to "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" were cancelled. In July 2015, Denis Leary, who had portrayed police Captain George Stacy in the previous two films, revealed that the film at one point had Spider-Man "take this formula and regenerate the people in his life that died." This would bring back both Captain Stacy (who died in the first film) and potentially Emma Stone's Gwen Stacy, rumored to return as a version of the character Spider-Gwen. 

On December 12, 2013, Sony issued a press release through the viral site "Electro Arrives" announcing that two films were in development, with Alex Kurtzman, Roberto Orci and Ed Solomon writing a spin-off to "The Amazing Spider-Man" focused on Venom (with Kurtzman attached to direct) and Drew Goddard writing one focused on the villain team Sinister Six with an eye to direct. Hannah Minghella and Rachel O'Connor would oversee the development and production of these films for the studio. In April 2014, it was announced that Goddard would direct the "Sinister Six" film, and that both spin-offs would be released before a fourth "Amazing Spider-Man", with Spider-Man potentially appearing in both spin-offs. Later in the month, Tolmach and Arad revealed the "Sinister Six" film would be a redemption story and that the film's lineup might differ from the comics. On July 23, 2014, Sony Pictures announced that "The Sinister Six" was scheduled for release on November 11, 2016. By August 2014, Sony was also looking to release a female-centered spin-off film in 2017, with Lisa Joy writing, and had given the "Venom" spin-off the potential title of "Venom: Carnage".

Despite the announcement in February 2015 of a new franchise with Marvel Studios, the "Sinister Six", "Venom", and female-led spin-off films set in the "Amazing Spider-Man" franchise were then "still moving forward". Feige was not expected to be creatively involved with these films. However, the "Sinister Six" film was cancelled due to "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" underperforming commercially, and by November 2015, the other prospective spin-off films were cancelled as well.. However, Sony has reworked these plans into creating a new film series based on Marvel characters associated with Spider-Man separate from both the Marvel Cinematic Universe or the "Amazing Spider-Man" franchise, starting with the release of the 2018 film "Venom". These include spinoff films centering around the characters of Morbius, Kraven the Hunter, and Silver and Black, a female-centric team up of the Spider-Man villains Silver Sable and Black Cat. On June 27, 2018, it was announced that Jared Leto will portray Morbius in the spinoff film directed by Daniel Espinosa. The film is set to release on July 31, 2020. The Kraven the Hunter film is currently being written by Richard Wenk.

In December 2014, following the hacking of Sony Pictures' computers, Sony and Marvel Studios were revealed to have had discussions about allowing Spider-Man to appear in the 2016 Marvel Cinematic Universe film "" while having control of the film rights remaining with Sony. However, talks between the studios then broke down. Instead, Sony had considered having Sam Raimi return to direct a new trilogy.

However, on February 9, 2015, Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios announced that Spider-Man would appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), with the character appearing in an MCU film and Sony releasing a "Spider-Man" film co-produced by Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige and Amy Pascal. Sony Pictures will continue to own, finance, distribute, and exercise final creative control over the "Spider-Man" films. The next month, Marvel Entertainment CCO Joe Quesada indicated that the Peter Parker version of the character would be used, which Feige confirmed in April. Feige also stated that Marvel had been working to add Spider-Man to the MCU since at least October 2014. The following June, Feige clarified that the initial Sony deal does not allow the character to appear in any of the MCU television series, as it was "very specific... with a certain amount of back and forth allowed." In November 2016, Holland revealed that he was signed for "three Spider-Man movies and three solo movies". In June 2017, Holland, Feige and Watts confirmed that a child wearing an Iron Man mask whom Stark saves from a drone in "Iron Man 2" (portrayed by Max Favreau) was a young Peter Parker, retroactively making it the introduction of the character to the MCU.

Reports indicated that the first MCU film that Spider-Man would appear in as part of the deal, would be "Captain America: Civil War". Joe and Anthony Russo, the directors of "Captain America: Civil War", had lobbied for months to include the character in the film. Anthony Russo stated that, despite Marvel telling them to have a "plan B" should the deal with Sony fail, the Russos never created one because "it was very important to us to reintroduce" Spider-Man in the film, adding, "We only have envisioned the movie with Spider-Man." By the end of May 2015, Asa Butterfield, Tom Holland, Judah Lewis, Matthew Lintz, Charlie Plummer and Charlie Rowe screen tested for the lead role, against Robert Downey Jr., who portrays Iron Man, for chemistry. The six were chosen out of a search of over 1,500 actors to test in front of Feige, Pascal and the Russo brothers. In June, Feige and Pascal narrowed the actors considered to Holland and Rowe. Both screen tested again with Downey, with Holland also testing with Chris Evans, who portrays Captain America, and emerged as the favorite. On June 23, 2015, Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios jointly announced that Holland would play Spider-Man. The following month, Marisa Tomei was in talks for the role of May Parker, later appearing in "Civil War".

In the film, Parker, who has spent the last six months as a local costumed crimefighter named Spider-Man, is recruited by Tony Stark / Iron Man to join his team of Avengers to stop Steve Rogers / Captain America and his rogue faction of Avengers, who oppose the Sokovia Accords, from fleeing with fugitive Bucky Barnes. During the fight with Rogers and his team, Parker, utilizing a Stark-upgraded version of his initial makeshift suit, proves to be a formidable opponent, and implements a tactic with which he and Vision disable Scott Lang / Ant-Man in his giant-sized form. Upon returning home, Parker discovers some of the StarkTech features of the suit he was given by Stark.

"Spider-Man: Homecoming" was released on July 7, 2017. The film is directed by Jon Watts, from a screenplay by Jonathan M. Goldstein & John Francis Daley and Watts & Christopher Ford and Chris McKenna & Erik Sommers. Holland, Tomei, and Downey reprise their roles as Peter Parker / Spider-Man, May Parker, and Tony Stark / Iron Man, respectively, and are joined by Michael Keaton, who plays Adrian Toomes / Vulture. Jon Favreau, who appeared as Happy Hogan in the "Iron Man" films, also appears in the film. Production began in June 2016 in Atlanta, Georgia and ended in October.

The film sees Parker two months after the events of "Civil War" as he anxiously awaits his next assignment from Stark while simultaneously balancing his life at Midtown High with his vigilante life as Spider-Man. His investigation of a series of highly weaponized robberies leads him to a mysterious weapons trafficker named Adrian Toomes, who turns out to be the father of his high school crush, Liz Allan.

In October 2016, Holland said the possibility of him appearing in "" was "all up in the air", but that "some sort of deal is in the mix" with Sony for him to appear. Holland was eventually confirmed to appear in "Infinity War" as part of the ensemble cast in February 2017.

Parker joins Iron Man, Doctor Strange, and the Guardians of the Galaxy in battling Thanos in the ruins of his home planet, Titan. However, Parker is among the many heroes who perish after Thanos snaps his fingers with a completed Infinity Gauntlet, which wipes out half of all life in the universe.

Holland was confirmed to be a part of "Avengers: Endgame" in April 2017.

In December 2016, Sony Pictures announced a sequel for "Spider-Man: Homecoming", scheduled to be released on July 5, 2019. In June 2017, Feige stated that the film would be titled in a similar fashion to "Homecoming", using a subtitle, and would not have a number in the title. A year later, Holland revealed the film's title as "". Holland, Keaton, Tomei and Favreau are set to reprise their roles from "Homecoming" and are joined by Jake Gyllenhaal as Quentin Beck / Mysterio. Like in "Homecoming" other characters from previous MCU installments are set to reprise their roles with Samuel L. Jackson and Cobie Smulders appearing as Nick Fury and Maria Hill respectively. 

The film, set after the events of "Avengers: Endgame", features Parker and his friends going to Europe on summer vacation where Parker is drawn back to superheroics when he is forced to team up with Nick Fury and Mysterio in battling the Elementals.

In April 2015, Sony announced that Phil Lord and Christopher Miller were writing and producing a Spider-Man animated comedy in development at Sony Pictures Animation. As revealed by the e-mail leak one year before, the duo had been previously courted by Sony to take over the studio's animation division. Originally scheduled to be released on December 21, 2018, Sony announced on April 26, 2017 the film would be released a week earlier on December 14, 2018. Sony Pictures Animation president Kristine Belson unveiled the film's logo, with the working title "Animated Spider-Man", at CinemaCon 2016, and declared that "conceptually and visually, [the film] will break new ground for the superhero genre." On June 20, 2016, "The Hollywood Reporter" reported that Bob Persichetti would direct the animated film. Sony announced that Miles Morales would be the Spider-Man in the film and Peter Ramsey would serve as co-director.

In November 2018, it was revealed that "Into the Spider-Verse" had entered into sequel development. The sequel, which will continue Morales' story and feature a romance with Gwen Stacy / Spider-Gwen, is set to be directed by Joaquim Dos Santos and written by David Callaham.

Along with the announcement of a sequel, a spin-off focused on female Spider-characters was revealed to be in development, with Lauren Montgomery in talks to direct the film, while Bek Smith is set to write. The spin-off will star Spider-Gwen, and is set to feature the characters Cindy Moon / Silk and Jessica Drew / Spider-Woman. Producer Amy Pascal felt that "it’s great that we're going to be able to tell movies about female superheroes in this realm" as she believes "there are going to be characters that really resonate for people". On how the spin-off film will be connected to the sequel to "Into the Spider-Verse", Pascal said that it will act as a "launching pad" for the spin-off. Hailee Steinfeld expressed interest in reprising her role as Spider-Gwen in the film.

"Into the Spider-Verse" producers Phil Lord and Christopher Miller expressed interest in developing animated shorts starring Spider-Ham. On February 18, 2019, it was revealed that the short film "Spider-Ham: Caught in a Ham" would be released on February 26, 2019, along with the digital release of "Into the Spider-Verse".

John Mulaney expressed interest in a spin-off film starring Spider-Ham, with the potential plot being a "Watergate-like story" which could focus on the character's career as a reporter.

On May 31, 2010, an animated 4D film, titled "Marvel Super Heroes 4D" was launched at Madame Tussauds London, featuring Spider-Man and Iron Man leading the Avengers against Doctor Doom. On April 26, 2012, an updated version of the film with a different plot, featuring Spider-Man in a diminished capacity, was opened at Madame Tussauds New York. The film features Tom Kenny as the voice of Peter Parker / Spider-Man.

At Comic-Con 2013, Dan Buckley, president of Marvel Worldwide, Inc announced the development of a crossover television film of the animated series "Phineas and Ferb", that would feature characters from Marvel Entertainment. The film aired between August 16–25, 2013 on Disney Channel and Disney XD, featuring Drake Bell reprising his role from "Ultimate Spider-Man" and "Avengers Assemble" as Peter Parker / Spider-Man, alongside Danny Trejo as the Venom Symbiote.

Stan Lee, one of the co-creators of Spider-Man, has appeared in varied cameos in all films since the Raimi trilogy. Bruce Campbell, a long-time colleague of Sam Raimi, appeared in all three of his films. In "Spider-Man", he was the announcer at the wrestling ring Peter was in and gave him the name "Spider-Man", instead of the "Human Spider" (the name with which Peter wanted to be introduced). In "Spider-Man 2", he was an usher who refuses to let Peter enter the theatre for Mary Jane's play when arriving late. In "Spider-Man 3", Campbell appears as a French maître d'. In the ultimately unmade "Spider-Man 4", Campbell's character would have been revealed as Quentin Beck / Mysterio.

The Sam Raimi trilogy was released on DVD, the first two being released exclusively as two-disc sets and on VHS, with the third film being released in both single and two-disc editions. All three films were later packaged in a "Motion Picture DVD Trilogy" box set.

"Spider-Man 3" was initially the only "Spider-Man" film to be released individually on the high-definition Blu-ray format. The first two films were made available on Blu-ray, but only as part of a boxed set with the third film, called "Spider-Man: The High-Definition Trilogy". The first two films lacked the bonus features from the DVDs, although "Spider-Man 2" did contain both cuts of the film.

Sony announced on April 2, 2012 that the three films would be re-released on June 12, 2012. The DVDs of the first two films reinstated a selection of the bonus features missing from the earlier Blu-ray releases, although the "Spider-Man 3" reissue did not include the bonus disc of additional special features that appeared on earlier Blu-ray releases.

All three films which comprise the Raimi trilogy are available in the U.S. on iTunes.

"The Amazing Spider-Man 2" became the first Spider-Man movie released on Ultra HD Blu-ray on March 1, 2016. October 17, 2017 saw Sony release the home video release of "Homecoming" on UHD and other home video formats as well as sets featuring all of their other Spider-Man movies on UHD. This included "Spider-Man": Limited Edition Collection, which includes all three Raimi films, and "The Amazing Spider-Man": Limited Edition Collection, which includes both Webb films.

The first three "Spider-Man" films set new opening day records in North America in their opening weekend. The films are among the top of North American rankings of , with "Spider-Man" ranking seventh, "Spider-Man 2" ranking ninth, "Spider-Man 3" ranking 11th, and "Spider-Man: Homecoming" ranking 12th. In North America, "Spider-Man", "Spider-Man 2", "Spider-Man 3" and "Spider-Man: Homecoming" are ranked 11th, 13th, 15th, and 17th for all superhero films. Worldwide, "Spider-Man 3" and "Spider-Man: Homecoming" are ranked 12th and 13th for all superhero films (behind "", "The Avengers", "", "Black Panther", "Incredibles 2", "Iron Man 3", "", "Aquaman", "The Dark Knight Rises", "The Dark Knight" and "Captain Marvel"). "Spider-Man", "Spider-Man 2", "Spider-Man 3" and "Spider-Man: Homecoming" are four of the five most successful films produced by Sony/Columbia Pictures in North America.

David Ansen of "Newsweek" enjoyed "Spider-Man" as a fun film to watch, though he considered "Spider-Man 2" to be "a little too self-important for its own good." Ansen saw "Spider-Man 3" as a return to form, finding it "the most grandiose chapter and the nuttiest." Tom Charity of CNN appreciated the films' "solidly redemptive moral convictions", also noting the vast improvement of the visual effects from the first film to the third. While he saw the second film's Doc Ock as the "most engaging" villain, he applauded the third film's Sandman as "a triumph of CGI wizardry." Richard Corliss of "Time" enjoyed the action of the films and thought that they did better than most action movies by "rethinking the characters, the franchise and the genre."

Colin Covert of the "Star Tribune" praised "Spider-Man" as a "superb debut" of the superhero as well as "Spider-Man 2" as a "superior sequel" for filmgoers who are fans "of spectacle and of story." Covert expressed disappointment in "Spider-Man 3" as too ambitious with the multiple storylines leaving one "feeling overstuffed yet shortchanged." Manohla Dargis of "The New York Times" enjoyed the humor of the first two films, but found it missing in the third installment. Dargis also noted, "The bittersweet paradox of this franchise is that while the stories have grown progressively less interesting the special effects have improved tremendously." Robert Denerstein of the "Rocky Mountain News" ranked the films from his favorite to his least favorite: "Spider-Man 2", "Spider-Man", and "Spider-Man 3". While Denerstein missed the presence of Alfred Molina as Doctor Octopus from the second film, he found the third film – despite being "bigger, though not necessarily better" – to have a "satisfying conclusion."



</doc>
<doc id="7954455" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7954455" title="New York University">
New York University

New York University (NYU) is a private research university originally founded in New York City but now with campuses and locations throughout the world. Founded in 1831, NYU's historical campus is in Greenwich Village, New York City. As a global university, students can graduate from its degree-granting campuses in NYU Abu Dhabi and NYU Shanghai, as well as study at its 12 academic centers in Accra, Berlin, Buenos Aires, Florence, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Paris, Prague, Sydney, Tel Aviv, and Washington, D.C.

In 2018, NYU was ranked amongst the top 30 universities internationally by the "Academic Ranking of World Universities", "Times Higher Education World University Rankings", and "U.S. News & World Report". For the class that matriculated in the fall of 2018, NYU received 75,037 applications for its undergraduate programs; this is more applications than any other private college or university in the United States.

Alumni include heads of state, royalty, eminent scientists, inventors and entrepreneurs, media figures, founders and CEOs of Fortune 500 companies, and astronauts. , 37 Nobel Laureates, 8 Turing Award winners, 5 Fields Medalists, over 30 Academy Award winners, over 30 Pulitzer Prize winners, and hundreds of members of the National Academies of Sciences and United States Congress have been affiliated as faculty or alumni. Globally, NYU is ranked 7th by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings for producing alumni who are millionaires, and 4th by Wealth-X for producing ultra high net-worth and billionaire alumni.

Albert Gallatin, Secretary of Treasury under Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, declared his intention to establish "in this immense and fast-growing city ... a system of rational and practical education fitting and graciously opened to all". A three-day-long "literary and scientific convention" held in City Hall in 1830 and attended by over 100 delegates debated the terms of a plan for a new university. These New Yorkers believed the city needed a university designed for young men who would be admitted based upon merit rather than birthright or social class.

On April 18, 1831, an institution was established, with the support of a group of prominent New York City residents from the city's merchants, bankers, and traders. Albert Gallatin was elected as the institution's first president. On April 21, 1831, the new institution received its charter and was incorporated as the University of the City of New York by the New York State Legislature; older documents often refer to it by that name. The university has been popularly known as New York University since its inception and was officially renamed New York University in 1896. In 1832, NYU held its first classes in rented rooms of four-story Clinton Hall, situated near City Hall. In 1835, the School of Law, NYU's first professional school, was established. Although the impetus to found a new school was partly a reaction by evangelical Presbyterians to what they perceived as the Episcopalianism of Columbia College, NYU was created non-denominational, unlike many American colleges at the time. American Chemical Society was founded in 1876 at NYU.

It became one of the nation's largest universities, with an enrollment of 9,300 in 1917. NYU had its Washington Square campus since its founding. The university purchased a campus at University Heights in the Bronx because of overcrowding on the old campus. NYU also had a desire to follow New York City's development further uptown. NYU's move to the Bronx occurred in 1894, spearheaded by the efforts of Chancellor Henry Mitchell MacCracken. The University Heights campus was far more spacious than its predecessor was. As a result, most of the university's operations along with the undergraduate College of Arts and Science and School of Engineering were housed there. NYU's administrative operations were moved to the new campus, but the graduate schools of the university remained at Washington Square. In 1914, Washington Square College was founded as the downtown undergraduate college of NYU. In 1935, NYU opened the "Nassau College-Hofstra Memorial of New York University at Hempstead, Long Island". This extension would later become a fully independent Hofstra University.

In 1950, NYU was elected to the Association of American Universities, a nonprofit organization of leading public and private research universities.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, financial crisis gripped the New York City government and the troubles spread to the city's institutions, including NYU. Feeling the pressures of imminent bankruptcy, NYU President James McNaughton Hester negotiated the sale of the University Heights campus to the City University of New York, which occurred in 1973. In 1973, the New York University School of Engineering and Science merged into Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, which eventually merged back into NYU in 2014 forming the present Tandon School of Engineering. After the sale of the Bronx campus, University College merged with Washington Square College. In the 1980s, under the leadership of President John Brademas, NYU launched a billion-dollar campaign that was spent almost entirely on updating facilities. The campaign was set to complete in 15 years, but ended up being completed in 10.

In 1991, L. Jay Oliva was inaugurated the 14th president of the university. Following his inauguration, he moved to form the League of World Universities, an international organization consisting of rectors and presidents from urban universities across six continents. The league and its 47 representatives gather every two years to discuss global issues in education.

In 2003 President John Sexton launched a $2.5 billion campaign for funds to be spent especially on faculty and financial aid resources. Under Sextons leadership, NYU also began its radical transformation into a global university.

In 2009, the university responded to a series of "New York Times" interviews that showed a pattern of labor abuses in its fledgling Abu Dhabi location, creating a statement of labor values for Abu Dhabi campus workers. A 2014 follow-up article found that while some conditions had improved, contractors for the multibillion-endowment university were still frequently subjecting their workers to third-world labor conditions. The article documented that these conditions included confiscation of worker passports, forced overtime, recruitment fees and cockroach-filled dorms where workers had to sleep under beds. According to the article, workers who attempted to protest the NYU contractors' conditions were promptly arrested. Reports also claimed that those arrested by police were later abused at the police station. Many workers who were not local were then deported to their home countries. The university quickly responded to the reports with an apology to the workers. In 2015, NYU compensated thousands of migrant workers on its Abu Dhabi complex.

From 2007 to 2018, NYU experienced a 114% increase in applications to its university system, increasing from around 35,000 applicants to over 75,000 in 2018. This has caused, even with the addition of a substantially sized engineering school, for the acceptance rate to significantly drop. NYU marked its lowest acceptance rate in modern times in 2018, at a mere 19% of applicants accepted. In parallel to NYU's expansion in the early 1900s, the university similarly expanded vigorously in the early 2000s, becoming the largest private university in the United States with a combined undergraduate/graduate enrollment of over 59,000 students as of 2018.

In August 2018, the New York University School of Medicine announced it would be offering full-tuition scholarships to all current and future students in its MD program regardless of need or merit, making it the only top-10 medical school in the United States to do so.

The university logo, the upheld torch, is derived from the Statue of Liberty, signifying NYU's service to New York City. The torch is depicted on both the NYU seal and the more abstract NYU logo, designed in 1965 by renowned graphic designer Tom Geismar of the branding and design firm Chermayeff & Geismar. There are at least two versions of the possible origin of the university color, violet. Some believe that it may have been chosen because violets are said to have grown abundantly in Washington Square and around the buttresses of the Old University Building. Others argue that the color may have been adopted because the violet was the flower associated with Athens, the center of learning in ancient Greece.

Washington Square and Greenwich Village have been hubs of cultural life in New York City since the early 19th century. Much of this culture has intersected with NYU at various points in its history. Artists of the Hudson River School, the United States' first prominent school of painters, settled around Washington Square. Samuel F.B. Morse, a noted artist who also pioneered the telegraph and created the Morse Code, served as the first chair of Painting and Sculpture. He and Daniel Huntington were early tenants of the Old University Building in the mid-19th century. (The University rented out studio space and residential apartments within the "academic" building.) As a result, they had notable interaction with the cultural and academic life of the university.

In the 1870s, sculptors Augustus Saint-Gaudens and Daniel Chester French lived and worked near the Square. By the 1920s, Washington Square Park was nationally recognized as a focal point for artistic and moral rebellion. As such, the Washington Square campus became more diverse and bustled with urban energy, contributing to academic change at NYU. Famed residents of this time include Eugene O'Neill, John Sloan, and Maurice Prendergast. In the 1930s, the abstract expressionists Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning, and the realists Edward Hopper and Thomas Hart Benton had studios around Washington Square. In the 1960s the area became one of the centers of the beat and folk generation, when Allen Ginsberg and Bob Dylan settled there. This led to tension with the university, which at the time was in the midst of an aggressive facilities expansion phase. In 1975, the university opened The Grey Art Gallery at 100 Washington Square East, housing the NYU art collection and featuring museum quality exhibitions.

NYU has successfully completed a seven-year, $2.5 billion campaign, surpassing expectations by raising more than $3 billion over the seven-year period. Started in 2001, this campaign was the university's largest in its history, in which they planned to "raise $1 million per day for scholarships and financial aid, faculty building, new academic initiatives, and enhancing NYU's physical facilities". The campaign included a $50 million gift from the Tisch family (after which one building and the art school are named) and a $60 million gift from six trustees called "The Partners Fund", aimed at hiring new faculty. On October 15, 2007 the university announced that the Silver family donated $50 million to the School of Social Work, which will be renamed as a result. This is the largest donation ever to a school of social work in the United States.

The 2007–2008 academic year was the most successful fundraising year to date for NYU, with the school raising $698 million in only the first 11 months of the year, representing a 70% increase in donations from the prior year. The University also recently announced plans for NYU's Call to Action, a new initiative to ask alumni and donors to support financial aid for students at NYU.

The university has announced a 25-year strategic development plan, scheduled to coincide with its bicentennial in 2031. Included in the "NYU 200" plans are increasing resident and academic space, hiring additional faculty, and involving the New York City community in a transparent planning process. Additionally, NYU hopes to make their buildings more environmentally friendly, which will be facilitated by an evaluation of all campus spaces. As a part of this plan, NYU purchased 118 million kilowatt-hours of wind power during the 2006–2007 academic year – the largest purchase of wind power by any university in the country and any institution in New York City. For 2007, the university expanded its purchase of wind power to 132 million kilowatt-hours. As a result, the EPA ranked NYU as one of the greenest colleges in the country in its annual College & University Green Power Challenge.

NYU consistently ranks as one of the top fundraising institutions in the country, raising $506.4 million in 2015 and $648 million in 2016. NYU is also the 19th wealthiest university in America with $5.3 billion in cash and investments in fiscal year 2014.

NYU's campus in New York City includes more than 171 buildings spread between Manhattan and Brooklyn. Most of NYU's buildings in Manhattan are located across a roughly area bounded by Houston Street to the south, Broadway to the east, 14th Street to the north, and Sixth Avenue (Avenue of the Americas) to the west. The core of NYU consists of buildings that surround Washington Square Park. In addition to its New York campus, NYU has 49 additional buildings overseas located throughout two 'portal' campuses and 12 Global Academic Centers.

With approximately 12,000 undergraduate and graduate residents, NYU had the seventh-largest university housing system in the U.S. , and one of the largest among private schools.

Since the late 1970s, the central part of NYU has been its Washington Square campus in the heart of Greenwich Village. The Washington Square Arch is an unofficial symbol of NYU. Until 2007, NYU had held its commencement ceremonies in Washington Square Park, but moved the ceremonies to Yankee Stadium in 2008 because of renovations to Washington Square.

In the 1990s, NYU became a "two square" university by building a second community around Union Square, in close proximity to Washington Square. NYU's Union Square community primarily consists of the priority residence halls of Carlyle Court, Palladium Residence Hall, Alumni Hall, Coral Tower, Thirteenth Street Hall, University Hall, Third North Residence Hall, and Founders Hall.

NYU operates theaters and performance facilities that are often used by the university's music conservatory and Tisch School of the Arts. External productions are also occasionally held in NYU's facilities. The largest performance accommodations at NYU are the Skirball Center for Performing Arts (850 seats) at 566 LaGuardia Place, just south of Washington Square South, and the Eisner-Lubin Auditorium (560 seats) in the Kimmel Center. Recently, the Skirball Center hosted important speeches on foreign policy by John Kerry and Al Gore. The Skirball Center is the largest performing arts facility south of 42nd Street.

The Elmer Holmes Bobst Library, built between 1967 and 1972, is the largest library at NYU and one of the largest academic libraries in the United States. Designed by Philip Johnson and Richard Foster, the 12-story, structure sits on the southern edge of Washington Square Park (at 70 Washington Square South) and is the flagship of an eight-library, 4.5 million-volume system. Bobst Library offers one Multidisciplinary Reference Center, a Research Commons, of open-stacks shelving, and approximately 2,000 seats for student study. The library is visited by more than 6,800 users each day, and circulates more than one million books annually.

Bobst's Avery Fisher Center for Music and Media is one of the world's largest academic media centers, where students and researchers use more than 95,000 audio and video recordings per year. The Digital Studio offers a constantly evolving, leading-edge resource for faculty and student projects and promotes and supports access to digital resources for teaching, learning, research and arts events.

Bobst Library is also home to many special collections. The Fales Collection houses collections of English and American fiction in the United States, the unique Downtown Collection, documenting the New York literary avante-garde arts scene from the 1970s to the present, and the Food and Cookery Collection, which documents American food history with a focus on New York City. Bobst Library also houses the Tamiment Library, which holds collections in labor history, socialism, anarchism, communism, and American radicalism for scholarly research. Tamiment includes the Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives, the Archives of Irish America, the Center for the Cold War and the U.S., and the Frederic Ewen Academic Freedom Center.

NYU's Brooklyn campus is located at MetroTech Center, an urban academic-industrial research park, sits on top of the A C F subway lines, is only a few blocks from the Brooklyn Bridge, and its connected to NYU's Manhattan campus via the NYU Shuttle Bus System. It houses the School of Engineering, the Center for Urban Science and Progress and also several of Tisch School of the Arts and Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development's degree programs. The Brooklyn campus also houses NYU's Game Center Open Library, which is the largest collection of games held by any university in the world. In 2014, NYU Langone Medical Center acquired a healthcare facility in Brooklyn. Quickly following this announcement, NYU announced in 2017 that it would invest over $500 million in the coming years to renovate and expand its Brooklyn campus.

The New York University School of Medicine is situated near the East River waterfront at 550 First Avenue between East 30th and 34th Streets. The campus hosts the medical school, Tisch Hospital, and the Rusk Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine. Other NYU Centers across the city include NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases and the Bellevue Hospital Center. NYU's Silver School of Social Work (formerly Ehrenkranz School of Social Work) manages branch campus programs in Westchester County at Sarah Lawrence College and in Rockland County at St. Thomas Aquinas College.

In Sterling Forest, near Tuxedo, NYU has a research facility that contains institutes, in particular the Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine. The Midtown Center at 11 West 42nd Street is home to the NYU Schack Institute of Real Estate. The Woolworth Building in the financial district is home to NYU's professional studies and education programs.

NYU has two units located on the Upper East Side. The Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, a discrete entity within NYU, independent of any other school or department of the university, is located on East 84th Street, while the New York University Institute of Fine Arts, a graduate school of art history and fine arts, is located at the James B. Duke Building at 1 East 78th Street.

NYU has international houses on its Manhattan campus, including the Deutsches Haus, La Maison Française, Casa Italiana Zerilli Marimò, the Glucksman Ireland House, the King Juan Carlos I of Spain Center, the Hagop Kevorkian Center, an Africa House and a China House.

Tisch School of the Arts, Asia was NYU's first branch campus abroad. The result of a partnership between Tisch School of the Arts and the Singapore Government, it offered Master of Fine Arts degrees in animation and digital arts, dramatic writing, film and international media producing. The campus opened in fall 2007 with the intention to enroll approximately 250 students. Anticipated enrolment figures were not achieved, financial irregularities were alleged and President Pari Sara Shirazi was dismissed from her post by NYU in November 2011. She subsequently announced her intention to commence legal proceedings against NYU alleging wrongful termination and defamation. In a letter to the Tisch Asia community dated November 8, 2012, Dean Mary Schmidt Campbell announced that the campus would close after 2014 with recruitment and admission of new students suspended with immediate effect. In 2016, three former students of the now defunct Tisch Asia sued NYU.

NYU has a host of foreign facilities used for study away programs, referred to as Global Academic Centers. , NYU operates 12 academic sites in Africa, Asia and the Middle East, Australia, Europe, North America, and South America, including undergraduate academic-year and summer study abroad programs in Accra, Berlin, Buenos Aires, Florence, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Paris, Prague, Sydney, Tel Aviv, and Washington, D.C. One of the most noteworthy is the campus of NYU Florence Villa LaPietra in Italy, bequeathed by the late Sir Harold Acton to NYU in 1994, that at the time was the largest donation to a university in history.

In spring 2014, NYU opened a new campus in Paris, in the student area of the Quartier Latin, where NYU Law set up an EU Regulatory Policy Clinic taught by Alberto Alemanno and Vincent Chauvet.

In fall 2010, NYU Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) opened as the university's first overseas "Portal Campus" with an inaugural class of 150 students. Unlike NYU's other study abroad centers, NYUAD functions as a separate liberal arts college within a university, offering complete degree programs to students admitted directly to NYUAD. NYUAD recruits students from all over the world and describes itself as the "World's Honor College". The main campus for NYUAD is under construction on Saadiyat Island and is scheduled to open in 2014. Until then the school operates from a campus located in downtown Abu Dhabi. The campus construction and operational costs are entirely funded by the Abu Dhabi government.

In 2011, NYU announced plans to open another portal campus, New York University Shanghai, for the fall semester of 2013. It was set to have about 3,000 undergraduate students, the majority of whom would be Chinese. It was approved by the Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China in January 2011. NYU's local partner will be East China Normal University (ECNU). ECNU's president Yu Lizhong will be the chancellor and play a major role in government relations while Jeffrey S. Lehman, former president of Cornell amongst other positions, will serve as vice chancellor and have "free rein in academic affairs".

NYU houses approximately 12,000 undergraduate and graduate residents, and had the seventh-largest university housing system in the U.S. , and one of the largest among private schools. NYU's undergraduate housing system consists of more than 20 residence halls and is governed by the Inter-Residence Hall Council (IRHC), an umbrella student council organization. 

Uniquely, many of NYU's residence halls are converted apartment complexes or old hotels. In general, NYU residence halls receive favorable ratings, and some are opulent. Many rooms are spacious and contain amenities considered rare for individual college residence hall rooms, such as kitchens, lavatories, living rooms and common areas. The university operates its own transit system to transport its students by bus to its campus. A few of the Residence Halls are considered to be amongst the nicest in the nation, being furnished with granite counter-tops, stainless-steel appliances, in-hall gyms, wood flooring, marble bathroom fixtures, large floor lounges, floor to ceiling windows and extensive views of lower and midtown Manhattan. 

Undergraduate students are guaranteed housing during their enrollment at NYU and are split into two categories, FYRE (First-Year Residential Experience) and TRUE (The Residential Upperclassmen Experience). Most FYRE halls are located near the Washington Square area. While nearly all TRUE halls are located near the Union Square area, two former residence halls were located in the Financial District and one is still in use in Chinatown. Two residence halls are located in and around the MetroTech Commons, intended to serve NYU's Brooklyn Campus. 

In 2007, the National Association of College and University Residence Halls (NACURH) named NYU the National School of the Year for IRHC and NRHH's strong efforts over the past year. In addition, NYU was named the National Program of the Year for UltraViolet Live, the annual inter-hall competition that raises funds for Relay For Life.

NYU has made the greening of its campus a large priority. For example, NYU has been the largest university purchaser of wind energy in the U.S. since 2009.
With this switch to renewable power, NYU is achieving benefits equivalent to removing 12,000 cars from the road or planting 72,000 trees. In May 2008, the NYU Sustainability Task Force awarded $150,000 in grants to 23 projects that would focus research and efforts toward energy, food, landscape, outreach, procurement, transportation and waste.
These projects include a student-led bike-sharing program modeled after Paris' Velib program with 30 bikes free to students, staff, and faculty. NYU received a grade of "B" on the College Sustainability Report Card 2010 from the Sustainable Endowments Institute.

NYU purchased 118 million kilowatt-hours of wind power during the 2006–2007 academic year – the largest purchase of wind power by any university in the country and any institution in New York City. For 2007, the university expanded its purchase of wind power to 132 million kilowatt-hours.

The EPA ranked NYU as one of the greenest colleges in the country in its annual College & University Green Power Challenge.

In 2007, NYU created a strategic plan for a six billion dollar 25 year, expansion scheduled to conclude by the universities bicentennial in 2031. Details of the plan include of additional on-campus housing and of modern academic spaces spread between NYU's New York City campuses.

The expansion started in earnest in 2017 with the groundbreaking of 181 Mercer Street, a new multi-purpose building that will act as the flagship athletic facility for NYU, while also accompanying a 350-bed Residence Hall, 58 general purpose classrooms and a 350-seat theater. The roughly , $1.1 billion building is directly adjacent to the south eastern corner of the Washington Square campus and represents a significant focus on the university owner super blocks. Work on the plans second project, 370 Jay Street, a addition to the Brooklyn campus is scheduled to conclude in 2019. The building will house 'the digital arts and sciences' such as the Tandon School of Engineering departments of Computer Science, Electrical and Computer Engineering; the Tisch School of the Arts Clive Davis Institute for Recorded Music and Game Center and various other NYU initiatives such as the Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP) and NYU Wireless (5G research).

To date, NYU has confirmed specific construction details for its NYU 2031 plan to the tune of at a cost of $1.6 Billion with roughly 12 years to go until the universities bicentennial. In order to meet the plans outlined goals on time, the university would have to significantly increase spending, fundraising and construction over the next decade.

Admission to NYU is highly selective. For the undergraduate first-year class of 2022, 15,722 were admitted from an applicant pool of over 75,000 (19%), the lowest in its school's history. Of those admitted, 5,873 made up the total enrollment for the class, representing all 50 states and 115 countries, with 28% as non-US citizens. Most freshmen have a typical unweighted GPA of 3.7/A (90–95%) and are in the top 10% of their high school graduating class. The average admit has achieved an SAT above 1400 (out of 1600) and between 30 and 34 on the ACT. The student-to-faculty ratio at the New York campus is 10:1, and less than that at the Abu Dhabi and Shanghai campuses. The average scholarship amount awarded to freshmen is $29,528, and 21% of freshmen received Pell Grants.

, NYU's graduate schools have acceptance rates of 1.8% to the School of Medicine, 23% to the School of Business, 28% to the School of Engineering, 29% to the Graduate School of Arts and Science, and 34% to the School of Law.

Average MCAT score of students at the School of Medicine is 36/45, average GMAT score of graduate students at the School of Business is 710/800, and average LSAT score of students at the School of Law is 171/180.

NYU is a private, global, sectarian and not-for-profit institution of higher education organized into 10 undergraduate schools and 15 graduate/professional schools, with a roughly even split of students between the divisions. Arts and Science is currently NYU's largest academic division. It has three subdivisions: the College of Arts and Science, the Graduate School of Arts and Science, and the Liberal Studies program. The College of Arts and Science and Liberal Studies program are undergraduate divisions, and the former has existed since the founding of NYU.

According to NYU, it has created a 'global network university' with its primary campus, two 'portal' campuses, and 12 academic sites. The 'portal' campuses at NYU Shanghai and NYU Abu Dhabi function as full-fledged colleges, allowing students to study all four years of their undergraduate studies and receive a degree, never having stepped foot on what would be considered NYU's traditional campus in New York. The academic sites at Accra, Berlin, Buenos Aires, Florence, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Paris, Prague, Sydney, Tel Aviv, and Washington, D.C. function as study away sites, allowing students to spend up to a year away from their home campus. NYU, citing a report by the Institute of International Education, asserts that it has sent more students abroad and brought more international students in than any other university for five continuous years.

The President of New York University, is selected by the Board of Trustees and serves as the primary executive officer of the university for an unspecified term length. On March 18th, 2015, Andrew D. Hamilton became the 16th and current President of NYU. His administration's current objectives include measures of strengthening NYU's science and engineering departments, expanding diversity and inclusionary practices, maintaining its status as a global university and attempting to make the university broadly more affordable.

NYU manages one of the largest annual collegiate research budgets of any university in the United States. In 2014, NYU received $524 million in research grants from the National Science Foundation alone. NYU School of Medicine received $305 million in external research funding from the National Institutes of Health in 2014. NYU was granted 90 patents in 2014, the 19th most of any institution in the world. NYU owns the fastest supercomputer in New York City. , NYU hardware researchers and their collaborators enjoy the largest outside funding level for hardware security of any institution in the United States, including grants from the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Office of Naval Research, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the United States Army Research Laboratory, the Air Force Research Laboratory, the Semiconductor Research Corporation, and companies including Boeing, Microsoft, and Google.

Nationally, NYU is ranked 14th in the Center for World University Rankings, 15th by Global Language Monitor, 19th by "QS World University Rankings", 22nd in the "Academic Ranking of World Universities", 24th by "Business Insider", and 30th by "U.S. News & World Report".

Globally, NYU is ranked 18th in the Center for World University Rankings, 17th in International Colleges and Universities, 29th in the "Academic Ranking of World Universities", 27th in the "Times Higher Education World University Rankings", and 46th in the "QS World University Rankings". Additionally, NYU is ranked 20th in the "Times Higher Education World University Rankings" Reputation Rankings.

"U.S. News & World Report" ranks NYU's graduate schools 6th for law, 6th for public policy, 9th for math (1st for applied math), 10th for Occupational therapy under Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, and Human Development, 10th for business, 11th for economics, 12th for political science, 12th for medical school research, 13th for education, 12th for nursing, 27th for physical therapy, 29th for computer science, 30th for psychology, and 45th for engineering.

Globally, NYU's social sciences are ranked 8th by the "Academic Ranking of World Universities", 15th by the "Times Higher Education World University Rankings", and 16th by the "QS World University Rankings". NYU is globally ranked 11th for psychology by the "QS World University Ranking". The Social Psychology Network ranks NYU 5th for industrial/organizational psychology, 14th for clinical psychology, and "U.S. News & World Report" ranks NYU 9th for social psychology and 9th for behavioral neuroscience.

"U.S. News & World Report" ranks the New York University School of Law 1st for tax law and 1st for international law. The publication also ranks The Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service 6th in public policy. The NYU Department of Philosophy is globally ranked 1st by "The Philosophical Gourmet Report" and the "QS World University Rankings". In "The Los Angeles Times", NYU Tisch School of Arts is ranked 1st for film by Ranker. NYU is ranked 1st for New Ivies by college resource guide Unigo. In 2006, NYU was named by Kaplan as one of the "New Ivies". The annual Global Employability Survey in The New York Times ranks NYU 11th nationally and 29th globally for employability. For four consecutive years NYU has been ranked as America's "#1 dream school" by the Princeton Review. NYU is consistently ranked as a "Top 10 Dream College" for both parents and students according to The Princeton Review. Alongside Stanford University, Harvard College, Princeton University, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, NYU is one of few universities to regularly appear in the top 10 list for both parents and students. NYU ranks 19th in the world based on the number of patents generated.

NYU ranked 7th among the "World's top 100 universities for producing millionaires", as compiled by "Times Higher Education World University Rankings". NYU ranked 5th globally among universities with the highest number of alumni worth $30 million or more, as compiled by ABC News. CNBC ranked NYU 4th globally among universities with the most billionaire graduates.

The Student Government Assembly (SGA) is the governing student body at NYU. The SGA has been involved in controversial debates on campus, including a campus-wide ban on the sale of Coca-Cola products in 2005, and the Graduate Student Organizing Committee unionization in 2001 and subsequent strike in 2005. This ban was lifted by the University Senate on February 5, 2009. SGA consists of 75 voting members from subsidiary student government organs including the Student Senators Council (SSC) and the Presidents Council, which are elected from their respective individual undergraduate and graduate colleges. 

In 2018, the structure of the universities student government was called into question by numerous students through school newspapers and social media pages calling for "sweeping changes to its byzantine structure." Advocates claimed the structure of SGA failed to represent all students, wasted university funds and operated in an undemocratic manner. Opponents claimed that advocates were merely motivated by legislation supporting the BDS movement that was likely to pass.

NYU has over 450 student clubs and organizations on campus. In addition to the sports teams, fraternities, sororities, and study clubs, there are many organizations on campus that focus on entertainment, arts, and culture. These organizations include various student media clubs: for instance, the daily student newspaper the "Washington Square News", the NYU Local daily blog, "The Plague" comedy magazine, ""Washington Square Local" web-based satire news source, and the literary journals "Washington Square Review" and "The Minetta Review", as well as student-run event producers such as the NYU Program Board and the Inter-Residence Hall Council. It also operates radio station WNYU-FM 89.1 with a diverse college radio format, transmitting to the entire New York metropolitan area from the original campus, and via booster station WNYU-FM1 which fills in the signal in lower Manhattan from atop one of the Silver Towers, next to the football field at the Washington Square campus.

The New York University Mock Trial team is consistently ranked as one of the best collegiate mock trial teams in the country. NYU has qualified for the National Championship Tournament for 10 consecutive seasons and placed in the top 10 during each of those years. In the 2009–2010 season, NYU won the 26th National Championship Tournament in Memphis over rival Harvard. The following season, they qualified for the final round once more only to be the runners-up to UCLA. In the American Mock Trial Association's 2015–2016 power rankings, NYU ranks third, behind Harvard and Yale.

During the University Heights era, an apparent rift evolved with some organizations distancing themselves from students from the downtown schools. The exclusive Philomathean Society operated from 1832 to 1888 (formally giving way in 1907 and reconstituted into the Andiron Club). Included among the Andiron's regulations was "Rule No.11: Have no relations save the most casual and informal kind with the downtown schools". The Eucleian Society, rival to the Philomathean Society, was founded in 1832. The Knights of the Lamp was a social organization founded in 1914 at the School of Commerce. This organization met every full moon and had a glowworm as its mascot. The Red Dragon Society, founded in 1898, is thought to be the most selective society at NYU. In addition, NYU's first yearbook was formed by fraternities and "secret societies" at the university.

NYU has traditions which have persisted across campuses. Since the beginning of the 20th century initiation ceremonies have welcomed incoming NYU freshmen. At the Bronx University Heights Campus, seniors used to grab unsuspecting freshmen, take them to a horse-watering trough, and then dunk them head-first into what was known colloquially as "the Fountain of Knowledge". This underground initiation took place until the 1970s. Today freshmen take part in university-sponsored activities during what is called "Welcome Week". In addition, throughout the year the university traditionally holds Apple Fest (an apple-themed country fest that began at the University Heights campus), the Violet Ball (a dance in the atrium of Bobst Library), Strawberry Fest (featuring New York City's longest Strawberry Shortcake), and the semi-annual midnight breakfast where Student Affairs administrators serve free breakfast to students before finals.

Students publish a campus comedy magazine, "The Plague". Like many college humor magazines, this often pokes fun at popular culture as well as campus life and the idiosyncrasies of New York University. "The Plague" was founded in 1978 by Howard Ostrowsky along with Amy Burns, John Rawlins, Joe Pinto and Dan Fiorella, and is currently published once per semester. It is not NYU's first humor magazine, as "The Medley" was a humor magazine published by the Eucleian Society from 1913 to 1950.

Some of the first fraternities in the country were formed at NYU. Greek life first formed on the NYU campus in 1837 when Psi Upsilon chartered its Delta Chapter. The first fraternities at NYU were social ones. With their athletic, professional, intellectual, and service activities, later groups sought to attract students who also formed other groups. Since then, Greek letter organizations have proliferated to include 25 social fraternities and sororities. , approximately 13% of NYU students are members of fraternities or sororities.

Four governing boards oversee Greek life at the university. The Interfraternity Council (IFC) has jurisdiction over all twelve recognized fraternities on campus. Eight sororities are under the jurisdiction of the Panhellenic Council (PhC), which features seven national sororities (ΔΦΕ, ΑΕΦ, ΑΣΤ, ΠΒΦ, ΚΚΓ, ΖΤΑ, ΔΓ) and two local sororities (ΑΦΖ and ΘΦΒ). Five multicultural organizations maintain membership in the Multicultural Greek Council (MGC), including two fraternities and three sororities. All three of the aforementioned boards are managed under the auspices of the Inter-Greek Council.

Greek organizations have historical significance at NYU. Delta Phi Epsilon, Zeta Psi, Alpha Epsilon Pi, Tau Delta Phi, Alpha Kappa Psi and Delta Sigma Pi were founded at NYU. Zeta Psi Fraternity of North America was chartered in 1847, Delta Sigma Pi in 1907, Alpha Epsilon Pi in 1913, and Alpha Phi Omega in 1938. Delta Phi Epsilon was founded in 1917. The NYU Gamma chapter of Delta Phi, founded in 1841, is the longest continuously active fraternity chapter in the world, having never gone inactive since its establishment. Delta Phi is also the oldest continuously active fraternity in the United States, being the only organization in the original Union Triad to remain active since its institute. The NYU Gamma chapter of Zeta Beta Tau is the oldest active ΖΒΤ chapter in the country.

NYU does not have an ROTC program on campus. However, NYU students may participate in the U.S. Army ROTC program through NYC Army ROTC, headquartered at Fordham University.

NYU's sports teams are referred to as the NYU Violets, the colors being the trademarked hue "NYU Violet" and white. Since 1981, the school mascot has been a bobcat, whose origin can be traced back to the abbreviation then being used by the Bobst Library computerized catalog—short: Bobcat. NYU's sports teams include baseball, men's and women's varsity basketball, cross country, fencing, golf, soccer, softball, swimming and diving, tennis, track and field, volleyball, and wrestling. Most of NYU's sports teams participate in the NCAA's Division III and the University Athletic Association, while fencing and ice hockey participate in Division I. While NYU has had All-American football players, the school has not had a varsity football team since 1952.

NYU students also compete in club and intramural sports, including badminton, baseball, basketball, crew, cycling, equestrianism, ice hockey, lacrosse, martial arts, rugby, softball, squash, tennis, triathlon, and ultimate. The Palladium Athletic Facility serves as the home base of NYU's Varsity and Club intercollegiate athletic teams, while NYU's 404 and Brooklyn athletic facilities offer additional space for the NYU fitness community. Many of NYU's varsity teams play their games at various facilities and fields throughout Manhattan because of the scarcity of space for playing fields near campus. NYU is currently in the process of building a new billion dollar flagship athletic facility known as 181 Mercer Street. When complete, the new home of NYU Athletics will host a six-lane swimming pool, four full basketball courts, a complete in-door running track and other sports related offerings.

NYU has 470,000 living alumni . At least 37 Nobel Prize winners are affiliated with NYU. NYU is associated with a great number of important inventions and discoveries. For example, cardiac defibrillator and artificial cardiac pacemaker (Barouh Berkovits), closed-chest cardiac defibrillator (William B. Kouwenhoven), laser (Gordon Gould), atom bomb (Frederick Reines), polio vaccine (Albert Sabin), RFID (Mario Cardullo), telephone handset (Robert G. Brown), wireless microphone (Hung-Chang Lin), first digital image scanner (Russell A. Kirsch), television (Benjamin Adler), light beer (Joseph Owades), non-stick cookware (John Gilbert), black hole thermodynamics (Jacob Bekenstein), polymer science (Herman Francis Mark), microwave (Ernst Weber), X-ray crystallography (Paul Peter Ewald), barcode (Jerome Swartz), structure of the DNA (Francis Crick), tau lepton (Martin Lewis Perl), processes for creating food coloring, decaffeination and sugar substitute (Torunn Atteraas Garin), processes for the mass production of penicillin (Jasper H. Kane), X-ray generator and rotational radiation therapy (John G. Trump), nuclear reactor and hydrogen bomb (John Archibald Wheeler), and contact lenses (Norman Gaylord), among many others. Alumnus Fred Waller who invented Cinerama and the Waller Gunnery Trainer, also obtained the first patent for a water ski. The first patents for touch screen cash machine (Richard J. Orford), and zoom lens (Leonard Bergstein), were also obtained by NYU alumni.

Some of the most prolific inventors in American history are NYU alumni, for example Jerome H. Lemelson whose 605 patents involved the cordless telephone, fax machine, videocassette recorder and camcorder, among others; Samuel Ruben whose inventions include electric battery; James Wood who invented cable-lift elevator, fabricated the steel cables for the Brooklyn Bridge and contributed to the development of lockmaking, submarine, electric generator, electric motor, transformer and the design of the refrigerator; and Albert Macovski whose innovations include the single-tube color camera and real-time phased array imaging for ultrasound. NYU is the birthplace of the tractor beam and 5G. Before and during World War II, NYU's Tandon School of Engineering worked on problems whose solution led to the development of radar, and later broke ground in electromagnetic theory, electronics in general, and solved re-entry problems of the manned space capsules, as well as helped develop and design the NASDAQ Automated Quote System and trading floors. Developer of the early telephone systems in the United States Bancroft Gherardi Jr., developer of the submarine communications facilities Jack M. Sipress, inventor of Italy's first computer Mario Tchou, designer of the Panama Canal locks Henry C. Goldmark, designer of the Pentagon Hugh John Casey, designer of the Apollo Lunar Module Thomas J. Kelly, as well as the designer of virtually every major bridge in New York City from the George Washington to the Verrazano, Leopold Just, are also NYU alumni.

Many of the world's most renowned companies, such as IBM (Charles Ranlett Flint), Twitter (Jack Dorsey), Bloomberg L.P. (Charles Zegar), Jacobs Engineering Group (Joseph J. Jacobs), Hudson Group (Robert B. Cohen), MTV (Tom Freston), Barnes & Noble (Leonard Riggio), Northrop Grumman (William T. Schwendler), Automatic Data Processing (Henry Taub), Duracell (Samuel Ruben), Bugle Boy (William C. W. Mow), Virgin Mobile USA (Dan Schulman), among many others, were founded or co-founded by NYU alumni. Likewise, many of the world's most famous companies were either owned or led by NYU alumni. For example, Lockheed Martin (Robert J. Stevens), Xerox (Ursula Burns), Yahoo! (Alfred Amoroso), TPV Technology (Jason Hsuan), 20th Century Fox (Marvin Davis), BAE Systems Inc (Mark Ronald), AECOM (John Dionisio), Pfizer (John Elmer McKeen), Ingersoll Rand (Herbert L. Henkel), General Motors (Alfred P. Sloan), Sears (Arthur C. Martinez), The New York Times (Spencer Trask), Stanley Black & Decker (John Trani), American International Group (Harvey Golub), American Express (Edward P. Gilligan), Qwest (Joseph Nacchio), Chase Bank (Walter V. Shipley), CBS (Laurence Alan Tisch), Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (Charles A. Heimbold, Jr.), Citigroup (Robert I. Lipp), Morgan Stanley (Robert A. Kindler), Marvel Entertainment (John Turitzin), ConocoPhillips (John Carrig), Deloitte (Barry Salzberg), Sony Pictures Entertainment (Peter Guber), GQ (Steven Florio), Viacom (Thomas E. Dooley), Liberty Media (John C. Malone), Verizon (Lawrence Babbio Jr.) and Chemtura (Vincent A. Calarco). Pioneer of Silicon Valley, Eugene Kleiner, and World Trade Center site owner, Larry Silverstein, are also alumni of NYU.

The following are examples of some of the many notable members of some of the many notable graduating classes: class of 1941, which graduated three later Nobel Prize laureates (Julius Axelrod, Gertrude B. Elion and Clifford Shull), Olympic Gold Medalist John Woodruff, sportscaster Howard Cosell, former dean of Duke University's School of Engineering Walter J. Seeley and sociologist Morris Janowitz; 1951 included professor emeritus at MIT and former DARPA director Jack Ruina, former chair of the Computer Science Department at University of California, Berkeley Martin H. Graham and Cathleen Synge Morawetz, first woman recipient of National Medal of Science; 1957 included Pulitzer Prize winning author Frank McCourt, former dean of Northwestern University's School of Engineering and Applied Science Bruno A. Boley and former president of Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Josef Singer; 1964 included former Chief Engineer of NASA Johnson Space Center Jay Greene, Turing Award winner Judea Pearl, former Cooper Union Engineering School Dean and the first female dean of an engineering school in the United States Eleanor K. Baum, former chair of the Division of Engineering and Applied Science at California Institute of Technology K. Mani Chandy, former Vice Provost and Dean of Research at Stanford University Arthur Bienenstock, former head of the Nuclear Science and Engineering Department at Massachusetts Institute of Technology Jeffrey P. Freidberg, former scientist of the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the first space tourist to fund his own trip into space Dennis Tito, former Commissioner of the National Football League (NFL) Paul Tagliabue, and film director Martin Scorsese; 1974 included astronaut and Senior Advisor for Engineering Development at NASA Langley Research Center Charles Camarda, chairman of the chemical engineering department at Johns Hopkins University Jerome Gavis, United States Navy Captain and astronaut Lee Morin and astronaut and NASA Space Flight Medalist Paolo Nespoli; and 1977 included: former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan; IRS Commissioner Mark Everson; former INSEAD Dean Gabriel Hawawini; Pulitzer, Oscar and Tony Award winner John Patrick Shanley; NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman; NASDAQ CEO Robert Greifeld; Ma Ying-jeou president of Taiwan; Guillermo Endara president of Panama, Clive Davis music industry executive, and Cathy Minehan, Federal Reserve Chairman Boston.

NYU has been portrayed in books, movies and television shows, and the campus of NYU has been the backdrop for a number of different books and movies.




</doc>
<doc id="8015635" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8015635" title="Give It All">
Give It All

"Give It All" is a song by American rock band Rise Against. It was originally recorded for the 2004 compilation album "Rock Against Bush, Vol. 1", while a slightly altered version appeared on the band's third studio album "Siren Song of the Counter Culture" later that year. It is a hardcore punk song, with lyrics that are about "being a punk rocker in today's world," according to lead vocalist Tim McIlrath. It was released as "Siren Song of the Counter Culture" first single in October 2004.

Despite receiving minimal coverage from music critics who reviewed "Siren Song of the Counter Culture", "Give It All" has become one of Rise Against's most widely recognized songs, and is credited as the band's breakthrough single. It has been featured on multiple lists of the best Rise Against songs, and peaked at number thirty-seven on the "Billboard" Alternative Songs chart. The accompanying music video has the band perform in a crowded subway car, while other people travel throughout the city of Chicago vandalizing and defacing billboards and posters, with the intention of raising social and political awareness.

After spending several years as an underground band, in which they released two albums with Fat Wreck Chords, Rise Against signed a recording contract with Geffen Records in 2003. This deal was criticized by some fans, who felt that a major record label would hinder the band's creative process and negatively impact their music. The first song the band released following their signing to Geffen was "Give It All", which was featured on the 2004 compilation album "Rock Against Bush, Vol. 1". The band liked the song, and decided to record a slightly altered version for their third studio album "Siren Song of the Counter Culture" later that year.

"Give It All" is a short hardcore punk track, with a fast pace and a slow bridge, and in the key of A major (although the verses, pre-chorus, and bridge start with F-sharp minor). Lead vocalist Tim McIlrath commented that the song is "kind of a punk rock anthem about being a punk rocker in today’s world; like what being a human being in today’s world is like." Scott Heisel of Punknews.org felt that the "Rock Against Bush, Vol. 1" version maintained the band's distinctive sound, and signing to a major record label had not changed the band's music. Davey Boy of Sputnikmusic noted that the "Siren Song of the Counter Culture" version reminded him of a harder version of songs by the Offspring, and that it was controlled enough to appeal to casual rock fans.

"Give It All" began playing on radio stations in October 2004, as the first single from "Siren Song of the Counter Culture". Commercially, "Give It All" became the first Rise Against song to reach the "Billboard" Modern Rock Tracks chart, peaking at number thirty-seven on January 1, 2005. The song was also on the soundtrack of Need for Speed Underground 2.

Upon the release of "Siren Song of the Counter Culture", "Give It All" received almost no coverage from music critics who reviewed the album, aside from Justin Donnelly of "Blistering", who described the piece as "a little generic and forgettable". Despite the lack of coverage, it has become one of the band's most widely recognized songs, and John J. Moser of "The Morning Call" credits it as Rise Against's breakthrough single. Dave Kim of WGRD-FM listed "Give It All" as the fourth best Rise Against song, while WatchMojo.com listed it as the band's best song. WatchMojo.com also ranked it as number ten on their list of the ten decade defining hard rock and heavy metal songs of the 2000s.

The accompanying music video was directed by James Cox, and filmed in Chicago. In the video, Rise Against performs inside a subway car on the Chicago "L". Passengers begin boarding the car in large quantities, and engage in a mosh pit, while the band continues to perform. Simultaneously, other passengers leave the car and travel throughout the city at night, vandalizing and defacing billboards and posters with the intention of raising social and political awareness. In the morning, the vandals change into suits, and go to work.

The band was given a small budget to film the music video. McIlrath remarked that the band did not want to make a video that felt "really cheesy or overproduced", and instead wanted to incorporate the song's message. The night before filming began, the band performed at a local venue, and asked the audience members to star in the video; several audience members came the following day. The subway car featured in the video continued to make its regular stops, while the band and the actors performed. During one scene in the video, the vandals sneak into the local zoo, and deface a tiger cage with a sticker that says "I've spent my entire life trapped in a cage". The zoo had not given permission for the band to film the tiger cage, out of fear it would damage their reputation. The filming crew chose to instead sneak into the zoo at night to film the scene.

Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Siren Song of the Counter Culture".


Additional personnel


</doc>
<doc id="8018330" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8018330" title="Prayer of the Refugee">
Prayer of the Refugee

"Prayer of the Refugee" is a song by American rock band Rise Against, featured on their fourth studio album "The Sufferer & the Witness" (2006). The lyrics were written by lead vocalist Tim McIlrath, and deal with the themes of forced displacement and the societal issues surrounding refugees. The song uses a contrasting verse-chorus form, with slow and melancholic verses against fast-paced and chaotic choruses. It was released as "The Sufferer & the Witness" second single on December 6, 2006.

Commercially, "Prayer of the Refugee" reached number seven on the Alternative Songs chart, and was later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. Critics praised the contrasting verse-chorus format, as well as the simple yet effective lyrics. In the accompanying music video, the band performs in a retail store, with intermittent shots of foreign workers making the store products. The band wanted the video to showcase how conventional business models allow for various human rights violations.

The lyrics for "Prayer of the Refugee" were written by lead vocalist Tim McIlrath, while the music was collectively written by the band. Bill Stevenson and Jason Livermore engineered and produced the song, while Chris Lord-Alge served as the audio mixer. It was recorded at The Blasting Room in Fort Collins, Colorado, and mastered by Ted Jensen.

"Prayer of the Refugee" is three minutes and nineteen seconds, and combines elements of hardcore punk and melodic hardcore. According to the song's sheet music, the composition is written in the time signature of common time, with a fast tempo of 144 beats per minute. It follows verse-chorus form, and is composed in the key E♭ minor, with a melody that spans a tonal range of A♭ to C♭. The song is about forced displacement, and the societal issues surrounding refugees. The lyrics begin from the perspective of a refugee telling their child of their life before displacement, backed by "plaintive guitars and weary singing". The slow opening directly contrasts the chorus, which "jarringly explode[s]" into a fast-paced rhythm section and chaotic vocals. After a second verse-chorus section, the bridge begins, which is followed by a guitar solo by McIlrath. The songs concludes with a final chorus section.

"Prayer of the Refugee" began playing on radio stations in November 2006. The following month, it was released as the second single from the band's fourth studio album, "The Sufferer and the Witness". Commercially, "Prayer of the Refugee" reached number seven on the Alternative Songs chart in the United States. It was certified platinum in July 2013 by the Recording Industry Association of America, denoting shipments of 1,000,000 copies.

Several critics have highlighted the contrasting verse and chorus format. Drew Beringer of AbsolutePunk felt that the contrast allows the song to slowly build up, "only to kick you in the gut with the bombastic chorus". AllMusic's Corey Apar and "PopMatters" Will Rausch had similar opinions, as they both described the chorus as "empowering". Writing for Sputnikmusic, Davey Boy praised the simple yet effective lyrics, and compared "Prayer of the Refugee" to one of Rise Against's previous songs, "Life Less Frightening". Eric Clark of "The Gazette" called "Prayer of the Refugee" "The Sufferer & The Witness" "crowning achievement".

The accompanying music video was directed by Tony Petrossian. In the video, Rise Against performs inside a retail store. The camera intermittently zooms in on products, such as shoes and toy cars, before zooming out to foreign workers and children making the products. Near the end of the video, the workers place Made in USA stickers on packaged boxes, while the band members destroys items in the store. The video ends with a shot of the broken and fallen products, which spell out "fair trade".

Petrossian originally thought to write a video treatment about a refugee trying to enter the United States, but knew that the band was going to receive several treatments with the same idea. Instead, he decided to portray the plight of the refugee from a different angle. The band members unanimously agreed upon Petrossian's treatment. The video deals various themes, including consumerism, fair trade, and sweatshops, and attempts showcase how conventional business models allow for various human rights violations.

Credits adapted from the liner notes of "The Sufferer & the Witness".


Additional personnel


</doc>
<doc id="8078887" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8078887" title="Roza Shanina">
Roza Shanina

Roza Georgiyevna Shanina (, ; 3 April 1924 – 28 January 1945) was a Soviet sniper during World War II who was credited with fifty-nine confirmed kills, including twelve soldiers during the Battle of Vilnius. Shanina volunteered for the military after the death of her brother in 1941 and chose to be a marksman on the front line. Praised for her shooting accuracy, Shanina was capable of precisely hitting enemy personnel and making doublets (two target hits by two rounds fired in quick succession).

In 1944, a Canadian newspaper described Shanina as "the unseen terror of East Prussia". She became the first servicewoman of the 3rd Belorussian Front to receive the Order of Glory. Shanina was killed in action during the East Prussian Offensive while shielding the severely wounded commander of an artillery unit. Shanina's bravery received praise already during her lifetime, but conflicted with the Soviet policy of sparing snipers from heavy battles. Her combat diary was first published in 1965.

Roza Shanina was born on 3 April 1924 in the Russian village of Yedma in Arkhangelsk Oblast to Anna Alexeyevna Shanina, a kolkhoz milkmaid, and Georgiy (Yegor) Mikhailovich Shanin, a logger who had been disabled by a wound received during World War I. Roza was reportedly named after the Marxist revolutionary Rosa Luxemburg and had six siblings: one sister Yuliya and five brothers: Mikhail, Fyodor, Sergei, Pavel and Marat. The Shanins also raised three orphans. Roza was above average height, with light brown hair and blue eyes, and spoke in a Northern Russian dialect. After finishing four classes of elementary school in Yedma, Shanina continued her education in the village of Bereznik. As there was no school transport at the time, when she was in grades five through seven Roza had to walk to Bereznik to attend middle school. On Saturdays, Shanina again went to Bereznik to take care of her ill aunt Agnia Borisova.

At the age of fourteen, Shanina, against her parents' wishes, walked across the taiga to the rail station and travelled to Arkhangelsk to study at the college there (the trek was later attested by Shanina's school teacher Alexander Makaryin). Shanina left home with little money and almost no possessions; and before moving to the college dormitory she lived with her elder brother Fyodor. Later in her combat diary Shanina would recall Arkhangelsk's stadium Dinamo, and the cinemas, Ars and Pobeda. Shanina's friend Anna Samsonova remembered that Roza sometimes returned from her friends in Ustyansky District to her college dormitory between 2:00 and 3:00 am. As the doors were locked by that time, the other students tied several bedsheets together to help Roza climb into her room. In 1938, Shanina became a member of the Soviet youth movement Komsomol.

Two years later, Soviet secondary education institutes introduced tuition fees, and the scholarship fund was cut. Shanina received little financial support from home and on 11 September 1941, she took a job in kindergarten No. 2 (lately known as Beryozka) in Arkhangelsk, with which she was offered a free apartment. She studied in the evenings and worked in the kindergarten during the daytime. The children liked Shanina and their parents appreciated her. Shanina graduated from college in the 1941–42 academic year, when the Soviet Union was in the grip of World War II.

Following the German invasion of the Soviet Union, Arkhangelsk was bombed by the "Luftwaffe", and Shanina and other townspeople were involved in firefighting and mounted voluntary vigils on rooftops to protect the kindergarten. Shanina's two elder brothers had volunteered for the military. In December 1941, a death notification was received for her 19-year-old brother Mikhail, who had died during the Siege of Leningrad. In response, Shanina went to the military commissariat to ask for permission to serve. Two more of Shanina's brothers died in the war. At that time the Soviet Union had begun deploying female snipers because they had flexible limbs, and it was believed that they were patient, careful and cunning. In February 1942, Soviet women between the ages of 16 and 45 became eligible for the military draft, but Shanina was not drafted that month, as the local military commissariat wanted to spare her from the draft. She first learned to shoot at a shooting range. On 22 June 1943, while still living in the dormitory, Shanina was accepted into the Vsevobuch program for universal military training. After Shanina's several applications, the military commissariat finally allowed her to enroll in the Central Women’s Sniper Training School, where she met Aleksandra "Sasha" Yekimova and Kaleriya "Kalya" Petrova, who became her closest friends, with Shanina calling them "the vagrant three". Honed to a fine point, Shanina scored highly in training and graduated from the academy with honours. She was asked to stay as an instructor there, but refused due to a call of duty. In 1941–1945 a total of 2,484 Soviet female snipers were deployed for the war and their combined tally of kills is estimated to be at least 11,280.

After the momentous victory in the Battle of Stalingrad, the Soviets mounted nationwide counter-offensives and Shanina on 2 April 1944 joined the 184th Rifle Division, where a separate female sniper platoon had been formed. Shanina was appointed a commander of that platoon. Three days later, southeast of Vitebsk, Shanina killed her first German soldier. In Shanina's own words, recorded by an anonymous author, her legs gave way after that first encounter and she slid down into the trench, saying, "I've killed a man." Concerned, the other women ran up saying, "That was a fascist you finished off!" Seven months later, Shanina wrote in her diary that she was now killing the enemy in cold blood and saw the meaning of her life in her actions. She wrote that if she had to do everything over again, she would still strive to enter the sniper academy and go to the front again.

For her actions in the battle for the village of Kozyi Gory (Smolensk Oblast), Shanina was awarded her first military decoration, the Order of Glory 3rd Class, on 18 April 1944. She became the first servicewoman of the 3rd Belorussian Front to receive that order. According to the report of Major Degtyarev (the commander of the 1138th Rifle Regiment), she received the award for the corresponding commendation list, between 6 and 11 April Shanina killed 13 enemy soldiers while subjected to artillery and machine gun fire. By May 1944, her sniper tally increased to 17 confirmed enemy kills, and Shanina was praised as a precise and brave soldier. The same year, on 9 June, Shanina's portrait was featured on the front page of the Soviet newspaper "Unichtozhim Vraga".

When Operation Bagration commenced in the Vitebsk region on 22 June 1944, it was decided that female snipers would be withdrawn. They voluntarily continued to support the advancing infantry anyway, and despite the Soviet policy of sparing snipers, Shanina asked to be sent to the front line. Although her request was refused, she went anyway. Shanina was later sanctioned for going to the front line without permission, but did not face a court martial. She wanted to be attached to a battalion or a reconnaissance company, turning to the commander of the 5th Army, Nikolai Krylov. Shanina also wrote twice to Joseph Stalin with the same request.

From 26 to 28 June 1944, Shanina participated in the elimination of the encircled German troops near Vitebsk during the Vitebsk–Orsha Offensive. As the Soviet army advanced further westward, from 8 to 13 July of the same year, Shanina and her sisters-in-arms took part in the battle for Vilnius, which had been under German occupation since 24 June 1941. The Germans were finally driven out from Vilnius on 13 July 1944. During the Soviet summer offensives of that year Shanina managed to capture three Germans.

From her time at the military academy, Shanina became known for her ability to score doublets (two target hits made in quick succession). During one period she crawled through a muddy communications trench each day at dawn to a specially camouflaged pit which overlooked German-controlled territory. She wrote, "the unconditional requirementto outwit the enemy and kill himbecame an irrevocable law of my hunt". Shanina successfully used counter-sniper tactics against a German cuckoo sniper hidden in a tree, by waiting until dusk when the space between the tree branches would be backlit by sunlight and the sniper's nest became visible. On one occasion, Shanina also made use of selective fire from a submachine gun.

Shanina enjoyed writing and would often send letters to her home village and to her friends in Arkhangelsk. She started writing a combat diary; although diaries were strictly prohibited in the Soviet military, there were some furtive exceptions, such as "The Front Diary" of Izrael Kukuyev and "The Chronicle of War" of Muzagit Hayrutdinov. To preserve military secrecy, Shanina termed the killed and wounded "blacks" and "reds" respectively in her diary. Shanina kept the diary from 6 October 1944 to 24 January 1945.

After Shanina's death, the diary, consisting of three thick notebooks, was kept by the war correspondent Pyotr Molchanov for twenty years in Kiev. An abridged version was published in the magazine "Yunost" in 1965, and the diary was transferred to the Regional Museum of Arkhangelsk Oblast. Several of Shanina's letters and some data from her sniper log have also been published.

In August 1944 advancing Soviet troops had reached the Soviet border with East Prussia and by 31 August of that year Shanina's battle count reached 42 kills. The following month the Šešupė River was crossed. Shanina's 184th Rifle Division became the first Soviet unit to enter East Prussia. At that time, two Canadian newspapers, the "Ottawa Citizen" and "Leader-Post", reported that according to an official dispatch from the Šešupė River front, Shanina killed five Germans in one day as she crouched in a sniper hideout. Later in September her sniper tally had reached 46 kills, of which 15 were made on German soil and seven during an offensive. On 17 September, "Unichtozhim Vraga" credited Shanina with 51 hits. In the third quarter of 1944, Shanina was given a short furlough and visited Arkhangelsk. She returned to the front on 17 October for one day, and later received an honourable certificate from the Central Committee of Komsomol. On 16 September 1944, Shanina was awarded her second military distinction, the Order of Glory 2nd Class for intrepidity and bravery displayed in various battles against the Germans in that year.

On 26 October 1944 Shanina became eligible for the Order of Glory 1st Class for her actions in a battle near Schlossberg (now Dobrovolsk), but ultimately received the Medal for Courage instead. She was among the first female snipers to receive the Medal for Courage. Shanina was awarded the medal on 27 December for the gallant posture displayed during a German counter-offensive on 26 October. There Shanina fought together with Captain Igor Aseyev, a Hero of the Soviet Union, and witnessed his death on 26 October. Shanina, who served as an assistant platoon commander, was ordered to commit the female snipers to combat. Schlossberg was finally retaken from Germans by the troops of the 3rd Belorussian Front on 16 January 1945 during the Insterburg–Königsberg Operation.

On 12 December 1944, an enemy sniper shot Shanina in her right shoulder. She wrote in her diary that she had not felt the pain, "the shoulder was just scalded with something hot." Although the injury, which Shanina described as "two small holes", seemed minor to her, she needed an operation and was incapacitated for several days. She reported in her diary that the previous day she had a prophetic dream in which she was wounded in exactly the same place.

On 8 January 1945 Nikolai Krylov formally allowed Shanina to participate in front-line combat, albeit with great reluctance: previously Shanina was denied that permission by the commander of the 184th Rifle Division and the military council of the 5th Army as well. Five days later, the Soviets launched the East Prussian Offensive, which prompted heavy fighting in East Prussia. By 15 January, travelling with divisional logistics, Shanina reached the East Prussian town of Eydtkuhnen (now Chernyshevskoye), where she used white military camouflage. Several days later, she experienced friendly fire from a Katyusha rocket launcher and wrote in her diary, "Now I understand why the Germans are so afraid of Katyushas. What a fire!" At the border of East Prussia, Shanina killed 26 enemy soldiers. The last unit she served in was the 144th Rifle Division. According to the online Book of Memory of Arkhangelsk Oblast, Shanina served in the 205th Special Motorized Rifle Battalion of that division. Shanina had hoped to go to university after the war, or if that was not possible, to raise orphans.

In the course of her tour of duty Shanina was mentioned in despatches several times. Her final sniper tally reached fifty-nine confirmed kills (fifty-four, according to other sources), including twelve kills during the Battle of Vilnius, with sixty-two enemies knocked out of action. Domestically her achievements were acknowledged particularly by the war correspondent Ilya Ehrenburg and in the newspaper "Krasnaya Zvezda", which said that Shanina was one of the best snipers in her unit and that even veteran soldiers were inferior to her in shooting accuracy. Shanina's exploits were also reported in the Western press, particularly in Canadian newspapers, where she was called "the unseen terror of East Prussia". She paid no special attention to the achieved renown, and once wrote that she had been overrated. On 16 January 1945 Shanina wrote in her combat diary: "What I've actually done? No more than I have to as a Soviet person, having stood up to defend the motherland." She also wrote, "The essence of my happiness is fighting for the happiness of others. It's strange, why is it that in grammar, the word "happiness" can only be singular? That is counter to its meaning, after all. ... If it turns necessary to die for the common happiness, then I'm braced to."

In the face of the East Prussian Offensive, the Germans tried to strengthen the localities they controlled against great odds. In a diary entry dated 16 January 1945, Shanina wrote that despite her wish to be in a safer place, some unknown force was drawing her to the front line. In the same entry she wrote that she had no fear and that she had even agreed to go "to a melee combat." The next day, Shanina wrote in a letter that she might be on the verge of being killed because her battalion had lost 72 out of 78 people. Her last diary entry reports that German fire had become so intense that the Soviet troops, including herself, had sheltered inside self-propelled guns. On 27 January Shanina was severely injured while shielding a wounded artillery officer. She was found by two soldiers disemboweled, with her chest torn open by a shell fragment. Despite attempts to save her, Shanina died the following day near the Richau estate (later a Soviet settlement of Telmanovka), southeast of the East Prussian village of Ilmsdorf (). Nurse Yekaterina Radkina remembered Shanina telling her that she regretted having done so little. By the day of Shanina's death the Soviets had overtaken several major East Prussian localities, including Tilsit, Insterburg and Pillau, and approached Königsberg. Recalling the moment Shanina's mother received notification of her daughter's death, her brother Marat wrote: "I clearly remembered mother's eyes. They weren't teary anymore. ... 'That's all, that's all'—she repeated". Shanina was buried under a spreading pear tree on the shore of the Alle River—now called the Lava— and was later reinterred in the settlement of Znamensk, Kaliningrad Oblast.

In 1964–65 a renewed interest in Shanina arose in the Soviet press, largely due to the publication of her diary. The newspaper "Severny Komsomolets" asked Shanina's contemporaries to write what they knew about her. Streets in Arkhangelsk, Shangaly and Stroyevskoye were named after her, and the village of Yedma has a museum dedicated to Shanina. The local school where she studied in 1931–35 has a commemorative plate. In Arkhangelsk, regular shooting competitions were organized among members of the paramilitary DOSAAF sport organisation for the Roza Shanina Prize, while Novodvinsk organized an open shooting sports championship in her memory. The village of Malinovka in Ustyansky District started to hold annual cross-country ski races for the Roza Shanina Prize.

In 1985, the Council of Veterans of the Russian Central Women Sniper Academy unsuccessfully requested the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union to posthumously bestow the Order of Glory 1st Class on Shanina (which would have made her a Full Cavalier of that order). In the same year, Russian author Nikolai Zhuravlyov published the book "Posle boya vernulas" ("Returned After Battle"). Its title refers to Shanina's words, "I will return after the battle," which she uttered after receiving a note from her battalion commander urging her to return to the rear immediately. Verses have been composed about Shanina, such as those by writer Nikolai Nabitovich. A small memorial stele dedicated to Shanina (part of a three-piece monument) was erected in Bogdanovsky settlement, Ustyansky District.

In 2000, Shanina's name appeared on the war memorial stone of the Siberian State Technological University, although there is no evidence she had any affiliation with it during her life. Russian author Viktor Logvinov controversially wrote in the 1970s that Shanina had studied in the Siberian Forestry Institute and that she was the daughter of an "old Krasnoyarsk communist". The claim was continued by Krasnoyarsk publications in later years, particularly in 2005. In 2013, a wall of memory, featuring graffiti portraits of six Russian war honorees, including Roza Shanina, was opened in Arkhangelsk.

The war correspondent Pyotr Molchanov, who had frequently met Shanina at the front, described her as a person of unusual will with a genuine, bright nature. Shanina described herself as "boundlessly and recklessly talky" during her college years. She typified her own character as like that of the Romantic poet, painter and writer Mikhail Lermontov, deciding, like him, to act as she saw fit. Shanina dressed modestly and liked to play volleyball. According to Shanina's sister-in-arms Lidiya Vdovina, Roza used to sing her favourite war song "Oy tumany moi, rastumany" ("O My Mists") each time she cleaned her weapon. Shanina had a straightforward character and valued courage and the absence of egotism in people. She once told a story when "about half a hundred frenzied fascists with wild cries" attacked a trench accommodating twelve female snipers, including Shanina: "Some fell from our well-aimed bullets, some we finished with our bayonets, grenades, shovels, and some we took prisoners, having restrained their arms."

Shanina's personal life was thwarted by war. On 10 October 1944, she wrote in her diary, "I can't accept that Misha Panarin doesn't live anymore. What a good guy! [He] has been killed ... He loved me, I know, and so did I ... My heart is heavy, I'm twenty, but I have no close [male] friend". In November 1944, Shanina wrote that she "is flogging into her head that [she] loves" a man named Nikolai, although he "doesn't shine in upbringing and education". In the same entry she wrote that she did not think about marriage because "it's not the time now". She later wrote that she "had it out" with Nikolai and "wrote him a note in the sense of 'but I'm given to the one and will love no other one". Ultimately in her last diary record, filled with grim tones, Shanina wrote that she "cannot find a solace" now and is "of no use to anyone".





</doc>
<doc id="8106329" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8106329" title="Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad">
Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad

The Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad , familiarly known as the "Ma and Pa", was an American short-line railroad between York and Hanover, Pennsylvania, formerly operating passenger and freight trains on its original line between York and Baltimore, Maryland, from 1901 until the 1950s. The Ma and Pa was popular with railfans in the 1930s and 1940s for its antique equipment and curving, picturesque right-of-way through the hills of rural Maryland and Pennsylvania. Reflecting its origin as the unintended product of the merger of two 19th-century narrow gauge railways, the meandering Ma and Pa line took to connect Baltimore and York, although the two cities are only apart in a straight line.

Passenger service was discontinued on August 31, 1954, and the section from Baltimore to Whiteford, Maryland (just south of the Mason-Dixon line demarcating the Pennsylvania-Maryland border) was abandoned in June 1958. Most of the remaining original railroad line was abandoned by 1984. The Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad acquired a former Pennsylvania Railroad (PRR) branch line between York and Hanover in the 1980s, now operated by a successor corporation, York Railway.

The Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad was formed from two earlier 19th-century 3 ft (914 mm) narrow gauge railways: the Baltimore & Delta Railway, later the Baltimore & Lehigh Railway, and the York and Peach Bottom Railway, later the York Southern Railroad. Construction of the Baltimore & Delta Railway started in 1881, and passenger trains between Baltimore and Towson, Maryland began on April 17, 1882. Later that year the company was merged into the Maryland Central Railroad. The line was extended northward to Bel Air, Maryland on June 21, 1883, and the following January, the line was completed to Delta, Pennsylvania.

In Pennsylvania, the Peach Bottom Railway was incorporated in 1871. The railway's Middle Division laid narrow gauge track between York and Red Lion by August 1874 and completed its line southward to Delta in 1876. It went bankrupt in 1881 and was reorganized as the York and Peach Bottom Railway (Y&PB) in 1882. The Y&PB merged with the Maryland Central Railway (successor to the Maryland Central RR) in 1891, becoming the Baltimore and Lehigh, and the new company operated trains on the combined track between York and Baltimore.

Both railroads struggled with light freight traffic and financial difficulties in the 1890s. Because of their narrow gauge construction, the Baltimore & Lehigh Railway and York Southern Railroad could not interchange freight cars with other lines. The two companies finally converted to standard gauge between 1898–1900 and subsequently merged to form the Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad on February 12, 1901. The result was the circuitous, "Ma and Pa" route between Baltimore and York, compared to the competing Pennsylvania Railroad's more direct distance between the two cities on its Northern Central Railway division. The completed line had grades up to 2.3 percent and 55 sharp curves of (most mainline railroads seldom exceed six degrees, and even the former Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad's mainline through the Rocky Mountains does not exceed 12 degrees).

Following the merger, the Ma and Pa operated through passenger and freight trains between York and Baltimore, as well as local trains at each end of the line, hauling mail and express, slate, marble, anthracite coal, lumber, furniture, and agricultural products to market. Particularly on the Pennsylvania Division (Delta–York), slate from Delta and manufactured goods from Red Lion and York were mainstays of the railroad's outbound freight traffic in the early years. On the Maryland Division, inbound anthracite coal deliveries accounted for a significant volume of carloadings, along with milk from the many dairy farms in the area. One early morning train from Fallston boarded more than 1,100 gallons of milk daily and was dubbed the "Milky Way". The line was profitable and traffic volume was such that additional locomotives were necessary. The Ma and Pa acquired two 0-6-0 Baldwin switchers in 1913, #29 and #30 "(pictured)", called "jewels of engines, in some respects the most attractive the road had", by writer George Hilton in "The Ma & Pa – A History of the Maryland & Pennsylvania Railroad". The next year, three 2-8-0 "Consolidations" by Baldwin were added to the roster, providing more powerful locomotives for the Baltimore–York through freights. At its peak, the railroad had 16 locomotives and 160 pieces of rolling stock, with 573 employees.
With increasing competition from trucks and automobiles in the 1920s, passenger volume began to decline along with less-than-carload freight, such as milk from the many dairy farms along the Ma and Pa's pastoral route. The Ma and Pa substituted more economical, self-propelled gas-electric passenger cars for steam-powered passenger trains in 1927–1928. Carload freight volume increased in the 1920s, however, as more industries located along the line, and earnings were strong enough for the company to declare dividends in 1930 and 1931. The Ma and Pa's relative prosperity ended with the economic downturn during the Great Depression, which cut the railroad's gross revenues by half from 1932 to 1935.

In the mid-1930s, the Ma and Pa became an early favorite of railfans, attracted by its hilly, curving line through rural Maryland and Pennsylvania. The railroad offered several popular fan excursions pulled by its elderly steam locomotives.

Following the end of World War II, the Ma and Pa acquired four diesel locomotives for more economical operations, but traffic declined significantly. When the Ma and Pa's mail contract was cancelled by the U.S. postal service, the railroad discontinued all passenger service on August 31, 1954. One person on the last passenger train recalled that many riders came from as far away as Boston, Massachusetts, and Washington, D.C., to participate in the historic event, along with members of the National Railway Historical Society. The picturesque line's last steam engine dropped its fire for the final time on November 29, 1956.
The lack of traffic on the railroad's Baltimore–Whiteford Maryland Division in the 1950s was particularly acute. One of the last major shipments to occur was Indiana limestone for the construction of Baltimore's Cathedral of Mary Our Queen in 1956. The Baltimore–Whiteford segment in Maryland was finally abandoned altogether on June 11, 1958, leaving only the stone abutments where the tracks crossed York Road in Towson on a steel girder bridge. A local group of history buffs placed a bronze plaque on the west abutment in 1999, commemorating the departed railroad's place in Towson history.

In the 1960s, the Ma and Pa Railroad continued to solicit business along its line for its remaining Whiteford–York segment, almost entirely in Pennsylvania. In 1964, it added a siding long near Red Lion to serve a new cigar box factory. In 1971, the Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad was acquired by Emons Industries. Primarily hauling slate from a quarry at Delta, and furniture from a factory in Red Lion, the Ma and Pa's Pennsylvania Division continued in operation until June 14, 1978, when the line was further reduced to the York–Red Lion section. The Red Lion freight station was closed on November 1, 1980; when the Pennsylvania town's furniture manufacturer shuttered its doors in 1984, the Red Lion section of the railroad was also abandoned.
The Emons-controlled Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad acquired of a former PRR branch line between York and Hanover, Pennsylvania in the 1980s. In December 1999, Emons merged its M&P subsidiary with another area short-line, Yorkrail, forming the York Railway. In 2002, Genesee and Wyoming gained control of the York Railway, including the former M&P Railroad trackage between York–Hanover. The York Railway currently serves 40 online rail customers and connects with the Norfolk Southern and CSX railroads.

A small, fragment of the original railroad line still exists between Laurel and Muddy Creek Forks in York County, Pennsylvania, maintained by the Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad Preservation Society. Founded by enthusiasts and former employees in 1986, the group has restored the Muddy Creek Forks station and also has a small collection of rolling stock there. The preserved Red Lion station is now a museum operated by the Red Lion Area Historical Society. Another section of the Ma and Pa's old right-of-way was converted in 1998 to a rail trail in Harford County, Maryland. Now long, the Ma & Pa Heritage Trail through Bel Air is used for hiking and biking.

In Baltimore, near Pennsylvania Station, Ma and Pa track remnants and the old roundhouse, freight shed, and yard shed are still extant. The Baltimore Streetcar Museum now operates in this area.

In York County, the Muddy Creek Bridge, Delta Trestle Bridge, and Scott Creek Bridge-North were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1995.




</doc>
<doc id="8130865" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8130865" title="Taylor Swift (album)">
Taylor Swift (album)

Taylor Swift is the self-titled debut studio album by American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift, released on October 24, 2006, by Big Machine Records. Swift was 16 years old at the time of the album's release and wrote its songs during her freshman year of high school. Swift has writing credits on all of the album's songs, including those co-written with Liz Rose. Swift experimented with several producers, ultimately choosing Nathan Chapman, who had produced her demo album. Musically, the album is country music styled, and lyrically it speaks of romantic relationships, a couple of which Swift wrote from observing relationships before being in one. Lyrics also touch on Swift's personal struggles in high school.

Five singles were released from the album, all of which have been certified platinum by the RIAA. "Tim McGraw" was released as the lead single and reached the top ten on "Billboard"s Hot Country Songs. "Teardrops on My Guitar" was released as the second single and was the album's best-charting song on the "Billboard" Hot 100. "Our Song" was released as the third single from the album and was Swift's first number one on "Billboard'"s Hot Country Songs chart. It made her the youngest person to single-handedly write and perform a number one song on the Hot Country Songs chart. "Picture to Burn" and "Should've Said No" were released as the fourth and fifth singles from the album, respectively, and both were successful on the country charts in the United States. Swift promoted the album by performing on tour as the opening act for artists such as Rascal Flatts, George Strait, Brad Paisley, Tim McGraw and Faith Hill.

"Taylor Swift" received generally positive reviews from music critics, who praised Swift's talent at such a young age. The album enjoyed commercial success and launched Swift's career in country music. In the United States, it topped the Top Country Albums Chart for 24 non-consecutive weeks, and was certified seven times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for sales of over 7 million copies. "Taylor Swift" has logged 275 weeks on "Billboard"s Top 200 albums chart as of early 2013, making it the Longest Charting album of the 2000s decade. The album was also successful outside of Swift's native country, especially in Canada, Australia, and the United Kingdom.

Swift is from Reading, Pennsylvania and developed an early interest in country music and songwriting. When she was eleven, she and her family made their first visit to Nashville, Tennessee in pursuit of a record deal, though nothing came out of it. Swift was judged and neglected by record labels for being too young. In regards to the labels which rejected her, she said,
Swift wrote "Tim McGraw" during her freshman year, knowing that she and her senior boyfriend, Brandon Borello, would break up at the end of the year when he left for college. Rose said Swift showed up at her after school job writing songs for Sony/ATV "with the idea and the melody. She knew exactly what she wanted." The nostalgic song describes a summer romance and Swift's hope that when Borello "think[s] Tim McGraw" he would "think [her] favorite song" – McGraw's "Can't Tell Me Nothin" – and remember her. Conversely, "Picture to Burn" describes a girl furious after a break-up. Swift says that while the song is about "just being mad" and is "completely, brutally honest"; she gave it a comedic edge. While at work after school, Swift "found [her]self just sitting there with [her] guitar going, 'I hate his stupid truck that he doesn't let me drive. He's such a redneck! Oh my God!'," a line which developed into the song's chorus. The up-tempo song is heavy with banjos and drums, while the chorus is marked by distorted guitars and big vocals.

The singer penned the autobiographical song "The Outside" as an outlet at age twelve, the year she began writing her own songs. Like many of the other songs she wrote early on, the song describes the unhappiness and loneliness Swift felt when her love of country music alienated her from her peers. Swift wrote "Tied Together with a Smile" the day she learned one of her best friends was bulimic, a fact which shocked her. She recalled, "How can somebody that seems so strong have such a horrible, horrible weakness? Something that is killing her." The lyrics to "Tied Together with a Smile" describe a beautiful girl trying to hide her inner turbulence and mourn that "You're tied together with a smile/But you're coming undone". Swift commented, "I always thought that one of the biggest overlooked problems American girls face is insecurity." She wrote "Should've Said No" according to "something really, really dramatic and crazy happening to [her] and [her] needing to address it in the form of music". The song was a last minute addition to "Taylor Swift": Swift had written it two days before mastering was scheduled and booklets were about to be printed; she then called her producer and completed the song overnight.

"Mary's Song (Oh My My My)" was actually inspired by her next-door neighbors' long lasting marriage, being the opposite of what tabloids fixate on. Swift wrote "Our Song" for her freshman year of high school talent show with no intentions of including it on the album. She claimed she "just knew there was something about it" and chose to include it on "Taylor Swift". "I wrote it about this guy I was dating, and how we didn't have a song. So I went ahead and wrote us one." The song is a narrative and describes a young couple who use the events in their lives in place of a regular song. The banjo-riddled song is placed at the end of the album due to its closing lyrics, a request to "play it again". "Invisible" is ballad describing loneliness and heartache of going unnoticed. Sean Dooley of About.com writes, the "piano-driven song [...] perfectly captures the awkward teenage angst we all endure—or have endured—at one time or another."

While recording her demo album, Swift worked with demo producer Nathan Chapman, whom she met in a little shed behind a publishing company she was at. Swift said, "I'd always go in there and play him some new songs, and the next week he would have this awesome track, on which he played every instrument, and it sounded like a record. We did this for a period of a year to two years before I got my record deal."

To record "Taylor Swift", she had to choose which album producer she would work with: "Then, all of a sudden, it was, 'OK, we're going to use this producer' or 'We're going to use that producer.'" After experimenting with different producers, originating from Nashville, Swift chose Chapman because of the unique sound he put into songs. Big Machine Records was skeptical about hiring Chapman because he had never done a studio album prior to "Taylor Swift", only demos. Swift described the songs he produced as "the right chemistry hit[ting]" and therefore, Big Machine Records accepted Chapman producing some of the album's songs. In the end, Chapman produced all but one of the tracks on "Taylor Swift". Recording was executed during a four-month period before 2005 was over.

"Taylor Swift" was released on October 24, 2006 with eleven tracks. Swift was highly involved in the album packaging, designing doodle graphics herself. She also personally capitalized specific letters in the lyrics from each song to spell out hidden messages, a feat she would also execute for her succeeding albums. On November 6, 2007, the album was released under the title "Taylor Swift Deluxe Edition" for a limited time. The deluxe edition contained three new songs: "I'm Only Me When I'm with You", "Invisible" and "A Perfectly Good Heart", the radio edits for "Teardrops on My Guitar", and "Our Song", and Swift's first phone conversation with Tim McGraw. The release also bore new artwork and a bonus DVD with all of Swift's music videos at the time ("Tim McGraw", "Teardrops on My Guitar", and "Our Song"), behind-the-scenes footage of "Teardrops on My Guitar" and "Our Song" music videos, and a performance of "Picture to Burn", among other material. The American retail company Target released an exclusive version of "Taylor Swift Deluxe Edition", with performances of Swift during McGraw and Hill's Soul2Soul II Tour. A third and final edition appeared on March 18, 2008 with the original album artwork, including the three new songs from the "Taylor Swift Deluxe Edition", as well as the radio edit of "Picture to Burn," and an additional pop remix of "Teardrops on My Guitar". This version of the album was also released on vinyl in 2016. A karaoke version of "Taylor Swift" was released on January 27, 2009, containing the first fourteen tracks from the album on both CD+G and DVD.

Swift's first broadcast performance of "Tim McGraw" was on October 24, 2006 on "Good Morning America". Other songs from "Taylor Swift" have been performed on television programs, award shows, and festivals such as "The Megan Mullally Show", the New Faces Show, "America's Got Talent", Total Request Live, the 2008 CMT Music Awards, and the Academy of Country Music. Swift spent much of 2006 promoting "Tim McGraw" and "Taylor Swift" in a radio tour. In regards to the extensive radio tour, Swift commented, "Radio tours for most artists last six weeks. Mine lasted six months. That's because I wanted it to. I wanted to meet every single one of the people that was helping me out."

Swift also promoted the album by performing as an opening act for several country artists' concert tours. She opened for Rascal Flatts on several dates, from October 19 to November 3, 2006, included on the Me and My Gang Tour (2006–07), performing a total of five songs from the album. She also served as opening act on twenty dates for George Strait's 2007 United States tour, and selected dates for Brad Paisley's Bonfires & Amplifiers Tour (2007–08); Swift served as an opening act during all 2007 legs of the tour. During mid-2007, Swift engaged as the opening act on several dates for Tim McGraw's and Faith Hill's joint tour, Soul2Soul II Tour (2006–07). Swift again opened for Flatts for their Still Feels Good Tour in 2008. In addition, Swift performed six songs from "Taylor Swift" on her first headlining tour, the Fearless Tour (2009–10).

"Tim McGraw" was released as the lead single from "Taylor Swift" on June 19, 2006. The song was critically appreciated for Swift's delivery. "Tim McGraw" enjoyed commercial success, peaking at number forty on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and at number six on "Billboard"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Hot Country Songs; it was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for the shipment of 2,000,000 copies.

"Teardrops on My Guitar" was released as the second single from "Taylor Swift". "Teardrops on My Guitar" received critical success for its memorable chorus and crossover potential, as well as commercial success by becoming the best-charting single from "Taylor Swift" on the "Billboard" Hot 100, peaking at number thirteen. It became Swift's first pop crossover hit, peaking at number eleven on the now-canceled Pop 100 chart. The song was certified double platinum by the RIAA for the shipment of 3,000,000 copies. "Teardrops on My Guitar" peaked at number forty-five in Canada and at number fifty-one in the United Kingdom.

"Our Song" was released as the third single from the album. The song was critically favored, being described as "gem". "Our Song" peaked at number sixteen on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and was certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA; it also became Swift's first-number one on Hot Country Songs. The song peaked at number thirty on the Canadian Hot 100, becoming the best-charting single from "Taylor Swift" in Canada.

"Picture to Burn" was released as the fourth single from "Taylor Swift". "Picture to Burn" was appreciated by contemporary critics for lyrics reflecting feminism. It became a fourth consecutive top ten single for Swift on the United States' chart Hot Country Songs and was certified double platinum by the RIAA.

"Should've Said No" was released as the fifth and final single from the album. In the United States, "Should've Said No" became Swift's second number-one on Hot Country Songs and was certified double platinum by the RIAA. The song made its highest international peak in the New Zealand Singles Chart, at number eighteen.

"Taylor Swift" received positive reviews from contemporary critics. Jeff Tamarkin of AllMusic described Swift as "a fresh, still girlish voice, full of hope and naïveté, but it's also a confident and mature one". He said her "talent to be reckoned" was portrayed through the songs "Tim McGraw", "The Outside", and "Mary's Song (Oh My My My)". Tamarkin criticized producer Nathan Chapman for applying "a gloss that not all [songs] really require and in some cases would do better to shed". Rick Bell of Country Standard Time gave a positive review, saying that Swift had "smart songwriting" and that "her deeply personal, self-penned songs, particularly 'The Outside' and 'Our Song'" were "stirring." He compared her sound to Cyndi Thomson and Hilary Duff. Chris Neal of "Country Weekly" said that Swift "demonstrat[es] an honesty, intelligence and idealism with which listeners of any age will be able to connect" and added that "the more thoughtful material suggests a talent poised to last well past high school." Ken Rosenbaum of "The Toledo Blade" wrote Swift "deftly handles lyrics and subjects in that shadowy area between teenager and womanhood."

On the week ending November 11, 2006, "Taylor Swift" debuted at number nineteen on the "Billboard" 200 due to sales of 40,000 copies. It reached its highest sales week on the week ending January 5, 2008 with 187,000 copies sold. After sixty-three weeks on the "Billboard" 200, on the week ending January 19, 2008, the album reached its charting peak at number five due to sales of 47,000 copies. "Taylor Swift" marked the longest stay on the "Billboard" 200 by any album released in the decade. As of June 3, 2011, the album has stayed on the chart for 275 weeks. The album topped "Billboard"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Top Country Albums Chart for twenty-four non-consecutive weeks. On the week ending August 2, 2008, Swift's EP "Beautiful Eyes" replaced "Taylor Swift" as the chart's number one album. With "Taylor Swift" charting at number two, Swift became the first artist to hold the first two positions on Top Country Albums since LeAnn Rimes charted in 1997 with "Blue" (1996) and "" (1997). In December 2017, the album was certified seven times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for the shipment and sales of 7,000,000 copies. As of July 2015, the album has sold 5.52 million pure copies in the United States.

Six years after its release, "Taylor Swift" debuted at number thirty-eight on the New Zealand Albums Chart. "Taylor Swift" peaked at number fourteen on the Canadian Albums Chart and at number-one on the Canadian Country Albums Chart. "Taylor Swift" was certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association (CRIA) for the shipment of 80,000 copies. In Australia, "Taylor Swift" peaked at number thirty-three on the main chart and at number three on the country-genre chart. On the week ending September 5, 2009, it entered the UK Albums Chart at number 88; the following week, it reached its peak at number 81. The album has been certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for sales of more than 100,000 copies.

Notes

Credits are adapted from liner notes of "Taylor Swift".



</doc>
<doc id="8171787" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8171787" title="Commelina communis">
Commelina communis

Commelina communis, commonly known as the Asiatic dayflower, is an herbaceous annual plant in the dayflower family. It gets its name because the blooms last for only one day. It is native throughout much of East Asia and northern parts of Southeast Asia. In China, the plant is known as yazhicao (), roughly translating to "duckfoot herb", while in Japan it is known as , meaning "dew herb". It has also been introduced to parts of central and southeastern Europe and much of eastern North America, where it has spread to become a noxious weed. It is common in disturbed sites and in moist soil. The flowers emerge from summer through fall and are distinctive with two relatively large blue petals and one very reduced white petal.

The Asiatic dayflower plant serves as the type species for its large genus. Linnaeus picked the name "Commelina" in honour of the two Dutch botanists of the Commelijn family, using the two large showy petals of "Commelina communis" to symbolise them. Linnaeus described the species in the first edition of his landmark work, "Species Plantarum", in 1753. Long before the plant was studied in Europe, however, it had been used for generations in traditional Chinese medicine. The flowers have also been used in Japan to produce a dye and a pigment that was used in many world-renowned Ukiyo-e woodcuts from the 18th and early 19th centuries. In the modern era the plant has found limited use as a model organism in the field of plant physiology due to its complex pigment chemistry and the ease of viewing its stomata.

The Asiatic dayflower is considered a weed both in areas where it was introduced and in certain parts of its native range. The flowers' interactions with pollinators have been well studied and have helped to support important hypotheses about pollination in the field of plant ecology. Recent research has also revealed that the Asiatic dayflower can bioaccumulate a number of metals, making it a candidate for revegetating and essentially cleaning spoiled copper mines. Several animals and fungi use the plant as a food source, with a few species feeding upon it exclusively.

The Asiatic dayflower is an annual herb with stems that are typically decumbent, meaning that they are prostrate at the base but become erect towards the tips, but some individuals may be simply erect. The diffusely branched stems tend to root at the basal nodes. The pubescence on the stems is variable, but common patterns include a line of hair continuous with the leaf sheath, or they may be glabrous basally, meaning hairless, and puberulent towards the extremities, that is covered with fine hairs. The leaves are sessile: they lack a leaf stalk, also known as a petiole; or they may be subpetiolate, meaning they have very small petioles. The leaf sheaths are cylindrical, sometimes striped with red, and typically glabrous, but usually have margins that are puberulent or pilose, meaning lined with fine, soft hairs. The leaf blades range from narrowly lanceolate, or lance-shaped, to ovate-elliptic, between egg-shaped and ellipse-shaped. They measure by wide. The blades range from glabrous to puberulent and have scabrescent, or slightly rough, margins. Their tips are acute, meaning they come to a point quickly, to acuminate, meaning the point develops gradually. The leaf bases are oblique, or uneven.

The flowers are arranged on inflorescences called cincinni (singular: cincinnus), which are also called scorpioid cymes. This is a form of a monochasium where the lateral branches arise alternately. The cincinni are subtended by a spathe, a modified leaf. The solitary spathes usually measure long, but some may be up to in length, while they are tall, but sometimes up to . The uncurved spathes typically have a cordate, or heart-shaped, whitish base, which contrasts with its dark green veins. Their margins lack hairs, are somewhat scabrous, or rough, and are unfused, meaning they are distinct to the base. Their apices are acute to acuminate while the surfaces are glabrous, puberulent, or hirsute-ciliate, meaning with longer, shaggier hairs. The spathes are borne on peduncles, or stalks, that measure and sometimes up to long.
There are often two cincinni present, though the upper, or distal, cincinnus may be vestigial. The lower, or proximal, cincinnus bears 1 to 4 bisexual flowers and is nearly included in the spathe, while the upper cincinnus has 1 to 2 male flowers and is about long. The individual flowers are subtended by bracteoles that fall off early in development. The pedicels supporting single flowers, and later the fruits, are erect initially but curve when in fruit. They measure about . The 3 concave, membranous sepals are inconspicuous, but persist after the fruit develops; the lateral pair are fused basally, measure only long by wide, and are elliptic and glabrous. The lower sepal is lanceolate and about long by about wide. The 2 upper petals are blue to indigo in colour, while the much smaller lower petal is white. The upper two petals measure long by wide, while the lower petal is long by about wide. The 2 upper petals are composed of a claw about long and a broadly ovate limb with an acute apex and a cuneate-cordate base.

There are three anticous fertile stamens, meaning they are on the lower part of the flower, and three posticous infertile stamens, meaning they are on the upper part of the flower. These infertile stamens are termed staminodes. The fertile stamens are dimorphic: the lateral pair have maroon to indigo anthers that measure about long and are elliptic with a base that is sagittate or arrowhead-shaped. Their filaments are about long. The central fertile stamen has a yellow, elliptic anther with a maroon connective and a base that is hastate or spearhead-shaped, but with the lobes at right angles. The anther measures about long while its filament is about long. The three staminodes are all alike with yellow, cruciform, or cross-shaped, antherodes that are about long on filaments about long. Sometimes the antherodes will have a central maroon spot. Each antherode has two abortive lateral pollen sacks. The ovary is ellipsoid, about long and has a style that is about long.

The fruit is a dehiscent, ellipsoid capsule with two locules each containing two seeds. The capsule is glabrous, brown, measures long, and dehisces into two valves. The seeds are brown or brownish yellow in colour and deltoid, or roughly triangular in outline. They are dorsiventral, meaning they have distinct upper and lower surfaces, with the ventral, or lower, surface being planar and the dorsal, or upper, surface being convex. Seeds range in length from , but seeds as short as can occur, while they are across. The surfaces are rugose pitted-reticulate and are densely covered with smaller farinose granules with sparse larger farinose granules.

"Commelina communis" was first described in 1753 by Carl Linnaeus in the first edition of his "Species Plantarum", along with eight other species in the genus. The plant serves as the type species for the genus. The scientific name "Commelina" was chosen based on the Asiatic dayflower. Linnaeus picked the name in honour of the Dutch botanists Jan and Caspar Commelijn, using the two large showy petals of "Commelina communis" to symbolise them. A number of names given to plants thought to be different species have fallen into synonymy with the Asiatic dayflower. Albrecht Wilhelm Roth created the first such synonym, "Commelina polygama", in 1790. Wenceslas Bojer described what he believed were two new species, "Commelina barabata" and "Commelina salicifolia", in his work "Hortus Mauritianus", both of which were quickly found to be identical to "C. communis". Karl Sigismund Kunth created the synonym "Commelina willdenowii" in 1841. Finally, Korean populations of the species were named under the synonym "Commelina coreana" in 1910 by Augustin Abel Hector Léveillé.

Several varieties have also been named. "Commelina communis" var. "ludens" was created by C.B. Clarke after demoting it from the full species status in which it was placed by Friedrich Anton Wilhelm Miquel in 1861. The variety is distinguished by its darker flowers, antherodes with central maroon spots, less well developed distal cymes that usually do not produce a flower, and spathes that are proportionally broader. Jisaburo Ohwi's Flora of Japan also treats the variety as geographically distinct, stating that it is restricted to mountainous areas. This variety is still accepted by some workers, but others, such Robert B. Faden, consider it impossible to consistently separate from the type variety. Another variety, "C. communis" var. "hortensis", which was named by Tomitaro Makino and is apparently a cultivated variety which originated from "C. communis" var. "ludens" in Japan, is also accepted by some botanists. It differs in having larger showy flowers which are used to produce a dye (see "Uses" section below). A variegated form called "C. communis" var. "ludens" f. "aureostriata" named by Frank C. MacKeever in 1961 is known to occur randomly throughout much of the species' range.

The plant's native distribution includes much of East Asia and Southeast Asia. Country by country, it is found in China, Taiwan, Japan, Korea, the Russian Far East, Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, Thailand, India and Vietnam. Within China it is found in all provinces except Qinghai, Hainan, Xinjiang, and Tibet. In Japan the plant is found throughout the bulk of the country from Hokkaido south to Kyūshū. In Russia the Asiatic dayflower is found naturally on Sakhalin as well as in the Far East in areas surrounding the Ussuri River.

The species has been introduced to much of Europe and eastern North America. On the former continent it is now found from Central Europe well into western Russia. Specifically it is known from Italy north to Switzerland, east through the region encompassing the former Yugoslavia, east into the regions around the Black Sea including Romania, the Moldavia Region, and Ukraine but excluding Crimea, north through the Dnieper Basin into Belarus and Russia, continuing east into the regions surrounding the Don River and the Volga River south to their intersection at the Volga-Don Canal and north to the regions around Lake Ladoga and Lake Ilmen, and farther east to the regions of the Ural River and the Kama River. It is also found in the Czech Republic and Slovakia. It is present in the provinces of Ontario and Quebec in Canada, and in most of the eastern and central American states from Massachusetts and New York in the northeast, west to Minnesota and south through the Great Plains to Texas and east to extreme northern Florida in the United States.

Within its native distribution, the plant is most typical of moist, open places, including shady forest edges and wet areas of crop fields, orchards, ditches, and roadsides. In Taiwan, it can be found from elevation. In areas where the Asiatic dayflower is an introduced weed it is most common in waste places, but also along the edges of fields, woods, and marshes, and occasionally penetrating into woods.

The Asiatic dayflower is considered an invasive weed in many areas where it has been introduced. In the United States, the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation, for example, categorises the species as "occasionally invasive" in its "Invasive Plant Species of Virginia". This means that the plant will "not affect ecosystem processes, but may alter plant community composition by outcompeting one or more native plant species". The species is typically limited to disturbed sites, whence it spreads relatively slowly. Within its native range in China it is also sometimes considered a pest, especially in the northeast of the country where it has caused economically significant agricultural damage in orchards.

The Asiatic dayflower has been used in pollination studies concerning the behaviour of plants in relation to their pollinators. One important experiment tested the hypotheses that floral guides (i.e. various patterns and colours on anthers and petals) simultaneously promote pollinator visitation and prevent visits where the pollinator fails to come into contact with the stigma or anthers, termed pollen theft. As the flowers of the Asiatic dayflower lack nectar, they offer only pollen as a reward to their visitors. To attract pollinators, the plant has three types of brightly colored floral organs: the large blue petals, fertile yellow anthers, and infertile yellow antherodes that lack pollen. When the infertile antherodes were experimentally removed in natural populations, the number of total floral visitor landings was reduced, supporting the hypothesis that these infertile anthers essentially trick their pollinators into believing they offer more than they actually do. When the central, bright yellow fertile anther was removed, leaving only two brown fertile anthers, the frequency of legitimate flower landings decreased, meaning that the visitors were not pollinating the flowers, suggesting that floral signals also prevent "theft", or visits where the pollinators take pollen, but do not place any on the stigma. Thus both the fertile anthers and the infertile antherodes were shown to play an important role in both increasing visitor landings and orienting floral visitors toward a landing point appropriate for pollination.

Recent studies have shown that wild Asiatic dayflower populations found growing on copper mine spoils in eastern China exhibited very high concentrations of copper within the plants, more so than the 48 species tested. "Commelina communis" had sequestered some 361 mg/kg of copper, while the plant with the next highest concentration, "Polygonum macrathum", had 286 mg/kg. Five of the species examined, including the Asiatic dayflower, also showed high concentrations of other metals such as zinc, lead, and cadmium. The results suggest that the Asiatic dayflower is a good candidate for copper mine spoil revegetation and phytoremediation.

Ten species of fungi have been found on the Asiatic dayflower, four of which can infect the plant, while 12 species of insects are known to be associated with it. Two of the fungi, "Kordyana commelinae" and "Phyllosticta commelinicola", are thought to be host specific with the Asiatic dayflower. Of the ten fungi seven are Basidiomycota and three are Ascomycota. Nine of the 12 insects associated with the plant are beetles, seven of which are in the genus "Lema", while the other two are in the families Hispidae and Pentatomidae. The remaining three insects include one species of moth, "Pergesa acteus", and two true bugs, namely "Aphis commilinae" and "Aeschrocoris ceylonicus". Important pollinators include the Asian honeybee, "Apis cerana", syrphid fly, "Episyrphus balteatus", and the bumble bee species "Bombus diversus".

 In China it is used as a medicinal herb with febrifugal, antipyretic, anti-inflammatory, and diuretic effects. Additionally, it is also used for treating sore throats and tonsillitis. Recent pharmacological investigations have revealed that the Asiatic dayflower contains at least five active compounds. One of these, p-hydroxycinnamic acid, shows antibacterial activity, while another, D-mannitol, has an antitussive effect. In China and India the plant is also used as a vegetable and fodder crop.

In Japan there is a sizeable dye industry devoted to the plant. The purported variety "Commelina communis" var. "hortensis", which is apparently a cultivated form of another putative variety, namely "Commelina communis" var. "ludens", is grown for its larger petals which yield a blue juice used in manufacturing a paper called "boshigami" or , which is the famous product of the Yamada village in the Shiga prefecture. The paper is usually resoaked, allowing the pigment to be reabsorbed in water for use as a dye. The dye, also referred to as "aigami", but also as or , is composed primarily of malonyl awobanin and was used extensively as a colorant in 18th and 19th century woodblock prints in Japan, especially during the early Ukiyo-e era. The colorant is known to have been used by several famous Ukiyo-e artists such as Torii Kiyonaga. However, "aigami" fades to a greenish yellow in a matter of months when exposed to sunlight. As a result, the color was eventually replaced by imported Prussian blue, a much more stable colour with its first commercial appearance in 1829 in the work of Keisai Eisen. The plant is also grown for its dye in northern China. Additional uses of the colourant include making preparatory designs on cloth before dyeing with other pigments.

Commelinin is the blue pigment from the flowers of "C. communis", is a metalloanthocyanin. It is a complex of 4 Mg ions chelating six anthocyanin molecules.

"Commelina communis" is also used as a model organism in plant physiology and plant development to a limited extent, especially in relation to stomatal physiology and the biology of pigmentation development. For example, the blue pigmentation of Asiatic dayflower petals was shown to consist of a large complex of six anthocyanins, six flavones, and two associated magnesium ions, demonstrating that supramolecular complexes of several copigments and chelated metals often determine colour. Other research on the plant has helped to explain photoreceptor systems in plants such as their stomatal responses to blue light versus red light spectrums, abscisic acid perception and its role in cell signaling, particularly concerning the chemical's role in stomatal function, the role of vanadates in inhibiting stomatal opening, and the necessity of calcium in stomatal closure, among other topics. Its widespread use in stomatal studies is due to the fact that the leaves produce exceptional epidermal peels that are consistently one cell layer thick. This same quality makes the plant popular for use in laboratory exercises in higher education for demonstrating stomatal function and morphology. Guard cell turgor pressure and its regulation in the opening and closing of stomata is particularly easy to demonstrate with the Asiatic dayflower.



</doc>
<doc id="8190469" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8190469" title="Hamdi Qandil">
Hamdi Qandil

Hamdi Qandil ( "Ḥamdī Qandīl", also Romanized "Qandeel" or "Kandil"; 1936 – 31 October 2018) was a prominent Egyptian journalist, news anchor, talk show host and activist. Qandil started his journalism career in the 1950s when he wrote for the "Akher Sa'a" ("Last Hour") magazine at the invitation of veteran journalist Mustafa Amin. In 1961 he began broadcasting a news show called "Aqwal al-Suhuf" ("In the Press") until 1969 when he was appointed director of the Arab Broadcasting Studios Union. In 1971 he left his post in protest at a government inspection of his technical staff. He later worked with UNESCO from 1974 to 1986, specializing in the field of international media. In 1987 he co-founded a satellite broadcasting company that later became known as MBC, where he worked for three months before leaving because of political differences with its management. Qandil briefly presented the show "Ma'a Hamdi Qandil" ("With Hamdi Qandil") for ART, but left amid disagreements between him and his managers regarding Qandil's planned interviews with Muammar Gaddafi and Tariq Aziz.

He returned to Egyptian television in 1998, hosting the current affairs and press review talk show "Ra'is el-Tahrir" ("Editor-in-Chief"). The program became one of the most popular and respected in Egypt. After apparent trouble with the state censors, Qandil moved the show to Dubai TV in 2004 under the name "Qalam Rosas" ("Pencil"). The new program was highly watched throughout the Arab world. He was forced to quit Dubai TV after criticizing Arab governments and subsequently hosted the show on the Libyan channel Al-Libiya for two months before the Libyan government cancelled it. He returned to Egypt and wrote for the "Al-Masry Al-Youm" newspaper and then "Al-Shorouk", but his association with the latter ended as a result of a libel suit brought on by then-Egyptian foreign minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit in response to a column critical of Egyptian foreign policy written by Qandil in May 2010. The case was later dropped following the 2011 Egyptian Revolution.

Qandil was well known for his pan-Arabist discourse and fierce criticism of the Egyptian and other Arab governments. According to Al-Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies political analyst Diaa Rashwan, Qandil "is a great Egyptian journalist and highly credible, he is bold and gives constructive criticism ... people listen to him and take what he says seriously, which is why he poses a threat" to the government. Prior to the Egyptian revolution, Qandil co-founded the National Association for Change, a reformist group headed by Mohamed ElBaradei. From September 2012, Qandil had lent his support to the Egyptian Popular Current opposition movement.

Qandil was born in Cairo in 1936 to a father from Menoufia. He was the eldest of five children. Qandil spent much of his childhood and had his primary schooling in the Nile Delta city of Tanta. His father had moved the middle-income family to that city, where he owned a few feddans of land mostly planted with pears and grapes. Qandil's father primarily distributed them to neighbors and others close to him.

During Qandil's boyhood, he borrowed and read books from a medical practice and a culture and sporting association in Tanta on a near weekly basis. He also learned field hockey there. Qandil was at the top of his class throughout his later school years and initially sought to enter the medical profession, a typical career aspiration for students with high marks. His mother particularly encouraged him to become a doctor. Qandil simultaneously took an interest in writing, Arabic calligraphy and foreign languages.

Qandil was introduced to journalism when he began writing a secondary school research paper. During that time, he also wrote an article for the low-budget Tanta newspaper "Al Ikhlas", criticizing King Farouk for spending one million pounds from the treasury to purchase a yacht called the "Mahrousa". He was fired soon after, but had since grown fond of journalism. Due to this new interest and his father's increasingly poor health, Qandil did not complete the first stage of his medical studies, causing his 1952 application to medical school to be rejected. He instead enrolled in the department of geology at Alexandria University. In July of that year, King Farouk was overthrown by a group of dissenting officers led by Gamal Abdel Nasser, leading to the subsequent establishment of a republican system under the presidency of leading officer Muhammad Naguib.

Qandil spent two months studying geology and decided to retake his high school examinations in order to enter into medical school. He performed well and was admitted to Cairo University's Qasr El-Ainy Faculty of Medicine in 1953. He continued in his studies until 1956, by which time Nasser had become president. During this period he also joined the National Guard. Together with some of his fellow students he founded his college's official magazine, which they printed through the Akhbar el-Yom publishing house. The magazine's first edition was confiscated due to an article Qandil wrote that was critical of university professors and regulations. Shortly after completing his final exams in 1956, Qandil was offered a writing position with "Akher Sa'a" ("Last Hour") magazine by its owners, the prominent journalists and brothers Mustafa Amin and Ali Amin. Mustafa employed Qandil with a salary of 15 Egyptian pounds and initially tasked him with writing the horoscope and a column that responded to letters from readers. Qandil was asked by Amin to serve as an editor for "Akher Sa'a" in 1961.

That year Qandil also attended the International Union of Students in Prague, Czechoslovakia, where he met Yasser Arafat, then the head of the General Union of Palestinian Students. Later in 1956 Qandil was accepted into the department of journalism, obtaining a "license" (bachelor's degree) in journalism in 1960. Four years later he received a diploma in journalism from the Berlin Institute. Throughout this period he wrote for the magazine "Al-Tahrir", earning a salary of 25 Egyptian pounds, and also worked with "Al-Jamahir" magazine in Damascus.

In 1961 Qandil began to work in broadcast television as the presenter of the program "Aqwal al-Suhf" ("In the Press"). In 1966 he became a media adviser to a television studio in Jordan, a role which ended after six weeks; the single broadcast of "Aqwal al-Suhuf" in Jordan was met with consternation from the Jordanian royal government and after Qandil was notified of this disapproval, he immediately returned to Egypt where he continued presenting the program. His position in "Aqwal al-Suhuf" ended in 1969 with his appointment as director of the Arab Broadcasting Stations Union (ABSU).

In early May 1971 Qandil left the ABSU after refusing to launch a disciplinary investigation of the technical team that recorded the Labor Day speech given by Anwar Sadat, who became president following Nasser's death in 1970. He left at a time when numerous broadcasters and media personalities were removed from their positions during Sadat's Corrective Revolution. However, he briefly returned to television in 1973 to announce Egypt's claimed victory in the Yom Kippur War with Israel in October of that year.

Qandil was appointed manager of the Department of the Free Flow of Information and Communication Policies for UNESCO in 1974. In an interview with "Al-Ahram Weekly", Qandil stated that while at UNESCO he "specialised in satellite communications and published several books and studies" dealing with global media and broadcasting. During this time he strongly pushed to include Palestine as a member and attempted to remove the United States, the United Kingdom and Singapore from the organization. According to his own account, he was also able to master the English and French languages, and gain experience in diplomacy. He left UNESCO in 1986.

Together with partners from Egypt and the Arab world, Qandil co-founded the Eastern Satellite Communications Company in 1987. Its main purpose was to serve broadcasting station that would target Arabic-speaking communities in the Western world and to counter what Qandil perceived as Western bias in global media. However, in 1992, as a result of financial difficulties the company was sold and subsequently became the Middle East Broadcasting Center (MBC). Qandil worked at MBC for roughly three months until he quit, citing political differences with the station's managers, who considered him a Nasserist. That same year, he was offered to host his own show at Arab Radio and Television (ART), but initially opted to work on a project setting up a private Egyptian station for "Al-Ahram". The station was not launched and Qandil took up a position at ART in 1996 where he hosted his own show called "With Hamdi Qandil". Qandil's arrangements to interview Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi on the anniversary of the 1969 coup that brought him to power, and also Tariq Aziz, the vice president of Iraq at the time, aroused controversy among ART's managers. He quit thereafter.

In 1998 Qandil responded favorably to the invitation of Safwat El-Sherif, the Information Minister in Hosni Mubarak's government, to return to Egyptian television. In March his program "Ra'is el-Tahrir" ("Editor-in-Chief") began airing. Qandil stated he returned to Egyptian television because he felt he owed "a debt of gratitude to the institution that built my fame when I was in my twenties. Also, working in Egypt is more immediately rewarding than anywhere else." With the relaxation of media restrictions during this period, "Ra'is el-Tahrir" became one of the most popular and respected television programs in Egypt. Describing the relative freedom afforded to the media, Qandil stated in 2001 that the situation was an improvement from when he first began the program, but "as long as there remains a censor, we will continue to ask for more [freedom of expression]."

"Ra'is el-Tahrir" was intended to serve as a weekly review of the pan-Arab press, but in practice the program became a medium through which Qandil expressed his opinions on various issues confronting Egypt and the Arab world, views which he claimed were representative of the popular Egyptian sentiment. "Al-Ahram Weekly"′s Amina Elbandary wrote that during the show, Qandil spoke "in histrionic style, his commentary replete with daring questions and remarks. Viewers are fascinated by his apparent lack of inhibition."

In the wake of the Second Intifada, the Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation that began in 2000, the show became dominated by the conflict, which Qandil generally regarded as a campaign of Israeli aggression. He frequently broadcast the Israeli military's actions during the Intifada and called for viewers to support the uprising and boycott Israeli products. Qandil responded to a query regarding his extensive coverage of the Intifada by saying, "How are news shows expected to react to events such as the Intifada? Are we supposed to keep silent?"

"Ra'is el-Tahrir" later moved to Dream TV, an Egypt-based television station. Qandil continued to express his frustrations regarding the Israel and the Intifada, the run-up to the invasion of Iraq, and what he perceived as the United States' maligned intentions for the Middle East. According to author and researcher Andrew Hammond, "The show's combination of current affairs, press reviews and talk-shows became the most talked-about television in Egypt since Al-Jazeera's "al-Ittijah al-Mu'akis"." His show on Dream TV was cancelled abruptly in early 2003 amid rumors that he had been crossing political red lines during his broadcasts, including stinging criticism of the government of Hosni Mubarak. This reasoning was dismissed by Dream TV manager Sanaa Mansour, who stated that Qandil had not been let go, was free to express himself and left the show without offering an explanation to management.

In 2004 Qandil moved to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) began hosting a program on Dubai TV called "Qalam Rosas" ("Pencil"). The program was virtually a continuation of "Ra'is al-Tahrir", a highly watched show dealing with the Arab world's major political, economic and social affairs of the day. "Qalam Rosas" would normally open with Qandil interviewing an Arab intellectual and discussing a current event. The show would then continue to a round table discussion with other journalists analyzing various social and political events and movements concerning the citizens of the Arab world. At its closing, Qandil would summarize the show with a well-known maxim or saying. The London-based Arab Media Watch organization awarded Qandil the 2006 Media Accomplishment Award to commend him for his "creativity and participation in the media world" over the course of his five decade career. In 2008 Qandil was forced to leave Dubai TV for criticizing Arab leaders, while commending Hassan Nasrallah, the secretary-general of the Lebanese political party and paramilitary group Hezbollah.

After his departure from Dubai TV he entered into a contract with Al-Libia, although he only remained with the Libyan channel for two months. Qandil's show was cancelled when the state-owned Al Jamahiriya Radio's General Authority took control of the channel. There was no official reason for the cancellation, but Qandil stated it was because of "instructions from high-ranking Libyan officials due to pressures from Egypt". He was reportedly offered to present "Qalam Rosas" on the Hezbollah-linked Al-Manar TV in early 2009, but opted not to join citing an unclear situation regarding his contract with Al-Libia.

After his brief stint on Al-Libia, Qandil returned to Egypt to write for the newspaper "Al-Masry Al-Youm" in 2008 and later began writing for "Al-Shorouk". He co-founded and served as the media spokesman for National Association for Change (NAC) headed by Mohamed ElBaradei in early 2010. The NAC's stated purpose is push for democratic and other reforms in Egypt. In May Egyptian foreign minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit brought a lawsuit for libel against Qandil in response to a critical column about Aboul Gheit and Egyptian foreign policy that Qandil wrote for "Al-Shorouk", called "The Homeland’s Disgrace and that of the Citizen." In the column Qandil lambasted the contradictory statements made by Aboul Gheit and Egypt's ambassador to Israel, in which the latter said Israel was a friendly state, while Aboul Gheit had just previously stated that Israel was an enemy. Qandil wrote that the ambassador sought to cover up Aboul Gheit's statement, and that Aboul Gheit's words "usually ... fall from his mouth like droppings of a torn rubbish bag". The matter was transferred to the criminal court. His relationship with "Al-Shorouk" consequently ended as a result of the controversy.

In June 2010 Qandil quit his position as the NAC's media spokesman. He did not give an official reason for resigning, but was reportedly upset that ElBaradei was frequently outside of Egypt. In mid-December Qandil appeared in court and his defense team, which included his brother Assem and Gamal Eid requested that the "biased" court quit and that the case be transferred to a civil jurisdiction. On 24 January 2011 the court refused the referral and also refused to summon Aboul Gheit at the request of Qandil's defense team. On 25 January mass demonstrations demanding President Hosni Mubarak's downfall erupted across Egypt, eventually overthrowing the government, including Aboul Gheit, on 11 February. In April Aboul Gheit dropped the lawsuit. According to Hafez Abu Seada of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, the revolution was the clear reason Aboul Gheit withdrew the suit, and had it not occurred, "the court could have handed [Qandil] a prison sentence."

Qandil described himself as a supporter of Nasserism, which he defined not as a political affiliation, but rather an ideal of "social justice" and "national liberation" that "goes beyond generation and class". He did not join any of Egypt's Nasserist political parties or organizations, but viewed the era of late president Nasser as a period in which his "generation was taught self-respect, national pride and the courage to stand up against the great powers". Qandil was described by Hammond as a "secular-nationalist ... embodying the 'conscience of the Arab nation'".

In a 1999 interview Qandil stated his view that the pan-Arab media was not able to counter what he perceived as the influence of Zionism in American media and that the state of Arab media reflected the state of stagnation in the Arab world in general. Qandil was vociferously opposed to United States foreign policy in the Middle East. He referred to the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 as the "biggest modern disaster for the Arabs since 1948," the year in which the newly established state of Israel defeated a coalition of Arab armies, causing a mass exodus of Palestinians from their homes.

Qandil supported the 2011 Egyptian revolution and called for Mubarak to step down from the start of the protests. In a lecture to students from the American University of Cairo in early March 2011, Qandil hailed the young protesters who started the revolution as "brave" and expressed hope that it would open an era of democracy and press freedom in Egypt. During the 2012 Egyptian presidential election, Qandil endorsed Nasserist candidate Hamdeen Sabahi after the Revolutionary Youth Coalition (RYC) announced their support for him. In late September 2012, during the post-revolution period in Egypt during Mohamed Morsi's presidency, Qandil announced his support for the Egyptian Popular Current movement founded by Sabahi. At the inaugural conference, Qandil stated that "a major political battle" would soon be launched for the next parliamentary elections and that Egypt's diverse make-up could never be changed.

Qandil met and married Egyptian actress Naglaa Fathi in 1992. He was married twice before. Fathi said of Qandil "He is the first man who has fascinated me. It is not easy to bewitch me, but he did. I feel like a student when I'm with him: I discover new qualities in him every day," while Qandil said he felt an "immediate chemical bond" with Naglaa.

Qandil died on 31 October 2018 after a long illness, aged 82.


</doc>
<doc id="8234273" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8234273" title="Adam Smith (footballer, born February 1985)">
Adam Smith (footballer, born February 1985)

Nathan Adam Smith (born 20 February 1985), known as Adam Smith, is an English semi-professional footballer who plays as a winger.

Smith came through the youth ranks at Chesterfield, who had originally spotted him playing local football. He broke into the first-team squad in 2001 and made his debut a year later. He was forced to undergo knee surgery in 2005 and has suffered several injuries during his career. He was loaned out to Lincoln City in 2008 and was released by Chesterfield after seven seasons at the club, after which he moved down to play in non-League football with Gainsborough Trinity, York City, Mansfield Town, Lincoln City, F.C. Halifax Town, Wrexham, Guiseley, Alfreton Town and Bradford Park Avenue.

Smith was born in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire and played in the Huddersfield and District Association Football League for Lepton Highlanders. He trialled at Football League clubs Huddersfield Town and Oldham Athletic at the ages of 14 at 15 respectively. While playing for Kirkheaton he was spotted by Chesterfield and was invited for a trial match, and was eventually offered a place on the club' scholarship scheme. He began training with the first team during the 2001–02 season and was first named on the bench for Chesterfield's 1–0 victory over Reading at the Madejski Stadium on 1 December 2001. He made his debut in a Football League Trophy match against Port Vale on 22 November 2002, where he came on as a substitute in the 77th minute, and scored in the penalty shoot-out that was eventually lost 4–3. His Football League debut came on 13 September 2003 after coming on as a substitute for the injured Mark DeBolla in the 79th minute of a 1–0 defeat to Notts County. He went on to make further appearances that month against Brighton & Hove Albion and Brentford, where he played on the left wing. He was offered a two-year professional contract with Chesterfield in March 2004, effective from 2004–05. His first league start for Chesterfield came in a 1–0 defeat to Hull City on 10 October. He underwent laparoscopic surgery on his knee to repair cartilage damage in February 2005, which was expected to rule him out for six weeks. He made his return on 18 March after coming on as a 60th-minute substitute for Carlos Logan in a 2–2 draw with Brentford. Soon after making his return, he picked up an injury to his left ankle, which was sustained during Chesterfield's 3–2 defeat to Bournemouth. This ruled him out for the rest of the season, which he finished with 19 appearances.

He was fit for the start of 2005–06 and set up two of Chesterfield's goals in the 3–1 opening day victory over Blackpool. He went on to score his first goals for Chesterfield with a brace after coming on as a half-time substitute against Yeovil Town; he scored from a pass from Paul Hall after Yeovil goalkeeper Chris Weale was left stranded after being lobbed, and then scored his second after gaining the ball from Mark Allott, which helped his team to a 3–1 victory. An 89th-minute goal from Smith against Bradford City on 7 January 2006 saw his team earn a 1–0 victory. He agreed to a new two-year contract at Chesterfield in March and finished 2005–06 with 29 appearances and scoring three goals. His recurring knee injury was confirmed to be severe patella tendinitis, which resulted in him being unfit for the start of 2006–07. He made his return to action in a friendly against Staveley Miners Welfare in August and made his first league appearance of the season in a 4–0 defeat to Nottingham Forest on 2 September 2006 after coming on as a 63rd-minute substitute. He scored the winner for Chesterfield in the Football League Trophy against Oldham Athletic with a diagonal shot from distance. Smith suffered from a knee injury in March 2007, which resulted in him undergoing surgery that ruled him out for the remainder of the 2006–07 season; in which he made 17 appearances and scored one goal, while Chesterfield were relegated to League Two. His severe tendinitis affected him in September, and eventually made his return in a 2–1 defeat to Tranmere Rovers in the FA Cup first round on 10 November. He was sent out on loan at League Two club Lincoln City for a month on 4 January 2008 and made his debut for the team a day later, helping set up the first goal in a 2–0 victory over Rochdale, after Jamie Forrester scored from goalkeeper Sam Russell's parry of a Smith effort. He made four appearances during his stay at Lincoln, all as a substitute, which was concluded after Lincoln decided against extending his loan at the club.

Smith was released by Chesterfield after he was not offered a new contract at the end of 2007–08. He trialled with Darlington of League Two, but was told by manager Dave Penney he was not what they were looking for. He then had a trial with newly relegated Conference Premier club Wrexham and eventually signed a contract with Gainsborough Trinity of the Conference North in late August. Smith made a goalscoring debut for Gainsborough with the team's goal in a 1–1 draw at home to Vauxhall Motors on 30 August. He joined York City in the Conference Premier on loan on 27 November, becoming Martin Foyle's first signing as manager, in a deal that would expire on 6 January 2009. Smith made his debut after coming on as a 63rd-minute substitute for Craig Farrell in a 1–1 draw with Salisbury City. His first goal came after scoring the opener for York with a close range finish in a 3–1 victory over Ebbsfleet United. Following this, Foyle stated his intention of extending Smith's loan at York. Smith said he was looking to join the club on a permanent contract and that Gainsborough manager Steve Charles would allow him to leave for a club in a higher division on a free transfer. However, a move to York stalled in January as Gainsborough were holding out for a fee, although Foyle refused to pay this. York eventually made an offer of a quarter of Gainsborough's asking price, which was rejected.

He signed for York permanently on 26 January for an undisclosed fee on a contract until the end of 2009–10 season. His first appearance after returning came as a 74th-minute substitute in a 1–1 draw against Altrincham on 27 January. A bruised foot picked up in a reserve-team match meant he was unable to play for York against Grays Athletic in April. He was forced into missing some matches towards the end of 2008–09 due to concerns over his baby daughter, which he finished with 17 appearances and two goals for York. Smith made his first appearance of 2009–10 after being introduced as an 86th-minute substitute against Rushden & Diamonds on 11 August, the second match of the season, which finished as a 0–0 draw. In the following match, he came on in the 87th minute and played as a striker, scoring York's second goal in a 2–0 victory over Forest Green Rovers. Soon after this match, he suffered from sciatica during a training session. He featured as a substitute in York's play-off semi-final first leg victory over Luton Town, which finished 1–0, with the tie ending 2–0 on aggregate. After finishing the season with 34 appearances and two goals for York he entered negotiations with the club over a new contract.

He eventually turned down talks with York and agreed to sign a one-year contract with fellow Conference team Mansfield Town on 19 May. On signing, Smith said "It was time for a change after not getting as much football as I would have liked. I'm still young, Mansfield are going in the right direction and I'm excited about the new season". He made his debut in the opening match of 2010–11, a 3–1 victory over Forest Green, and was substituted in the 80th minute. Smith scored his first goal for Mansfield in a 4–0 victory over Altrincham on 30 August. A red card in the 61st minute of a 1–0 defeat away to Gateshead on 2 October for a high challenge resulted in a three match suspension. He finished the season with 38 appearances and six goals.

Having been restricted to three appearances as a substitute for Mansfield in 2011–12, Smith joined League Two club Aldershot Town on a one-month loan on 7 October 2011. He returned to Mansfield on 10 November to receive treatment for a slight back strain, before re-signing for Aldershot on loan until 7 January 2012 on 23 November.

Smith signed for Conference rivals Lincoln City on a one-year contract on 21 June 2012. He made his debut after starting Lincoln's 1–0 victory over Kidderminster Harriers on 11 August 2012, which was the team's opening match of 2012–13. He finished the season with 37 appearances and two goals.

Smith joined newly promoted Conference club F.C. Halifax Town on 2 July 2013, making his debut in their 5–1 defeat away to Cambridge United in the opening match of 2013–14 on 11 August. He signed for Halifax's National League rivals Wrexham on 18 June 2015. On 5 November 2015, he joined their divisional rivals Guiseley on loan until January 2016. Smith made a positive impact in eight appearances while on loan, which led to Guiseley signing him permanently on 5 January 2016.

Smith's time at Guiseley was short-lived and he signed with Alfreton Town on 5 October 2016. Making his debut in a National League North match away to F.C. United of Manchester, Smith scored two goals in a 4–3 defeat. He re-signed for National League North club Gainsborough Trinity on 5 January 2018. He made his only appearance the next day as a half-time substitute in a 4–0 defeat away to Blyth Spartans, before signing for Gainsborough's divisional rivals Bradford Park Avenue on 26 January 2018. He was released at the end of 2017–18. 

Smith signed for Northern Premier League Premier Division club Matlock Town on 30 July 2018. He left the club on 3 October 2018 after talks with manager Dave Frecklington.

Smith is a right winger who has also played on the left, although in this position his crossing ability is reduced. He has been described as a "flying winger", whose play is "raiding" and "foraging". He is also capable of playing as a striker.

Smith grew up as a supporter of hometown club Huddersfield Town and Manchester United. After leaving Chesterfield, he started studying a course in sports massage therapy. In January 2017, he received a suspended prison sentence when found guilty of fraud.



</doc>
<doc id="8268129" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8268129" title="Silver Bullet (roller coaster)">
Silver Bullet (roller coaster)

Silver Bullet is a western-themed steel inverted roller coaster designed by Bolliger & Mabillard located at Knott's Berry Farm, an amusement park in Buena Park, California. The $16 million roller coaster was announced on December 1, 2003 and opened on December 7, 2004. A first rider auction was also held where people would bid on seats to be the first riders. The track is approximately long and the lift hill is about tall. The ride lasts two minutes and thirty seconds and features six inversions including a vertical loop, cobra roll, zero-g roll, and two corkscrews.

On May 28, 2003, a trademark for the name "Silver Bullet" was filed by Cedar Fair, the owners of the park. Construction for the new roller coaster began in September 2003 with the relocation of The Church of Reflections. As part of a $85 million investment in all Cedar Fair parks, Silver Bullet was announced to the public on December 1, 2003. The final piece of track was placed on September 30, 2004. On November 5, 2004, Knott's Berry Farm launched a "First Rider Auction" in which people from anywhere in the world would bid against each other in order to be one of the first public riders on Silver Bullet on December 7, 2004. Although sixty seats were made available, only 13 of these received bids. Out of those bids, the highest bid was $200 (US), and a total of $1643 was raised with all the money going to the Speech & Language Development Center of Buena Park. After construction and testing was completed, the roller coaster opened first to the media, then to the public on December 7, 2004 though the initial scheduled opening was on Christmas Eve of 2004. Silver Bullet was also one of four attractions that opened at Knott's Berry Farm in the same year and carries a western theme.

Silver Bullet's layout passes through three of the park's themed areas: Ghost Town, Fiesta Village, and Indian Trails.

After the train departs from the station, it makes a 90 degree right turn before beginning to climb the lift hill. Once at the top, the train goes through a pre-drop before entering the downward right drop. Once at the bottom, the train enters a vertical loop. After exiting the loop, the train makes a banked left turn leading into the cobra roll. Almost immediately after, the train goes through a zero-gravity roll followed by a downward left helix. Then, the train enters the first of two corkscrews which are separated by a banked left turn. Next, the train enters an upward left helix (the beginning of the helix is close to water) before entering the brake run. The train then makes a right turn into a second, shorter, brake run which leads straight back to the station. One cycle lasts approximately two minutes and thirty seconds.

The steel track of Silver Bullet is approximately long, and the height of the lift is approximately high. Silver Bullet, along with all of Bolliger & Mabillard's other roller coasters, was manufactured by Clermont Steel Fabricators located in Batavia, Ohio and erected by Coan Construction Company. The track is filled with sand to reduce the noise made by the trains. Silver Bullet was also the first Bolliger & Mabillard inverted roller coaster to use magnetic brakes in the brake run. The track and supports of the second brake run to the lift hill is all red, with the remaining track being yellow with red rails and the remaining supports colored white.

Silver Bullet operates with two steel and fiberglass trains, with a third kept in reserve for maintenance. Each train has eight cars that can seat four riders in a single row, for a total of 32 riders per train. The seats are colored light blue, with orange over-the-shoulder restraints and tri-color wheel coverings (red, orange, and yellow).

Joel Taylor from "Amusement Business" praised the ride saying, "In all, it's an exhilarating 2 1/2 minutes from start to finish." He was also impressed with the ride's smoothness and overall excitement, stating that the ride is, "smooth and comfortable while delivering twisting, stomach-churning excitement."

Since Silver Bullet's debut in 2004, it has consistently been ranked in the top 140 positions in Mitch Hawker's Best Roller Steel Coaster Poll. It peaked at position 99 in 2010. The roller coaster has never placed on the Golden Ticket Awards.



</doc>
<doc id="8312530" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8312530" title="Ao Man Long">
Ao Man Long

Ao Man Long (born in Macau, December 1956) was the first Secretary for Transport and Public Works of the Macau Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, from 20 December 1999 to 6 December 2006.

On 8 December 2006, Ao was arrested based on a case built by the Macau Commission Against Corruption, making him the highest-ranking official arrested in the history of Macau. Ao had allegedly offered preference in government works projects, and had amassed assets totalling 804 million patacas. On 30 January 2008, Ao was found guilty on 40 counts of bribe-taking, amongst others, and was sentenced to 27 years in prison. Ao was aided and abetted by four family members, who were also jailed for between 10 and 18 years for money laundering. On 31 May 2012, Ao was found guilty of taking bribes of more than 31.9 million patacas, and received a sentence of 29 years in prison. Joseph Lau and Steven Lo are both implicated and have been charged with offering tens of millions in bribes to Ao.

Ao's graduation from Yuet Wah College, Macau. He graduated with a Bachelor's degree in civil engineering at National Taiwan University in 1982, and a Master of Business Administration at the University of Macao. Ao joined the government in 1987. He was appointed as the first Secretary for Transport and Public Works after the handover of Macau from Portugal to the PRC on 20 December 1999.

On 6 December 2006, Ao was arrested for allegedly taking bribes and having engaged in irregular financial activities. The Macau Commission Against Corruption (CAC) alleged that between 2002 and 2006 Ao received MOP 187 million in bribes from three real estate and construction companies, two from Macau and one from the mainland, in return for which Ao had allegedly offered preference in 20 government works projects. Ao allegedly had assets not commensurate with his earnings: Ao and his wife earned 14 million patacas from their official posts between 2000 and 2006, yet had accumulated assets totalling 804 million patacas (US$100m), equivalent to 57 times their earnings. Ao was charged with 76 counts, including corruption, bribe-taking, money laundering and abuse of power.

According to Article 50 of the Basic Law of Macau, the removal of ministers would require Central Government approval. Citing "irrefutable evidence" of improper behaviour, Chief Executive Edmund Ho asked Beijing to remove Ao from office.

Ao Man-long stood trial in Macau on 5 November 2007, facing 30 years in prison. Given Ao's status of Government Secretary (equivalent to Minister), he was tried directly in the Court of Final Appeal of the Macau SAR. Over one hundred witnesses were called to testify.

Although it was an open trial, the 500-page indictment was not made public. Media representatives petitioned for its release, but it was denied by judge Viriato Manuel Pinheiro de Lima, who said it would affect witnesses' thoughts and testimony. The prosecution charged Ao with having received millions of dollars in kickbacks for contracts, including those for the dome constructed for the 2005 East Asian Games, the Venetian and the Galaxy StarWorld Hotel, from Ho Meng-fai, Chairman of San Meng Fai Engineering and Construction Company.

Anti-corruption officers were aided unwittingly by Ao, who kept details of every illegal transaction and the kickbacks he received in a notebook. Ho Meng-fai – who had jumped bail – confessed in statements given to the CAC and the procurator's office that Ao offered to recommend his company to foreign investors in exchange for 2 to 3 percent of the winning tenders. Ho said between 2004 and 2006, he paid Ao about HK$140 million in kickbacks, for private projects only. During the trial, 7 witnesses, including Ho, went missing.

Ao allegedly set up shell companies a network of secret bank accounts in Hong Kong and the British Virgin Islands with the help of friends and family members to launder bribe money. Ao's father Ao Veng-kong, brother Ao Man-fu, and sister-in-law Ao Chan Va-choi were charged with setting up overseas bank accounts and shell companies for Ao Man-long to handle kickbacks. The total deposits in more than a dozen Hong Kong bank accounts under his father's name exceeded HK$157 million as of December 2006. The three family members pleaded not guilty, claiming Ao Man-long opened the bank accounts for them. All family members were sentenced to prison terms by a decision of the Macau Court of Second Instance on 30 October 2008.

On 30 January 2008, Ao was found guilty on 40 counts of bribe-taking, 13 counts of money laundering, two counts of abuse of power, one count of incorrect declaration of assets and one count of holding assets from unknown sources; Ao was sentenced to 27 years in prison. About MOP 252 million of his assets in Macau were seized. Ao decided not to appeal. There were concerns voiced in the Macau media that Ao was the fall-guy, as most Macanese were sceptical that corruption on such a scale could take place without anyone else knowing or being involved. During his trial, Ao hinted that contacts valued at in excess of 6 million Patacas required the approval of his superior in government, Edmond Ho.

In a separate trial, his wife was sentenced "in absentia" to 23 years in jail for her role in laundering money. Ao's four family members, each accused of six to 14 counts of money laundering activities, were also jailed for between 10 and 18 years. Ao's wife is believed to have absconded to the United Kingdom. Macau authorities were co-operating with the ICAC in Hong Kong to retrieve an estimated HK$637 million (US$81.7 million), which was reportedly deposited in 39 Hong Kong bank accounts in Ao's name and 92 overseas bank accounts opened in the name of his relative-accomplices.

Ao filed a motion before the Court of Appeal to un-freeze some of his personal bank accounts, on the grounds that those accounts were supposedly not linked to the corruption case, and were the actual accounts for receiving his salary. The motion was denied on 26 September 2008: according to the verdict of his corruption trial, all his money and personal possessions, even if purchased legally, now belonged to Macau.

In March 2008, reports emerged that a fresh set of criminal proceedings related to other acts of corruption were being investigated by the Macau Commission Against Corruption. In addition, the family members and the businessmen allegedly involved were appealing their convictions.
A second trial took place before the Court of Final Appeal. The final decision was handed on 22 April 2009, and the total penalty was increased from 27 years of imprisonment to 28 and a half years.

On 31 May 2012, Ao was found guilty of taking bribes of more than 31.9 million patacas. Joseph Lau and Steven Lo are both implicated and have been charged with offering MCP20 million in bribes to Ao to secure five plots of land near the airport in Macau. The judge remarked that "no other officials involved in corruption in Asia and other countries can compare" to Ao. The maximum jail term is 30 years, according to the laws of Macau, thus the judge ordered Ao serve his 29-year term concurrent with his existence sentence.




</doc>
<doc id="8324324" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8324324" title="Tao Li">
Tao Li

Tao Li (; born 10 January 1990) is a Singaporean competitive swimmer who specializes in the backstroke and butterfly.

Tao has represented Singapore at the Southeast Asian Games (SEA Games), the Asian Games, World Championship, Commonwealth Games and Olympics. She holds several national records.In fact, she's the only female Singapore swimmer who qualified for an Olympic Finals.

At the 2005 SEA Games in the Philippines, at just 15, she won 4 golds and a bronze. She reached the finals of the women's 50 metres, 100 metres and 200 metres butterfly events at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne though she did not win any medal. In December 2006, Tao won gold at the 50 metres butterfly in Doha's 2006 Asian Games, beating China's multi-gold medallist Xu Yanwei and breaking her own national record in the process. She was Singapore's most medalled athlete at the 2007 SEA Games in Nakhon Ratchasima (Korat), Thailand, winning four gold medals. Earlier in the year, she became the first Singaporean female swimmer to reach a FINA World Aquatics Championships final, finishing seventh in the 50 metres butterfly.

Tao made her Olympic début for Singapore at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. She qualified in the 100 metres finals, ranking fourth in the semifinals with a time of 57.54 seconds and setting two Asian records in two days. She thus became the first Singaporean swimmer to qualify in an Olympic final. She emerged fifth at the women's 100 metres butterfly finals with a time of 57.99 seconds.

Tao Li was born on 10 January 1990 in Wuhan, Hubei, in the People's Republic of China, the only child of Tao Ran and his wife Li Yan, who were both former provincial swimmers in their youths, and later took on careers as swim coaches. Her early years were spent in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province. She began swimming at the age of five, and by the time she was ten, had begun competitive swimming. In her first contest she won two gold medals and broke two age-group records.

In 2002, when Tao was 13, her mother brought her to Singapore, to further her career in swimming. Her father was initially against the idea as she was then training with a provincial swimming team and earning a monthly stipend of RMB 500. And there was a good chance she might do well enough to join the Chinese national team. However, they decided to do so after she was deemed too short for the Chinese National team. Since her parents were not earning much, they faced much difficulty paying for Tao's swim training. Tao's English was not as good as other students her age, she joined a Primary 5 class in Queenstown Primary School though she was three years older than her classmates. She found things tough-going. However, she worked hard and took extra language lessons, and now converses fluently in English.

Tao became a Singapore citizen in August 2005. In 2008, Tao enrolled at the Singapore Sports School She was expected to continue with her education there until she graduates with a diploma in sports science under an arrangement between the school and the Auckland University of Technology.

She trained with the Sports School's swim coach, Peter Churchill. followed by training at the Aquatic Performance Swim Club (under former Olympian Ang Peng Siong) from 2001. Apparently a contract dispute in 2006 saw her switching her training to another former Olympian, David Lim, at Swimfast Aquatic Club.

Tao has represented Singapore at the Southeast Asian Games (SEA Games) and Asian Games. Following her success at the 1st Hong Kong Open Invitational Championships, she took home four gold medals and was named the most outstanding female swimmer, At the 23rd SEA Games held in the Philippines later that year, she won gold for the 100 metres backstroke, 200 metres butterfly, and 4 x 100 metres medley relay with teammates Ho Shu Yong, Nicolette Teo and Joscelin Yeo.

In March the following year, she won gold in the 50 metres butterfly at the Milo Asia Swimming Championships in Singapore, the Republic's first top award at the competition. Between 16 and 21 March 2006 she took part in the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne, reaching the finals of the 50 metres, 100 metres and 200 metres butterfly, though she did not gain any medals. In December the same year, Tao won a gold medal at the 50 metres butterfly in Doha's 2006 Asian Games, beating China's multi-gold medallist Xu Yanwei and breaking her own national record in the process. She won a bronze medal at the 100 metres butterfly earlier in the tournament, recording a national and Asian mark of 58.96 seconds.

Tao became the first Singaporean female swimmer to reach a FINA World Aquatics Championships Final. The 2007 World Aquatics Championships were held in Melbourne from 17 March to 1 April 2007, and she finished seventh in the 50 metres butterfly. Later that year at the 2007 SEA Games in Nakhon Ratchasima (Korat), Thailand, she was Singapore's most medalled athlete at the Games, winning four gold medals in the 100 metres backstroke, 100 and 200 metres butterfly, and 4 x 100 metres medley relay. On 28 June 2008, Tao was named Sportswoman of the Year in the Singapore Sports Awards given out by the Singapore National Olympic Council each year. She won the award in 2007. too.

In January 2008, Tao became embroiled in controversy after the Singapore Swimming Association (SSA) introduced a 15% levy on the cash awards given to swimmers, with about 6% set aside for youth development. As part of the government's Multi-Million Dollar Award Programme (MAP), she received S$23,750 for winning three individual titles and one team gold at the 2007 SEA Games. She was therefore "taxed" S$3,562.50, with S$1,425 going to youth development. Unhappy with this, Tao said: "If they [the SSA] want to cultivate youth, they should find their own money, not pay using our awards. It's through our hard work that we got the money. So, I don't see the point that we should give the money to the youths." She itereited that it been her school and not the SSA which had borne the expense of her overseas training. The SSA said it was "very disappointed" with her comments, and pointed out that the association had spent "easily in excess of $20,000" in sending her for competitions abroad such as the World Championships, Hong Kong Open and Japan International, and a stint at the Australian Institute of Sport. SSA Vice-President Oon Jin Gee told the press, "Even with the Sports School funding it, it's our taxpayers' dollars going into her development. It doesn't matter which avenue it comes from, it's still Singapore's support for her."

Tao made her Olympic début for Singapore at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, arriving ranked 26th out of 49 butterfly swimmers. On 9 August, the second day of the swimming competition, she qualified fourth fastest for the semifinals of the 100 metres butterfly after winning her heat with a personal best time of 57.77 seconds. The following day she made it to the finals, shaving off 0.23 seconds for another personal best time and new Asian record of 57.54 seconds. She came in fourth behind her role model, Australian swimmer Lisbeth Trickett, and the USA's Christine Magnuson and Australia's Jessicah Schipper. She thus set two Asian records and the national record for the event, and became the eighth fastest butterfly swimmer in the world and first Singaporean swimmer to qualify for an Olympic Final. On 11 August, she came fifth at the 100 metres butterfly finals with a time of 57.99 seconds. The top three spots were taken by Trickett (56.73 seconds), Magnuson (57.10 seconds) and Schipper (57.25 seconds). Asked by "The Straits Times" about her performance, Tao said, "If I have given another personal best, it would not have gotten me a medal. The top three winners were just too good. I wanted to do my best and I pushed all the way and hoped for the best." Given Tao's age compared to those of the medallists, there were hopes that she would be able to improve on her performance at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London.

On 12 August, Tao swam in the second heat of the 200 metres butterfly. She finished fifth (26th in a field of 34) and thus did not proceed to the semi-finals, but her time of 2 minutes 12.63 seconds was a new national record. Discussions have begun regarding plans for her future development. The Singapore Sports Council's high performance chief Wayde Clews has said: "Money will not be a prohibitive factor in providing the support and necessary resources for Tao Li to reach her full potential ... with the 2012 Olympics as the target." As Tao needs to gain more high-level competing experience, there is also the issue of whether she should continue training in Singapore or head overseas, particularly to Australia or the US.

On 1 November 2008 at the FINA/Arena Swimming World Cup in Singapore, Tao achieved gold in the 100 metres short-course (25 metres) butterfly, and the following evening a bronze in the 50 metres butterfly in a personal-best time of 25.93 seconds. She repeated her feat in the 100 metres butterfly at the Stockholm leg of the competition on 11 November, and in Berlin on 15 November when she set a competition record with a time of 56.28 seconds. Tao was named the inaugural "The Straits Times" Athlete of the Year 2008, and came second in "Today" newspaper's 2008 list of athletes of the year.

Tao participated in the 25th Southeast Asian Games in Vientiane, Laos. On 10 December 2009, she took the gold in the 200 metres backstroke in a time of 2 minutes 17.12 seconds. Three days later, she was part of the winning 4 x 100 metres medley relay team with Roanne Ho, Shana Lim and Quah Ting Wen, and on 14 December she broke her own 2005 Games record in the 200 metres butterfly in a time of 2 minutes 13.49 seconds. As she chalked up five wins, including the 100 metres backstroke and butterfly events, these were her most successful Games to date.

On 18 November 2010, Tao won Singapore's first gold medal at the 2010 Asian Games in Guangzhou, China, in the 50 metres butterfly. Her time of 26.10 seconds was a personal best as well as a national record. She had achieved silver in the 100 metres butterfly on 13 November.

Tao competed for Singapore at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. In the women's 100 metres butterfly she reached the semifinals held on 28 July, but with a time of 58.18 seconds did not do well enough to join the eight swimmers who advanced to the finals with times below 58 seconds. The next day, in the women's 100 metres backstroke, she bettered her national record with a time of 1 minute 1.6 seconds but did not advance beyond the heats, ranking 26th out of 45 swimmers.

As of 30 July 2012, Tao was the holder of the following Singapore records:




 


</doc>
<doc id="8325437" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8325437" title="Jennifer Brunner">
Jennifer Brunner

Jennifer Lee Brunner (born February 5, 1957) is an American attorney, politician and judge. She is currently a judge on Ohio's Tenth District Court of Appeals. Brunner is a member of the Democratic Party who served as the Ohio Secretary of State; Brunner was the first woman to serve in this capacity. She took office after sixteen years of Republican control, which included two four-year terms by her predecessor J. Kenneth Blackwell, who oversaw the 2000 and 2004 United States elections. Prior to being elected Secretary of State, Brunner worked in the Ohio Secretary of State's Office and served as a County Judge in Franklin County, Ohio. She also owned her own private practice; during her private practice career, she focused on election law and campaign finance law. She represented a broad range of candidates, businesses, political parties and committees before the Ohio Elections Commission on quasi-criminal matters.

As Secretary of State, Brunner was actively involved in evaluating and adjusting statewide election systems. Her efforts focused on correcting the procedural election difficulties that Ohio was known for. She evaluated voting mechanisms and instituted policy changes. She argued policy regarding same day voting, privacy of social security information, and foreclosure-related voter eligibility.

In 2008, she earned a Profiles in Courage Award for her reform of the voting systems. During the 2008 United States elections, Brunner was involved in several court cases in the Ohio State Supreme Court and United States Supreme Court regarding voter registration, provisional ballots and absentee ballots.

On February 17, 2009, she announced that she would run for the 2010 United States Senate election in Ohio, coincident with the retirement of incumbent George Voinovich and the end of her term as Secretary of State. Lieutenant Governor Lee Fisher announced his candidacy on the same day and defeated her in the Democratic primary on May 4, 2010.

Brunner announced on February 18, 2014, that she was certified by the Franklin County Board of Elections as the Democratic candidate for the Ohio Tenth District Court of Appeals. Brunner defeated incumbent Judge Amy O'Grady in the general election.

Brunner grew up in Springfield, Ohio. She earned a B.A. in sociology-gerontology, cum laude, from Miami University in 1978 and a J.D. from Capital University Law School with honors in 1982. Subsequently, Brunner worked in the Ohio Secretary of State's Office as a deputy director and legislative counsel to the Ohio General Assembly during the administration of Sherrod Brown from 1983–87. In four years of service under Brown, Brunner's responsibilities included working with state legislators on finance-reporting laws for campaign committees and laws for election procedures.

She then began a statewide law practice where she gained 12 years experience focusing on election law and campaign finance from 1988–2000. She briefly worked for the Franklin County Board of Elections. In 1988, Brunner represented the Ohio Pesticide Applicators for Responsible Regulation, when the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency held hearings about testing Ohio water supplies for pesticides that were not against federal regulations. She agreed that testing standards should be higher, but felt that such standards should not be mandated. She expressed an interest in public service when a seat on the Columbus City Council became available following the April 29, 1988 death of John R. Maloney. The list of candidates who applied included at least 20 applicants.

Brunner has litigated various ballot propositions. In 1988, she represented a client who contested the validity of a ballot proposal to halt the sale of alcohol at the Cuyahoga Falls entertainment center. She was treasurer of a citizens group that attacked the financial reports related to a Westerville, Ohio school district tax levy on the November 1988 ballot. Later in 1989, she represented property owners in a rezoning referendum. Brunner represented Ohioans Against Casino Gambling in its dispute over the wording of the 1990 ballot issue on "games of chances".

Brunner's private practice was not exclusively about ballot issues. She served as treasurer of Choice '90, a political action committee that ran television commercials about the abortion positions of 1990 Ohio's gubernatorial candidates (Anthony J. Celebrezze Jr. (D) and George Voinovich (R)) but that was funded primarily by the Ohio Democratic Party. Brunner represented Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Eugene Branstool in battles with the Ohio Republican Robert Bennett and Canton, Ohio industrialist William R. Timken over the state redistricting following the 1990 Census. Brunner successfully brought a claim by Ohio House of Representatives Seventh District representative Rocco J. Colonna against Brook Park Mayor Thomas Coyne in 1991 for circulating campaign literature containing false statements.

Brunner was also involved in a drawn out case involving the rights of Hamilton County bars to serve alcohol in glass containers. The bars she represented were effectively put out of business by neighborhood residents' passage of an ordinance. Brunner challenged petition signatures on a similar matter in Franklin County. However, the case in Franklin County was dismissed. The Hamilton County plaintiffs were granted a stay preventing the Ohio Liquor Control Commission from receiving the certified May 7 results. This stay allowed their case to be heard. Meanwhile, Brunner won another related case in the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. The case overturned a state law allowing liquor licenses to be revoked by popular referendum. This ruling bolstered the case of the other four bars she represented. In 1992, Franklin County Democratic Party chairwoman Fran Ryan approached Brunner about becoming a judge, but Brunner declined.

Brunner successfully defended Ohio House of Representatives member C.J. Prentiss when her position on the ballot was challenged in the May 1994 primary. In 1998, she successfully represented House Rep. Charleta Tavares when her petition signatures were challenged during her candidacy to replace J. Kenneth Blackwell as Ohio Secretary of State.

In 1994, she represented the Delaware County Amphitheater Action Committee, a group that attempted to block the state Liquor Department from issuing a beer permit. When their case was dismissed, they appealed to the Ohio Supreme Court. At the same time, she represented vendors whose liquor licenses were about to be cancelled following a vote where poll workers allegedly acted with bias. Brunner got her clients a September 1994 ruling that the poll workers had, in fact, attempted to influence voters. That same month, she was unable to get a pair of liquor option questions removed from the November 1994 ballot.

In 1994, Brunner also represented neighbors of an adult video store that was being razed to make way for a McDonald's store in an affluent neighborhood. She obtained a 14-day restraining order to halt issuance of a zoning certificate and demolition and building permits. The Bexley, OH neighborhood hosts the Ohio Governor's Mansion and mansions once owned by "Hustler" publisher Larry Flynt and The Limited chairman Les Wexner. She got citizens to appear before the zoning appeals board to attempt to stop the construction. The Citizens were unsuccessful in convincing the Board of Zoning Appeals to change their earlier decisions. After the citizens were unsuccessful with the zoning board, they pursued remedy in the Franklin County Common Pleas Court. In addition to the court proceedings, the citizens sought the attention of the City Council in attempt to preserve the neighborhood by keeping the video store from being converted into a McDonald's. On April 7, 1995, Brunner gained a verdict for her clients that in the interest of avoiding traffic congestion and pedestrian dangers, the McDonald's would not be allowed to build. The developer attempted to appeal the decision by obtaining friend-of-the-court briefs from surrounding municipalities. The Franklin County Appeals Court overturned the lower court ruling making way for the construction of the McDonald's. Brunner's clients appealed to the Ohio Supreme Court. However, the Supreme Court declined to hear the case. A few other cases against the developers remained in some lower courts. However, these were unsuccessful. After the lower court zoning victory, in May 1995, she was hired to oppose a project.

In 1995, Brunner again applied for a vacant seat on the Columbus City Council. That year, Brunner represented the AFL-CIO in their battle against proposed rule changes related to new Ohio campaign finance laws. Also, in 1995, she was hired to handle several elections law cases. She successfully represented Franklin County Democratic Party Chairman Dennis White in a 1996 case about whether his primary campaign mailings violated Ohio election laws. She also was involved in a residency challenge in 1996. She represented a Seneca County constituent of then State Representative (current State Senator) Karen Gillmor who felt the Franklin County home where Gillmor's family resides is her true residence. The challenge failed.

Brunner was involved in a hanging chad controversy when in a 14,696-ballot November 4, 1997 election in Licking County an income tax issue which had failed by four votes subsequently passed by thirteen on a November 26 automatic recount. Brunner was present for a court-ordered second January 6 recount to evaluate whether chads remained hanging by one, two, or three hinges or whether they were sufficiently indented to count.

Brunner represented the Save The Doves Committee, an animal rights group that attempted to ban the hunting of mourning doves in Ohio via a ballot initiative. The group had previously attempted to petition the state to have the doves removed from the state game list. Ohio had formerly had a history of protecting mourning doves dating back to 1917, but hunting them was legalized starting in 1995. The doves had an Ohio population of 5 million and were legal prey in 38 states. A pro hunting wildlife group, unsuccessfully challenged the committee's petitions. The actual wording of the ballot issue, which became "No person shall take or hunt a mourning dove," was contentious. Some found the issue wording confusing because a "Yes" vote meant support for "No hunting". Television ads opposing the ballot issue also were hotly contested. This issue was the only statewide issue on the 1998 ballot. The ban proposal failed.

Brunner represented pro-gambling interests in an off-track betting ballot issue in Stark County. After the Canton City Council allowed a new betting parlor, the Stark County Board of Elections deadlocked along party lines on whether to allow a county-wide referendum against off-track betting. Republican Secretary of State Taft, broke the tie allowing the referendum on September 14. Brunner appealed the Board's decision to allow the voters the chance to overrule the city council.

In 1998, she represented the Ohio Democratic Party when they challenged 1998 Ohio gubernatorial election candidate Bob Taft's ad campaign. On various occasions, during the race she obtained probable cause determinations by the Ohio Elections Commission that there were improprieties in Taft's television commercials. While the dispute was being resolved, one of Taft's ads was ordered to be pulled off the air via a restraining order on October 10. The restraining order was lifted three days later. On October 16, the Ohio Elections Commission rebuked Taft for lying in his commercials. After the ruling, the candidates continued to contest other campaign ads for a few days. Then they signed a code of ethics. During the same election period, she represented Mark L. Mallory in a similar ad campaign battle when he unseated State Senator Janet Howard. In another campaign advertising case, she represented Richard Cordray who charged his opponent, Betty Montgomery with money laundering of campaign advertising funds. Brunner felt Montgomery should have been disqualified in the election.

Brunner also represented a pair of judge candidates who were charged with misconduct during the 1998 elections. She was able to get charges dismissed against Judge Deborah P. O'Neill of Franklin County Common Pleas Court. However, a disciplinary panel of the Ohio Supreme Court recommended Stark County Common Pleas judge candidate Elizabeth Burick to pay a $5,000 fine for actions that "demeans the judiciary".

In 1999, she represented a pair of individuals whose published election-related literature was challenged. She represented Northland Mall owner in his attempts to block funding for roads to the planned Polaris Fashion Place mall. Her client was able to get a ballot issue placed to oppose the special financing. Television ad regarding this issue were hotly contested. The voters failed the proposal before the Franklin County prosecutors decided whether to take actions following the Ohio Election Commission's determination that the ads were false.

In one of her final cases in private practice, Brunner returned to represent interested parties in Bexley. Although she was campaigning for her own November 2000 election at the time, she represented a restaurant at risk of losing its Sunday liquor license. After several years of representing controversial parties in elections issues, Brunner, a principal of Brunner, Kirby & Jeffries Co., ran a non-controversial campaign. Brunner, who was making her first run for elective office, opposed incumbent John F. Bender who had been appointed by Governor Taft in April 2000 to replace the retiring James J. O'Grady. The race was the only contested race in the general division of Franklin County Common Pleas Court. During the campaign, Bender outpaced Brunner in fundraising by a $76,613 to $58,145 margin.

In 2000, Brunner was elected to an unexpired term on the Franklin County Common Pleas Court. She was reelected in 2002. The Court of Common Pleas judges tested, approved and created a separate drug court to reduce addiction-related recidivism. Judges recommend repeat offenders who have been charged with non-violent felonies stemming from their drug or alcohol addictions for the program, which targets those repeatedly charged with theft, receiving stolen property, writing bad checks, prostitution or drug possession, which are all addiction related crimes. Brunner started the court in April 2004 after several years of research.

In December 2001, she approved a US$22 million settlement between Georgia-Pacific and 6,000 residents that resulted from a 1985 and a 1997 explosion. The settlement became controversial when several residents remained uncompensated nearly a year later. She handled cases ranging from a drug-related firebomb death, a former-Columbus Division of Policeman's intramarital shooting and Interstate 71 highway chase, and an Ohio State University student Drive-by shooting death, to an international kidnapping case, alcohol service suspensions, domestic abuse, a sex offender rights case, a federal fugitive case, and a state construction contract case. After Brunner's May 30 ruling in the contract case, which involved the Ohio School Facilities Commission and their $2 billion school construction program, Ohio Governor Bob Taft forced the commission to review its contracts for a five-year retroactive period. Brunner had ruled that a three-person commission review contracts instead of just the commission's director, Randall Fischer. Approximately 1,800 contracts were reviewed. The 10th Ohio District Court of Appeals in Franklin County overturned her ruling. The Ohio State Supreme Court refused to hear appeals. Despite having been overturned, Brunner was supported by the Ohio Inspector General who found ethics violations. Brunner was also involved in a controversy for jailing a lawyer who she claimed was in contempt of court that resulted in op-ed page debate.
Brunner resigned from the Court on September 1, 2005 to run for Secretary of State. She ran unopposed in the May 2, 2006 Democratic Primary. On November 7, 2006, she defeated Republican Greg Hartmann in the 2006 general election by a 55%–40% margin and took office on January 8, 2007. Since the office is one that serves as a keeper of public records, the histories of the two candidates' vigilance against identity theft was an important issue. The campaign also included mudslinging. She also received significant support from the Secretary of State Project, which "helped me toward the election".

Ohio had complaints of voting irregularities in the 2000 and 2004 elections. The state had hours-long lines at polling places in its major cities in 2004 and a fraud scandal in Cuyahoga County, which includes Cleveland, that led to the convictions of two elections workers on rigging recounts and Ms. Brunner's takeover of the county board of elections. In September 2007, Brunner announced extensive efforts to identify and correct serious problems with the security and reliability of voting machines in time for the March 4, 2008 Ohio Democratic and Republican primaries. In a US$1.9 million federally financed study released December 14, 2007, Brunner reported the results of tests of all five voting systems used in Ohio. All systems had major flaws. The study focused on security; reliability of the equipment and the systems; the software configuration; and procedures of the local officials. Security and procedures were seen to be serious problems. The security level of the computer equipment did not match the contemporaneous levels of security used in other information-sensitive industries.

She has advocated the replacement of all Ohio voting machines, including the direct-recording electronic (DRE) touch-screen ones used in more than 50 of Ohio's 88 counties. Brunner supports a move to paper ballots, which would use optical scanning. As a result of the study, during the March 2008 primaries, paper ballots were supposed to be available at all polling places for voters who preferred them. The paper ballots also served as a backup for machine failures. Brunner mandated a paper ballot election for the November 2008 general election. This was due both to the study and problems faced during the 2007 election with touch screen electronic voting machines. However, the Republican-controlled Ohio General Assembly has not addressed the subject of funding an all-paper ballot. Consequently, Brunner focussed on addressing the procedures instead of the inherent lack of technical security.

In January 2007, Brunner proposed a plan that would allow counties to recruit poll workers by mail, who would then undertake two paid training days, and work a paid eight-hour shift at the polls on Election Day. Brunner explained the plan in an interview:

In terms of Ohio and what happened in the 2004 presidential election, there has been a crisis in confidence in our election system in Ohio, both nationally and in our state. One of the quickest ways to repair that is to make sure that we have adequate numbers of poll workers. ... We suggested this as one tool that the boards of elections would have available to them for recruiting poll workers. We would be looking to do this similar to how we recruit jurors, only jurors are recruited for two weeks of service whereas we'd only be asking for three days. It would also allow us to offer split shifts to poll workers. In Ohio the polling places are open for thirteen hours, so essentially a poll worker works at least fourteen hours; with the average age of our poll workers at 72, that's a tough day for anyone, no matter what their age is. ... It's an option, and we can even include a trigger, so that a county has to be deficient by a certain percentage of poll workers to even be able to use this.

In the initial proposal it was not yet decided what wages would be paid, and whether refusing recruitment would result in penalties. The proposal will be decided by the Ohio General Assembly.

Brunner has established the Voting Right Institute (VRI) to improve voter access to elections in Ohio. The VRI has instituted a "Grads Vote" program which supplies voter registration forms to all graduating high school seniors. The VRI has also partnered with the U.S. Postal Service to include voter registration forms in government moving packets and with the Overseas Vote Foundation to improve online absentee ballot applications for overseas and military voters.

She has also moved to shield social security information and other private information from public view for millions of online records and coordinated with the Ohio General Assembly to prevent the filing of private information.

Brunner worked with Ohio's 88 county boards of elections and thousands of poll workers to ensure record voter turnout in the March presidential primaries. Despite the record turnout, the primary was marred by paper ballot shortages, bomb threats, ice storms and power failures. In addition, flooding forced the relocation of some polling places in southeastern Ohio. 21 precincts in the Cleveland metropolitan area were held open for an extra 90 minutes due to paper ballot shortages. Brunner claimed that in Clermont and Summit Counties ballots ran out because of the number of Republicans who voted in the Democratic primary and that only Democratic ballots ran out.

Brunner has spoken out against election officials taking voting machines home with them in the days before an election. Such actions could allow hacking even though it makes transport and delivery to the eventual polling place simpler. Some elections officials say they feel the system is better if elections officials keep an eye on machines the days before the elections. Brunner says poll workers have sometimes cast ballots on machines in their homes. She issued the following directive on the matter: "We want Ohio's voters and the rest of the nation to see that we have prepared a transparent process of transporting voting equipment, ballots and supplies. That begins with security practices at boards of elections and polling places, documented chain of custody, and now procedures to make secure voting machine delivery." She has ordered bipartisan transport teams and proscribed storage conditions such as humidity. The federal government will subsidize the cost of her mandate.

In 2008 Ohio experienced an unintended consequence of a new statute that resulted in a brief period of overlap voting, when absentee voting has started and before the close of voter registration. This period ran from September 30 until October 6, due to the newly instituted early voting policy. On August 13, 2008, Brunner ordered county election board officials to establish procedures to enable voters who register to be immediately issued an absentee ballot. Because a voter could show up with only a cell phone bill, give any four digits and claim they were the last four digits of his or her Social Security Number, and then immediately vote and have such ballots put into the same pool as other votes with no procedure for more rigorous scrutiny of their validity, the Republican Party opposed the same day voting plan and fought it in several Ohio Courts. Ohio Republican Party officials and Republican voters argued in separate lawsuits that Ohio law requires voters to be registered for 30 days before they cast an absentee ballot. On September 29, 2008 (a day after lower state and federal courts overruled GOP objections to same-day registration and voting or GOP requests for mandated ballot segregation and verification) the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in Cincinnati, Ohio rejected Republican efforts to stop the plan. United States district court judge James Gwin in Cleveland, Ohio also ruled against the Republicans and issued a restraining order to enforce Brunner's plan. In Columbus, Ohio, U.S. District Judge George Smith declined to rule on another statewide challenge, deferring to the state Supreme Court's decision. The rulings, which opened a window to register and vote on the same day until the absentee ballot deadline on October 6, 2008, was upheld by the Ohio Supreme Court in a 4-3 decision in which two Republican jurists who were on the November 2008 ballot recused themselves and were replaced by one Republican and one Democrat by Chief Justice Thomas Moyer. The normal roster of Ohio Supreme Court jurists is all Republican and the lone Democrat replacement, William H. Wolff Jr., cast the tie-breaking vote. The dissenters noted that Ohio's Constitution requires that a person register to vote 30 days in before voting. Brunner ordered segregation of same-day-registration ballots and verification of them before counting them on Election Day, November 4, 2008. In related proceedings on September 30, 2008, Judge Smith of The U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio in Columbus had granted an Ohio Republican Party request for a restraining order that would mandate election observers during early voting. Brunner prevailed in the appellate court which ruled that the district court "abused its discretion" in granting the restraining order.

The same-day registration ballots are subject to the standard Ohio notification card protocol whereby a postcard is sent to the newly registered address to assist in determining the validity of the address. A card that comes back marked return to sender is questioned and marked on the voter rolls. Additionally, the boards of elections submit new voter registrations into a database in the office of the Ohio Secretary of State. The information is matched with driver's licenses on an Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles database and failing a match there it is sent to the Social Security Administration to pursue a match.

Ohio (along with Colorado, Indiana, Michigan, Nevada and North Carolina) is one of six states expected to be heavily affected by compliance with the 2002 Help America Vote Act, which mandates that states corroborate voter registration applications with government databases. Due to the disproportionate voter registration by Democrats it is anticipated that much of the confusion at the polling places will be for challenges to newly registered Democrats who have been delisted from the ranks of registered voters.

It appears that Ohio is using social security information to verify new voter registration, even though "[u]nder federal law, election officials are supposed to use the Social Security database to check a registration application only as a last resort, if no record of the applicant is found [within the state's own] databases," according to a "New York Times" article. Michael J. Astrue, commissioner of the Social Security Administration, alerted the United States Department of Justice and sent letters to six states including Ohio to ensure compliance with federal law. Brunner has stated that the filing of paperwork by Republican officials may be an attempt to establish grounds for contesting ballots on Election Day. The paperwork requires use of provisional ballots by persons with discrepant registrations. On October 9, 2008, the Republicans also were granted an order against Brunner by Judge Smith requiring that Brunner must perform voter registration verification according to the Help America Vote Act. Matching new registrants' information against Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles or the Social Security Administration databases is one of the requirements. Challenges to mismatched registrations, which force the use of provisional ballots, must be filed twenty days prior to the election. Legal expert Greta Van Susteren viewed the ruling as a significant breaking news story and interviewed Brunner on her show "On the Record w/ Greta Van Susteren" the day it was made. Van Susteren interpreted the ruling as a statement that Brunner has not been taking sufficient steps to prevent voter fraud. "Democracy Now!" also interviewed Brunner on that day, but they did so before the final verdict.

Between January 1, 2008 and mid-October 2008, over 666,000 Ohioans registered to vote either for the first time or with updated voter information, and over 200,000 of them provided driver's licenses or Social Security numbers that do not match government records. Over 20% of these voters are from Cuyahoga County, which is heavily Democratic. Also, many of the newly registered voters were the result of voter registration drives to register voters for Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton for the March 4, 2008 Ohio Democratic primary. The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in a 9-6 decision, ruled against Brunner on October 14, 2008 in deciding that extra steps must be taken to authenticate these registrants and Jeffrey Sutton's majority opinion suggested that these misregistered voters cast provisional ballots. Historically, 20% of provisional ballots have been thrown out. As a result of the ruling, Brunner's Office of the Ohio Secretary of State must provide each county with a list of registrants with mismatching information and provide direction on a proper course of action. There are federal laws barring purging voters from the election rolls within 90 days of an election. This issue is considered to be a partisan one with Republicans favoring greater scrutiny, and the justices voted almost along party lines based on the United States President that appointed them.

On October 17, 2008, in Brunner v. Ohio Republican Party, 07A332, the United States Supreme Court overturned the 6th Circuit Decision requiring Brunner to provide lists of improperly registered voters to each county election board. The ruling means that Brunner can instruct the 88 county boards of elections to ignore public record requests by the Ohio Republican Party made to challenge registrants with information mismatched between their registration and their driver's license or social security number. The Republican Party claimed that the ruling was based on a technicality rather than the merits of the arguments. Bennett said that "The justices did not disagree with our argument that Jennifer Brunner has failed to comply with federal election law. They merely said we don't have a right to bring a private challenge against her under this particular provision." The McCain-Palin campaign said "...the United States Supreme Court does not address violations of the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) by Ohio Secretary of State Jennifer Brunner. Rather, the Court ruled that Congress had likely not authorized private individuals or political parties to bring suit under the section of HAVA requiring voter registration verification through data-matching." Since the ruling did not directly address the issues that the Republicans wanted determined, they filed a similar case in the Ohio Supreme Court. However, they withdrew the case.

One month before the 2008 United States election, 5% of Ohio mortgages were either severely delinquent or in foreclosure. There were 67,658 foreclosure actions in the first half of 2008. An editorial in "The New York Times" purported that Republicans may try to use foreclosure lists to block voters. Brunner warned all election boards that involvement in a foreclosure is not, by itself, sufficient basis for challenging enfranchisement.

On entering office, Brunner took immediate action against Republican county elections officials, including Robert T. Bennett, Ohio Republican Party Chairman. At the time, while writing for "The Cincinnati Enquirer", columnist Peter Bronson described Brunner as "the most partisan state official in Ohio". More recently, she has been accused of partisanship by her former Secretary of State opponent in the 2008 general election. He claims that she set policy in order to throw out absentee ballots likely to be cast for the John McCain-Sarah Palin ticket. The Ohio State Supreme Court supported the Republican argument. Other sources claim that ACORN advises and influences Brunner.

The 2008 general election was expected to be marred by Diebold electronic voting machines that had malfunctioned on vote transfers from the local precinct machines to the county election board headquarters. Brunner is suing Diebold for other types of vote-dropping malfunctions. Fifty-three of eighty-eight counties used the problematic touch screen electronic voting machines. The machines had also mysteriously crashed and their printers had jammed in the 2007 elections. Brunner feels that electronic machines should be avoided until they achieve the same security standards as the computer equipment in the banking and communications industries. She issued a report that both Premier Election Solutions (a Diebold subsidiary) and Hart and Election Systems & Software produce electronic voting systems with severe security flaws.

Brunner has made several specific efforts to alleviate some of the past voting difficulties. 2008 was the first Ohio election that permits absentee voting as a matter of preference without any justification for need. This resulted in a record number of absentee ballots. Additionally, voting machine redistribution has been closely studied with the hope of alleviating long waits in problem areas. Redistribution is based on past turnout, new registrations, any recent purges under the National Voter Registration Act, and the number of ballot issues in the district. Each precinct has been supplied with sufficient paper ballots to accommodate 25% number of voters who voted in the previous presidential election.

Brunner has noted that only incarcerated convicted felons become ineligible to vote in Ohio. Thus, persons incarcerated for misdemeanors and persons detained in prisons awaiting new trials can vote directly from prison.

In fall of 2008, Brunner was challenged in a pair of cases involving the Northeast Ohio Coalition for the Homeless. In September, in Project Vote (on behalf of Northeast Ohio Coalition for the Homeless) v. Madison County Board of Elections, No. 1:08-cv-02266 (N.D. Ohio), Judge Garvin enjoined the Madison County Board of
Elections from adhering to its September 5 announcement that it would disregard Secretary Brunner's directives to issue an absentee ballot to anyone who has not already been registered for 30 days. The Board had threatened an action that the judge determined would violate Section 202 of the Voting Rights Act causing irreparable injury to
registered voters who will be unable to receive absentee ballots. On October 27, 2008 in the case The Northeast Ohio Coalition for the Homeless v. Brunner, Case No. C206-
896, U.S. District Judge Edmund Sargus ruled that in concert with Ohio Revised Code § 3503.02(I) which states: "If a person does not have a fixed place of habitation, but has a shelter or other location at which the person has been a consistent or regular inhabitant and to which the person has the intention of returning, that shelter or other location shall be deemed the person's residence for the purpose of registering to vote." The order mandated that Brunner as Secretary of State "instruct the County Boards of Elections that provisional ballots may not be rejected for failing to list a building address on the provisional ballot envelope if the voter resides at a location that does not have an address." This ruling states that all Ohio counties must allow homeless voters use non-building locations such as park benches as their addresses. At the same time, the court ruled that poll worker error is not a valid reason to reject a provisional ballot. "Time" said that these rulings brought uniformity in handling provisional ballots to the counties that did not previously exist.

On October 20, 2008 Brunner had to temporarily shut down the Ohio Secretary of State website after it was hacked. The offense was placed under the jurisdiction of the Ohio State Highway Patrol. At the time of the announcement Ohio Governor Ted Strickland noted that Brunner has been the subject of threats and Brunner noted that her office has been assaulted with threats and actual delivery of abuse.

In November 2008, Brunner became involved in a legal battle against two Steve Stivers supporters that relates to the validity of a 1000 provisional ballots in the race for Ohio's 15th congressional district that at the time of recounting had a 149-vote margin and 27,000 absentee ballots to be counted. The case was consolidated with other cases in the United States District Court upon Brunner's request. On December 5, 2008, Stivers' supporters won a ruling in the Ohio Supreme Court that the 1,000 provisional ballots that lacked signatures or had names and signatures in the wrong places be thrown out.

Brunner's term as Ohio Secretary of State ends in 2011 and was up for re-election in 2010 along with other Ohio statewide offices. In January, rumors that were eventually confirmed began circulating that second term Republican United States Senator George Voinovich would not run for re-election in 2010. Brunner's name was mentioned as a potential Democratic candidate for the seat. On January 23, 2009, Brunner and Ohio Lieutenant Governor Lee Fisher met to discuss the possibility that either of them would run, but did not confirm any decision or leanings to the media.

On February 17, 2009, Brunner announced that she would be a candidate for the U.S. Senate in 2010. She ran against Fisher for the Democratic nomination. In September 2009, DSCC Chairman Bob Menendez, who supported Fisher and had been trying to clear the field for him, stated he would actively work against any underfunded candidate, in which Brunner eventually responded "I'm not scared of you" at a fundraiser in Washington D.C. in December of that year. By February 2010, she had significantly less cash on hand than Fisher or likely general election opponent Rob Portman (who would eventually win the seat), but claimed, "I only need enough money to win," adding, "And frankly, in this economic environment, it's rather obscene when people start crowing about how many millions they have on hand." Polling in late 2009 and January 2010 showed Brunner to be more competitive than Fisher in a general election matchup against Portman, while Fisher and Brunner were deadlocked in Democratic primary polling. Her budget-spirited campaign employed "Rosie the Riveter" imagery and the use of an old school bus called "The Courage Express" to travel across the state. During the campaign Fisher faced accusations of being afraid of Fox News and being too staged and not genuine. The final Quinnipiac Poll released at the end of April showed Brunner leading Fisher among men 38-24% and defeating Portman 40-36%.

Brunner lost to Fisher in the May 4, 2010 party primary, 55% to 45%.

Brunner was certified as the sole Democratic candidate running for the Ohio Tenth District Court of Appeals seat occupied by incumbent judge Amy O'Grady, who was appointed to the seat by Governor John Kasich in 2013. The 2014 judicial elections are notable for the number of judges on the ballot, with "The Columbus Dispatch" stating that it was the first time 12 contested judicial seats would appear on the ballot in Franklin County, Ohio. She was the only Democratic nominee for the appellate seat, running against incumbent judge Amy O'Grady. Brunner defeated O'Grady and was elected to a two-year term as Franklin County appeals judge unexpired term in the General Election.

Brunner worked with the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) of the US Department of State as a consultant on campaign finance, elections, and ballot issues in the Republic of Serbia during 2012. Brunner also served as an adviser to Serbian misdemeanor court judges on outreach strategies to rebuild the public's confidence in elections systems. The project, named Judicial Reform and Government Accountability, also aims to enable the Serbian government to better detect and prevent corruption in the government. She has been engaged to serve as an adviser through USAID four times, with a trip to Serbia in 2013 assisting the Serbian Minister of Justice with judicial reform.

Brunner also served as an international election observer in Egypt for the 2014 Egyptian constitutional referendum.

Judge Brunner is a Member of the Board of Advisors of the Berlin, Prague and Sydney-based Global Panel Foundation - a respected NGO which works behind-the-scenes in conflict areas around the world.

Brunner is a resident of Columbus, Ohio. She and her husband, Rick, have been married since 1978 and have three adult children. They have also been foster parents to three children. Brunner is an alumna of Whetstone High School in Clintonville, Ohio. Brunner served on the Ohio Student Loan Commission, a nine-member group that guarantees loans for college students, for a term that ended in 1992. Republican Governor John Kasich appointed her to a Democratic seat the Ohio Cultural Facilities Commission in 2011, which was legislated out of existence in 2013. In October 2012, Kasich also appointed her to the Ohio Counselor, Social Worker, Marriage and Family Therapist Board. Columbus Mayor Michael B. Coleman appointed Brunner to the Central Ohio Transit Authority Board in 2013.

In March 2008, Brunner was given the Profile in Courage Award by the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. She earned the award for challenging the reliability of electronic voting in order to protect the right to vote in Ohio. The award was announced on March 18, 2008. She received the award May 12, 2008. Brunner assumed office in 2007 and ordered paper ballots be provided to any voter who requested one in the March 2008 primary and called for the replacement of all the state's electronic voting systems by the November 2008 presidential election. Her overhaul of the Ohio voting system was considered costly and reckless by some, but after the election her risk was heralded in the press as successful.



</doc>
<doc id="8413728" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8413728" title="Joseph Staten">
Joseph Staten

Joseph Michael Staten is an American writer best known for his work at video game studio Bungie.

At Bungie, Staten served as director of cinematics for the studio's games, including the "Halo" series; he would write mission scripts and movie dialogue for the titles. He has also been involved in managing the expansion of the "Halo" franchise to other game studios and producers, including Peter Jackson's Wingnut Interactive. Though not a published author previously, Tor Books approached Staten to write the fifth "Halo" novelization, "". Released in 2007, the novel reached #3 on "The New York Times" bestseller list in the first week of its release and received positive reviews. Staten rejoined Microsoft Studios as a senior creative director on January 9, 2014.

Joseph Staten is the son of a minister who is a professor of theology and philosophy of religion. He was born in San Francisco, California. Staten entered Northwestern University in 1990 with the aspiration of becoming a professional actor. Realizing he was not leading man material, he switched his focus to other subjects and graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in communication and international studies in 1994. Staten also has studied at the University of Chicago, where he received a Master of Arts degree in international relations in 1997.

After being rejected for employment with the Central Intelligence Agency, Staten dropped the idea of entering the foreign service and instead helped his family at their winery in Sonoma Valley. He pursued a number of jobs before becoming a staff member at game developer Bungie in 1998 after meeting some of the developers in online "Myth" matches.

Staten's former role at Bungie was director of cinematics and was responsible for the in-game movies for Bungie's "", "Halo 2", and "Halo 3". Work on the games at "crunch time" involved 80-hour weeks and stretches without sleep maxing out at 72 hours. Staten worked alongside three other staff writers at Bungie, each with their own separate role: Frank O'Connor developed "Halo 3"s combat dialogue, Rob McLees focused on "Halo" canon and working with licensing partners, Luke Smith interacted with the fans online, and Staten developed the cinematics and missions scripts. Staten said in an interview that he considered it challenging to write for the games, as "first person shooters [are] all about writing 'between the bullets'"—relating plot information to the players in between action sequences. "You need to be efficient and clever to give players the story—the context—they need. But you don't want to push too hard or they'll reject it." During his work on the games he read science fiction works by Iain Banks, Robert A. Heinlein, and Vernor Vinge. In addition to his writing contributions, Staten lends his voice to small aliens known as Grunts in all three video games.

Though previous "Halo" novels had been written by professional writers like Eric Nylund and William C. Dietz, publisher Tor Books chose Staten to write the fifth "Halo" novelization, entitled "". Editor Eric Raab noted in the book's press release that "who better to tell the tale" of humanity's encounter with the antagonistic alien Covenant than Staten, who had "intimate knowledge" of the series' story. The novel is an ensemble piece, with the action being narrated from both human and alien viewpoints; the work of Staten's favorite science-fiction authors helped teach him the importance of honing a "strong, consistent voice". Staten found that writing compelling action involved slowing things down, paradoxically the opposite of the fast-paced gameplay of a "Halo" title. He considered the book the perfect way to elaborate on the "Halo" story without stripping it down for a video game, and flesh out the character of Avery Johnson more than the games had allowed.
On release, "Contact Harvest" reached a top spot of #3 on the "New York Times" bestseller list, where it remained for four weeks. The novel also appeared on the "USA Today" bestsellers list at the same time. Reviewers noted that despite being an unproven writer, Staten had succeeded in crafting an excellent novel. The novel's success was considered to be evidence that games were breaking into the mainstream, and that the genre was becoming increasingly about the story.

After "Contact Harvest"s release Staten played an important role in the development of offshoots to the "Halo" franchise. He traveled to New Zealand several times to work with Peter Jackson and Weta Workshop. Staten assisted with the fiction of Ensemble Studios title "Halo Wars", and the now-postponed "Halo" film. In interviews, Staten has explained that the game's protagonist, the Master Chief, would serve as a supporting character rather than who the film would focus on. He worked on story development for the "Halo 3" expansion, "". Staten provided the voices for a number of characters as placeholder audio during the representational play testing of the game in December 2008. Staten was last working for Bungie as the writer and design director for Destiny. On September 24, 2013, Bungie announced that Staten had left the company to pursue new creative challenges.

Staten rejoined Microsoft Studios as a senior creative director on January 9, 2014. On March 12, 2015, 343 Industries' official website posted a blog post detailing a list of upcoming "Halo" novels. One of the novels listed is "Halo: Shadow of Intent" authored by Joseph Staten and released on December 7, 2015. He is the lead writer for Microsoft's "ReCore", which was released on September 13, 2016.

Staten is married and has two children. On June 18, 2011, he gave the convocation address to the class of 2011 of the Northwestern University School of Communication .



</doc>
<doc id="8436300" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8436300" title="New York State Route 418">
New York State Route 418

New York State Route 418 (NY 418) is a state highway located entirely within the Adirondack Park in Warren County, New York, in the United States. The route begins just west of the hamlet of Thurman Station, where Athol Road changes designations from County Route 4 (CR 4) to NY 418. It heads eastward through the towns of Thurman and Warrensburg, following the Schroon River to an intersection with U.S. Route 9 (US 9) in the hamlet of Warrensburg. All of NY 418 is part of the Dude Ranch Trail, a New York State Scenic Byway that runs through Warren County and Saratoga County.

The origins of NY 418 date back to the 19th century when Thurman Station and Warrensburg were first connected by way of a road. This highway was reconstructed by the state of New York during the early 1910s and added to the state highway system in 1915. It was designated as NY 418 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York. The highway has remained mainly unchanged since, save for the replacement of its bridges over the Schroon and the Hudson Rivers in the 1930s and 1940s, respectively.

NY 418 begins just southwest of Thurman Station, a hamlet within the town of Thurman, where Athol Road shifts from county maintenance (as CR 4) to state maintenance (as NY 418). It heads northeastward along the base of Sugarloaf Mountain, one of the Three Sisters Mountains, as it passes an area with very little development. The route continues along a northeasterly trek to Thurman Station, where it intersects with River Road in the center of the isolated community. At this point, the route turns southeastward and crosses the Upper Hudson River Railroad at-grade before passing over the Hudson River on the Thurman Station Bridge. NY 418 passes into the town of Warrensburg at the midpoint of the bridge.

On the opposite riverbank, the route turns eastward to follow the eastern bank of the Schroon River through an undeveloped portion of Warrensburg comprising little more than forests. The route winds along the bank of river to the hamlet of Warrensburg, where the route becomes River Street and heads past several blocks of houses. At Alden Avenue, the route curves to the northeast, mirroring the curvature of the river through Warrensburg. It continues along the waterway to the junction of Ridge and River Streets, where NY 418 turns north onto Richards Avenue and finally crosses the river on a truss bridge. The route meets Water Street (CR 9) on the opposite bank before continuing northward past several commercial properties to the center of Warrensburg, where NY 418 ends at an intersection with US 9 (Main Street).

The origins of NY 418 date back to 1896, by which time a road had been constructed between Thurman Station and Warrensburg. In 1912, the state of New York solicited bids for a project to improve the road to state highway standards. On June 12, 1912, the contract for the project was awarded to the Joseph Walker Construction Company of Albany for $35,776 (equivalent to $ in 2019). About $3,400 worth of upgrades were made to the highway before the contract was cancelled. The state resolicited bids for the project in February 1914 and let a $35,231 (equivalent to $ in 2019) contract for the project on February 20, 1914. The highway was rebuilt as a stone highway bound by asphalt. The upgraded highway was accepted into the state highway system on January 8, 1915.

The Thurman Station–Warrensburg state highway was designated as NY 418 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York. NY 418's alignment has not been substantially altered since that time; however, parts of the route have been upgraded since 1930. In 1933, the original bridge that carried NY 418 over the Schroon River in Warrensburg was replaced with a new truss bridge in length. The route's original bridge over the Hudson River near Thurman Station was replaced in 1941 with the Thurman Station Bridge, another truss bridge long. The bridges were reconstructed by the New York State Department of Transportation in 2000 and 1995, respectively.

Parts of NY 418 run through a proposed tourism district known as the First Wilderness Heritage Corridor. The corridor, conceived by Warren County, is intended to revitalize the Hudson River corridor by turning it into a tourist destination. Areas currently being studied for future development include the primarily residential and agricultural areas around Thurman Station, the privately owned train station along NY 418 in this same area, and two vacant lots adjacent to the Hudson River on NY 418. At some point in time, the entire length of NY 418 was included as part of the Dude Ranch Trail, a New York State Scenic Byway that connects Lake George to the Hudson River.


</doc>
<doc id="8436547" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8436547" title="Ridgedale Center">
Ridgedale Center

Ridgedale Center, colloquially known as Ridgedale, is an enclosed shopping mall in Minnetonka, Minnesota, a western suburb of the Twin Cities. It is directly located off I-394/US 12 between Ridgedale Drive and Plymouth Road (Hennepin CSAH 61). Ridgedale Center comprises of leaseable retail space, and contains approximately 140 retail tenants. It is currently jointly owned by Brookfield Properties Retail Group and CBRE Group, and managed by Brookfield. Anchors are JCPenney, Macy's, Nordstrom and Sears.

Built in 1974, it was originally anchored by Dayton's, Donaldson's, JCPenney, and Sears, before the first two anchors merged with other companies. The mall has undergone several expansions and renovations throughout the years, including the recent addition of a Nordstrom department store in 2015. Considered an "upscale shopping center", Ridgedale includes various luxury brands such as Michael Kors, Swarovski, and TUMI.

Ridgedale Center was constructed on 81.3 acres of land in 1974 by the Dayton–Hudson Corporation, becoming the Twin Cities' fourth 'dale' shopping center, following Southdale, Brookdale, and Rosedale. The original center comprised of retail space, and was anchored by Dayton's, Donaldson's, JCPenney, and Sears, the former of which also developed the center.

Dayton's announced plans in the early 1990s to tear down their current location at Ridgedale, and replace it with a much larger location in the same mall; these plans were also made at the other 'dale' centers, like Southdale and Rosedale. However, these plans were eventually scrapped and never occurred. In 1996, Dayton's opened up a second anchor store at the center; this new store focused on men's clothing and furniture, while the original location changed focus and became centered on women's and children's clothing; the two stores were differentiated by their new titles, "Men's & Home Store" and "Women's and Children's Store".

In 1987, Donaldson's announced the merger with Chicago-based department store chain Carson Pirie Scott. The Carson Pirie Scott store would also eventually leave Ridgedale Center, in 1995. Mervyn's, a California-based department store, announced interest in the former building, but never opened, despite opening locations at former Carson's locations at Brookdale Center, Eden Prairie Center, and Rosedale Center. In 2001, Dayton's merged with Chicago-based Marshall Field's, which merged with Macy's in 2006.

In early 2007, Ridgedale underwent a multimillion-dollar renovation to "freshen and brighten" the mall, with the use of "all-new lighting, flooring, and paint."<ref name="Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal Article #1"></ref> The renovation also included the addition of new restrooms and seating areas. Completion of the renovation process occurred later that same year. The center was also briefly mentioned in the commercially successful 2007 film "Juno".

In 2009, Nordstrom announced plans to open a location at Ridgedale in 2011; however, these plans were later cancelled due to General Growth Properties, the mall's owner, filing for bankruptcy. This announcement came with the closure of the Macy's Men's & Home Store. Later in 2013, Nordstrom confirmed plans to open up a department store at Ridgedale by 2015; these plans allowed Macy's current anchor of to grow into a larger, location. The current Macy's Women's & Children's Store was expanded to provide additional space for the combination; during this process, a major fire occurred at the construction site, delaying the construction by several weeks.

On June 4, 2014, deconstruction of the Men's & Home Store occurred, to make way for the new Nordstrom store, plus an additional of leaseable space, presumably for upscale retail and dining options.<ref name="Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal Article #2"></ref> This expansion was evaluated at $50 million, according to General Growth Properties. The Nordstrom location officially opened on October 2, 2015, followed by a grand opening ceremony.

On October 15, 2018, it was announced that Sears had filed for bankruptcy and plans on closing 142 stores. These closures include the Sears at Ridgedale, which will hold a liquidation sale until the end of the year.



</doc>
<doc id="8444275" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8444275" title="New York State Route 421">
New York State Route 421

New York State Route 421 (NY 421) is a short state highway located within Adirondack Park in the southeastern corner of St. Lawrence County, New York, in the United States. It is a narrow, two-lane spur route connecting NY 30 to Horseshoe Lake by way of Tupper Lake. A dead end sign is posted immediately off NY 30, the only route with which it intersects. The entire road is located in the town of Piercefield, although that name is not posted on NY 421. The route offers access to several picnic and snowmobile areas.

The eastern portion of NY 421 was built in the 1920s under the terms of a 1923 law authorizing the construction of a highway leading from modern NY 30 north to Warren Point. This road was completed in 1925. NY 421 was assigned to the entirety of the north–south highway . The roadway connecting Horseshoe Lake to Tupper Lake was built and became part of NY 421 by 1968. NY 421's former routing to Warren Point remained a state highway up through 1999, when a bill permitting the New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT) to remove it from the state highway system was signed into law.

NY 421 begins at a dead end south of the hamlet of Horseshoe in an isolated part of the town of Piercefield. Here, the highway connects to a pair of dirt roads, one of which leads north alongside Horseshoe Lake to Horseshoe. The two-lane route heads eastward from the trails, following the southern shore of Horseshoe Lake while traversing the deep woods of Adirondack Park. At the southeastern end of the lake, NY 421 turns northeastward, crossing a small stream feeding into the lake before curving back toward the east. For the next , the road passes through unabated wilderness as it heads toward the western shoreline of Tupper Lake.

At Tupper Lake, the route serves a cluster of recreational buildings at its intersection with Warren Point Road, a private drive leading to Warren Point. Here, NY 421 turns southward, running along the lake shore to nearby Paradise Point Road, which leads east to Paradise Point and the lakeside Veterans' Mountain Camp. After Paradise Point Road, the highway follows a winding, southeasterly course along Tupper Lake, passing little more than dense forests while crossing over the Bog River near its mouth. NY 421 follows the lake to its southern tip, where the route ends at an intersection with NY 30 just west of the St. Lawrence–Franklin county line.

In 1923, the New York State Legislature passed a law authorizing the construction of a highway connecting Route 24 (an unsigned legislative route that is now part of NY 30) to the new Veterans' Mountain Camp, an American Legion camp on Tupper Lake. The work was funded through appropriations defined in the law. The beginning of a state road to the camp came in 1924 when earth movers were brought in by the Harnathy Contracting Company, with construction beginning in early June. The project would include construction of a concrete bridge over the Bog River. However, Hanrathy was unable to finish the job as it went bankrupt, and a second firm, the Spadaccini Realty Construction Corporation of The Bronx was brought into finish the job, which began in June 1925.The bridge over the Bog River was completed on August 29, 1925 and they announced would be opened for traffic within ten days.The route did finally open in 1925, with the Veterans Camp opening on May 15, 1926. This road was extended from modern NY 30 north to a dead end at Warren Point. In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York, hundreds of state-maintained highways that did not yet have a designation were assigned one. The Veterans' Mountain Camp highway was designated as NY 421 by the following year.

A highway leading westward from NY 421 southwest of Warren Point to Horseshoe Lake was completed . It became part of an extended NY 421 by 1968. At the time, NY 421's western terminus was located at a railroad crossing in the isolated hamlet of Horseshoe, situated at the northwestern corner or Horseshoe Lake. The former routing of NY 421 north to Warren Point, legislatively designated as State Highway 9106B, was initially considered a spur of NY 421; it was later redesignated as NY 971D, an unsigned reference route. By 1993, the west end of NY 421 was moved about south to its current location southwest of Horseshoe Lake.

After the Veterans' Mountain Camp was closed in the 1960s, the property was sold off to private owners, turning NY 971D into little more than a private drive. Thus, the road saw little use, handling less than 10 vehicles per day on average. As a result, the New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT) no longer considered the highway worthy of inclusion in the state highway system and began to take steps to remove the highway from the system. On February 22, 1999, NYSDOT sent a memorandum to the New York State Senate that laid out the groundwork for a bill which, if passed, would allow NYSDOT to remove NY 971D from the state highway system once it was able to transfer ownership and maintenance of the highway to another entity. A bill based on the memo was introduced in the State Senate on March 29 and eventually passed by the Senate and the New York State Assembly. The bill was signed into law by Governor George Pataki on July 27, 1999. The former routing of NY 971D is now officially a private drive.



</doc>
<doc id="8478651" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8478651" title="Edinburgh Place Ferry Pier">
Edinburgh Place Ferry Pier

Edinburgh Place Ferry Pier (), often referred to as the "Star Ferry" Pier, was a pier in Edinburgh Place, Central, Hong Kong, serving the Star Ferry. The pier, with its clock tower, was a prominent waterfront landmark. Built in 1957 at the height of the Modern Movement, it was the third generation of the Star Ferry Pier in Central, and was located near the City Hall and the General Post Office.

The pier was the central flashpoint of the Hong Kong riots in 1966, and 40 years later became the focus of a confrontation between conservationists and the government, which wanted to demolish the pier to allow for reclamation. The ferry service from the pier was suspended on 11 November 2006, and moved to piers 7 and 8 of Central Piers. Demolition commenced on 12 December, and was completed in early 2007.

The entire waterfront where the "third generation" pier was situated was created in the late 1950s following a major land reclamation. The shoreline was shifted from its position at the time, level to the Mandarin Hotel. The pier was built in 1957 in Edinburgh Place, at the height of the Modern Movement, near the City Hall complex which was being planned at the time.

The Star Ferry Pier was designed by a local Chinese architect, Hung Yip Chan (born in 1921). He worked in the Architectural Office (AO) of the Hong Kong Government from 1952 to 1957 as an assistant architect. He designed the façade of the pier, and the Chief Architect, Michael Wright, added the Clock Tower to make the pier more balanced and practical.

The chimes of the turret clock installed at the pier marked every quarter-hour since the pier's inauguration in 1957. The clock was a gift from John Keswick, who had in turn received it from the Prince of Belgium. The mechanism was manufactured by British company Edward John Dent, which also provided the mechanical signature to "Big Ben" of London.

There is a major bus terminus on the Kowloon side, which is conveniently situated close to the Tsim Sha Tsui Ferry Pier. Thousands of residents passed through this principal gateway to Hong Kong Island from the Kowloon Peninsula daily from 1957 until 2006. However, the inauguration of the Cross Harbour Tunnel in 1972 popularised vehicular travel across the harbour and reduced the flow of passengers. From 1972 to 2006, the ferry was still used by many as the shortest route from Tsim Sha Tsui (TST) to Central District, and a daily average of 74,000 passenger trips were made across the harbour in 2004.

On the island side, various routes of the New World First Bus, Citybus, and public light buses connected to many destinations on Hong Kong Island.

The plan to relocate the Central Ferry Piers dates back to July 1999, when proposed amendments to the draft Central District (Extension) Outline Zoning Plan covering the Central Reclamation III area were published. Both the third generation Star Ferry Pier and Queen's Pier would be demolished and 16 hectares of land directly in front of the fourth-generation pier reclaimed to make way for a six-lane road and a low-rise shopping centre. The cost was estimated at HK$3.5 billion. The Government said that the historical significance of the third-generation pier would be recognised and promised to recreate the landmark on the new waterfront.

In 2001, an impact assessment for the Central Reclamation recommended the relocation of the Star Ferry Pier, and this was approved by the Antiquities Advisory Board in 2002.

3D Laser Scanning Technology in digital recording of structures was applied to capture three-dimensional images of the pier before the demolition.

Following the pier's decommissioning on 12 November 2006, demolition work started amidst protests. The demolition was originally scheduled for the early part of 2007, but demolition was brought forward by 3 months, to 12 December 2006. The government ignored a nonbinding motion in September in the Legislative Council of Hong Kong urging it to retain the pier and clock tower.

The demolition crew took control of the site by erecting scaffolding on 6 December 2006, and demolition commenced on 12 December. Workers took down the clock mechanism and clock face, leaving a gaping hole, and then proceeded to lift the clock tower off in one piece. After the protesters had been dispersed, the remainder of the pier was completely dismantled, away from the glare of publicity.

Although the scale of the phase 3 reclamation in Central was cut back from 32 to 18 hectares, the fate of the piers was sealed by the reclamation. The pier became the centre of a bitter struggle between the Government and conservationists, who opposed either further destruction of the harbour or the further loss of historical buildings.

Consultants who prepared the Environmental Impact Assessment report in 2001 for the Central reclamation noted the pier's significant role in Hong Kong's transport history. The Government was warned that a public backlash could be expected when the full implications of the reclamation were known.

However, the Government had maintained that the Pier and its tower was not old enough to be classified as "historical" and that people were not necessarily "concerned about the building itself". To some extent, it was not wrong, since the activists were mainly fighting for the preservation of a public place and against the methods and urban planning policies of its government, perceived to favour business interests over the public interest. The struggle to preserve the Star Ferry and, later, the Queen's Pier, was the occasion to raise questions on Hong Kong's history, the question of colonialism, and that of democracy in the HKSAR.

The Government had grossly underestimated the very strong public sentiment about this 49-year-old landmark in the "collective memory" of Hong Kong residents. By its own retrospective admission, it lacked legitimacy: a Government spokesman conceded that the it had failed to gain the moral high ground.

Ferry passengers would face a lengthier trek to reach the new pier. By relocating the new piers 300 m away, it is estimated that the Star Ferry could lose perhaps 13 percent or more of passengers due to its inconvenience. On the Tsim Sha Tsui side of the harbour, the proposed relocation of the bus terminus which acts as a feeder for the ferry is forecast to further reduce passenger numbers by one-fifth.

This loss, totalling one-third of its passengers, would translate into revenue loss of some HK$17 million per annum for Star Ferry.

Architects and conservationists argued that the pier was architecturally significant to Hong Kong as one of the last remaining examples of a Streamline Moderne public building (along with the Central Market and Wan Chai Market which have been earmarked for demolition); culturally the pier was widely recognised as a part of local collective memory. The Hong Kong Institute of Architects warned against the destruction of Hong Kong's heritage, saying it would be an irreversible mistake. Public opinion has resulted in alternatives put forward to preserve the clock tower, including moving the proposed six-lane road or relocating the clock tower to the front of the new pier as a memorial.

One reason cited by the Government against the relocation of the turret clock and tower was that an expert feasibility study advised that there was "no guarantee the clock and chimes would continue to work after relocation, due to their age and obsolete components". However, Neil Brennon Wright of Thwaites & Reed, the world's longest operating clockmaking firm, who arrived from England on 18 December 2006 to examine the clock, said that his firm had restored far worse.

The Government promised that it would "rebuild" the chimes of the clock, complete with the restitution of the original clock faces and mechanism at some nearby location.

The public outcry, anticipated by the consultancy report for the Antiquities and Monuments Office, was to become reality. With the imminent threat of demolition, the local community rallied to save pier, to widespread media coverage. In the weeks running up to the cessation of service from the pier, thousands of Hong Kong residents arrived to post banners and other messages in support of retention.

There were some 150,000 nostalgic visitors to the Pier and harbour crossing on the night of 11 November 2006. To mark the special occasion, Star Ferry hosted a "last ride" before the pier was closed-down, with the last four ferries leaving this pier on the stroke of midnight. Eighteen hundred Hongkongers willingly paid up $88 (40 times the normal fare) for the last ride, whose proceeds were designated for charity.

On 19 November 2006, the Civic Party, Democratic Party, Harbour-front Enhancement Committee, Hong Kong Institute of Architects, People's Sustainable Development Committee, Clear the Air, and Earth Care jointly met to urge the public to fight for the preservation of the pier. Over 1,000 signatures were collected on that one day alone, in a petition to be submitted to Chief Executive Donald Tsang and other senior officials. In addition, a group of protesters began a peaceful sit-in that day. So Sau Chung, veteran campaigner (now a monk), whose hunger strike against Star Ferry fare increases triggered the riots in 1966, came by to lend his support.
Further spurred by the start of demolition on the afternoon of 12 December 2006, more protesters started gathering spontaneously after workers removed the bell and the clock face from the tower, leaving a big hole. Activists, including "Long Hair" Leung Kwok-hung, rushed into and occupied part of the demolition site, chanting slogans from the roof of an excavator and demanded to meet Secretary for Housing, Planning and Lands, Michael Suen Ming-yeung. Protesters formed a human chain at the entrance of the construction site so as to try to stop the construction crew and machines from further demolishing the site.

In addition to the public, Civic Party legislators, and Choy So-yuk, a councillor from the pro-government Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong, showed up to lend support.

The demolition drew widespread condemnation from the public, legislators, and conservationists, all of whom claimed the government action was contrary to the wishes of the public. Legco members tabled motions to immediately halt the demolition, pending further consultation. The Government denied a last-minute reprieve, reiterating that there has been "adequate consultation", and forged ahead with demolition. The Conservancy Association claimed it made its objection known in 1996 when Government proposed to construct a temporary road through the Edinburgh Place and that the Government has never consulted the public regarding demolition of the pier, or the adjacent Queen's Pier.

After the demolition of the pier, the government said that it would consider the memories of the citizens and not the historic value of the building/structure before demolishing it.

Conservationists vowed to take the fight to Queen's Pier, and a number of other historical sites threatened with a similar fate. At the end of 2006, in a testament to how the protests have struck a chord with the public, the Ferry protesters were voted "Person of the Year" by RTHK Radio 3. Local Action, the group of rather young cultural and media activists which formed the core of the movement, were to later influence social movements, in Hong Kong as well as in the mainland: part of the more militant "post 80s" generation, they are critical of government business collusion, a one-sided development approach, Hong Kong's subordinate status within China and the perceived lack of democracy in the territory, and have been involved in the fight for real political reform in Hong Kong, and against the Express Rail link to Guangzhou.






</doc>
<doc id="8489366" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8489366" title="End Game (The X-Files)">
End Game (The X-Files)

"End Game" is the seventeenth episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series "The X-Files". It premiered on the Fox network on . It was directed by Rob Bowman, and written by Frank Spotnitz. "End Game" featured guest appearances by Megan Leitch, Peter Donat, Brian Thompson and saw Steven Williams reprise his role as X. The episode helped explore the series' overarching mythology. "End Game" earned a Nielsen household rating of 11.2, being watched by 10.7 million households in its initial broadcast. It received positive reviews from critics.

The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) who work on cases linked to the paranormal, called X-Files. In this episode, Scully is kidnapped by an alien bounty hunter and Mulder offers his sister Samantha (Leitch) forward as ransom. However, Samantha is merely one of several clones created as part of a human-alien hybrid project, leading Mulder to pursue the bounty hunter for the truth about her disappearance. "End Game" is a two-part episode, continuing the plot from the previous episode, "Colony".

"End Game" was the first episode of the series written by Spotnitz, who eventually went on to become one of the series' executive producers.

The USS "Allegiance", an American nuclear submarine, is patrolling the Beaufort Sea off the coast of Alaska when it comes across a craft below the ice that is emitting a radio signal. The "Allegiance" is ordered to fire upon the craft by Pacific Command. However, the craft manages to disable the sub using a high-pitched frequency, stranding it far below the ice.

Continuing from the cliffhanger ending in "Colony", Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) is beaten and kidnapped by "Mulder", who is really the Bounty Hunter in disguise. When the real Mulder (David Duchovny) finds the wrecked hotel room, his sister Samantha explains that the Bounty Hunter will set up a hostage exchange to swap Scully for her. She further explains that the Bounty Hunter can only be killed by piercing the base of his neck, and that his toxic alien blood is deadly to humans. Finally, Samantha reveals that the clones are the progeny of two original aliens, and worked at abortion clinics to gain access to fetal tissue. Their objective was to set up an extraterrestrial colony on Earth, an effort that has gone as far back as the 1940s. However, because the clones' experiments were considered to have tainted their alien race, the Bounty Hunter was sent to kill them.

Walter Skinner meets Mulder and Samantha at Mulder's apartment, telling them that the remaining clones are missing. Mulder receives a call from Scully, who tells him that the Bounty Hunter seeks an exchange for Samantha. Mulder and Samantha are sent to a bridge near Bethesda while Skinner hides nearby with a sharpshooter. After the exchange takes place, Samantha attacks the Bounty Hunter. During the struggle, the sharpshooter fires upon the Bounty Hunter, and both he and Samantha fall into a river. An anguished Mulder tearfully apologizes to his father, Bill, for losing her again. His father leaves him a note from Samantha, which provides Mulder with the address of a Maryland clinic where they can meet if separated. Mulder hopes that she is alive, but soon gets a call from Scully reporting that Samantha's body has been found. After Scully ends the call, she discovers Samantha's body dissolving into a green liquid.

Meanwhile, inside the clinic, Mulder finds multiple clones of Samantha working on fetuses in labs similar to that of the clones. They reveal that they manipulated Mulder by sending one of their own to pose as "Samantha" in an effort to have him protect her original clone. They also claim to know the real Samantha's location. Mulder, realizing he has been duped, initially refuses to help and starts to leave, but is knocked unconscious by the arriving Bounty Hunter, who proceeds to kill the Samantha clones and burn down the clinic. When no trace of the clones are found, Mulder meets with X at the Kennedy Center, demanding to know the Bounty Hunter's location. X says that the Bounty Hunter's craft below the Beaufort Sea has been found, and that a naval fleet has been sent to destroy it. Mulder heads there, and e-mails Scully to tell her not to follow him.

Scully goes to Skinner for help, but he initially refuses. Scully also summons X to Mulder's apartment, but he turns her down. On his way out, X is confronted by Skinner in an elevator. After the two men get into a vicious physical altercation, X divulges Mulder's whereabouts. Meanwhile, Mulder finds the stranded "Allegiance", with its sail broken through a patch of shallow ice. Inside, he finds what seems to be the sub's only surviving crewman, whom Mulder correctly guesses is the disguised Bounty Hunter. The two struggle, during which Mulder becomes exposed to the Bounty Hunter's toxic blood. The Bounty Hunter claims that Samantha is still alive before dumping Mulder off the sail and submerging the "Allegiance"; Mulder is nearly cut in half with the sub's diving plane in the process. Mulder is discovered and rushed to the field hospital seen at the beginning of "Colony", where Scully—having learned that the alien blood contains a retrovirus that dies in cold temperatures—convinces the doctors to take him out of the bath that would warm his body up.

As Mulder's condition stabilizes, Scully writes a field report crediting science with detecting the retrovirus and saving Mulder. She contends that the retrovirus is of a mysterious origin, and reports that neither the Bounty Hunter nor the "Allegiance" have been found. When Mulder regains consciousness, he tells Scully that his experiences did not give him the answers he had been searching for, but that they have given him renewed "faith to keep looking".

This was the first episode of the series written by Frank Spotnitz. Spotnitz, who came up with the idea to bring back Samantha Mulder in "Colony", wrote this episode, his first credited work on the show. According to Spotnitz, he along with Chris Carter, were overly ambitious when writing this episode. Since this was Spotnitz's debut as a television writer, he got significant help from Carter to put the script together. All of the scenes originally pitched by Spotnitz were kept, except for a car chase scene that ended with a crash, and one where Mulder mistakes a federal marshal for the bounty hunter. The scenes were cut due to time restraints during filming. Spotnitz later became a frequent collaborator on many of the subsequent mythology episodes of the show, as well as co-writing the two feature films.

It turned out in this episode that the Samantha Mulder (Megan Leitch) who appeared was a clone. Carter did not want it to be the real Samantha, since that would have been "straight science fiction" and it was too "ridiculous" to give too many answers. Spotnitz further explained that the production crew never saw "The X-Files" as a "science fiction show", but more of a show that incorporated science fiction, and that this and previous episode "Colony" were more of a "suspense thriller" than any other genre. Chris Carter described the "Colony" and "End Game" two-parter as the "backbone of the show, the romantic quest of Mulder for the truth and Scully as well", and that it led Scully to believe in the conspiracy.

The motel scene with the bounty hunter and Dana Scully was shot on a sound stage in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada in a simple motel room set. The scene featuring Scully being beaten up by the bounty hunter was primarily performed by a stunt woman. The stiletto weapon, often referred to as the "gimlet", used by the bounty hunter was constructed from aluminium and acrylic, and activated by a pneumatic hose hidden in actor Brian Thompson's sleeve. The grunt Scully utters when thrown through a table was insisted on by Standards and Practices, giving the reasoning that the show needed to make it clear for the viewers that she was not dead. According to executive producer Frank Spotnitz it was an "arcane, bizarre logic that you have to deal with when you're putting a show on network television." As director Rob Bowman was dissatisfied with the first take of Skinner shoving X against the elevator wall, Mitch Pileggi and Steven Williams decided to do the stunt for real, and Pileggi did it with so much strength that it broke the back of the elevator scenery. Williams' background in fight choreography, stemming from his role in "", allowed him to help in choreographing the brawl.

One hundred and forty tons of snow and ice were trucked into a soundstage to create the scene with the submarine towards the end of the episode, and the stage had to be refrigerated for five days. The control tower scenery was able to rise or lower only five feet, leading to restrictions such as filming on black backdrops. A decommissioned destroyer, HMCS "Mackenzie" was rented from the Royal Canadian Navy and used for the submarine interior. It was reused two episodes later for interior shots in "Død Kalm".

"End Game" premiered on the Fox network on , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11.2 with a 19 share, meaning that roughly of all television-equipped households, and of households watching television, were tuned in to the episode. A total of households watched this episode during its original airing.

The episode has been met with positive reviews from critics. In a retrospective of the second season in "Entertainment Weekly", the episode was rated an A−, being called "an exhausting, essential chapter, boasting the series' most visually stunning finale". Writing for "The A.V. Club", Zack Handlen rated the episode an A, noting that it was ""X-Files" in top form". He felt that the fight between Skinner and X was "one of the season's great moments", although he derided the use of Scully in a "heroine-as-victim" role. Michelle Bush, in her book "Myth-X", has noted that "End Game" is "a good example of the basic premises that Mulder and Scully cannot succeed without the other", and serves to highlight "the danger of making someone else's choice for them."




</doc>
<doc id="8490390" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8490390" title="Lindsay Lohan">
Lindsay Lohan

Lindsay Dee Lohan (; born July 2, 1986) is an American actress, businesswoman, fashion designer, film producer, and singer. Born and raised in New York, Lohan was signed to Ford Models as a child. Having appeared as a regular on the television soap opera "Another World" at age 10, her breakthrough came in the Walt Disney Pictures film "The Parent Trap" (1998). The film's success led to appearances in a string of televised films for Disney Channel and the movie "Freaky Friday" (2003).

Lohan's work won her childhood stardom, and the sleeper hit "Mean Girls" (2004) affirmed her status as a teen idol. After starring in "" (2005), she quickly became the subject of intense media coverage following a series of personal struggles and legal trouble, as well as stints in rehabilitation facilities, which led to the loss of several roles and significantly impacted her career and public image. Thereafter, she focused on smaller, more mature roles in "A Prairie Home Companion" (2006), "Bobby" (2006), and "Chapter 27" (2007). In the 2010s, she appeared in films "Machete" (2010), "Liz & Dick" (2012) and "The Canyons" (2013), among others. Following a highly publicized interview with Oprah Winfrey, Lohan was subject of the OWN documentary series "Lindsay" (2014). Between 2014 and 2015, she made her stage debut in the London West End production of "Speed-the-Plow", in 2018, had a recurring role on the British series "Sick Note", and in 2019, began appearing in the MTV reality series "Lindsay Lohan's Beach Club".

Lohan came to prominence in music after signing with Casablanca Records and releasing two studio albums, "Speak" (2004) and "A Little More Personal (Raw)" (2005), which were certified platinum and gold respectively in the United States and saw the commercial success of the singles "Rumors" and "Over". She has also contributed vocals to the soundtracks of her acting projects. Lohan dabbled in fashion, beginning a line of her own titled "6126" and briefly serving as artistic advisor for Emmanuel Ungaro in 2009. In 2016, she opened the Lohan Nightclub in Athens, Greece, and in 2018, two Lohan Beach Houses in the Cyclades islands.

Lindsay Lohan was born on July 2, 1986, in The Bronx borough of New York City, and grew up in Merrick and Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island, New York. She is the eldest child of Dina and Michael Lohan. Her father, a former Wall Street trader, has been in trouble with the law on several occasions, while her mother is a former singer and dancer. Lohan has three younger siblings, all of whom have been models or actors: Michael Jr., who appeared with Lohan in "The Parent Trap," Aliana, known as "Ali," and Dakota "Cody" Lohan. Lohan is of Irish and Italian heritage, and she was raised as a Catholic. Her maternal antecedents were "well known Irish Catholic stalwarts" and her great-grandfather, John L. Sullivan, was a co-founder of the Pro-life Party on Long Island. Lohan attended Cold Spring Harbor High School and Sanford H. Calhoun High School, where she did well in science and mathematics, until grade 11, when she started homeschooling. Lohan is a natural red head.

Lohan's parents married in 1985, separated when Lindsay was three, and later reunited. They separated again in 2005 and finalized their divorce in 2007.

Lohan began her career as a child model with Ford Models at the age of three. She modeled for Calvin Klein Kids and Abercrombie, and appeared in over 60 television commercials for brands like Pizza Hut and Wendy's, as well as a Jell-O spot with Bill Cosby. By the age of 10, when Lohan played Alexandra "Alli" Fowler in the television soap opera "Another World," "Soap Opera Magazine" said she was already considered a show-business veteran.

Lohan remained in her role on "Another World" for a year, before leaving to star in Disney's 1998 family comedy "The Parent Trap," a remake of the 1961 movie. She played dual roles of twins, separated in infancy, who try to reunite their long-divorced parents, played by Dennis Quaid and Natasha Richardson. The film earned $92 million worldwide, and received largely positive reviews. Lohan received unanimous acclaim for her debut performance. Critic Kenneth Turan called Lohan "the soul of this film as much as Hayley Mills was of the original," going on to say that "she is more adept than her predecessor at creating two distinct personalities." The film won Lohan a Young Artist Award for best performance in a feature film as well as a three-film contract with Disney. At the age of 14, Lohan played Bette Midler's daughter in the pilot episode of the short-lived series "Bette," but she resigned her role when the production moved from New York to Los Angeles. She also starred in two Disney television movies: "Life-Size" alongside Tyra Banks in 2000, and "Get a Clue" in 2002.

In 2003, Lohan starred alongside Jamie Lee Curtis in the 2003 remake of Disney's family comedy "Freaky Friday," playing a mother and daughter who switch bodies and have to take on each other's roles. At Lohan's initiative, her character was rewritten and changed from a Goth style to be more mainstream. Her performance was once again met with significant praise. Critic Roger Ebert wrote that Lohan "has that Jodie Foster sort of seriousness and intent focus beneath her teenage persona." "Freaky Friday" earned Lohan the award for Breakthrough Performance at the 2004 MTV Movie Awards and, , it remained her most commercially successful film, earning $160 million worldwide as well as an 88 percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes.

In 2004, Lohan had lead roles in two major motion pictures. The first film, Disney's teen comedy "Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen," earned a domestic box office total of $29 million, with Brandon Gray of Box Office Mojo commenting that it was "well above expectations as it was strictly for young girls." But the film did not meet with critical acclaim. Robert K. Elder of the "Chicago Tribune" wrote that "though still a promising star, Lohan will have to do a little penance before she's forgiven for "Confessions."" Her second lead role that year, in the teen comedy "Mean Girls," marked Lohan's first movie independent of Disney. Based in part on the non-fiction book "Queen Bees and Wannabes," the film stars Lohan as a previously homeschooled 16-year-old learning to navigate the social cliques of a public high school. It was a critical and commercial success, grossing $129 million worldwide and, according to Brandon Gray, "cementing her status as the new teen movie queen." Mick LaSalle from the "San Francisco Chronicle" wrote that "Lohan is sensitive and appealing, a solid locus for audience sympathy." David Rooney from "Variety" said that "Lohan displays plenty of charm, verve and deft comic timing." Lohan received four awards at the 2004 Teen Choice Awards for "Freaky Friday" and "Mean Girls," including Breakout Movie Star. "Mean Girls" also earned her two awards at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards.

With "Mean Girls," Lohan's public profile was raised significantly. "Vanity Fair" described how she became a household name. Paparazzi began following her and her love life and partying became frequent targets of gossip sites and the tabloid media. Following the film, which was scripted by former "Not Ready For Prime Time Actress" Tina Fey and featured several other veterans of "Saturday Night Live's" "Not Ready For Prime Time Company," Lohan hosted the show three times between 2004 and 2006. In 2004, when Lohan was 17, she became the youngest host of the MTV Movie Awards and in 2006 she hosted the 2006 World Music Awards.

Lohan returned to Disney in 2005, starring in the comedy "," the fifth film in the series with the anthropomorphic car Herbie. "Fully Loaded" earned $144 million worldwide, but it received mixed reviews. Stephen Holden of "The New York Times" called Lohan "a genuine star who ... seems completely at home on the screen", while James Berardinelli wrote that "as bright a starlet as she may be, Lohan ends up playing second fiddle to the car." In 2005, Lohan became the first person to have a My Scene celebrity doll released by Mattel. She also voiced herself in the animated direct-to-DVD film "", based on the series of dolls.

Lohan's next widely released film, the romantic comedy "Just My Luck," opened in May 2006 and, according to "Variety", earned her over $7 million. The opening weekend box office takings of $5.7 million "broke lead actress Lindsay Lohan's winning streak" according to Brandon Gray. The film received poor reviews and earned Lohan her first Golden Raspberry nomination for Worst Actress. Following "Just My Luck," Lohan focused on smaller roles in more mature, independent movies. Robert Altman's ensemble comedy "A Prairie Home Companion," based on humorist Garrison Keillor's works, in which Lohan co-stars with Meryl Streep and Lily Tomlin, had a limited release in June 2006. Peter Travers wrote for "Rolling Stone" that "Lohan rises to the occasion, delivering a rock-the-house version of 'Frankie and Johnny.'" Co-star Streep said of Lohan's acting: "She's in command of the art form" and "completely, visibly living in front of the camera." The Emilio Estevez ensemble drama "Bobby," about the hours leading up to the Robert F. Kennedy assassination, was released in theaters in November 2006. Lohan received favorable comments for her performance, particularly a scene alongside Sharon Stone. As part of the "Bobby" ensemble cast, Lohan was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award.

Lohan's next appearance was in "Chapter 27" as a John Lennon fan who befriends Mark David Chapman, played by Jared Leto, on the day he murders Lennon. Filming finished in early 2006, but the film was not released until March 2008 due to difficulties in finding a distributor. In May 2007, the drama "Georgia Rule" was released. In the film, Lohan portrays an out-of-control teenager whose mother (Felicity Huffman) brings her to the house of her own estranged mother (Jane Fonda). Owen Gleiberman of "Entertainment Weekly" wrote that "Lohan hits a true note of spiteful princess narcissism." During filming in 2006, Lohan was hospitalized, her representative saying "she was overheated and dehydrated." In a letter that was made public, studio executive James G. Robinson called Lohan "irresponsible and unprofessional." He mentioned "various late arrivals and absences from the set" and said that "we are well aware that your ongoing all night heavy partying is the real reason for your so-called 'exhaustion.'" In 2007, Lohan was cast in the film "Poor Things,"<ref name="AP/CBS"></ref> which she ultimately lost.
In early January 2007, production on the film "I Know Who Killed Me" was put on hold when Lohan underwent appendix surgery. While Lohan was in rehab, she continued shooting the film, returning to the facility at night. Shortly thereafter, Lohan withdrew from a film adaptation of Oscar Wilde's "A Woman of No Importance," her publicist stating that Lohan needed to "focus on getting better." Lohan was replaced in "The Edge of Love" in April 2007, shortly before filming was to begin, with the director citing "insurance reasons" and Lohan later explaining that she "was going through a really bad time then."In the wake of her second DUI arrest, Lohan withdrew from a scheduled appearance on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" in which she had been due to promote "I Know Who Killed Me," a low-budget psychological horror-thriller in which she stars as a stripper with a dual personality. The film premiered in July 2007 to what "Entertainment Weekly" called "an abysmal $3.5 million." It earned Lohan dual Golden Raspberry awards for Worst Actress, with Lohan coming first and second, tying with herself. Hollywood executives and industry insiders commented that it would be difficult for Lohan to find employment until she could prove that she was sober and reliable, citing possible issues with securing insurance.

In May 2008, Lohan made her first screen appearance since "I Know Who Killed Me," on ABC's television series "Ugly Betty". She guest starred in four episodes as Kimmie Keegan, an old schoolmate of the protagonist Betty Suarez. In the comedy "Labor Pains," Lohan plays a woman who pretends to be pregnant. During the shoot, Lohan's manager worked with the paparazzi to encourage the media to show her work, as opposed to partying. It was originally planned for a theatrical release, but instead appeared as a TV movie on the ABC Family cable channel in July 2009, "a setback for the star" according to "Variety." The premiere received 2.1 million viewers, "better-than-average" for the channel according to E! Online. Alessandra Stanley of "The New York Times" wrote that "this is not a triumphant return of a prodigal child star. ... ["Labor Pains"] never shakes free of the heavy baggage Ms. Lohan brings to the role." Lohan was a guest judge on US TV style contest "Project Runway" sixth-season premiere episode, which aired in August 2009.

Lohan narrated and presented the British television documentary "Lindsay Lohan's Indian Journey," about human trafficking in India. It was filmed during a week in India in December 2009, and transmitted on BBC Three in April 2010. The BBC was criticized for having hired Lohan, and while reviewers called the documentary compelling, they also found Lohan's presence to be odd and distracting. Lohan said: "I hope my presence in India will bring awareness to the really important issues raised in making this film." In April 2010, Lohan was let go from the film "The Other Side" where she had been set to star, with the director saying she was "not bankable."

In June 2010, Lohan was the subject of a fashion shoot in the photographer docu-series "Double Exposure" on Bravo. Robert Rodriguez's action exploitation film "Machete" opened in September 2010. In the film, Lohan's character takes drugs, is naked in much of her appearance, and later dons a nun's habit while toting a machine gun. Its critical reviews were mixed. "The Washington Post" described her character as "a campier, trampier version of herself – or at least her tabloid image." Premiere.com said she was "terrible" while "Variety" called it "her best work in some time." Because of her rehabilitation and legal engagements, Lohan did not participate in promotion of the movie. Lohan filmed a sketch where she is dressed as Marilyn Monroe for "Inappropriate Comedy" in 2010. The film had issues finding a distributor and was not released until 2013, when it was met with poor box office and critical reception. Lohan appeared on the October 2010 cover of "Vanity Fair". She told the magazine: "I want my career back" and "I know that I'm a damn good actress."

Lohan had not appeared on "Saturday Night Live" since 2006, when she hosted the show for the fourth time in March 2012. Her appearance received mixed to negative reviews. Critics appreciated the self-deprecating references to her personal troubles, but also commented that she largely played a supporting role. The episode had the second highest ratings of the season with 7.4 million viewers. In May 2012, Lohan appeared briefly, as a celebrity judge, on the television series "Glee," in the episode "Nationals." Lohan stars as a surfer in the art film "First Point" by artist Richard Phillips. It debuted at Art Basel in June 2012 and features a score by Thomas Bangalter from Daft Punk. Comments from critics on Lohan's work were mixed.

Lohan starred as Elizabeth Taylor in the biographical made-for-TV movie "Liz & Dick", which premiered on the Lifetime cable channel in November 2012. Reviews of Lohan's performance were largely, but not unanimously, negative. "The Hollywood Reporter" said she was "woeful" while "Variety" called her "adequate." "Entertainment Weekly" described the premiere ratings of 3.5 millions as "a little soft." During the production, paramedics were called to Lohan's hotel room, treating her for exhaustion and dehydration. In April 2013, the horror comedy "Scary Movie 5" was released, where Lohan appears as herself alongside Charlie Sheen in the opening sketch. While the movie itself was panned by critics, a few reviewers found Lohan's and Sheen's to be one of the better scenes. Lohan also guest-starred as herself in an April 2013 episode of Sheen's comedy series "Anger Management."

In August 2013, just days after Lohan left rehab, "The Canyons" was released, an independent erotic thriller directed by Paul Schrader and written by Bret Easton Ellis. It was made on a low budget, most of which was gathered through online fund raiser Kickstarter. Lohan received $100 a day and a share of the profits, and she was also credited as a co-producer. "The New York Times Magazine" described Lohan as difficult to work with, and the shoot as fraught with conflict between Lohan and Schrader. Lohan and her co-star, adult-film actor James Deen, portray an actress and a producer in a volatile relationship. Reviews for the film were generally poor, but several critics praised Lohan's performance. "The New Yorker" said she was "overwrought and unfocused" while "Variety" called her "very affecting" and "Salon" described her as "almost incandescent." The same month Lohan filled in for Chelsea Handler as host of the cable talk show "Chelsea Lately." She received mostly positive reviews for her appearance and the show garnered its best ratings of the year.

The 8-part docu-series "Lindsay" was transmitted in March and April 2014 on Oprah Winfrey's OWN cable network. The series followed Lohan's life and work as she moved to New York City after leaving rehab. In the final episode, Lohan said that she had had a miscarriage which had interrupted filming of the series. The premiere had 693,000 viewers, described as "so-so" by "The Hollywood Reporter." The ratings then slipped and the finale only had 406,000 viewers. "New York Daily News" called the series "surprisingly routine," "Variety" described it as boring, while Liz Smith said it was "compelling" and "usually painful to watch." In April 2014, Lohan guest-starred in an episode of the CBS sitcom "2 Broke Girls."

Lohan made her stage debut in October 2014, starring in the London West End production of David Mamet's "Speed-the-Plow," a satire about the movie business. She portrayed Karen, the secretary of a Hollywood executive, in a role originally played by Madonna. Reviews of Lohan's performance were mixed, with the Associated Press describing critical reception overall as "lukewarm." "The Stage" said she was "out of her league" while "The Times" wrote that she "can act a bit" and "The Guardian" said she "holds the stage with ease." In July 2018, the second season of "Sick Note" —in which Lohan has a recurring role— premiered on Sky One.

Lohan began writing the tracks on her album in April 2004. "I write a lot of lyrics and I'm involved in the producing process, because it's like, if I'm singing it, I want it to be something that I can relate to," Lohan said. "I'm just trying to feel it out and see where it goes. I'm playing guitar and
I also love to dance, so [the music will be] somewhere along the lines of hip-hop and rock."

Lohan's debut album, "Speak," was released in the United States on December 7, 2004. The album was the first high-seller from Casablanca Records in several years, selling 1,000,000 units in the United States. The album received mostly negative reviews, with critics commenting that Lohan "isn't a bad singer, but not an extraordinary singer either." In the United States, the album peaked at number four on the "Billboard" 200, selling 261,762 copies in its first week. In Germany the album debuted at the #53 position and took four weeks to complete its chart run. The first two singles from "Speak," "Rumors" and "Over," were both successes, with "Over" topping the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles where it stayed for three weeks. The song also did well internationally in countries such as Australia, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. "Rumors" peaked at #6 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart and also did well in Australia and Germany, where it reached #14. The music video for "Rumors" was nominated for "Best Pop Video" at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards. Both songs received heavy airplay on MTV's "Total Request Live." The final single, "First," was released to help promote Lohan's film, "." The song earned small success in Australia and Germany. Lohan promoted the album by performing the songs in a number of live appearances. A tour in Taiwan was planned, but later scrapped.

Lohan's second album, "A Little More Personal (Raw)," was released in December 2005. It peaked at number 20 on the Billboard 200 chart, and was eventually certified Gold. Lohan co-wrote most of the songs on the album, which received a mixed critical response. "Slant Magazine" called it "contrived ... for all the so-called weighty subject matter, there's not much meat on these bones." Lohan herself directed the music video for the album's only single, "Confessions of a Broken Heart (Daughter to Father)," which features her sister Ali Lohan. The video is a dramatization of the pain Lohan said her family suffered at the hands of her father. It was her first song to chart on the ""Billboard" Hot 100," peaking at number 57.

Emilio Estefan and his wife, Gloria Estefan, signed Lohan to a five-album production deal in September 2002. Lohan landed the role as the daughter in Disney's remake, "Freaky Friday," also that month, which required her to learn how to play the guitar and to sing. Lohan recorded a song for the film, "Ultimate," which was released to Radio Disney to help promote the film. The song peaked at #18 on Radio Disney's Top 30. Lohan announced that the song was separate from her singing career since many teen idols such as Hilary Duff and Raven-Symoné were expanding their careers from acting to singing. In 2003, Lohan recorded four songs that were released for the soundtrack to Lohan's film, "Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen", including a Radio Disney hit, "Drama Queen (That Girl)."

She had begun working with Diane Warren and Randy Jackson, who were going to help write and produce her album. Diane Warren wrote the song, "I Decide," for Lohan which was originally going to be on her album. When Lohan decided not to collaborate with Warren and Jackson, "I Decide" was instead released on "" and on to Radio Disney.

Following a switch to Universal Motown, Lohan began working on a third album, tentatively titled "Spirit in the Dark," in late 2007. In May 2008, the single "Bossy" was released onto digital outlets, which reached number one on the US "Billboard" Hot Dance Club Play chart. The single was meant to serve as the lead single from the album. Later that year, Lohan said that work on the album had stalled and that she wanted to avoid the stress of working on movies and music at the same time.

In 2015, the English band Duran Duran announced that Lohan had been featured on the song "Danceophobia" from their upcoming fourteenth studio album, "Paper Gods."

Lohan has been the face of Jill Stuart, Miu Miu, and, as well as the 2008 Visa Swap British fashion campaign. She was also the face of Italian clothing company Fornarina for its Spring–Summer 2009 campaign. Lohan has a long-lasting fascination with Marilyn Monroe going back to when she saw "Niagara" during "The Parent Trap" shoot. In the 2008 "Spring Fashion" edition of "New York" magazine, Lohan re-created Monroe's final photo shoot, known as "The Last Sitting," including nudity, saying that the photo shoot was "an honor." "The New York Times" critic Ginia Bellafante found it disturbing, saying "the pictures ask viewers to engage in a kind of mock necrophilia. ... [and] the photographs bear none of Monroe's fragility."

In 2008, Lohan launched a clothes line, whose name "6126" was designed to represent Monroe's birth date (June 1, 1926). The line started with leggings, before expanding to a full collection, covering 280 pieces . In January 2009, Lohan appeared as a guest judge on "Project Runway". In September 2009, Lohan became an artistic adviser for the French fashion house Emanuel Ungaro. A collection by designer Estrella Archs with Lohan as adviser was presented in October, receiving a "disastrous" reception, according to "Entertainment Weekly" and "New York." Lohan left the company in March 2010. Lohan appeared in the January–February 2012 issue of "Playboy" magazine, in a shoot inspired by a nude pictorial of Marilyn Monroe from the first issue of the magazine. Editor Hugh Hefner said Lohan's issue was "breaking sales records."

In early 2018, Lohan announced plans on developing a makeup brand separate from her fashion brand and stated that it was still in its early stages of development.

In December 2014, the free-to-play video game app "Lindsay Lohan's The Price of Fame" was released for the iOS and Android operating systems. "Polygon" said it was "funny, trashy and surprisingly self-aware" while Vulture called it "a crappy knockoff of "Kim Kardashian: Hollywood"".

In June 2017, Lohan announced she was starting a lifestyle site called Preemium, which subscribers could access for $2.99 a month.

In October 2016, Lohan opened her first nightclub, in collaboration with her ex-business partner Dennis Papageorgiou, named "Lohan Nightclub", in Athens, Greece. In May 2018, she opened a resort on the Greek island Mykonos called "Lohan Beach House Mykonos" and later her second resort in Ialisos Beach, Rhodes, called "Lohan Beach House Rhodes". In July 2018, "People" magazine revealed that Lohan had signed on to star in an MTV reality series, "Lindsay Lohan's Beach Club" focusing on the Mykonos Beach House and her future career and business ventures. The series premiered on January 8, 2019 on MTV.

Following "Mean Girls," Lohan spent several years living out of hotels in Los Angeles, of which two years were spent at the Chateau Marmont. In late 2007, after settling down in a more permanent residence, she explained that she "didn't want to be alone" but that "it wasn't a way of life ... not very consistent." She had a series of car accidents that were widely reported, in August 2004, October 2005, and November 2006, when she suffered minor injuries because a paparazzo who was following her for a photograph hit her car.

In July 2007, Lohan's home was burgled by the Bling Ring, a group of fashion-motivated burglars whose ringleader considered Lohan to be their ultimate conquest. Video surveillance of the burglary recorded at Lohan's home played a large role in breaking the case.

Speaking about her sexual orientation, Lohan said that she was not a lesbian. When asked if she was bisexual in 2008, she responded "Maybe. Yeah," adding, "I don't want to classify myself." However, in a 2013 interview, she said, "I know I'm straight. I have made out with girls before, and I had a relationship with a girl. ... I think I was looking for something different."

In April 2016, Lohan was studying Islam and considered converting.

In October 2017, Lohan received scrutiny for defending Harvey Weinstein, whom she worked with on several films, on Instagram and saying that his wife Georgina Chapman should stay with him. Weinstein had been accused of sexual harassment and sexual assault. Lohan later clarified stating, "I am saddened to hear about the allegations against my former colleague Harvey Weinstein. As someone who has lived their life in the public eye, I feel that allegations should always be made to the authorities and not played out in the media."

In September 2018, Lohan garnered controversy and scrutiny after she livestreamed herself attempting to lead away a homeless woman's children on Instagram Live. In the video, she accuses the woman of child trafficking and dubs the family 'Syrian refugee[s]'. The situation has been regarded as an attempted kidnapping, and suspicions have arisen that Lohan was intoxicated.

Lohan began dating actor Wilmer Valderrama in 2004. She also guest-starred in an episode of "That '70s Show", where Valderrama was a regular. After their break-up, Lohan wrote her second single, "Over", about the experience. Lohan dated Hard Rock Cafe heir Harry Morton in 2006. Lohan dated DJ Samantha Ronson in 2008 and 2009. She co-hosted club events with Ronson and accompanied her when she was DJ-ing. In April 2009, following her breakup with Ronson, Lohan appeared in a dating video spoof on the comedy website Funny or Die. It was viewed 2.7 million times in the first week and received favorable comments from the media. , her love interest and fiancé was London based Russian millionaire Egor Tarabasov, owner of the real estate agency Home House Estates and son of Dmitry Tarabasov. They reportedly broke up in mid 2017 with Lindsay accusing Egor of abuse and him accusing her of stealing £24,000 worth of his belongings.

Lohan spoke about her turbulent childhood in 2007, the same year her parents finalized their divorce: "I feel like a second parent in the sense that I helped raise my family...I was put between my mother and father a lot." Despite the conflicts, Lohan spoke very fondly of her family. However, in 2007, 2008, and 2009 she admitted that she had cut off contact with her father, describing his behavior as unpredictable and hard to deal with.

During the 2008 US presidential campaign, Lohan offered her services to Barack Obama's Democratic election effort, but was declined. In a blog post, Lohan criticized the media and then Republican Vice Presidential candidate Sarah Palin for not focusing on policy, and attacked Palin's positions on homosexuality, birth control and abortion. Lohan had previously expressed an interest in going to Iraq, during the Iraq War in 2006, on a USO tour with Hillary Clinton. In the 2012 presidential election, Lohan supported Republican candidate Mitt Romney, something that prompted ABC News to call her a "political turncoat". Only weeks later, she tweeted words supportive of Obama.

By the age of 21, Lohan started to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, and had become a prominent fixture of the Los Angeles late-night scene, where alcohol and other drugs were often present and on hand for her. By 2007, her lifestyle had "caught up" with her, she once noted, as she started to receive more attention for her late-night persona than for her film work, and faced the beginning of what would be a long series of run-ins with the law. She described herself as an "addict" in her 2014 interview with Oprah, stating that alcohol was a gateway drug to other things for her. She also admitted to using cocaine "10 to 15 times", explaining that it "allowed [her] to drink more".

Her January 2007 admittance into a rehab center marked the first of six court-ordered rehab stints in a span of six years; she had spent over 250 days in rehabilitation by 2014. In January 2007, Lohan admitted herself to the Wonderland Center rehabilitation facility for a 30-day stay. In May, she entered the Promises Treatment Center rehabilitation facility where she stayed for 45 days. In July, she entered the Cirque Lodge Treatment Center in Sundance, Utah for a third stint at rehabilitation in the year, staying for three months until her discharge in October. In August 2010, Lohan entered an inpatient rehabilitation facility, from where she was released after only 23 days, and in October, she entered the Betty Ford Center, a drug and alcohol treatment center, where she remained on court order for three months until early January 2011. Between May and July 2013, Lohan spent 90 days in rehabilitation.

In May 2007, Lohan was arrested on a charge of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). In July, less than two weeks out of rehab, Lohan was arrested a second time on charges of possession of cocaine, driving under the influence and driving with a suspended license. In August, Lohan pleaded guilty to misdemeanor cocaine use and driving under the influence and was sentenced to an alcohol education program, community service, one day in jail, and was given three years probation. Lohan released a statement in which she said "it is clear to me that my life has become completely unmanageable because I am addicted to alcohol and drugs." In November, Lohan served 84 minutes in jail. A sheriff spokesman cited overcrowding and the nonviolent nature of the crime as reasons for the reduced sentence.

In October 2009, Lohan's DUI probation was extended by an additional year, following several instances in which she failed to attend the court-ordered substance abuse treatment classes. In May 2010, Lohan traveled to the Cannes Film Festival to promote the biographical drama "Inferno." She was set to star as the lead, adult-film performer Linda Lovelace, but was later replaced while in court mandated rehab. Because she was in Cannes, Lohan missed a mandatory DUI progress hearing. A bench warrant was issued for her arrest which was rescinded after she posted bail. A judge determined that Lohan had violated the terms of her probation by missing several mandatory classes and meetings. She was sentenced to 90 days in jail, followed by 90 days of inpatient rehab treatment. However, Lohan served only 14 days of the jail sentence, due to overcrowding.

In September 2010, Lohan's probation was revoked following a failed drug test. She spent part of the day in jail before being released on bail. In February 2011, Lohan was charged with the theft of a necklace reported stolen from a jewelry store the month before. She was sentenced to community service and 120 days in jail for misdemeanor theft and probation violation, to which she pleaded no contest. Due to jail overcrowding, Lohan served the sentence under house confinement, wearing a tracking ankle monitor for 35 days. In November, Lohan was found to have violated the terms of her probation by failing to perform the required community service. She was sentenced to additional community service and 30 days in jail, of which she served less than 5 hours due to overcrowding.

On way to the "Liz & Dick" set in June 2012, Lohan was in a car accident, where she sustained minor injuries and which caused a delay in production. In March 2013, Lohan pleaded no contest to misdemeanor charges stemming from the June 2012 car accident; reckless driving and providing false information to a police officer. She was sentenced to community service, psychotherapy and lockdown rehabilitation. Her probation was also extended until May 2015, when a judge ended it after she completed the community service making it the first time in nearly 8 years that she was probation free.

After beginning her acting career as a child actor in the early 1990s, Lohan, at age 11, made her film debut in Disney's successful remake of "The Parent Trap" (1998). "Freaky Friday" (2003) remains her highest-grossing film, while "Mean Girls" (2004), both a critical and commercial success, became a cult classic. Her career faced many interruptions from legal and personal troubles during the late 2000s and early 2010s, but she has still been able to appear in 26 films (including 6 as a personality), 12 television appearances, 1 play and 5 music videos. Her most notable films include:





</doc>
<doc id="8501624" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8501624" title="The Calusari">
The Calusari

"The Căluşari" is the twenty-first episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series "The X-Files". It originally aired on the Fox network on April 14, 1995. It was written by Sara B. Charno and directed by Michael Vejar. "The Căluşari" is a "Monster-of-the-Week" story, unconnected to the series' wider mythology, or fictional history. It earned a Nielsen household rating of 8.3, being watched by 7.9 million households in its initial broadcast. Due to perceived inconsistencies in the plot, "The Căluşari" received mixed reviews from television critics.

The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) who work on cases linked to the paranormal, called X-Files. In this episode, a photograph taken just before the death of a two-year-old boy yields evidence of some supernatural intervention which piques Mulder and Scully's curiosity. When another death in the family occurs, the grandmother of the remaining child requests the aid of some Romanian ritualists, named the Calusari, in order to cleanse the home of evil.

The script for "The Căluşari" was inspired by Charno's experience as a doctor of Eastern medicine. The inspiration for the entry came from an idea series creator Chris Carter had involving someone getting hanged with a garage-door opener. Because "The Căluşari" was heavy in terms of violence, Fox's standards and practices department took issues with several scenes. In addition, Carter re-cut the episode after it was completed in order to make it scarier.

In Murray, Virginia, Maggie and Steve Holveys' family visits a local amusement park. When the youngest child, Teddy, lets his balloon fly away, his father, Steve, gives him the balloon that belongs to his older brother, Charlie (Joel Palmer). When the boys' mother, Maggie (Helene Clarkson), is in the bathroom, the strap in Teddy's stroller comes undone. Teddy follows the balloon floating under its own power out of the restroom and onto the tracks of the park's tour train, leading to him getting killed by the train. Charlie is the only member of the Holvey family not to grieve Teddy's death at the scene.

Three months later, Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) shows Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) a photo taken moments before Teddy's death. Mulder points out that a balloon does not stay close to the ground, nor does it blow sideways. After taking the photo to a lab, it is shown that a mysterious, electromagnetic force taking the form of a child was dragging the balloon. Mulder and Scully later visit the Holveys, and Mulder explains his seemingly asinine theory that Teddy was lured onto the tracks but some unseen force. As the Holveys push back against this idea, Scully notices an older woman (Lilyan Chauvin), who is Maggie's elderly Romanian mother named Golda, drawing a swastika on the boy's hand. Scully hypothesizes that the Holvey children may be victims of Munchausen by proxy, perpetrated by their grandmother.

Soon thereafter, Mulder and Scully later discuss the case with Steve. Eventually, the topic of the conversation turns to Golda. Steve notes that she was vehemently opposed to his marrying Maggie. However, she moved in with the couple after Teddy was born after a series of odd occurrences began to take place. Given all that has happened, as well as the possibility that Charlie is being abused, Scully recommends a social worker named Karen Kosseff (Christine Willes). Later, Steve and Charlie decide to attend one of Kosseff's sessions, but when Steve tries to open the garage door, it won't cooperate. After grabbing a ladder to examine the door's controls, his tie is caught in the door and he is strangled to death. Investigating Steve's death, the police find dead chickens in Golda's room: evidence of the ritualistic sacrifices. In the garage, Mulder discovers a layer of vibhuti—a sort of ash created by intense spiritual energy.

Later, Golda welcomes three elderly Căluşari mystics into her room and they begin to conduct a ritual. While this is going on, Kosseff shows up at the Holveys' house and asks to meet with Charlie. Suddenly the boy begins to convulse. After noticing smoke billowing out from under Golda's door, Kosseff and Maggie then burst into her room where she and the Căluşari mystics are performing a ritual. Maggie tries to stop it, dismissing the mystics, but Golda refuses to comply; she grabs Charlie, locks her door, and attempts to finish the ritual. Suddenly, Charlie brings a pair of sacrificed chickens back to life and they kill Golda. While this is going on Kosseff, rushes off and finds Mulder, who in turn questions the Căluşari mystics. They explain that they were attempting to stop "an ancient and unrelenting evil" with their ritual. Kosseff later sits Charlie down and inquires about the struggle, but the boy swears that it was not him in his grandmother's room, but rather another boy named "Michael". Maggie later tells Mulder and Scully that Michael was the name of Charlie’s twin brother who was a stillborn. Terrified, she insists that she and Steve never told Charlie. After Charlie was born, Golda tried to perform a ritual that would have separated the spirits of the two boys. However, Steve would not allow it.

Charlie seizes again and its taken to a hospital. However, Michael convinces Maggie, by pretending to be Charlie, that he wants to go home. Scully witnesses what is happening, and informs Mulder, who is certain that the spirit of Michael, and not Charlie, is killing people. The two agents split up: Mulder tracks down the Căluşari mystics to complete the ritual, and Scully goes to Maggie's home to protect her. After an intense struggle in which Michael very nearly kills Scully and Maggie, Mulder and the Căluşari complete the ritual, which causes Michael's spirit to disappear. Maggie returns to the hospital and is reunited with Charlie. Before the agents leave, the head elder of the Căluşari says it is over for the time being and cautiously forewarns Mulder that "it knows you."

The episode was written by Sara Charno and directed by Mike Vejar. Before becoming a writer, Charno had been a doctor of Eastern medicine, and so her "esoteric knowledge that none of the rest of [the writers] had about all kinds of things" was put to use in this script, according to writer Frank Spotnitz. The episode was based largely on an idea that series creator Chris Carter had had about a "garage-door opener hanging". Christine Willes, who plays the part of Agent Kosseff, reprises her role; she originally appeared in the earlier episode "Irresistible".

During production of the episode, the producers "agonized" over both the teaser (given that it revolves around a child being killed by a tram) and the episode's over-all bleakness. Fox's standards and practices department, on the other hand, took issues with the initial cut of Steve's strangulation scene; in the end, the sequence was kept but the actor's face was obscured to "soften the impact". Although the episode's filming went along smoothly, the final cut "didn't pass muster". Spotnitz explained that Carter "spent a lot of time in the editing room trying to figure out how to make this more terrifying." Spotnitz later noted that Carter's dedication proved that something could be so "much better ... if you didn't give up."

"The Calusari" originally aired on the Fox network on April 14, 1995, and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on February 6, 1996. The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8.3 with a 16 share, meaning that roughly 8.3 percent of all television-equipped households, and 16 percent of households watching TV, were tuned in to the episode. A total of 7.9 million households watched this episode during its original airing. "The Calusari" is the only episode of the series to have received an explicit rating of "18" in the United Kingdom by the BBFC for "occasional strong horror" and themes involving "demonic possession".

"The Calusari" received mixed reviews, with critics citing inconsistencies in the plot as the main detractions. "Entertainment Weekly" gave the episode a "B–" rating, calling it "an "Exorcist"/"Omen" rip-off, but a classy one". Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" gave it a "C+", writing that it was "an episode with a lot of great and spooky moments", but "a messy, chaotic story that could have been much better developed, and too many things that happen [...] just because the writers thought it would be cool if they happened". However, while he was "not sure everything hangs together" and he wished for more backstory, VanDerWerff did praise some "really great moments", particularly the opening teaser. John Keegan from Critical Myth, while calling the episode "a mixed bag", awarded it a 7 out of 10. He praised the entry's "fascinating implications [about] the mythology hidden within the events depicted", and noted that it was "well directed and acted". Despite this, he was more critical of the episode's plot and wrote that there were "clear logical flaws [...] and the subject matter can be disturbing. This is an episode that falls heavily to subjective interpretation." Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Wanting to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium & The Lone Gunmen", gave the episode a largely negative review and rated it one-and-a-half stars out of five. The two called it a "pale retread of "The Exorcist"" and noted that many of the episode's elements, like the chicken-sacrificing grandmother and the Calusari members, were "tremendously crass". Shearman and Pearson, however, did enjoy the episode's dialogue, praising one scene in particular where the spirit of Michael torments his mother by asking to be taken to the amusement park and ride the train that killed his younger brother. Regardless, however, the duo concluded that "there's something stale and pointless at [the episode's] heart." The plot for "The Calusari" was also adapted as a novel for young adults in 1997 by Garth Nix.




</doc>
<doc id="8532996" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8532996" title="Traveling Salesmen">
Traveling Salesmen

"Traveling Salesmen" is the thirteenth episode of the third season of the US version of "The Office", and the show's 41st overall. The episode was written by Michael Schur, Lee Eisenberg, and Gene Stupnitsky, and was directed by series creator and executive producer Greg Daniels. It first aired on January 11, 2007 in the United States on NBC.

The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton, Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. In this episode, the sales team goes out on sales calls, with Michael Scott (Steve Carell) and Andy Bernard (Ed Helms), Stanley Hudson (Leslie David Baker) and Ryan Howard (B. J. Novak), Phyllis Lapin (Phyllis Smith) and Karen Filippelli (Rashida Jones), and Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) and Jim Halpert (John Krasinski) pairing up. Andy tries to show Dwight in a bad light to Michael, Karen learns of Jim's previous crush on Pam Beesly (Jenna Fischer), and Angela Martin (Angela Kinsey) forgets to hand in some important documents to New York, so her secret boyfriend Dwight does it for her.

Krasinski believed "Traveling Salesmen" was the first episode to give a real glimpse into Dwight and Angela's relationship, and much of the plot centered on the two. It aired to an estimated 10.2 million viewers according to Nielsen Media Research. It was positively received by television critics. Along with "The Return", NBC later re-broadcast "Traveling Salesmen" as a combined hour-long episode as part of their sweeps week. As a result, both episodes underwent editing which included the addition of four minutes of previously unseen footage.

Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) arrives several hours late to work one morning, due to driving to corporate to help out Angela Martin (Angela Kinsey).

Michael announces that the sales department will be pairing up for sales calls. Andy Bernard (Ed Helms) chooses Michael Scott (Steve Carell), Phyllis Vance (Phyllis Smith) chooses Karen Filippelli (Rashida Jones), and Stanley Hudson (Leslie David Baker) grudgingly chooses Ryan Howard (B. J. Novak), leaving Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) with Jim Halpert (John Krasinski), who used to do sales calls together. Andy learns that Dwight does Michael's laundry as punishment for meeting with Jan to take over the branch. During their sales call, Andy sabotages the meeting, setting up an opportunity to later apologize to Michael, stating that he had really "Schruted" the situation, a further attempt to deride Dwight.

While the salespeople are out, Angela Martin (Angela Kinsey) tells Pam Beesly (Jenna Fischer) a thinly disguised story of how "Kurt" saves "Noelle" ("Kurt" and "Noelle" being Dwight's and Angela's middle names, respectively) by delivering the quarterly tax forms to New York.

At first, Jim's and Dwight's sales call appears to be a fiasco, but it is soon clear that the joint force of Jim's straight-and-honest sales approach, along with Dwight's aggressive, erratic tactics, is a very successful partnership. Ryan asks Stanley if he could lead on this call so Stanley can critique him, which Stanley obliges. However, Ryan freezes up and fails when he realizes that Stanley's clients are all black. Stanley laughs at an annoyed Ryan during the entire trip back to the office. Phyllis and Karen first stop at a beauty parlor, emerging with gaudy makeovers. Their sales call is a success because, as Phyllis knew, the client obviously likes women with that kind of look, as evidenced by the photo of his wife. Returning to the office, Phyllis tells Karen that she's pleased that Jim got over his crush on Pam. Karen confronts Jim with this information, and he reassures her that his crush has passed.

Upon returning after the sales call, Andy steals Dwight's keys, breaks into his car, and finds the toll booth ticket to New York City. Andy gives the evidence to Michael, who then accuses Dwight of disloyalty, and Angela prevents him from clearing his name because it would expose their relationship. Dwight resigns. Andy gloats over his success, but the documentary camera catches Angela in the background glaring at him.

"Traveling Salesman" was written by Michael Schur, Lee Eisenberg, and Gene Stupnitsky, while co-creator and executive producer Greg Daniels directed. Daniels shot "Traveling Salesmen" and "The Return" in mid-November 2006 before the cast and crew began an eight-week break.

John Krasinski enjoyed the episode because he believed it was the first real glimpse of Angela and Dwight's relationship, with Rainn Wilson noting that the audience gets "to see how Dwight becomes her hero." As with other "Office" episodes, a number of scenes in "Traveling Salesmen" were improvised and unscripted, including Angela with the jelly beans and Stanley laughing at Ryan in the car.

To create the old picture of Jim and Dwight, an actual high school photograph of Krasinski was photoshopped along with a 1991 image of Wilson while Wilson was on tour with an acting company. While standing in the parking lot, the cast had to pretend to shiver in 85-degree weather. Krasinski actually slapped Wilson at Wilson's request, which Krasinski considered "one of the craziest acting experiences I've ever had." Before deciding on singing to a melody from "Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory", Ed Helms and Daniels shot 50 different versions. Another "Willy Wonka" reference includes Andy's mention of a chocolate factory and not wishing "to fall into any chocolate river".

"Traveling Salesmen" was later rebroadcast with "The Return" as a combined hour-long episode on March 15, 2007, with four minutes of previously unseen footage added. Greg Daniels explained that it was both an attempt to attract a larger audience and "it's about giving something extra to our wonderful fans…their loyalty must be rewarded somehow, and we don't have the budget for 10 million muffin baskets." As part of the editing process, Pam is seen winning an art contest, four scenes of Andy searching through Dwight's things were condensed, and an Angela–Pam storyline as well as an extended scene of Andy going to anger management were added. The third season DVD contains a number of deleted scenes, such as Michael using his computer, "Harvey", to hit on Pam (this scene was the cold open for "Traveling Salesman" on its original broadcast; the combined hour-long version of "Traveling Salesman" and "The Return" has no cold open). Notable cut scenes included Andy dramatically illustrating to Karen that they are the only two Stamford employees remaining, Jim and Dwight surreptitiously planning their sales tactic, Pam offering to get coffee for her co-workers, and Dwight emotionally giving away selected items to others in the office.

"Traveling Salesmen" was first broadcast on January 11, 2007 in the United States on NBC. According to Nielsen Media Research, an estimated 10.2 million viewers tuned in, making it only a handful of other episodes of "The Office" to reach over 10 million viewers, the others being the show's pilot episode, "The Injury", "The Return," "Ben Franklin" and "Stress Relief," of which the latter reached over 20 million viewers.

Buddy TV senior writer Oscar Dahl remarked, "It didn't make me laugh out loud and, yet, I still loved it." He shed a negative light on Andy's behavior towards Dwight, calling it "annoying and not that funny." Dahl hoped Dwight would be reappearing soon, and concluded "Overall, a crucial story episode with a nice cliffhanger. Even if wasn't as funny as last week or even most episodes this season, "The Office" still entertains." AOL TV's Michael Sciannamea lauded the episode, writing "I cannot remember ever guffawing over every single line in a single sitcom episode as I did watching this one. If the performances in this particular one don't garner the actors in this show a plethora of Emmys, there ought to be an investigation." Sciannamea continued that he believed it was Steve Carell's best series performance thus far because he "displayed the full range of his personality—jokester, arrogant jerk, charming salesman, sensitive soul, and added a new one—anger."

"Entertainment Weekly" writer Abby West commented of Dwight's ouster, "There's no way Rainn Wilson is off the show, but it was a bold move to let him appear to be bested by the (slightly) more Machiavellian Andy. I can't wait to see how they play out this storyline." West referred to "Phyllis' expert psychological move" with the makeovers as her favorite subplot of the night, and appreciated the spotlight on the sales pairings; she expanded on this latter point, "The trip out of the office was also a great reminder of what these Dunder Mifflin-ers actually do and how good most of them are. Isn't it interesting that as much as they normally clash, Dwight and Jim make a very effective sales team, while the seeming bond that Michael and Andy share did nothing to keep Andy from punting their pitch? When Dwight started using the client's phone, Jim didn't skip a beat. They'd either used the ploy (of dialing the competition's customer service number and showing how long the wait time was) before, or Jim is comfortable going with Dwight's flow, at least in that kind of setting. They essentially played good cop/bad cop... or good cop/weird cop." Other television critics also praised the various sales call pairings.



</doc>
<doc id="8571244" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8571244" title="Tropical Storm Beryl (2000)">
Tropical Storm Beryl (2000)

Tropical Storm Beryl made landfall just south of the United States–Mexico border in mid-August 2000, causing minimal damage. The second named storm of the 2000 Atlantic hurricane season, Beryl originated from a tropical wave near the African coastline. Tracking westward, the wave failed to organize substantially until entering the Bay of Campeche, at which time it developed into a tropical storm. Beryl rapidly deepened while in the Gulf of Mexico, and it initially was forecast to strengthen to a hurricane under favorable conditions for development. Instead, Beryl remained at moderate tropical storm intensity and failed to intensify any further. It made landfall in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas as a weak tropical storm with winds of 50 mph (85 km/h) on August 15 and dissipated over mountainous terrain shortly thereafter. One death was reported in Mexico due to drowning. Otherwise, no significant damage was reported associated with Beryl, as it affected a sparsely populated area of Mexico.

A tropical wave emerged from the African coast with a closed circulation on August 3. It tracked westward across the tropical waters of the Atlantic Ocean and broke into two distinct parts, the northern portion eventually became Hurricane Alberto. The southern portion continued to track westward into the Caribbean Sea, while producing little or no deep convection. The wave reached Mexico's Yucatán Peninsula on August 12, and only then did deep convection redevelop, mostly due to diurnal heating. The wave emerged over the Bay of Campeche early on August 13 as a large area of low pressure. The wave was upgraded to Tropical Depression Five later that day, based on satellite intensity estimates and an observation from an Air Force Reserve reconnaissance aircraft. Six hours after developing, the depression was forecast to strengthen into a hurricane early on August 16 due to the warm waters of the Gulf of Mexico and little wind shear to inhibit development.

The tropical depression traveled to the northwest across the southwest Gulf of Mexico. It strengthened rapidly, and there was evidence of deep convection as it passed over warm waters. It was upgraded to Tropical Storm Beryl late on August 14 with surface winds of 50 mph (85 km/h), based on reconnaissance aircraft observation. Six hours later, the storm accelerated to near 9 mph (15 km/h), meaning that landfall would happen sooner than expected, preventing the time for Beryl to strengthen to a hurricane. However, Beryl failed to undergo significant intensification as was forecast, as it maintained an intensity of 50 mph (85 km/h). The lack of intensification could be due to moderate wind shear and entrainment over the Gulf of Mexico. Tropical Storm Beryl continued to track to the northwest toward the Rio Grande Valley area in the southern portion of the U.S. state of Texas. The storm made landfall early on August 15 along the Mexican coast about 105 mi (165 km) south of Brownsville, Texas, 35 mi (55 km) north La Pesca, Tamaulipas and about 115 mi (185 km) north of Tampico. Beryl was downgraded to a tropical depression about five hours after landfall. The Brownsville radar showed that the circulation center of the storm became elongated parallel to the mountain ranges of northeastern Mexico, so the system was no longer declared a tropical depression late on August 15, while located near Monterrey.

The National Hurricane Center began issuing hurricane warnings early on August 14, anticipating that Beryl would reach hurricane strength. The warnings were issued along the Texas coast from Baffin Bay to the United States–Mexico border. The Government of Mexico issued hurricane warnings from the borderline south to La Pesca. The hurricane warnings issued stretched for 230 miles (370 km) along the coast. Mexico also issued a tropical storm warning south of La Pesca to Tampico. A storm surge of 2 to 5 feet (0.6 m to 1.5 m) was expected along the coast near and to the north of Beryl’s center. Rainfall between 5 and 10 inches (125 to 250 mm) were also expected. Thousands of residents in coastal areas of southern Texas and northern Mexico were asked to pay attention to the hurricane warnings and to move towards higher ground. The National Weather Service warned the cities of Cameron and Kenedy, and Willacy County in southern Texas that severe flooding is the deadliest threat associated with the storm. In low-lying rural areas near the mouth of the Rio Grande, an estimated 20,000 residents were urged to seek shelter, as the inadequate drainage in these areas make them in danger to severe flooding. The National Weather Service also warned of possible tornadoes forming when associated with thunderstorms and tropical storm generated winds. Authorities in southern Texas filled 20,000 sandbags along the shores, and closed government offices. Residents nailed plywood on windows, parks were temporarily closed, and documents were transferred to waterproof storage areas.

The warnings remained in effect for twelve hours, then they were discontinued north of Port Mansfield in Texas. The hurricane warning was downgraded to a tropical storm warning in all areas between Port Mansfield southwards to Tampico. It was predicted the rains from Beryl could produce dangerous flash floods and mudslides over the mountainous areas of Mexico. When Beryl made landfall early on August 15, all warnings were discontinued in Texas. All warnings issued in the Government of Mexico were discontinued six hours later when Beryl was downgraded to a tropical depression.

Beryl made landfall in a sparsely populated region of northeast Mexico, so no official reports of tropical storm force winds were recorded. Moisture from Beryl brought 0.8 in (20.1 mm) of rain in Corpus Christi, Texas and 0.5 in (13.7 mm) in Brownsville, Texas in a 48-hour period between August 14 and August 16. The highest winds from these stations were no more than 28 mph (46 km/h). Cloud cover and rainfall resulted with cool high temperatures in southern Texas. Brownsville had a high temperature of 84˚F (28.9˚C) on August 15. This broke the record for the coolest maximum temperature in Brownsville for August 15; the previous record was 85˚F (29.4˚C) set in 1881.

In Mexico a rainfall total of 6.3 in (160 mm) within a period of 24 hours was measured in San Gabriel, Tamaulipas. Residents from two low-lying fishing villages were evacuated from the state of Tamaulipas and taken to extemporaneous shelters at schools and a sports complex. One drowning death was reported in northeast Mexico, caused by the extensive flooding from Beryl's heavy rains. Officials declared fifteen municipalities in Tamaulipas a disaster area. The total damage in Mexico was estimated to be $254,000 (2000 MXN, $27,400 2000 USD, $34,000 2008 USD).




</doc>
<doc id="8573584" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8573584" title="Money No Enough">
Money No Enough

Money No Enough () is a 1998 Singaporean comedy film about three friends with financial problems who start a car polishing business together. Original story by J P Tan and written by Jack Neo, directed by Tay Teck Lock and produced by JSP Films, the movie stars Neo, Mark Lee and Henry Thia. Released in cinemas on 7 May 1998 and Money No Enough received mixed reviews from critics, but earned over S$5.8 million and was the all-time highest-grossing Singaporean film until 2012. Its success helped revive the Singaporean film industry and pave the way for the emergence of other Singaporean cultural phenomena.

It was followed by a sequel, "Money No Enough 2".

The plot revolves around the lives of three close friends: Keong (Jack Neo), a spendthrift white-collar worker, Ong (Mark Lee), a general contractor, and Hui (Henry Thia), a kopi tiam waiter. After an argument with his boss (Chen Zhao Jin), Keong quits his job and is unable to get another due to his poor command of English, lack of academic qualifications and computer illiteracy. With bills (especially instalments) to pay and a family to support, he goes heavily into debt whereupon his wife leaves him, taking their daughter with her. Ong borrows S$40,000 from loan sharks, and plans to repay them after collecting a debt owed him by a friend who subsequently runs away. The loan sharks beat up Ong for not repaying the loan within the two-week deadline, so he flees to Johor Bahru. Hui, who is single and lives with his elderly mother, wastes his meagre salary on 4D and pursuing an insurance agent who he has a crush on.

In an attempt to resolve their financial problems, the three friends decide to start a car polishing business together with the limited capital they have. However, at the opening ceremony of their business, Hui's mother collapses and is taken to hospital, where she is diagnosed with leukaemia. Hui has three wealthy older sisters, but they refuse to help pay the medical bills, and his application for financial assistance is rejected because of his sisters' high incomes. To compound matters, the loan sharks show up at the company to harass Ong. Ong and Hui ask to cash out their shares so they can pay the loan sharks and medical bills respectively, but all their money has already been spent on equipment and other business running costs. Hui's mother then dies and at her wake, which raises ten thousand dollars of 'bai jin' (contributions toward funeral expenses). The loan sharks turn up, pursue Ong and are arrested after a lengthy police chase. Keong convinces his wife and daughter to enter an obstacle race where they win the first prize of S$100,000, which he uses to pay his creditors, and his family is reunited. The car polishing business is successful, and the three friends go on to become the directors of Autoglym Singapore.

In the 1990s, Neo, Lee and Thia became well known in Singapore for their performances in the Channel 8 television show "Comedy Night" (Wade-Giles: Kao hsiao hsin tung). Neo then acted in the 1997 Eric Khoo film "12 Storeys", and saw potential in the then virtually nonexistent local film industry. He wrote a screenplay about expatriates in the advertising industry, but decided the concept would not appeal to most Singaporeans, so he thought of writing a story about Ah Bengs (uneducated Chinese men), drawing on the humble backgrounds of Lee, Thia and himself. Inspired, he contacted Tay Teck Lock, a former producer for Channel 8, and suggested they collaborate. They decided on a plot about three Singaporean men facing financial difficulties. Neo spent eight months writing the script, while Tay helped develop the characters and jokes. Despite the Speak Mandarin Campaign, Neo chose to use Hokkien dialogue to "reflect real life" and "reach a different audience".

"Money No Enough" was produced by JSP Films on a budget of S$850,000. The production crew included Deri Ng as first assistant director, J.P. Tan as producer, Kamis as cinematographer, A. Supranamian as film editor, Anthony Ng as art director and Abdul Shukar Mohd as sound designer. Filming was plagued by financial problems, such as poor quality shooting equipment. After the Board of Film Censors reviewed and approved "Money No Enough", distributor Shaw Organisation released the film on 21 screens on 7 May 1998. The success of the movie led to a dispute between Neo and Producer over their shares of the profits. To mark its tenth anniversary, "Money No Enough" was released in cinemas again and was followed by a sequel, "Money No Enough 2".

"Money No Enough" earned S$50,000 from sneak previews and S$42,000 on its opening day, then topped the local box office for a month. In total, the film made S$5.8 million, which remained the best box-office showing by a local movie until the record was broken by "Ah Boys to Men" in 2012. After its box office run, 70,000 VCDs of "Money No Enough" were sold, which remains a record for a Singaporean film. Its success sparked the film career of Jack Neo, who won the Best Director Award at the 1998 Silver Screen Awards, and the development of the Singaporean film industry. Four more Singaporean movies were produced in 1998, two of which were described by critics as copycats of "Money No Enough". With its use of Hokkien and crude portrayal of Singaporean life, the film is also credited with paving the way for other Singaporean cultural phenomena such as mrbrown and TalkingCock.

The movie received a mixed critical reception with LoveHKFilm.com commending the film as "an effective satire of...Singaporean culture" and noted that the actors "do a credible job representing characters from Singapore's varying social strata", while a "Variety" review described the movie as "initially fresh and amusing but ultimately too one-note and local in its humor to travel far". Francis Dass of the "New Straits Times" wrote that "Money No Enough" was "spot-on" and "funny", but criticised the "clichéd script and the director's penchant for melodrama".



</doc>
<doc id="8609650" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8609650" title="Geilo Airport, Dagali">
Geilo Airport, Dagali

Geilo Airport, Dagali (; formerly ; ) is a private airport located at Dagali in Hol, Norway. It was previously a public airport that was both a regional airport and served international tourist charter airlines serving the nearby ski resorts centered on Geilo. The airport opened in 1985, but failed commercially and was eventually closed in 2003.

Originally featuring a runway, it was extended to in 1988. Now it is limited to which can still be used for private aircraft. The airport has been converted to a go cart track, though there is still some general aviation at the airport. The commercial services have been moved to Fagernes Airport, Leirin, which opened in 1987. The airport is owned and operated by a company owned by the municipalities of Hol and Nore og Uvdal.

Geilo Airport was opened in 1985 as a regional airport. On 20 June 1986, Coast Aero Center was awarded the concession for flying from Stavanger to Geilo Airport, Dagali until 1991. The airline used a Beechcraft 200 Super King Air on the service. At the same time, Norving started operations to Oslo. The ridership from Geilo turned out to be insufficient to make a profit, and both Coast Aero Center and Norving terminated their routes. Widerøe and Norsk Air said there was not enough ridership for them to be interested. In 1989, Coast Air received a one-year concession to operate from Geilo to Oslo and Stavanger. The company used de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter aircraft. The service was soon limited to two round trips each week.

Construction of a runway expansion from was started in 1988, allowing the airport to be served by jet aircraft in international charter traffic. The 15.3 million Norwegian krone (NOK) investment was financed through a municipal and county-guaranteed loan. Since 1984, the owners had hoped that the airport would become part of a state financing scheme that secured both guarantees for the operation of the airport, as well as subsidies to scheduled traffic. Geilo never received such status, unlike the nearby Fagernes Airport, Leirin which opened in 1987. By 1992, the mayors of Hol and Nore og Uvdal, the municipalities who owned the airport, admitted that it had been a mistake to build the airport. There were less than 1,000 passengers annually, and the scheduled traffic with Coast Air cost the municipalities NOK 1 million per year. In addition came the operating deficit of the airport itself. The company Norcharter had been created by Hol and Nore og Uvdal, along with private investors, but it failed to increase ridership, despite spending NOK 8 million on marketing the region and the airport.

Twenty-six municipally-owned airports were taken over by the Norwegian Civil Aviation Administration (now Avinor) on 1 January 1996. Geilo Airport was not among these, but received a NOK 1.5 million annual grant from the state. Following Norway's entry into the Schengen Agreement in 2000, more money had to be invested in the airport to rebuild it to meet immigration requirements. The airport set a new record with 8,870 passengers in 2002. From 1 June 2003, a new company, Geilo Lufthavn Drift A/S, made an agreement to take over operations of the airport. But the airport was temporally closed from April to September, and the new company chose to not reopen the airport afterward. The airport has since been turned into a go cart track, but private aircraft can use of the runway.



</doc>
<doc id="8630448" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8630448" title="Jasmin Ouschan">
Jasmin Ouschan

Jasmin Ouschan (pronounced "yaz-MEEN" "ocean", ; born 10 January 1986) is an Austrian professional pool player from Klagenfurt, Carinthia. Her first professional competition occurred in 2002, but she did not officially become a professional member of the Women's Professional Billiards Association (WPBA) until 2007. She is currently one of the top-ranked women in the world according to the 2010 prize money list and by the WPBA rankings. At times, she has been ranked as the number one female player in the world. Since 2006, she has been listed among the top-ten women in the annual prize money rankings. Ouschan competes regularly with men on the Euro Tour and in 2008 became the first woman to earn a medal in an open world pool championship.

In international competition she has earned the World Games 2005 gold medal and World Games 2009 silver medal in nine-ball. , she has earned a total of twenty-nine individual European Pool Championships gold medals (ten in eight-ball, ten in nine-ball, six in straight pool and three in ten-ball) since 1999, including eighteen (four in eight-ball, five in nine-ball, six in straight pool and three in ten-ball) since joining the open Women's division in 2005. She was the Youth European Champion in eight-ball six consecutive years from 1999–2004.

In the 2010 Pool & Billiard European Championship, held in Zagreb, Croatia, she became the first woman to sweep gold medals in all four disciplines contested (eight-ball, nine-ball, ten-ball and straight pool). In 2010, she also won the Women's WPA World Ten-ball Championship.

Born and raised in Klagenfurt, Ouschan began playing pool at a very early age because her parents owned a pool hall. Although she had a miniature table of her own, she aspired to play on the regulation size table and started playing by standing on a box. She has trained with Michael Neumann since the age of six and continues to train with him to this day. She has a younger brother named Albin. She graduated from high school in 2004 and has since taken coursework to become an accredited pool trainer in Europe.

She has earned eight open European Championship titles in eight-ball (2006, 2008, 2009), nine-ball (2005, 2009), and straight pool (2005–2007) in the women's division. She also won eleven Youth European Championship titles in eight-ball (1999–2004) and nine-ball (1999–2001, 2003, 2004).

In 1996, she entered at a tournament in Austria in which players like Allison Fisher, Gerda Hofstaetter and Franziska Stark participated and placed 4th place behind these three well established players. In 1998, she earned a silver medal in eight-ball and a bronze medal in nine-ball at the Youth European Championship. Starting in 1999, she won gold medals in both events every year as a Youth until 2004 except in 2002 when she earned a silver in nine-ball.
Her first professional competition was the Florida Classic 2002. In 2002, she had professional earnings of US$1,750 in prize money for taking first place in the 2002 WPBA Amateur Nationals. In 2005, she had earnings of $1,700. That year she became the World Games women's nine-ball champion. She also moved up to the Women's division in the annual European Championships in 2005 and has earned at least one gold medal each year since.

In 2006, she was ranked sixth among women in the prize money year-end rankings with a total of $36,251 in earnings. That year, she won the May 14—20, 2006 BCA Open Nine-ball Championship women's division, defeating the UK's Allison Fisher and earning $20,000. She has competed in what have traditionally been regarded as men's tournaments, especially while participating in the EuroTour. She placed 5th in the men's World Straight Pool Championship in 2006, which was won by Thorsten Hohmann. She also finished 3rd in the women's World Pool 10-ball Championship in Manila, Philippines.

In 2007, she joined the WPBA. That year, she was ranked ninth among women in the prize money year-end rankings with a total of $23,000 in earnings. Her best payday for the year was a second-place finish at the WPBA San Diego Classic for which she earned $8,300. She competed again at the Men's World Straight Pool Championship in 2007 but lost to Warren Kiamco in the last 16 to finish in 9th place.
In 2008, she was ranked fourth among women in the prize money year-end rankings with a total of $44,059 in earnings. During the season, she reached the top of the world rankings. Her largest victory that year was the September 14 WPBA Carolina Classic 7–1 win over Jeanette Lee, which earned her $13,500. In 2008, she reached the Men's World Straight Pool Championship semifinal by beating Mika Immonen and defending champion Oliver Ortmann, but then lost against Francisco Bustamante. However, her third-place finish resulted in the first medal won by any woman in an open world pool championship.

In April 2009, she won the European Championship eight-ball competition. She was also the world's top-ranked woman in early 2009. On June 21, 2009 she earned $12,700 for winning the WPBA Great Lakes Classic. On July 25, she earned a silver medal after losing to Allison Fisher at the 2009 World Games. Ouschan also won the October 14–18, 2009 WPBA Pacific Coast Classic and the November 11–15, 2009 WPBA Nationals. She finished third among women in 2009 with earnings of $58,578.

In the March 2010, European Pool Championships she swept all four disciplines, including the newly contested ten-ball. First in straight pool she defeated fellow Austrian Gerda Hofstatter. Then in ten-ball, she defeated German Ina Jentschura. Next, she defeated Norwegian Line Kjorsvik in eight-ball. Finally, she defeated Hofstatter again in the nine-ball championship. She became the first woman to win more than two gold medals in a single competition. In October in Manila, Philippines, she won the Yalin Women’s World 10-ball championship. During the year, she also won the WPBA September 23–26, 2010 Atlanta Classic held in Atlanta, Georgia. Her 2010 total of $41,391 ranked second among women.

In January 2011, she won the WPBA Masters by defeating Karen Corr at Mount Pleasant, Michigan for a prize of $7,500.00. At the 2011 European Pool Championships, she won gold medals in straight pool, ten-ball and nine-ball, but did not medal in eight-ball. On March 26, she defeated Kjorsvik for the straight pool title 75–31. Then, on April 1, she defeated Hofstatter, 7–2 in nine-ball. On April 2, she defeated Nataliya Seroshtan 6–1 in ten-ball. Her 2011 total of $31,300 ranked eighth among women.

Her 2012 total of $30,470 ranked fifth among women. At the European Championships, she won gold at the 10-ball competition, and she placed in bronze in the other three individual events as well as the team competition.

Her 2013 total of $26,048 ranked eighth among women. At the European Championships, she won gold at both the straight pool and the 9-ball competitions, and she placed in bronze in the other two individual events as well as the team competition.

She shoots with Predator/MEZZ (regular with 314 shaft) and Predator BK2 (Break) cue sticks. She is sponsored by Kärnten Sport(Kaernten Sport) Kelag, Sportsunion, Predator, and Justis Cue Cases. Her home club is the PBC Eintracht Klagenfurt.



</doc>
<doc id="8665012" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8665012" title="Chicago race riot of 1919">
Chicago race riot of 1919

The Chicago race riot of 1919 was a major racial conflict of violence committed by ethnic white Americans against black Americans that began in Chicago, Illinois, on July 27, 1919, and ended on August 3. During the riot, thirty-eight people died (23 black and 15 white) and over five hundred were injured. It is considered the worst of the approximately 25 riots during the Red Summer, so named because of the violence and fatalities across the nation. The combination of prolonged arson, looting, and murder made it the worst race riot in the history of Illinois.

The sociopolitical atmosphere of Chicago was one of ethnic tension caused by competition among many new groups. With the Great Migration, thousands of African Americans from the South had settled next to neighborhoods of European immigrants on Chicago's South Side, near jobs in the stockyards and meatpacking plants. The Irish had been established first, and fiercely defended their territory and political power against all newcomers. Post World War I tensions caused frictions between the races, especially in the competitive labor and housing markets. Overcrowding and increased African American militancy by veterans contributed to the visible racial frictions. Also, a combination of ethnic gangs and police neglect strained the racial relationships. According to official reports, the turmoil came to a boil after the murder of Eugene Williams, an African-American youth who had accidentally drifted into a swimming area at an informally segregated beach. Tensions between groups arose in a melee that blew up into days of unrest.

William Hale Thompson was the Mayor of Chicago during the riot and a game of brinksmanship with Illinois Governor Frank Lowden may have exacerbated the riot since Thompson refused to ask Lowden to send in the National Guard for four days, despite Lowden ensuring that the guardsmen were in Chicago and ready to intervene. Although future mayor Richard J. Daley never officially acknowledged being part of the violence, at age 17 he was an active member of the Irish Hamburg Athletic Club, which a post-riot investigation named as instigators in attacks on black Americans. In the following decades, Daley continued to rise in politics to become the city's mayor for twenty-one years.

United States President Woodrow Wilson and the United States Congress attempted to promote legislation and organizations to decrease racial discord in America. Illinois Governor Frank Lowden took several actions at Thompson's request to quell the riot and promote greater harmony in its aftermath. Sections of the Chicago economy were shut down for several days during and after the riots, since plants were closed to avoid interaction among bickering groups. Mayor Thompson drew on his association with this riot to influence later political elections.

Unlike southern cities at the time, Chicago did not segregate most public accommodations. According to Walter Francis White of the NAACP, pre-1915 Chicago had a good reputation for equitable treatment of African Americans. However, unofficially, early 20th-century Chicago beaches were racially segregated. African Americans had a long history in Chicago, with the city sending its first African-American representative to the state legislature in 1876. However, the black population in 1900 was only about 1 percent, while it expanded dramatically in the early years of the century. Most Irish Americans and African Americans competed for low-end jobs, causing tension between the groups.
By 1910, thousands of African Americans were moving from the South to Chicago, as a major destination in the Great Migration to industrial cities in the Northeast and Midwest, fleeing lynchings, segregation and disenfranchisement in the Deep South. The revived Ku Klux Klan in the South committed 64 lynchings in 1918 and 83 in 1919. With industrial jobs in the stockyards and meatpacking industry opening as European immigration was cut off by World War I, from 1916 to 1919 the African-American population in Chicago increased from 44,000 to 109,000, a 148 percent increase during the decade.

The growing African-American population settling in the South Side bordered a neighborhood of Irish Americans existing since the mid-19th century and the two groups competed for jobs and housing. African-American migrants arrived after waves of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe; there were competition and tensions in their relationships, too. Ethnic groups were possessive of their neighborhoods, which their young men often patrolled against outsiders. Because of agricultural problems, Southern whites also migrated to the city, about 20,000 by this period. The rapid influx of migrants caused overcrowding as a result of a lack of adequate low-cost housing.

In 1917, two summers before the Chicago riot, extensive and deadly race riots broke out in the expanding, war-time cities of East St. Louis, Illinois, and Houston, Texas, influencing the violent events of Red Summer across the nation and in Chicago. The postwar period also found tensions rising in numerous cities where populations were increasing rapidly. People from different cultures jostled against each other and competed for space. In 1917, the Chicago Real Estate Board established a policy of block by block segregation. New arrivals in the Great Migration generally joined old neighbors on the South Side. By 1920, the area held 85% of Chicago's African Americans--middle and upper class and poor. In the postwar period, veterans of all groups were looking to re-enter the work force. Some whites resented African-American veterans. At the same time, African-American veterans exhibited greater militancy and pride as a result of having served to protect their country. They expected to be treated as full citizens after fighting for the nation. Meanwhile, younger black men rejected the passivity traditional of the South and promoted armed self-defense and control of their neighborhoods.
In Chicago, the Irish dominated social and athletic clubs that were closely tied to the political structure of the city. Some had acted as enforcers for politicians. As the first major group of 19th-century European immigrants to settle in the city, the Irish had established formal and informal political strength. In Chicago, ethnic white gangs had been attacking people in African-American neighborhoods, and the police, overwhelmingly white and increasingly Irish-American, seemed little inclined to try to stop them. Meanwhile, newspapers carried sensational accounts of any African American allegedly involved in crime.

An example of territory was the Bridgeport community area, an ethnic Irish neighborhood just west of the Black Belt. The Irish had long patrolled their neighborhood boundaries against all other ethnic groups, especially African Americans. One group known as the Hamburg Athletic Club, whose members included a 17-year-old Richard J. Daley, future mayor of Chicago, contributed to gang violence in the area.

Longstanding racial tensions between whites and blacks exploded in five days of violence that started on July 27, 1919. On that hot summer day, on a segregated Chicago beach, a white man was throwing rocks at black swimmers in the water at a beach on the South Side which resulted in Eugene Williams' death. Tensions escalated when a white police officer not only failed to arrest the white man responsible for Williams' death, but arrested a black man instead. Objections by black observers were met with violence by whites. Attacks between white and black mobs erupted swiftly. At one point, a white mob threatened Provident Hospital, many of whose patients were African American. The police successfully held them off.

There was also attempts by the ethnic Irish gangs to incite Southern and Eastern European immigrant communities to commit acts of violence against blacks, as they had no history of hostility towards them. In one instance, members of the Ragen's Colts donned in blackface and set fire to Lithuanian and Polish homes in the Back of the Yards neighborhood in a deliberate attempt to incite the immigrant community to join them in committing acts against African Americans.

The Chicago riot lasted almost a week, ending only after the State of Illinois deployed nearly 6,000 Illinois Army National Guard troops. The troops were stationed around the Black Belt to prevent any further white attacks. By the evening of July 30, most violence had ended. The majority of the rioting, murder, and arson was the result of white ethnic groups attacking the African American population in the city's Black Belt on the South Side. Most of the casualties and property damage were suffered by black Chicagoans. Newspaper accounts noted numerous attempts at arson; for instance, on July 31, more than 30 fires were started in the Black Belt before noon and all were believed to be arson. Rioters stretched cables across the streets to prevent fire trucks from entering the areas. The mayor's office was informed of a plan to burn down the black area of Chicago and run its residents out of town. There were also sporadic violent attacks in other parts of the city, including the Chicago Loop. Because of the rioting, 38 people died (23 African American and 15 white), and another 537 were injured, two-thirds of them African American. Patrolman John W. Simpson was the only policeman killed in the riot. Approximately 1,000 residents, mostly African Americans, were left homeless because of the fires. Many African American families had left by train before the rioting ended, returning to their families in the South.

The Chief of Police, John J. Garrity, closed "all places where men congregate for other than religious purposes" to help restore order. Illinois Governor Frank Lowden authorized the deployment of the 11th Illinois Infantry Regiment and its machine gun company, as well as the 1st, 2nd and 3rd reserve militia. These four units totaled 3,500 men. The Cook County Sheriff deputized between 1000 and 2000 ex-soldiers to help keep the peace. With the reserves and militia guarding the Black Belt, the city arranged for emergency provisions to provide its residents with fresh food. White groups delivered food and supplies to the line established by the military; the deliveries were then distributed within the Black Belt by African Americans. While industry was closed, the packing plants arranged to deliver pay to certain places in the city so that African-American men could pick up their wages.

Once order was restored, Lowden was urged to create a state committee to study the cause of the riots. He proposed forming a committee to write a racial code of ethics and to draw up racial boundaries for activities within the city.

The Cook County Coroner's Office took 70 day sessions, 20 night sessions and 450 witnesses examinations to collect evidence about the riots. Its report stated that on July 27, 1919, Eugene Williams, an African American youth, drifted towards an informally segregated beach on the South Side while holding onto a railroad tie. He was subsequently hit by a stone as a white man threw rocks at him and other African Americans to drive them away from their part of the 29th Street beach in the city's Douglas community on the South Side. A witness recalled seeing a single white male standing on a breakwater from the raft of the African Americans and throwing rocks at them. Williams was struck in the forehead. He then panicked, lost his grip on the railroad tie, and drowned. The assailant ran toward 29th Street, where a different fight had already started when African Americans tried to use a section of the beach there, in defiance of its tacit segregation.

The rioting escalated when a white police officer refused to arrest the man who threw the stone at Williams. He instead arrested an African American on a white man's complaint of some minor offense. Anger over the arrest, coupled with Williams' death and rumors among both communities, escalated into five days of rioting. Most casualties were African American and most of the property damage was inflicted in African American neighborhoods. Having learned from the recent East St. Louis Riot, Chicago quickly stopped the street cars to try to contain the violence. Inflammatory newspaper coverage had the opposite effect. Historians noted, "South Side youth gangs, including the Hamburg Athletic Club, were later found to have been among the primary instigators of the racial violence. For weeks, in the spring and summer of 1919, they had been anticipating, even eagerly awaiting, a race riot" and, "On several occasions, they themselves had endeavored to precipitate one, and now that racial violence threatened to become generalized and unrestrained throughout Chicago, they were set to exploit the chaos." 

Early reports detailed injuries to Chicago police officers and a Chicago fireman. One African-American policeman was killed during the riot. The conduct of the white police force was criticized during and after the riots. State's Attorney Maclay Hoyne accused the police of arresting African-American rioters, while refusing to arrest white rioters. Roaming gangs of Bridgeport whites, who were mostly ethnic Irish, perpetrated much of the violence. Although the local newspapers carried accounts of African Americans setting fires, "later the office of State Fire Marshal Gamber proved conclusively that the fires were not caused by blacks, but by whites." "The New York Times" coverage during the riot, however, clearly conveyed that whites were responsible for planned large-scale arson against black areas and for numerous mob attacks. Because of early police failures to arrest whites, no white Chicagoans were convicted of any of the murders, and most of the deaths were not even prosecuted. One man was prosecuted for Williams' death, but he was acquitted.

The rioting impacted Chicago's economy. Some of the South Side's industry was closed during the riot. Businesses in the Loop were also affected by closure of the street cars. Many workers stayed away from affected areas. At the Union Stock Yard, one of Chicago's largest employers, all 15,000 African-American workers were initially expected to return to work on Monday, August 4, 1919. But after arson near white employees' homes near the Stock Yards on August 3, the management banned African-American employees from the stockyards in fear of further rioting. Governor Lowden noted his opinion that the troubles were related to labor issues rather than race. Nearly one-third of the African-American employees were non-union, and were resented by union employees for that reason. African-American workers were kept out of the stockyards for ten days after the end of the riot because of continued unrest. On August 8, 1919, about 3,000 non-union African Americans showed up for work under protection of special police, deputy sheriffs, and militia. The white union employees threatened to strike unless such security forces were discontinued. Their main grievance against African Americans was that they were non-union and had been used by management as strikebreakers in earlier years. Many African Americans fled the city as a result of the riots and damage.

Illinois Attorney General Edward Brundage and State's Attorney Hoyne gathered evidence to prepare for a Grand Jury investigation. The stated intention was to pursue all perpetrators and to seek the death penalty as necessary. On August 4, 1919, seventeen indictments against African Americans were handed down.

Richard J. Daley was president of the Hamburg Athletic Club in Bridgeport. Daley served as the Chicago's mayor from 1955 to 1976. In his long political career, he never confirmed nor denied involvement in the riots.

In 1922, six whites and six African-Americans were commissioned to discover the true roots of the riots. It claimed that returning soldiers from World War I not receiving their original jobs and homes instigated the riots.

In 1930, Mayor William Hale Thompson, a flamboyant Republican, invoked the riot in a misleading pamphlet urging African Americans to vote against the Republican nominee, Rep Ruth Hanna McCormick, in the United States Senate race for her late husband's seat. She was the widow of Sen. Joseph Medill McCormick as well as the sister-in-law of "Chicago Tribune" publisher Robert Rutherford McCormick. The McCormicks were a powerful Chicago family whom Thompson opposed.

United States President Woodrow Wilson pronounced white participants the instigators of the prolonged riots in Chicago and Washington, D.C.. As a result, he attempted to promote greater racial harmony through the promotion of voluntary organizations and through the enactment of legislative improvements by the United States Congress. He did not change the segregation of federal departments which he had imposed early during his first administration, however. The Chicago Race Riot of 1919 shocked the nation and raised awareness of the problems that African Americans faced every day in the 20th century United States.





</doc>
<doc id="8702096" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8702096" title="Presidency of George Washington">
Presidency of George Washington

The presidency of George Washington began on April 30, 1789, when Washington was inaugurated as the first President of the United States, and ended on March 4, 1797. Washington took office after the 1788–89 presidential election, the nation's first quadrennial presidential election, in which he was elected unanimously. Washington was re-elected unanimously in the 1792 presidential election, and chose to retire after two terms. He was succeeded by his vice president, John Adams of the Federalist Party.

Washington had established his preeminence among the new nation's Founding Fathers through his service as Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War and as President of the 1787 Constitutional Convention. Once the Constitution was approved, it was widely expected that Washington would become the first President of the United States, despite his own desire to retire from public life. In his first inaugural address, Washington expressed both his reluctance to accept the presidency and his inexperience with the duties of civil administration, but he proved an able leader.

Washington presided over the establishment of the new federal governmentappointing all of the high-ranking officials in the executive and judicial branches, shaping numerous political practices, and establishing the site of the permanent capital of the United States. He supported Alexander Hamilton's economic policies whereby the federal government assumed the debts of the state governments and established the First Bank of the United States, the United States Mint, and the United States Customs Service. Congress passed the Tariff of 1789, the Tariff of 1790, and an excise tax on whiskey to fund the government and, in the case of the tariffs, address the trade imbalance with Britain. Washington personally led federal soldiers in suppressing the Whiskey Rebellion, which arose in opposition to the administration's taxation policies. He directed the Northwest Indian War, which saw the United States establish control over Native American tribes in the Northwest Territory. In foreign affairs, he assured domestic tranquility and maintained peace with the European powers despite the raging French Revolutionary Wars by issuing the 1793 Proclamation of Neutrality. He also secured two important bilateral treaties, the 1794 Jay Treaty with Great Britain and the 1795 Treaty of San Lorenzo with Spain, both of which fostered trade and helped secure control of the American frontier. To protect American shipping from Barbary pirates and other threats, he re-established the United States Navy with the Naval Act of 1794.

Greatly concerned about the growing partisanship within the government and the detrimental impact political parties could have on the fragile unity of the nation, Washington struggled throughout his eight-year presidency to hold rival factions together. He was, and remains, the only U.S. president never to be affiliated with a political party. In spite of his efforts, debates over Hamilton's economic policy, the French Revolution, and the Jay Treaty deepened ideological divisions. Those that supported Hamilton formed the Federalist Party, while his opponents coalesced around Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson and formed the Democratic-Republican Party. While criticized for furthering the partisanship he sought to avoid by identifying himself with Hamilton, Washington is nonetheless considered by scholars and political historians as one of the greatest presidents in American history, usually ranking in the top three with Abraham Lincoln and Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

Following the Philadelphia Constitutional Convention of 1787, a fatigued Washington returned to his estate in Virginia, Mount Vernon. He seemed intent on resuming his retirement and letting others govern the nation with its new frame of government. The American public at large, however, wanted Washington to be the nation's first president. The first U.S. presidential campaign was in essence what today would be called a grassroots effort to convince Washington to accept the office. Letters poured into Mount Vernon – from the people, from former comrades in arms, and from across the Atlantic – informing him of public sentiment and imploring him to accept. Gouverneur Morris urged Washington to accept, writing "[Among the] thirteen horses now about to be coupled together, there are some of every race and character. They will listen to your voice and submit to your control. You therefore must, I say must mount this seat." Alexander Hamilton was one of the most dedicated in his efforts to get Washington to accept the presidency, as he foresaw himself receiving a powerful position in the administration. The comte de Rochambeau urged Washington to accept, as did the Marquis de Lafayette, who exhorted Washington to "not to deny your acceptance of the office of President for the first years." Washington replied "Let those follow the pursuits of ambition and fame, who have a keener relish for them, or who may have more years, in store, for the enjoyment." In an October 1788 letter, Washington further expounded on his feelings regarding the election, stating,

Less certain was the choice for the vice presidency, which contained little definitive job description in the constitution. The only official role of the vice president was as the President of the United States Senate, a duty unrelated to the executive branch. The Constitution stipulated that the position would be awarded to the runner-up in the presidential election, or the person with the second highest amount of electoral votes. Because Washington was from Virginia, Washington (who remained neutral on the candidates) assumed that a vice president would be chosen from Massachusetts to ease sectional tensions. In an August 1788 letter, Thomas Jefferson wrote that he considered John Adams, John Hancock, John Jay, James Madison, and John Rutledge to be contenders for the vice presidency. In January 1789, upon hearing that Adams would probably win the vice presidency, Washington wrote to Henry Knox, saying "[I am] entirely satisfied with the arrangement for filling the second office."

Each state's presidential electors gathered in their state's capital on February 4, 1789, to cast their votes for the president. As the election occurred prior to ratification of the Twelfth Amendment, each elector cast two votes for the presidency, though the electors were not allowed to cast both votes for the same person. Under the terms of the constitution, the individual who won the most electoral votes would become president while the individual with the second-most electoral votes would become vice president. Each state's votes were sealed and delivered to Congress to be counted.

Before the votes were counted, Washington had declared his willingness to serve, and was preparing to leave Mount Vernon for New York City, the nation's capital. On April 6, 1789, the House and Senate, meeting in joint session, counted the electoral votes and certified that Washington had been elected President of the United States with 69 electoral votes. They also certified that Adams, with 34 electoral votes, had been elected as Vice President. The other 35 electoral votes were divided among: John Jay (9), Robert H. Harrison (6), John Rutledge (6), John Hancock (4), George Clinton (3), Samuel Huntington (2), John Milton (2), James Armstrong (1), Benjamin Lincoln (1), and Edward Telfair (1). Informed of his election on April 14, Washington wrote in a letter to Edward Rutledge that in accepting the presidency, he had given up "all expectations of private happiness in this world."

The Congress of the Confederation had set March 1789 as the date for the beginning of operations of the federal government under the new U.S. Constitution. Owing to the formidable difficulties of long-distance travel in 18th century America, Congress was unable to reach a quorum until April. The House would not achieve a quorum until April 1, and the Senate on April 6, at which time the electoral votes were counted. Washington and Adams were certified as having been elected president and vice president respectively.

Adams arrived in New York on April 20, and was inaugurated as vice president on the next day. On his way to New York City, Washington received triumphal welcomes in almost every town he passed through, including Alexandria, Georgetown, Maryland, Baltimore, Philadelphia, and Trenton. He arrived in New York City on April 23, where he was greeted by New York Governor George Clinton as well as many congressmen and citizens. Washington was inaugurated as the first President of the United States on April 30, 1789, at Federal Hall in New York, then the nation's capitol. As judges of the federal courts had not yet been appointed, the presidential oath of office was administered by Chancellor Robert Livingston, the highest judicial officer in the state of New York. Washington took the oath on the building's second floor balcony, in view of throngs of people gathered on the streets. The Bible used in the ceremony was from St. John's Lodge No. 1, Ancient York Masons, and was opened at random to Genesis 49:13 ("Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon"). Afterward, Livingston shouted "Long live George Washington, President of the United States!" Historian John R. Alden indicates that Washington added the words "so help me God" to the oath prescribed by the constitution.

In his inaugural address (), Washington again touched upon his reluctance to accept the presidency.

As the presidential election of 1792 approached, Washington, pleased with the progress his administration had made in establishing a strong, stable federal government, hoped to retire rather than seek a second term. He complained of old age, sickness, the in-fighting plaguing his cabinet, and the increasing hostility of the partisan press. The members of his cabinet—especially Jefferson and Hamilton—worked diligently through the summer and autumn to persuade Washington not to retire. They apprised him of the potential impact the French Revolutionary Wars might have on the country, and insisted that only someone with his popularity and moderation could lead the nation effectively during the volatile times ahead. In the end, "Washington never announced his candidacy in the election of 1792," wrote John Ferling in his book on Washington, "he simply never said that he would not consider a second term."
The 1792 elections were the first ones in U.S. history to be contested on anything resembling a partisan basis. In most states, the congressional elections were recognized in some sense as a "struggle between the Treasury department and the republican interest," as Jefferson strategist John Beckley wrote. Because few doubted that Washington would receive the greatest number of electoral votes, the vice presidency became a focus of popular attention. The speculation here also tended to be organized along partisan linesHamiltonians supported Adams and Jeffersonians favored New York governor George Clinton. Both were technically candidates for president competing against Washington, as electoral rules of the time required each presidential elector to cast two votes without distinguishing which was for president and which for vice president. The recipient of the most votes would then become president, and the runner-up vice president.

Washington was unanimously reelected president, receiving 132 electoral votes (one from each elector), and Adams was reelected vice president, receiving 77 votes. The other 55 electoral votes were divided among: George Clinton (50), Thomas Jefferson (4), and Aaron Burr (1).

Washington's second inauguration took place in the Senate Chamber of Congress Hall in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on March 4, 1793. The presidential oath of office was administered by Supreme Court associate justice William Cushing. Washington's inaugural address was just 135 words, the shortest ever. The short and simple inauguration was viewed in a stark contrast to that of 1789, which was perceived by many as almost a monarchical coronation.

Although his second term began simultaneously with Washington's, John Adams was sworn into office for that term on December 2, 1793, when the Senate reconvened, in the Senate Chamber of Congress Hall. The vice presidential oath was administered by the president pro tempore of the Senate John Langdon.

The new Constitution empowered the president to appoint executive department heads with the consent of the Senate. Three departments had existed under the Articles of Confederation: the Department of War, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the Finance Office. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was reestablished on July 27, 1789, and would be renamed to the Department of State in September. The Department of War was retained on August 7, while the Finance office was renamed as the Department of the Treasury on September 2. Congress also considered establishing a Home Department to oversee Native American affairs, the preservation of government documents, and other matters, but the proposed department's duties were instead folded into the State Department. In September 1789, Congress established the positions of Attorney General, to serve as the chief legal adviser to the president; and Postmaster General, to serve as the head of the postal service. Initially, Washington met individually with the leaders of the executive departments and the Attorney General, but he began to hold joint meetings in 1791, with the first meeting occurring on November 26. The four positions of Secretary of War, Secretary of State, Secretary of Treasury, and Attorney General became collectively known as the cabinet, and Washington held regular cabinet meetings throughout his second term.

Edmund Randolph became the first Attorney General, while Henry Knox retained his position as head of the Department of War. Washington initially offered the position of Secretary of State to John Jay, who had served as the Secretary of Foreign Affairs since 1784 and acted as the interim Secretary of State. After Jay expressed his preference for a judicial appointment, Washington selected Thomas Jefferson as the first permanent Secretary of State. For the key post of Secretary of the Treasury, which would oversee economic policy, Washington chose Alexander Hamilton, after his first choice, Robert Morris, declined. Morris had recommended Hamilton instead, writing "But, my dear general, you will be no loser by my declining the secretaryship of the Treasury, for I can recommend a far cleverer fellow than I am for your minister of finance in the person of your aide-de-camp, Colonel Hamilton." Washington's initial cabinet consisted of one individual from New England (Knox), one individual from the mid-Atlantic (Hamilton), and two Southerners (Jefferson and Randolph).

Washington considered himself to be an expert in both foreign affairs and the Department of War, and as such, according to Forrest McDonald, "he was in practice his own Foreign Secretary and War Secretary." Jefferson left the cabinet at the end of 1793, and was replaced by Randolph, while William Bradford took over as Attorney General. Like Jefferson, Randolph tended to favor the French in foreign affairs, but he held very little influence in the cabinet. Knox, Hamilton, and Randolph all left the cabinet during Washington's second term; Randolph was forced to resign during the debate over the Jay Treaty. Timothy Pickering succeeded Knox as Secretary of War, while Oliver Wolcott became Secretary of the Treasury and Charles Lee took the position of Attorney General. In 1795, Pickering became the Secretary of State, and James McHenry replaced Pickering as Secretary of War.

Hamilton and Jefferson had the greatest impact on cabinet deliberations during Washington's first term. Their deep philosophical differences set them against each other from the outset, and they frequently sparred over economic and foreign policy issues. With Jefferson's departure, Hamilton came to dominate the cabinet, and he remained very influential within the administration even after he left the cabinet during Washington's second term to practice law in New York City.

During his two vice-presidential terms, Adams attended few cabinet meetings, and the President sought his counsel only infrequently. Nonetheless, the two men, according to Adams biographer, John E. Ferling, "jointly executed many more of the executive branch's ceremonial undertakings than would be likely for a contemporary president and vice-president." In the Senate, Adams played a more active role, particularly during his first term. He often participated in debates in the Senate. On at least one occasion, Adams persuaded senators to vote against legislation he opposed, and he frequently lectured the body on procedural and policy matters. He supported Washington's policies by casting 29 tie-breaking votes.

His first incursion into the legislative realm occurred shortly after he assumed office, during the Senate debates over titles for the president and executive officers of the new government. Although the House of Representatives agreed in short order that the president should be addressed simply as "George Washington, President of the United States," the Senate debated the issue at some length. Adams favored the adoption of the style of "Highness" (as well as the title of "Protector of Their [the United States'] Liberties") for the president. Others favored the variant of "Electoral Highness" or the lesser "Excellency". Anti-federalists objected to the monarchical sound of them all. All but three senators eventually agreed upon "His Highness the President of the United States and Protector of the Rights of the Same". In the end, Washington yielded to the various objections and the House decided that the title of "Mr. President" would be used.

While Adams brought energy and dedication to the presiding officer's chair, he found the task "not quite adapted to my character." Ever cautious about going beyond the constitutional limits of the vice-presidency or of encroaching upon presidential prerogative, Adams often ended up lamenting what he viewed as the "complete insignificance" of his situation. To his wife Abigail he wrote, "My country has in its wisdom contrived for me the most insignificant office that ever the invention of man . . . or his imagination contrived or his imagination conceived; and as I can do neither good nor evil, I must be borne away by others and meet the common fate."

The Constitution granted the president the power to veto legislation, but Washington was reluctant to encroach on legislative affairs,
and he only exercised his veto power twice. He exercised his presidential veto power for the first time on April 5, 1792, to stop an apportionment act from becoming law. The bill would have redistributed House seats among the states in a way that Washington considered unconstitutional After attempting but failing to override the veto, Congress soon wrote new legislation, the Apportionment Act of 1792, which Washington signed into law on April 14.

On September 24, 1789, Congress voted to pay the president a salary of $25,000 a year, and the vice president an annual salary of $5,000. Washington's salary was equal to two percent of the total federal budget in 1789.

Article Three of the Constitution established the judicial branch of the federal government, but left several issues to the discretion of Congress or the president. Unresolved issues included the size of the Supreme Court, the identity of the first Supreme Court Justices, the number and establishment of federal courts below the Supreme Court, and the relationship between state and federal courts. In September 1789, Congress passed the Judiciary Act of 1789, primarily written by Connecticut Senator Oliver Ellsworth. Through the Judiciary Act, Congress established a six-member Supreme Court, composed of one Chief Justice and five Associate Justices. The act also created thirteen judicial districts, along with district courts and circuit courts for each district.

As the first president, Washington was responsible for appointing the entire Supreme Court. As such, he filled more vacancies on the Court than any other president in American history. On September 24, 1789, Washington nominated John Jay as the first Chief Justice and nominated John Rutledge, William Cushing, James Wilson, John Blair, and Robert Harrison as Associate Justices. All were quickly confirmed by the Senate, but after Harrison declined the appointment, Washington appointed James Iredell in 1790. The Court's first term began on February 2, 1790, at the Royal Exchange in New York City. With no cases on the docket and little pressing business (a few procedural matters decided and 26 attorneys and counselors admitted to the federal bar), the term lasted for only eight days.

As Associate Justices left the court in subsequent years, Washington appointed Thomas Johnson, William Paterson, and Samuel Chase. Jay stepped down as Chief Justice in 1795 and was replaced by Rutledge, who received a recess appointment as Chief Justice. Rutledge served for six months but resigned after his nomination was rejected by the Senate in December 1795; Rutledge had alienated several Senators with his criticism of the Jay Treaty. After the rejection of Rutledge's nomination, Washington appointed Oliver Ellsworth as the third Chief Justice of the United States.

The Judiciary Act also created 13 judicial districts within the 11 states that had then ratified the Constitution, with Massachusetts and Virginia each being divided into two districts. Both North Carolina and Rhode Island were added as judicial districts in 1790 after they ratified the Constitution, as were the subsequent states that Congress admitted to the Union. The act also established circuit courts and district courts within these districts. The circuit courts, which were composed of a district judge and (initially) two Supreme Court justices "riding circuit," had jurisdiction over more serious crimes and civil cases and appellate jurisdiction over the district courts, while the single-judge district courts had jurisdiction primarily over admiralty cases, along with petty crimes and lawsuits involving smaller claims. The circuit courts were grouped into three geographic circuits to which justices were assigned on a rotating basis. Washington appointed 38 judges to the federal district courts during his two terms in office.

The subject of a permanent capital city had been discussed several times, but the Continental Congress could never agree on a site due to regional loyalties and tensions. New York City had served as the nation's temporary capital since 1785, but had never been intended to serve as a permanent capital. The city made numerous improvements in preparation for the new government, and the old City Hall was remodeled by Pierre L'Enfant to become Federal Hall. The Constitution said nothing about where the permanent capital would be. Interest in attracting the capital grew as people realized the commercial benefits and prestige that were at stake. There was much maneuvering by interstate coalitions that were formed and dissolved almost daily, as Congress debated the matter. More than 30 locations, including the Hudson Valley; Trenton, New Jersey; Wilmington, Delaware; Baltimore, Maryland; Norfolk, Virginia; and several locations in Pennsylvania, were proposed as the site of the capital. In 1789, discussions narrowed to a site on the Potomac River near Georgetown, a site on the Susquehanna River near Wrights Ferry (now Columbia, Pennsylvania), and a site on the Delaware River near Germantown, Pennsylvania. Both Pennsylvania sites nearly won congressional approval as the site of the permanent capital, but divisions between Pennsylvania's two senators, along with deft maneuvering by Congressman James Madison, postponed consideration of the topic into 1790.

Washington, Jefferson, and Madison all supported a permanent capital on the Potomac; Hamilton backed a temporary capital in New York City, and a permanent one in Trenton, New Jersey. At the same time, Hamilton's funding proposal, a plan in which the federal government would assume debts incurred by states in waging the Revolutionary War was failing to garner enough support to pass. Jefferson, understanding that Hamilton needed southern votes to pass his funding plan, and keenly aware that the Potomac capital concept would fail without additional northern support, made use of an opportunity provided by an encounter with Hamilton to stage an informal dinner meeting at which interested parties could discuss a "mutual accommodation." The deal subsequently struck, known as the Compromise of 1790, cleared the way for passage, in July 1790, of the Residence Act. The act transferred the federal capital to Philadelphia for 10 years, while a permanent capital along the Potomac was under construction. Hamilton's debt assumption plan became law with the passage of the Funding Act of 1790.

The Residence Act authorized the president to select a specific site along the Potomac for the permanent seat of government. It also authorized him to appoint three commissioners to survey and acquire property for the federal city. Washington announced his selection of a site on January 24, 1791, and planning for the new city began afterward. Washington personally oversaw this effort through the end of his presidency. In September 1791, the commissioners named the nascent city Washington, in the president's honor, and the district Columbia, which was a poetic name for the United States commonly in use at that time.

Construction on the White House (then called the "President's House") was begun in 1792. Washington laid the cornerstone for the United States Capitol (then called the "Congress House") on September 18, 1793. John Adams, Washington's successor, moved into the White House in November 1800; that same month, Congress held its first session in the Capitol. The following February, Congress approved the District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801, which officially organized the District of Columbia, and, in accordance with the Constitution, named Congress as its exclusive governing authority.

One of the most pressing issues facing the First Congress during its inaugural session was the issue of how to raise revenue for the federal government. Because direct taxes were politically unfeasible, Congress turned to the tariff as the main source of funding. The tariffs could also protect nascent American manufacturing by increasing the cost of imported goods, many of which came from Britain. Each region sought favorable terms for the duties on various goods. Because the federal government would be unable to even pay the salaries of its officials without passage of the bill, members of Congress were strongly motivated to reach a compromise. In July, Congress finally passed the Tariff of 1789, which Washington signed into law. The act created a uniform impost on goods carried by foreign ships, while also establishing a much smaller tax on goods carried by American-owned ships. The tariffs established by this and later acts would make up the vast majority of government revenue; more than 87 percent of the federal government's revenue between 1789 and 1800 came from import duties.

To enable the federal government to collect the import duties, Congress also passed the Collection Act of 1789, which established the United States Customs Service and designated ports of entry. One year later, the Revenue-Marine was established when Washington signed legislation authorizing construction of ten cutters to enforce federal tariff and trade laws and to prevent smuggling. Until Congress established the Navy Department in 1798, it served as the nation's only armed force afloat. Renamed a century later as the Revenue Cutter Service, it and the U.S. Life-Saving Service were merged in 1915 to form the United States Coast Guard.

After the passage of the Tariff of 1789, various other plans were considered to address the debt issues during the first session of Congress, but none were able to generate widespread support. In September 1789, with no resolution in sight and the close of that session drawing near, Congress directed Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton to prepare a report on credit. In his Report on the Public Credit, Hamilton estimated that the state and federal governments had a combined debt of $79 million; he projected that the federal government's annual income would be $2.8 million. Drawing on the ideas of Robert Morris and others, Hamilton proposed the most ambitious and far-reaching economic plan that had ever been advanced by an American, calling for the federal assumption of state debt and the mass issuance of federal bonds. Hamilton believed that these measures would restore the ailing economy, ensure a stable and adequate money stock, and make it easier for the federal government to borrow during emergencies such as wars. He also proposed redeeming the promissory notes issued by the Continental Congress during the American Revolution at full value, thereby establishing the precedent that the government would uphold the value of its securities. Hamilton's proposal drew opposition from Madison, who was reluctant to reward the speculators who had bought up many of the promissory notes at a fraction of their value after the Revolutionary War.

Congressional delegations from Virginia, Maryland, and Georgia, which had lower or no debts, and whose citizens would effectively pay a portion of the debt of other states if the federal government assumed it, were disinclined to accept the proposal. Many in Congress argued that the plan was beyond the constitutional power of the new government. James Madison led the effort to block the provision and prevent the plan from gaining approval. Others contended that the debts should be repudiated, and the United States should refuse to pay them. Washington supported Hamilton's plan but refused to become involved in the congressional debate, and opposition mounted in the House of Representatives. The debate over assumption became entangled with the simultaneous debate over the site of the nation's capital. In the Compromise of 1790, Hamilton's assumption plan was adopted as the Funding Act of 1790, as several southern congressmen voted for the bill in exchange for a capital located on the Potomac River.

Later in 1790, Hamilton issued another set of recommendations in his Second Report on Public Credit. The report called for the establishment of a national bank and an excise tax on distilled spirits. Hamilton's proposed national bank would provide credit to fledgling industries, serve as a depository for government funds, and oversee one nationwide currency. In response to Hamilton's proposal, Congress passed the Bank Bill of 1791, establishing the First Bank of the United States. Madison and Attorney General Randolph lobbied Washington to veto the bill as unconstitutional extension of the federal government's authority. Washington, having ten days to sign or veto the bill, sent their objections to Hamilton for comment. Hamilton persuasively argued that the Constitution granted Congress the power to establish the national bank. He asserted that the Constitution guaranteed "implied as well as express powers," and that government would be paralyzed should the latter not be acknowledged and exercised. After receiving Hamilton's letter, Washington still harbored some doubts, but he nonetheless signed the bill into law that evening.

The following year, Congress passed the Coinage Act of 1792, establishing the United States Mint and the United States dollar, and regulating the coinage of the United States. Historian Samuel Morison points to Hamilton's 1790 bank report as turning Jefferson against Hamilton. Jefferson feared that the creation of the national bank would lead to political, economic, and social inequality, with Northern financial interests dominating American society much as aristocrats dominated European society.

In December 1791, Hamilton published the Report on Manufactures, which recommended numerous policies designed to protect U.S. merchants and industries to increase national wealth, induce artisans to immigrate, cause machinery to be invented, and employ women and children. Hamilton called for federally-supervised infrastructure projects, the establishment of state-owned munitions factories and subsidies for privately owned factories, and the imposition of a protective tariff. Though Congress had adopted much of Hamilton's earlier proposals, his manufacturing proposals fell flat, even in the more-industrialized North, as merchant-shipowners had a stake in free trade. There were also questions raised about the constitutionality of these proposals, and opponents such as Jefferson feared that Hamilton's expansive interpretation of the Necessary and Proper Clause would grant Congress the power to legislate on any subject.

In 1792, with their relationship completely ruptured, Jefferson unsuccessfully tried to convince Washington to remove Hamilton, but Washington largely supported Hamilton's ideas, believing that they had led to social and economic stability. Dissonance over Hamilton's proposals also irrevocably broke the relationship between Washington and Madison, who had served as the president's foremost congressional ally during the first year of his presidency. Opponents of Hamilton and the administration won several seats in the 1792 Congressional elections, and Hamilton was unable to win Congressional approval of his ambitious economic proposals afterward.

Despite the additional import duties imposed by the Tariff of 1790, a substantial federal deficit remainedchiefly due to the federal assumption of state revolution-related debts under the Funding Act. By December 1790, Hamilton believed import duties, which were the government's primary source of revenue, had been raised as high as was feasible. He therefore promoted passage of an excise tax on domestically distilled spirits. This was to be the first tax levied by the national government on a domestic product. Both Hamilton and Madison believed that an excise tax on spirits was the least objectionable tax that the government could levy at that time; a direct tax on land would be even more unpopular. The tax had the support of some social reformers, who hoped that the tax would discourage alcohol consumption. The Distilled Spirits Duties Act, commonly known as the "Whiskey Act", became law on March 3, 1791, and went into effect on June 1.

The tax on whiskey was bitterly and fiercely opposed on the frontier from the day it was passed. Western farmers considered it to be both unfair and discriminatory. As the Lower Mississippi River had been closed to American shipping for nearly a decade, farmers in western Pennsylvania were forced to turn their grain into whiskey. The substantial reduction in volume resulting from the distillation of grain into whiskey greatly reduced the cost to transport their crops to the populous east coast, which was the only place where there were markets for their crops. In mid-1794, the government began to crack down on tax evasion, launching prosecutions against dozens of distilleries.

On July 15, 1794, tax collector John Neville and his slaves fired at a militia that had surrounded his house, killing a member of the militia. The next day, a group of militia members seeking Neville fired on a group of federal soldiers, causing casualties on both sides. Following this confrontation, the militia captured a federal marshal and continued to clash with federal forces. As word of this rebellion spread across the frontier, a whole series of loosely organized resistance measures were taken, including robbing the mail, stopping court proceedings, and the threat of an assault on Pittsburgh.
Washington, alarmed by what appeared to be an armed insurrection in Western Pennsylvania, asked his cabinet for written opinions about how to deal with the crisis. Hamilton, Knox and Attorney General Bradford all favored using a militia to crush the rebellion, while Secretary of State Randolph urged peaceful reconciliation. Washington heeded the advice of both factions of his cabinethe sent commissioners to meet with the rebels, while at the same time preparing soldiers to march into Western Pennsylvania. When the final report of the commissioners recommended the use of the militia to enforce the laws, the president invoked the Militia Law of 1792 to summon the militias of Pennsylvania, Virginia and several other states. The governors sent the troops and Washington took command as Commander-in-Chief.

Washington commanded a militia force of 12,950 men, roughly the same size of the Continental Army he had commanded during the Revolutionary War. Under the personal command of Washington, Hamilton and Revolutionary War hero General Henry "Light Horse Harry" Lee, the army assembled in Harrisburg and marched into Western Pennsylvania (to what is now Monongahela, Pennsylvania) in October 1794. The insurrection collapsed quickly with little violence, and the resistance movements disbanded. The men arrested for rebellion were imprisoned, where one died, while two were convicted of treason and sentenced to death by hanging. Later, Washington pardoned all the men involved.

The suppression of the Whiskey Rebellion met with widespread popular approval. This was the first time the new government had been directly opposed, and through a clear show of federal authority, Washington established the principle that federal law is the supreme law of the land, and demonstrated that the federal government had both the ability and willingness to suppress violent resistance to the nation's laws. The government's response to the rebellion was, therefore, viewed by the Washington administration as a success, a view that has generally been endorsed by historians.

Initially, Jefferson and Hamilton enjoyed a friendly working relationship. While never close, they seldom clashed during the first year in the Washington administration. Even so, deep philosophical differences soon caused a rift between them, and finally drove them apart. Hamilton believed that a vigorous use of the central government was essential for the task of nation building. He also believed that "a flourishing merchant economy would sow opportunities for all, resulting in a more philanthropic, knowledgeable and enterprising people." In Jefferson's view, centralized government was "simply European-style tyranny waiting to happen again." He idealized the yeoman farmers, for they "controlled their own destinies, and also a republic that, resting on the yeoman farmer, would keep 'alive that sacred fire' of personal liberty and virtue." These differences gained their clearest expression in the debate about the Bank of the United States.

As a split grew proponents and critics of Hamilton's economic policies, Jefferson and Madison sought to counter the influence of a Hamilton-aligned newspaper, the "Gazette of the United States". They convinced Philip Freneau to establish the "National Gazette", which recast the national politics not as a battle between Federalists and Anti-Federalists, but as a debate between aristocrats and republicans. By the end of 1792, political observers had begun to note the emergence of two political parties. In May 1792, Hamilton himself wrote, "Mr. Madison cooperating with Mr. Jefferson is at the head of a faction decidedly hostile to me an my administration." Washington sought to alleviate the rising tension between Jefferson and Hamilton, as well as prevent the partisan polarization of national politics, but by the end of 1792 Jefferson and his followers completely distrusted Hamilton. The faction aligned with Hamilton became known as the Federalists, while those aligned with Jefferson and Madison became known as the Republicans (often referred to as the Democratic-Republican Party in order to avoid confusion with the modern Republican Party). Political leaders of both groups, but especially the Federalists, were reluctant to label their own faction as a political party. Nonetheless, distinct and consistent voting blocs emerged in Congress in 1793. The Democratic-Republicans were strongest in the South, and many of party's leaders were wealthy Southern slaveowners. The Democratic-Republicans also attracted middle class Northerners, such as artisans, farmers, and lower-level merchants, who were eager to challenge the power of the local elite. The Federalists had broad support in New England, but in other places they relied on wealthy merchants and landowners.
While economic policies were the original motivating factor in the growing partisan split, foreign policy also became a factor. Though most Americans supported the French Revolution prior to the Execution of Louis XVI, some of Hamilton's followers began to fear the radical egalitarianism of the revolution as it became increasingly violent. Washington particularly feared British entrance into the war, as he worried that sympathy for France and hatred for Britain would propel the United States into the French Revolutionary Wars, to the ruin of the American economy. In 1793, after Britain entered the French Revolutionary Wars, several Democratic-Republican Societies were formed. These societies, centered on the middle class of several eastern cities, opposed Hamilton's economic policies and supported France. Conservatives came to fear these societies as populist movements that sought to re-make the class order. That same year, the British began attacking American ships that were trading with France, fanning the flames of anti-British sentiment. As Washington continued to seek peace with Great Britain, critics finally began to attack the president himself.

After crushing the Whiskey Rebellion, Washington publicly blamed the Democratic-Republican Societies for the rebellion, and Jefferson began to view Washington as "the head of a party" rather than "the head of a nation." Hamilton's followers, who coalesced into the Federalist Party, were thrilled by Washington's remarks, and the party sought to closely associate itself with Washington. The passage of the Jay Treaty further inflamed partisan warfare, resulting in a hardening of the divisions between the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans. By 1795–96, election campaigns—federal, state and local—were waged primarily along partisan lines between the two national parties, although local issues continued to affect elections, and party affiliations remained in flux.

Congress approved 12 amendments to the U.S. Constitution on September 25, 1789, establishing specific constitutional guarantees of personal freedoms and rights, clear limitations on the government's power in judicial and other proceedings, and explicit declarations that all powers not specifically delegated to Congress by the Constitution are reserved for the states or the people, and submitted them to the state legislatures for ratification. Congressional approval of the amendments was led by James Madison. Madison had previously opposed amending the constitution, but he hoped to prevent more far-reaching reforms by passing his own package of constitutional amendments. With the support of Washington, Madison put together a package of relatively uncontroversial amendments that won the backing of both Federalist and Anti-Federalist members of Congress. Congress passed a package constitutional amendments that were largely based on Madison's original proposals, though some of Madison's ideas were not adopted.

Although some Anti-Federalists continued to call for a new federal constitutional convention and ridiculed them, by December 15, 1791, 10 of the 12 proposed amendments had been ratified by the requisite number of states (then 11), and became Amendments One through Ten of the Constitution; collectively they are known as the Bill of Rights.

On March 4, 1794, in response to the ruling in "Chisholm v. Georgia," Congress approved an amendment to the United States Constitution clarifying judicial power over foreign nationals, and limiting the ability of citizens to sue states in federal courts and under federal law, and submitted it to the state legislatures for ratification. The Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified by the requisite number of states (then 12) on February 7, 1795, to become part of the Constitution.

In 1790, the Pennsylvania Abolition Society engaged in an unprecedented lobbying campaign to abolish slavery. Their efforts faced intense opposition from most southern congressman, who blocked any attempt to abolish an institution that was important to their plantation economy. After a contentious debate, congressional leaders put the proposals aside without voting on them, setting a precedent in which Congress generally avoided discussing slavery. Congress passed two acts related to slavery during the Washington administration: the Fugitive Slave Act of 1793, which made it a federal crime to assist an escaping slave, and established the legal system by which escaped slaves would be returned to their masters; and the Slave Trade Act of 1794, which limited the United States' involvement in the transportation of slaves by prohibiting the export of slaves from the country.

Following adoption of the Land Ordinance of 1785, American settlers began freely moving west across the Allegheny Mountains and into the Native American-occupied lands beyondland Great Britain had ceded to U.S. "control" at the end of the Revolutionary War (the Northwest Territory). As they did, they encountered unyielding and often violent resistance from a confederation of tribes. In 1789 (before Washington entered office), an agreement that was supposed to address the grievances of the tribes, the Treaty of Fort Harmar, was signed. This new treaty did almost nothing to stop the rash of violence along the frontier from confrontations between settlers and Native Americans and, the following year, Washington directed the United States Army to enforce U.S. sovereignty. Secretary of War Henry Knox ordered Brigadier General Josiah Harmar to launch a major offensive against the Shawnee and Miami Natives living in the region. In October 1790, his force of 1,453 men was assembled near present-day Fort Wayne, Indiana. Harmar committed only 400 of his men under Colonel John Hardin to attack a Native American force of some 1,100 warriors, who easily defeated Hardin's forces. At least 129 soldiers were killed.

Determined to avenge the defeat, the president ordered Major General Arthur St. Clair, who was serving as the governor of the Northwest Territory, to mount a more vigorous effort by the third quarter of 1791. After considerable trouble finding men and supplies, St. Clair was finally ready. At dawn on November 4, 1791, his poorly trained force, accompanied by about 200 camp followers, was camped near the present-day location of Fort Recovery, Ohio. A Native American force consisting of around 2,000 warriors led by Little Turtle, Blue Jacket, and Tecumseh, struck with swift and overwhelming displays of force, and, paralyzing the Americans with fear, soon overran their perimeter. St. Clair's army was almost annihilated during the three-hour encounter. The American casualty rate included 632 of 920 soldiers and officers killed (69%) and 264 wounded. Nearly all of the 200 camp followers were slaughtered, for a total of about 832.

British officials in Upper Canada were delighted and encouraged by the success of the Natives, whom they had been supporting and arming for years, and in 1792 Lieutenant Governor John Graves Simcoe proposed that the entire territory, plus a strip of New York and Vermont be erected into an Indian barrier state. While the British government did not take this proposal up, it did inform the Washington administration that it would not relinquish the Northwest forts, even if the U.S. paid its overdue debts. Also, early in 1794, the British built a new garrison, Fort Miami, along the Maumee River as a show of presence and support for the resistance.

Outraged by news of the defeat, Washington urged Congress to raise an army capable of conducting a successful offense against the Native confederacy, which it did in March 1792establishing more Army regiments (the Legion of the United States), adding three-year enlistments, and increasing military pay. The following month the House of Representatives conducted investigative hearings into the debacle. This was the first special Congressional investigation under the federal Constitution. Afterward, Congress passed two Militia Acts: the first empowered the president to call out the militias of the several states; the second required that every free able-bodied white male citizen of the various states, between the ages of 18 and 45, enroll in the militia of the state in which they reside.

Next, Washington put General "Mad" Anthony Wayne in command of the Legion of the United States and ordered him to launch a new expedition against Western Confederacy. Wayne spent months training his troops at the army's first formal basic training facility in Legionville, Pennsylvania, in military skills, forest warfare tactics and discipline, then led them west. In late 1793, the Legion began construction of Fort Recovery at the location of St. Clair's defeat; and, on June 30July 1, 1794, successfully defended it from a Native American attack led by Little Turtle.
Taking the offensive, the legion marched north through the forest, and, upon reaching the confluence of the Auglaize and Maumee rivers—about southwest of Fort Miami— on August 8, built Fort Defiance, a stockade with blockhouse bastions. There he offered peace, which was rejected. Wayne's soldiers advanced toward Fort Miami and on August 20, 1794, encountered Native American confederacy forces led by Blue Jacket, in what has become known as the Battle of Fallen Timbers. The first assault on Wayne's Legion was successful, but were able to regroup quickly and pressed the attack with a bayonet charge. The cavalry outflanked Blue Jacket's warriors, who were easily routed. They fled towards Fort Miami, but were surprised to find the gates closed against them. The British commander of the fort refused to assist them, unwilling to start a war with the United States. Wayne's army had won a decisive victory. The soldiers spent several days destroying the nearby Native villages and crops, before withdrawing.

With the door slammed shut on them by their old allies, Native American resistance quickly collapsed. Delegates from the various confederation tribes, 1130 persons total, gathered for a peace conference at Fort Greene Ville in June 1795. The conference lasted for six weeks, resulting, on August 3, 1795, in the Treaty of Greenville between the assembled tribes and the "15 fires of the United States." Under its terms, the tribes ceded most of what is now Ohio for American settlement, recognized the United States (rather than Great Britain) as the ruling power in the region, and turned ten chiefs over to the U.S. government as hostages until all white prisoners were returned. This, along with the recently signed Jay Treaty, which provided for the British withdrawal from pre-Revolutionary War forts in the region it had not yet relinquished, solidified U.S. sovereignty over the Northwest Territory. Believing that the Natives were on the verge of extinction due to uncontrolled white settlement in protected lands, Washington and Knox sought to assimilate them into American society. In the Southwest, Washington pursued this policy of assimilation through treaties such as the Treaty of New York (1790) and the Treaty of Holston.

With the Storming of the Bastille on July 14, 1789, the French Revolution erupted. The American public, remembering the aid provided by the French during the Revolutionary War, was largely enthusiastic, and hoped for democratic reforms that would solidify the existing Franco-American alliance and transform France into a republican ally against aristocratic and monarchical Great Britain. Shortly after the Bastille fell, the main prison key was turned over to the Marquis de Lafayette, a Frenchman who had served under Washington in the American Revolutionary War. In an expression of optimism about the revolution's chances for success, Lafayette sent the key to Washington, who displayed it prominently in the executive mansion. In the Caribbean, the revolution destabilized the French colony of Saint-Domingue (present-day Haiti), as it split the government into royalist and revolutionary factions, and aroused the people to demand civil rights for themselves. Sensing an opportunity, the slaves of northern St. Domingue organized and planned a massive rebellion which began on August 22, 1791. Their successful revolution resulted in the establishment of the second independent country in the Americas (after the United States). Soon after the revolt began, the Washington administration, at French request, agreed to send money, arms, and provisions to Saint-Domingue to assist distressed slave-owning colonists. Reacting to reports spread by fleeing Frenchmen of Haitian slaves murdering people, many Southerners believed that a successful slave revolt in Haiti would lead to a massive race war in America. American aid to Saint-Domingue formed part of the US repayment of Revolutionary War loans, and eventually amounted to about $400,000 and 1,000 military weapons.

From 1790 to 1794, the French Revolution became increasingly radical. In 1792 the revolutionary government declared war on several European nations, including Great Britain, starting the War of the First Coalition. A wave of bloody massacres spread through Paris and other cities late that summer, leaving more than one thousand people dead. On September 21, 1792, France declared itself a republic, and the deposed King Louis XVI was guillotined on January 21, 1793. Then followed a period labeled by some historians as the "Reign of Terror," between the summer of 1793 and the end of July 1794, during which 16,594 official death sentences were carried out against those accused of being enemies of the revolution. Among the executed were persons who had aided the American rebels during the Revolutionary War, such as the navy commander Comte D'Estaing. Lafayette, who was appointed commander-in-chief of the National Guard following the storming of the Bastille, fled France and ended up in captivity in Austria, while Thomas Paine, in France to support the revolutionaries, was imprisoned in Paris.

Though originally most Americans were in support of the revolution, the political debate in the U.S. over the nature of the revolution soon exacerbated pre-existing political divisions and resulted in the alignment of the political elite along pro-French and pro-British lines. Thomas Jefferson became the leader of the pro-French faction that celebrated the revolution's republican ideals. Though originally in support of the revolution, Alexander Hamilton soon led the faction which viewed the revolution with skepticism (believing that "absolute liberty would lead to absolute tyranny") and sought to preserve existing commercial ties with Great Britain. When news reached America that France had declared war on the British, people were divided on whether the U.S. should enter the war on the side of France. Jefferson and his faction wanted to aid the French, while Hamilton and his followers supported neutrality in the conflict. Jeffersonians denounced Hamilton, Vice President Adams, and even the president as "friends of Britain", "monarchists", and "enemies of the republican values that all true Americans cherish". Hamiltonians warned that Jefferson's Republicans would replicate the terrors of the French revolution in America"crowd rule" akin to anarchy, and the destruction of "all order and rank in society and government."

Although the president, who believed that the United States was too weak and unstable to fight another war with a major European power, wished to avoid any and all foreign entanglements, a sizable portion of the American public was ready to help the French and their fight for "liberty, equality, and fraternity." In the days immediately following Washington's second inauguration, the revolutionary government of France sent diplomat Edmond-Charles Genêt, called "Citizen Genêt," to America. Genêt's mission was to drum up support for the French cause. Genêt issued letters of marque and reprisal to American ships so they could capture British merchant ships. He attempted to turn popular sentiment towards American involvement in the French war against Britain by creating a network of Democratic-Republican Societies in major cities.

Washington was deeply irritated by this subversive meddling, and when Genêt allowed a French-sponsored warship to sail out of Philadelphia against direct presidential orders, Washington demanded that France recall Genêt. By this time the revolution had taken a more violent approach and Genêt would have been executed had he returned to France. He appealed to Washington, and Washington allowed him to remain, making him the first political refugee to seek sanctuary in the United States. Genêt's actual effectiveness has been contested, with Forrest McDonald writing that "Genêt was almost obsolete by the time he arrived in Charleston on April 8, 1793."

During the Genêt episode, Washington, after consulting his Cabinet, issued a Proclamation of Neutrality on April 22, 1793. In it he declared the United States neutral in the conflict between Great Britain and France. He also threatened legal proceedings against any American providing assistance to any of the warring countries. Washington eventually recognized that supporting either Great Britain or France was a false dichotomy. He would do neither, thereby shielding the fledgling U.S. from, in his view, unnecessary harm. The Proclamation was formalized into law by the Neutrality Act of 1794.

The public had mixed opinions about Washington's Proclamation of Neutrality. Those who supported Madison and Jefferson were far more likely to be in support of the French Revolution, as they saw it as an opportunity for a nation to achieve liberty from tyrannical rule. Several merchants were extremely happy that the President decided to remain impartial to the revolution. They believed that if the government took a stance on the war, it would ruin their trade relations with the British completely. This economic element was a primary reason for many Federalist supporters wanting to avoid increased conflict with the British. Hamilton supported the Proclamation of Neutrality, defending it both in cabinet meetings, and in newspapers under the pseudonym ""Pacificus"." He encouraged Washington to issue the Proclamation, lecturing him about the need for a "continuance of the peace, the desire of which may be said to be both universal and ardent."

Upon going to war against France, the British Royal Navy began intercepting ships of neutral countries bound for French ports. The French imported large amounts of American foodstuffs, and the British hoped to starve the French into defeat by intercepting these shipments. In November 1793, the British government widened the scope of these seizures to include any neutral ships trading with the French West Indies, including those flying the American flag. By the following March, more than 250 U.S. merchant ships had been seized. Americans were outraged, and angry protests erupted in several cities. Many Jeffersonians in Congress demanded a declaration of war, but Congressman James Madison instead called for strong economic retaliation, including an embargo on all trade with Britain. Further inflaming anti-British sentiment in Congress, news arrived while the matter was under debate that the Governor General of British North America, Lord Dorchester, had made an inflammatory speech inciting Native tribes in the Northwest Territory against the Americans.

Congress responded to these "outrages" by passing a 30-day embargo on all shipping, foreign and domestic, in American harbors. In the meantime, the British government had issued an order in council partially repealing effects of the November order. This policy change did not defeat the whole movement for commercial retaliation, but it cooled passions somewhat. The embargo was later renewed for a second month, but then was permitted to expire. In response to Britain's more conciliatory policies, Washington named Supreme Court Chief Justice John Jay as special envoy to Great Britain in an effort to avoid war. This appointment provoked the ire of Jeffersonians. Although confirmed by a comfortable margin in the U.S. Senate (18–8), debate on the nomination was bitter.

Jay was instructed by Alexander Hamilton to seek compensation for seizure of American ships and to clarify the rules governing British seizure of neutral ships. He was also to insist that the British relinquish their posts in the Northwest. In return, the U.S. would take responsibility for pre-Revolution debts owed to British merchants and subjects. He also asked Jay, if possible, to seek limited access for American ships to the British West Indies. Jay and the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Grenville, began negotiations on July 30, 1794. The treaty that emerged several weeks later, commonly known as the Jay Treaty, was, in Jay's words "equal and fair." Both sides achieved many objectives; several issues were sent to arbitration. For the British, America remained neutral and economically grew closer to Britain. The Americans also guaranteed favorable treatment to British imports. In return, the British agreed to evacuate the western forts, which they had been supposed to do by 1783. They also agreed to open their West Indies ports to smaller American ships, allow small vessels to trade with the French West Indies, and set up a commission that would adjudicate American claims against Britain for seized ships, and British claims against Americans for debts incurred before 1775. As the treaty contained neither concessions on impressment nor statement of rights for American sailors, another commission was later established to settle both those and boundary issues.
Once the treaty arrived in Philadelphia in March 1795, Washington—who had misgivings about the treaty's terms—kept its contents confidential until June, when a special session of the Senate convened to give its advice and consent. Peter Trubowitz writes that during these several months Washington wrestled with "a strategic dilemma," balancing geopolitics and domestic politics. "If he threw his support behind the treaty, he risked destroying his fragile government from within due to partisan rage. If he shelved the treaty to silence his political detractors, there would likely be war with Great Britain, which had the potential to destroy the government from the outside." Submitted on June 8, debate on the treaty's 27 articles was carried out in secret, and lasted for more than two weeks. Republican senators, who wanted to pressure Britain to the brink of war, denounced the Jay Treaty as an insult to American prestige, and a repudiation of the 1778 treaty with France; New York's Aaron Burr argued point-by-point why the whole agreement should be renegotiated. On June 24, the Senate approved the treaty by a vote of 20–10the precise two-thirds majority vote necessary for ratification.

Although the Senate hoped to keep the treaty secret until Washington had decided whether or not to sign it, it was leaked to a Philadelphia editor who printed it in full on June 30. Within a few days the whole the country knew the terms of the agreement, and, in the words of Samuel Morison, "a howl or rage went up that Jay had betrayed his country." The reaction to the treaty was the most negative in the South. Southern planters, who owed the pre-Revolution debts to the British and who were now not going to collect for the slaves lost to them, viewed it as a great indignity. As a result, the Federalists lost most of the support they had among planters. Protests, organized by Republicans, included petitions, incendiary pamphlets, and a series of public meetings held in the larger cities, each of which addressed a memorial to the president. As protests from treaty opponents intensified, Washington's initial neutral position shifted to a solid pro-treaty stance, aided by Hamilton's elaborate analysis of the treaty and his two-dozen newspaper essays promoting it. The British, in an effort to promote signing of the treaty, delivered a letter in which Randolph was revealed to have taken bribes from the French. Randolph was forced to resign from the cabinet, his opposition to the treaty became worthless. On August 24, Washington signed the treaty. There was a temporary lull in the Jay Treaty furor thereafter. By late 1796, the Federalists had gained twice as many signatures in favor of the treaty as had been gathered against. Public opinion had been swayed in favor of the treaty. The following year, it flared up again when the House of Representatives inserted itself into the debate. The new debate was not only over the merits of the treaty, but also about whether the House had the power under the Constitution to refuse to appropriate the money necessary for a treaty already ratified by the Senate and signed by the president. Citing its constitutional fiscal authority (Article I, Section 7), the House requested that the president turn over all documents that related to the treaty, including his instructions to Jay, all correspondence, and all other documents relating to the treaty negotiations. He refused to do so, invoking what later became known as executive privilege, and insisted that the House did not have the Constitutional authority to block treaties. A contentious debate ensued, during which Washington's most vehement opponents in the House publicly called for his impeachment. Through it all, Washington responded to his critics by using his prestige, political skills, and the power of office in a sincere and straightforward fashion to broaden public support for his stance. The Federalists heavily promoted the passage, waging what Forrest McDonald calls "The most intensive campaign of pressure politics the nation had yet known." On April 30, the House voted 51–48 to approve the requisite treaty funding. Jeffersonians carried their campaign against the treaty and "pro-British Federalist policies" into the political campaigns (both state and federal) of 1796, where the political divisions marking the First Party System became crystallized.

The treaty pushed the new nation away from France and towards Great Britain. The French government concluded that it violated the Franco-American treaty of 1778, and that the U.S. government had accepted the treaty despite the overwhelming public sentiment against it. This set up a series of diplomatic and political conflicts over the ensuing four years, culminating in the Quasi-War. The Jay Treaty also helped ensure American control of its own frontier lands. After the signing of treaty, the British withdrew their support from several Native Americans tribes, while the Spanish, fearing that the Jay Treaty signaled the creation of an Anglo-American alliance, sought to appease the United States.

Following the end of the Revolutionary War the ships of the Continental Navy were gradually disposed of, and their crews disbanded. The frigate , which had fired the last shots of the war in 1783, was also the last ship in the Navy. Many in the Continental Congress wanted to keep the ship in active service, but the lack of funds for repairs and upkeep, coupled with a shift in national priorities, eventually prevailed over sentiment. The ship was sold in August 1785, and the navy disbanded. At around the same time American merchant ships in the Western Mediterranean and Southeastern North Atlantic began having problems with pirates operating from ports along North Africa's so-called Barbary CoastAlgiers, Tripoli, and Tunis. In 1784–85, Algerian pirate ships seized two American ships ("Maria" and "Dauphin") and held their crews for ransom. Thomas Jefferson, then Minister to France, suggested an American naval force to protect American shipping in the Mediterranean, but his recommendations were initially met with indifference, as were later recommendations of John Jay, who proposed building five 40-gun warships. Beginning late in 1786, the Portuguese Navy began blockading Algerian ships from entering the Atlantic Ocean through the Strait of Gibraltar, which provided temporary protection for American merchant ships.

Piracy against American merchant shipping had not been a problem before 1776, when ships from the Thirteen Colonies were protected by British warships and treaties (nor was it a problem during the revolution, as the French Navy assumed the responsibility as part of the alliance treaty). Only after the U.S. achieved its independence did Barbary pirates begin capturing American ships and demanding ransom or tribute. Also, once the French Revolution started, the British Navy began intercepting American merchant ships suspected of trading with France, and France began intercepting American merchant ships suspected of trading with Great Britain. Defenseless, the American government could do little to resist. Even given these events there was great resistance in Congress to formation of a naval force. Opponents asserted that payment of tribute to the Barbary states was a better solution than building a navy, which they argued would only lead to calls for a navy department, and the staff to operate it. This would then lead to more appropriations of funds, which would eventually spiral out of control, giving birth to a "self-feeding entity." Then, in 1793, a truce negotiated between Portugal and Algiers ended Portugal's blockade of the Strait of Gibraltar, freeing the Barbary pirates to roam the Atlantic. Within months, they had captured 11 American vessels and more than a hundred seamen.

The cumulation of all these events led Washington to request Congress to establish a standing navy. After a contentious debate, Congress passed the Naval Armament Act on March 27, 1794, authorizing construction of six frigates (to be built by Joshua Humphreys). These ships were the first ships of what eventually became the present-day United States Navy. Soon afterward, Congress also authorized funds to obtain a treaty with Algiers and to ransom Americans held captive (199 were alive at that time, including a few survivors from the "Maria" and the "Dauphin"). Ratified in September 1795, the final cost of the return of those held captive and peace with Algiers was $642,000, plus $21,000 in annual tribute. The president was unhappy with the arrangement, but realized the U.S. had little choice but to agree to it. Treaties were also concluded with Tripoli, in 1796, and Tunis in 1797, each carrying with it an annual U.S. tribute payment obligation for protection from attack. The new Navy would not be deployed until after Washington left office; the first two frigates completed were: "United States", launched May 10, 1797; and "Constitution", launched October 21, 1797.

In the late 1780s, Georgia grew eager to firm up its trans-Appalachian land claim, and meet citizen demands that the land be developed. The territory claimed by Georgia, which it called the "Yazoo lands," ran west from the Appalachian Mountains to the Mississippi River, and included most of the present-day states of Alabama and Mississippi (between 31° N and 35° N). The southern portion of this region was also claimed by Spain as part of Spanish Florida. One of Georgia's efforts to accomplish its goals for the region was a 1794 plan developed by governor George Mathews and the Georgia General Assembly. It soon became a major political scandal, known as the Yazoo land scandal.

Spain had, since 1763, controlled the lands west of the Mississippi River. Those lands consisted of Spanish Louisiana and New Orleans. Great Britain, from 1763 to 1783, controlled the lands east of the Mississippi, British Florida, north from the Gulf of Mexico. Spain gained possession of British Florida south of 31° N and claimed the rest of itnorth to 32° 22′ (the junction of the Mississippi and Yazoo Rivers). Thereafter, Spain attempted to slow the migration of American settlers into the region, and to lure those already there to secede from the United States. Toward this end, in 1784 the Spanish closed New Orleans to American goods coming down the Mississippi, which was the only viable outlet for the goods produced by many American settlers, and began selling weapons to the Native tribes in the Yazoo.

After Washington issued his 1793 Proclamation of Neutrality he became concerned that Spain, which later that year joined Britain in war against France, might work in concert with Britain to incite insurrection in the Yazoo against the U.S., using the opening of trade on the Mississippi as an enticement. At that same time though, mid-1794, Spain was attempting to extract itself from its alliance with the British, and to restore peace with France. As Spain's prime minister, Manuel de Godoy, was attempting to do so, he learned of John Jay's mission to London, and became concerned that those negotiations would result in an Anglo-American alliance and an invasion of Spanish possessions in North America. Sensing the need for rapprochement, Godoy sent a request to the U.S. government for a representative empowered to negotiate a new treaty; Washington sent Thomas Pinckney to Spain in June 1795.

Eleven months after the signing of the Jay Treaty, the United States and Spain agreed to the Treaty of San Lorenzo, also known as Pinckney's Treaty. Signed on October 27, 1795, the treaty established intentions of peace and friendship between the U.S. and Spain; established the southern boundary of the U.S. with the Spanish colonies of East Florida and West Florida, with Spain relinquishing its claim on the portion of West Florida north of the 31st parallel; and established the western U.S. border as being along the Mississippi River from the northern U.S. to the 31st parallel.

Perhaps most importantly, Pinckney's Treaty granted both Spanish and American ships unrestricted navigation rights along the entire Mississippi River, as well as duty-free transport for American ships through the Spanish port of New Orleans, opening much of the Ohio River basin for settlement and trade. Agricultural produce could now flow on flatboats down the Ohio River to the Mississippi and on to New Orleans. From there the goods could be shipped around the world. Spain and the United States further agreed to protect the vessels of the other party anywhere within their jurisdictions and to not detain or embargo the other's citizens or vessels.

The final treaty also voided Spanish guarantees of military support that colonial officials had made to Native Americans in the disputed regions, greatly weakening those communities' ability to resist encroachment upon their lands. The treaty represented a major victory for Washington administration, and placated many of the critics of the Jay Treaty. It also enabled and encouraged American settlers to continue their movement west, by making the frontier areas more attractive and lucrative. The region that Spain relinquished its claim to through the treaty was organized by Congress as the Mississippi Territory on April 7, 1798.

Washington's wife Martha managed the presidential household in the federal capital, in addition to supervising affairs at Mount Vernon. Often referred to as "lady Washington" (the term "First Lady" did not come into common use until the mid 19th century), she also organized weekly public salons, where she met with visiting dignitaries, members of Congress, and citizens from the local community. These receptions made Martha, as Abigail Adams wrote, "the object of Veneration and Respect." Martha coordinated weekly Levees for the president as well. Designed to give the public access to the president and to project a dignified public image of the presidency, these receptions also elicited criticism. Opposition newspapers derided them as monarchical and wasteful. Nonetheless, the gatherings became a fixture in the capital's social scene, and continued throughout Washington's presidency.

Washington and his household lived in three executive mansions during his presidency:
Washington made three major tours around the country. The first was to New England (1789), the second to Rhode Island and New York City (1790), and the third to the Southern states of Maryland, Virginia, Georgia, North Carolina, and South Carolina (1791). His main goals were to educate himself about "the principal character and internal circumstances" of the different regions of the country, as well as meet "well informed persons, who might give him useful information and advice on political subjects."

Because he was himself from the South, Washington decided to visit the Northern states first. After Congress went into recess in September 1789, Washington traveled to New England, making his first stop in New Haven, Connecticut. Washington then traveled to Boston, where a large crowd greeted him. From Boston, Washington traveled north, stopping in Marblehead and Salem, Massachusetts. About a week after arriving in Boston, he traveled north to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, and circled back to New York, stopping in Waltham and Lexington. The trip was a success, serving to consolidate his popularity and improve his health. During his time in New England, Washington inspected possible sites for roads and canals and observed textile mills. After Rhode Island ratified the Constitution in 1790, Washington promptly took another tour to visit it. Along with Jefferson and New York governor George Clinton, he first stopped in Newport, Rhode Island, then traveled to Providence, Rhode Island.

In 1791, Washington toured the South, largely to promote national unity amid uproar over Hamilton's economic plan and slavery. The trip began on March 20, 1791, when Washington and a small group of aides began sailing down the Severn River. After sailing through a large storm, they arrived in Annapolis. From Annapolis they traveled to Mount Vernon, and from there to Colchester, Virginia, to Richmond, Virginia. After leaving Richmond, they went to Petersburg, than Emporia, Virginia. They left Virginia and went to Craven County, North Carolina, then New Bern. The group's last stop in North Carolina was Wilmington, after which they traveled to Georgetown, South Carolina, subsequently stopping in Charleston. Washington had never traveled south of North Carolina prior to 1791, and he was warmly received in Charleston. After South Carolina, Washington and his party arrived in Georgia, going to (among others) Augusta. In late May, the group turned around, stopping at many Revolutionary War battle sites. On June 11, 1791, they arrived back at Mount Vernon.

When the federal government began operations under the new form of government in the spring of 1789, two states—North Carolina and Rhode Island—were not yet members of the Union as neither had ratified the Constitution. Both did so while Washington was in office, thereby joining the Union: North Carolina, November 21, 1789; and Rhode Island, May 29, 1790. While North Carolina joined of its own accord, Rhode Island only joined the Union after the federal government threatened to break off trade relations.

Three new states were admitted to the Union (each on an equal footing with the existing states) while Washington was in office: Vermont, on March 4, 1791; Kentucky, on June 1, 1792; and Tennessee, on June 1, 1796.

As his second term entered its final year in 1796, Washington was exhausted from years of public service. Though he remained in fine mental condition, his physical health had begun to decline. He was also bothered by the constant attacks from the Democratic-Republican press, which had escalated after the signing of the Jay Treaty. Perhaps most importantly, Washington believed that he had accomplished his major goals as president. The nation had a stable economy, a strong grip over its Western territories, and peaceful relations with foreign powers. Against the wishes of most Federalists, who hoped that the president would seek re-election, Washington decided early in 1796 that he would retire unless compelled to run by a national emergency. He delayed a formal announcement until later in the year, but began drafting his Farewell Address.

Washington's retirement was a momentous decision, as at that time in the western world, national leaders rarely relinquished their titles voluntarily. In making the announcement and then following through on it, Washington established a precedent for the democratic transfer of executive power. His departure from office after two terms set a pattern for subsequent U.S. presidents.

In 1792, when Washington had considered retiring after one term, he turned to James Madison for help composing a "valedictory address" to the public. Now, four years later, he turned to Alexander Hamilton for guidance. Over the course of several months, Hamilton and the president collaborated on the form and wording of the address. One of Hamilton's drafts included pointedly sharp criticism of the newspapers and the press of the day, something subsequently not included in the final, finished letter. The final product, wrote Hamilton biographer Marie Hecht, "was a true marriage of minds, the peak of amity and understanding between the two men." Most historians believe that while the language is primarily Hamilton's, the ideas are essentially Washington's. The address was published on September 19, 1796, in David Claypoole's "American Daily Advertiser". It was immediately reprinted in newspapers and as a pamphlet throughout the United States.

Washington makes clear at the outset that he was not running for a third term, and then thanks his fellow citizens for the opportunity to serve as their president. He then writes about the preservation of the Union, the core of American nationhood, and which, along with the Constitution binds all Americans together and provides for the popular well being. Concerned about the obstacles and potential hazards that lay ahead for the nation, Washington urges the nation's people to cherish and safeguard their hard-won system of republican government despite their many differences.

The address is largely a statement of his policies while in office, with some comments mixed in to highlight certain points, in which he builds a case for the steps needed to perpetuate the union, a concept that began to germinate among and between the states during the Revolutionary War. In doing so he lifts up a well-formed and functioning Constitution (the rule of law), along with the proper habits and dispositions (both intellectual and religious) of the people as essential. Washington also lays out the greatest threats he sees to the Union, warning Americans to distrust the passions of political factionalism, be wary of foreign interference in the nation's domestic affairs, and avoid an entangling foreign policy.

After Washington's death in 1799, the address was reprinted in newspapers, and included in schoolbooks and collections of Washington's writings and biographies throughout the country. A quarter-century later, both Jefferson and Madison placed it on the primary reading list at the University of Virginia, describing it as one of the "best guides" to the "distinctive principles" of American government. It became one of the "great state papers of American history", often read in classrooms and other venues long after Washington left office. The U.S. Senate observes Washington's Birthday (February 22) each year by selecting one of its members, alternating parties, to read the address in legislative session.

Today the address is primarily remembered for its words concerning non-involvement in European wars and politics. For much of the 19th century, the expanse of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans had made it possible for the U.S. to enjoy a kind of "free security" and remain largely detached from Old World conflicts, and social conventions made international travel by incumbent politicians taboo. The restriction began to erode and break down in the early 20th century, as policy makers at the federal level began to reevaluate the nation's role in international affairs. The first international presidential trip was made in 1906 by Theodore Roosevelt, and subsequently, during World War I, Woodrow Wilson made a case for U.S. intervention in the conflict and a U.S. interest in maintaining a peaceful world order. Since then, the U.S. has signed numerous treaties of alliance with foreign nations.

Washington's announcement on September 19, 1796, that he would not be a candidate for a third term was, in the words of congressman Fisher Ames, "a signal, like dropping a hat, for the party racers to start." During the ensuing ten weeks, partisans from both factions sprang into action in an intensive and focused effort to influence the outcome of the electoral vote. Like the previous two presidential elections, no candidates were put forward for voters to choose between in 1796. The Constitution provided for the selection of electors, who would then elect a president. The clear favorite of Democratic-Republicans was Thomas Jefferson, although he was very reluctant to run. John Adams was the choice of a large majority of the Federalists.

The Democratic-Republicans in Congress held a nominating caucus and named Jefferson and Aaron Burr as their presidential choices. Jefferson at first declined the nomination, but he agreed to run a few weeks later. Federalist members of Congress held an informal nominating caucus and named Adams and Thomas Pinckney as their candidates for president. The campaign, was, for the most part, unorganized and sporadic, confined to newspaper attacks, pamphlets and political rallies; of the four contenders, only Burr actively campaigned.

In early November, France's ambassador to the U.S., Pierre Adet, inserted himself into the political debate on behalf of Jefferson, publishing statements designed to arouse anti-British sentiment and to leave the impression that a Jefferson victory would result in improved relations with France. Then, late in the campaign, Alexander Hamilton, desiring "a more pliant president than Adams," maneuvered to tip the election to Pinckney. He coerced South Carolina Federalist electors, pledged to vote for "favorite son" Pinckney, to scatter their second votes among candidates other than Adams. Hamilton's scheme was undone when several New England state electors heard of it, conferred, and agreed not to vote for Pinckney.

The electoral votes were counted during a Joint Session of Congress on February 8, 1797; Adams won the presidency by a narrow margin, garnering 71 electoral votes to 68 for Jefferson (who became the vice president). The balance of the Electoral College votes were dispersed among: Thomas Pinckney (59), Aaron Burr (30), Samuel Adams (15), Oliver Ellsworth (11), George Clinton (7), John Jay (5), James Iredell (3), John Henry (2), Samuel Johnston (2), George Washington (2), and C. C. Pinckney (1).

George Washington's presidency has generally been viewed as one of the most successful, and he is often considered to be one of the three greatest American presidents ever. When historians began ranking the presidents in 1948, Washington ranked 2nd in Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr.'s poll, and has subsequently been ranked 3rd in the Riders-McIver Poll (1996), and 2nd in the 2017 survey by C-SPAN.

Washington has been heavily written about, with more than 900 books having been written about him. Forrest McDonald concluded that "George Washington was indispensable, but only for what he was, not for what he did. He was the symbol of the presidency [but]... Washington had done little in his own right, had often opposed the best measures of his subordinates, and had taken credit for his achievements that he had no share in bringing about." By contrast, in his piece on Washington, Stephen Knott wrote "Literally the 'Father of the Nation,' Washington almost single-handedly created a new government—shaping its institutions, offices, and political practices...Washington's profound achievements built the foundations of a powerful national government that has survived for more than two centuries." Knotts adds that historians generally consider Washington's inability to prevent the outbreak of heated partisan battles to be his greatest failure. Ron Chernow considers Washington's presidency to be "simply breathtaking" writing:




</doc>
<doc id="8711145" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8711145" title="Battle of Horseshoe Bend (1832)">
Battle of Horseshoe Bend (1832)

The Battle of Horseshoe Bend, also referred to as the Battle of Pecatonica and the Battle of Bloody Lake, was fought on June 16, 1832 in present-day Wisconsin at an oxbow lake known as "Horseshoe Bend", which was formed by a change in course of the Pecatonica River. The battle was a major turning point in the Black Hawk War, despite being of only minor military significance. The small victory won by the U.S. militia at Horseshoe Bend helped restore public confidence in the volunteer force following an embarrassing defeat at Stillman's Run. The Battle of Horseshoe Bend ended with three militia men killed in action and a party of eleven Kickapoo warriors dead.

The militia men involved in the Battle of Horseshoe Bend proved their ability to obey orders, act as a disciplined unit, and show bravery. Unlike at Stillman's Run, the troops waited for Colonel Henry Dodge's commands before acting on the field of battle. When ordered to charge, the men obeyed and eventually won a fight that descended into a bloody hand-to-hand battle. A memorial marker was erected to commemorate the battle in 1922. Today the battleground at Horseshoe Bend is a county park.

As a consequence of an 1804 treaty between Governor William Henry Harrison of Indiana Territory and a group of Sauk and Fox leaders regarding land settlement, the Sauk and Fox tribes vacated their lands in Illinois and moved west of the Mississippi in 1828. However, Sauk Chief Black Hawk and others disputed the treaty, claiming that the full tribal councils had not been consulted, nor did those representing the tribes have authorization to cede lands. Angered by the loss of his birthplace, between 1830 and 1831 Black Hawk led a number of incursions across the Mississippi River, but was persuaded to return west each time without bloodshed. In April 1832, encouraged by promises of alliance with other tribes and the British, he again moved his so-called "British Band" of around 1000 warriors and non-combatants into Illinois. Finding no allies, he attempted to return to Iowa, but the undisciplined Illinois Militia force's actions led to the Battle of Stillman's Run. A number of other small skirmishes and massacres followed and the militias of Michigan Territory and Illinois were mobilized to hunt down Black Hawk's Band. The conflict became known as the Black Hawk War.

The period between Stillman's Run and Horseshoe Bend was filled with war-related activity. A series of attacks at Buffalo Grove, the Plum River settlement, Fort Blue Mounds and the war's most famous incident, the Indian Creek massacre, all took place between mid-May and late June 1832. In the week before the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, Colonel Henry Dodge of the western Michigan Territory militia was busy responding to various incidents across the region. On the afternoon of June 8, 1832, Dodge and his men, including James W. Stephenson, proceeded to Kellogg's Grove and buried the victims of the St. Vrain massacre. That night Stephenson returned to Galena, Illinois, while Dodge moved to Hickory Point where he remained overnight. The next morning Dodge set out for Dixon's Ferry, where he camped with General Hugh Brady.

On June 11, Dodge escorted Brady to the mouth of the Fox River to confer with overall commander General Henry Atkinson. Dodge left the conference with clear authority from Atkinson to deal with the violence in the mining region. He first traveled to his home fort, at Gratiot's Grove, which he reached on June 13. The Spafford Farm massacre occurred the following day, and Dodge set out for Fort Hamilton as soon as he heard about it, stopping at Fort Blue Mounds for supplies. On the way to Hamilton, the soldiers passed a German immigrant, Henry Apple, exchanged greetings and kept traveling. Shortly afterwards the soldiers heard gunshots in the distance; Apple had met with a Kickapoo ambush, likely meant for Dodge himself. Dodge was probably saved by his last minute decision to make a detour from the main route. Later Apple's horse galloped wildly back past the men, wounded and carrying a large amount of blood in its saddle. The horse continued all the way to Fort Hamilton, where it raised a furor among the inhabitants.

A Native American band from the Kickapoo tribe, eleven warriors in all, was responsible for the attack on Apple; the same band had killed five men at Spafford Farm on June 14. This band was only loosely affiliated with Black Hawk's British Band.

On hearing the ambush in the distance, Dodge hurried on toward Fort Hamilton (present-day Wiota, Wisconsin) where he gathered together a company of 29 mounted volunteers and sped off to intercept the attackers. He led the chase through tangled underbrush until, breaking into prairie, his force caught sight of the raiding party. The Kickapoo crossed the Pecatonica River within sight of the pursuing militia, and entered into an overgrown swamp. The militia followed across the swollen river and dismounted when they reached the swamp.

According to personal accounts of the battle, after dismounting Dodge offered his men a chance to back out of the operation. No one opted out, and 21 men advanced with Dodge in an extended firing line, unsure of the enemy's location. The remaining eight soldiers were posted as guards on high grounds and near the horses. Unlike the disorganized and undisciplined troops at Stillman's Run, the volunteers at Horseshoe Bend adhered to military discipline; they waited for Dodge to give the order before they entered the thicket and swampland in search of their enemy, and once searching they awaited their commander's order to attack.

After the militia advanced about 200 yards (200 m), the Kickapoo suddenly let loose a loud yell from their hidden position on the bank of an oxbow lake along the river. The warriors fired a volley toward the advancing militia and three men, Samuel Black, Samuel Wells and Montaville Morris, were hit and went down. Dodge did not hesitate and ordered his men to charge; they obeyed and waited until they were within six feet of the Kickapoo before discharging their weapons. The fight, after the initial charge and volley, descended into a hand-to-hand struggle with tomahawks, bayonets, muskets and spears the weapons of choice. The fighting only lasted a few minutes: nine Kickapoo were killed on the spot and the other two were felled while fleeing across the lake. During the hand-to-hand combat a fourth member of the militia, Thomas Jenkins, was wounded. Though short, the Battle of Horseshoe Bend had a lasting impact and influence on the rest of the war.

The Battle of Horseshoe Bend, though of little military significance, was a major turning point in the war for the volunteer militia forces and many white settlers. This minor militia victory was the first step in the process of redeeming the militia's own morale and its standing in the eyes of the settlers on the frontier. Individual accounts claim that the battle at Horseshoe Bend "turn(ed) the tide of the war." It was also notable for the proportion of killed in action to the number of combatants. All eleven Kickapoo that Dodge had pursued into the swamp were killed and scalped by his troops, while the final militia casualties were confined to three dead and one wounded. About an hour after the battle, Colonel William S. Hamilton arrived with friendly Menominee, Sioux and Ho-Chunk warriors. According to Dodge, the friendly warriors were given some of the scalps his men had taken, with which they were "delighted". Dodge also reported that the Native Americans then proceeded on to the battlefield and mutilated the corpses of the fallen Kickapoo.

Of Dodge's casualties, Thomas Jenkins was only slightly wounded. However, the three Militia men who had been shot as they advanced towards the Kickapoo position all later died. Samuel Wells, Montaville Morris and Samuel Black were transported to Fort Hamilton; Morris died at the fort, as did Wells, with his head in a comrade's lap. When informed by the surgeon of his imminent death, Wells requested to speak with Dodge. Wells asked Dodge "if he had behaved like a soldier." Dodge responded, "Yes, Wells, like a brave one." Wells then said to the commander, "Send that word to my old father," and died a short time later. Samuel Black was moved to Fort Defiance, where he lingered for nine days before dying.

This was the first battle in which a volunteer force defeated the Native Americans. Dodge became the first of the militia leaders to prove his ability to stand up to the enemy. He quickly became the "rising star" of the conflict, having helped negotiate the release of the Hall sisters after the Indian Creek massacre and proved himself at Horseshoe Bend.

The battlefield at Horseshoe Bend is now a campground located within a county park in Lafayette County, Wisconsin. The Black Hawk Memorial Park is maintained by the Lafayette County Sportsmen Alliance, Yellowstone Flint and Cap club, and the Friends of Woodford Park. In 1922, a marker was erected by the Shullsburg chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution and the residents of Woodford to commemorate the Battle of Horseshoe Bend; it is still visible today. The battlefield was listed on the National Register of Historic Places by the National Park Service on July 28, 2011.



</doc>
<doc id="8713214" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8713214" title="Drinking water supply and sanitation in the United States">
Drinking water supply and sanitation in the United States

Issues that affect drinking water supply and sanitation in the United States include water scarcity, pollution, a backlog of investment, concerns about the affordability of water for the poorest, and a rapidly retiring workforce. Increased variability and intensity of rainfall as a result of climate change is expected to produce both more severe droughts and flooding, with potentially serious consequences for water supply and for pollution from combined sewer overflows. Droughts are likely to particularly affect the 66 percent of Americans whose communities depend on surface water. As for drinking water quality, there are concerns about disinfection by-products, lead, perchlorates and pharmaceutical substances, but generally drinking water quality in the U.S. is good.

Cities, utilities, state governments and the federal government have addressed the above issues in various ways. To keep pace with demand from an increasing population, utilities traditionally have augmented supplies. However, faced with increasing costs and droughts, water conservation is beginning to receive more attention and is being supported through the federal WaterSense program. The reuse of treated wastewater for non-potable uses is also becoming increasingly common. Pollution through wastewater discharges, a major issue in the 1960s, has been brought largely under control.

Most Americans are served by publicly owned water and sewer utilities. Any public system, which is defined as a system that serves more than 25 customers or 15 service connections, is regulated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the Safe Water Drinking Act. Eleven percent of Americans receive water from private (so-called "investor-owned") utilities. In rural areas, cooperatives often provide drinking water. Finally, up to 15 percent of Americans are served by their own wells. Water supply and wastewater systems are regulated by state governments and the federal government. At the state level, health and environmental regulation is entrusted to the corresponding state-level departments. Public Utilities Commissions or Public Service Commissions regulate tariffs charged by private utilities. In some states they also regulate tariffs by public utilities. At the federal level, drinking water quality and wastewater discharges are regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which also provides funding to utilities through State Revolving Funds.
Water consumption in the United States is more than double that in Central Europe, with large variations among the states. In 2002 the average American family spent $474 on water and sewerage charges, which is about the same level as in Europe. The median household spent about 1.1 percent of its income on water and sewage. By 2018, 87% of the American population receives water from publicly-owned water companies.

In the 19th century numerous American cities were afflicted with major outbreaks of disease, including cholera in 1832, 1849 and 1866 and typhoid in 1848. The fast-growing cities did not have sewers and relied on contaminated wells within the city confines for drinking water supply. In the mid-19th century many cities built centralized water supply systems. However, initially these systems provided raw river water without any treatment. Only after John Snow established the link between contaminated water and disease in 1854 and after authorities became gradually convinced of that link, water treatment plants were added and public health improved. Sewers were built since the 1850s, initially based on the erroneous belief that bad air (miasma theory) caused cholera and typhoid. It took until the 1890s for the now universally accepted germ theory of disease to prevail.

However, most wastewater was still discharged without any treatment, because wastewater was not believed to be harmful to receiving waters due to the natural dilution and self-purifying capacity of rivers, lakes and the sea. Wastewater treatment only became widespread after the introduction of federal funding in 1948 and especially after an increase in environmental consciousness and the upscaling of financing in the 1970s. For decades federal funding for water supply and sanitation was provided through grants to local governments. After 1987 the system was changed to loans through revolving funds.

In the 1840s and 1850s the largest cities in the U.S. built pipelines to supply drinking water from rivers or lakes. However, the drinking water was initially not treated, since the link between waterborne pathogens and diseases was not yet well known. In 1842 New York City was one of the first cities in the U.S. to tap water resources outside the city limits. It dammed the Croton River in Westchester County, New York, and built an aqueduct from the reservoir to the city. Also in 1842, construction was completed on Chicago's first water works, with water mains made of cedar and a water intake located about into Lake Michigan. In 1848, Boston began construction of a water transmission system. A tributary of the Sudbury River was impounded creating Lake Cochituate, from where the Cochituate Aqueduct transported water to the Brookline Reservoir that fed the city's distribution system. In 1853 Washington, D.C. followed suit by beginning the construction of the Washington Aqueduct to provide water from the Great Falls on the Potomac River.

In 1854, the British physician John Snow found that cholera was spread through contaminated water. As a result of his findings, several cities began to treat all water with sand filters and chlorine before distributing it to the public. Before efforts to clean drinking water were implemented at the turn of the 20th century, mortality among 1- to 5-year-olds in the United States in some major river cities was nearly one in five. Clean water is estimated to have reduced about three-fourths of infant mortality, and two-thirds of child mortality. By 1900, sand filtration was widely used. In 1908, the first continuous application of chlorination to drinking U.S. water was in Jersey City, New Jersey (and not without controversy). Cities also began to construct sewers. As a result of water treatment and sanitation, the incidence of cholera and typhoid rapidly decreased. Slow sand filtration was initially the technology of choice for water treatment, later being gradually displaced by rapid sand filtration.

In the arid American Southwest, the water demand of rapidly growing cities such as Los Angeles exceeded local water availability, requiring the construction of large pipelines to bring in water from far-away sources. The most spectacular example is the first Los Angeles Aqueduct built between 1905 and 1913 to supply water from the Owens Valley over a distance of 375 km.

Drinking water quality standards were first issued in 1914 by the United States Public Health Service. However they were only enforceable for interstate transportation carriers at specific points where water was transferred.

Most of the first sewer systems in the United States were built as combined sewers (carrying both storm water and sewerage). They discharged into rivers, lakes and the sea without any treatment. The main reason for choosing combined sewers over separate systems (separating sanitary sewers from storm water drains) was a belief that combined sewer systems were cheaper to build than separate systems. Also, there was no European precedent for successful separate sewer systems at the time. The first large-scale sewer systems in the United States were constructed in Chicago and Brooklyn in the late 1850s, followed by other major U.S. cities.

Few sewage treatment facilities were constructed in the late 19th century to treat combined wastewater because of the associated difficulties. There were only 27 U.S. cities with wastewater treatment works by 1892, most of them "treating" wastewater through land application. Of these 27 cities, 26 had separate sanitary and storm water sewer systems, thus facilitating wastewater treatment, because there was no need for large capacities to accommodate wet weather flows. Furthermore, there was a belief that the diluted combined wastewater was not harmful to receiving waters, due to the natural dilution and self-purifying capacity of rivers, lakes and the sea. In the early 20th century a debate evolved between those who thought it was in the best interest of public health to construct wastewater treatment facilities and those who believed building them was unnecessary. Nevertheless, many cities began to opt for separate sewer systems, creating favorable conditions for adding wastewater treatment plants in the future.

Where wastewater was being treated it was typically discharged into rivers or lakes. However, in 1932, the first reclaimed water facility in the U.S. was built in Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, for the reuse of treated wastewater in landscape irrigation.

Sanitary sewers were not the only sanitation solution applied. They were particularly useful in high-density urban areas. However, in some newly built lower-density areas, decentralized septic systems were built. They were attractive because they reduced capital expenditures and had fewer operation and maintenance costs compared to wastewater treatment plants.

In the first half of the 20th century water supply and sanitation were a local government responsibility with regulation at the state level; the federal government played almost no role in the sector at that time. This changed with the enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1948, which provided for comprehensive planning, technical services, research, and financial assistance by the federal government to state and local governments for sanitary infrastructure. The Act was amended in 1965, establishing a uniform set of water quality standards and creating a Federal Water Pollution Control Administration authorized to set standards where states failed to do so. Comprehensive federal regulations for water supply and sanitation were introduced in the 1970s, in reaction to an increase in environmental concerns. In 1970 EPA was created by the Richard Nixon administration, and authority for managing various environmental programs was transferred to the new agency. In 1972, Congress passed the Clean Water Act, requiring industrial plants and municipal sewage plants to proactively improve their waste treatment practices in order to limit the effect of contaminants on freshwater sources. In 1974, the Safe Drinking Water Act was adopted for the regulation of public water systems. It was motivated by a resurgence in concern about the safety of drinking water due to breakthroughs in chemistry that revealed organic chemicals in water that were tentatively linked with cancer. This law specified a number of contaminants that must be closely monitored and reported to residents should they exceed the maximum contaminant levels allowed. The program it established in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency was charged with creating standards for drinking water for all public systems, defined as those that served more than 25 customers or 15 service connections. From then on, drinking water systems were closely monitored by federal, state, and municipal governments for safety and compliance with existing regulations. The Clean Water Act set the unprecedented goal of eliminating all water pollution by 1985 and authorized massive expenditures of $24.6 billion in research and construction grants for municipal sewage treatment. The funds initially provided an incentive to build centralized wastewater collection and treatment infrastructure for municipalities, instead of decentralized systems. However, the 1977 amendments to the Clean Water Act required communities to consider alternatives to the conventional centralized sewer systems, and financial assistance was made available for such alternatives. In the mid-1990s decentralized systems served approximately 25 percent of the U.S. population, and approximately 37 percent of new housing developments.

There were disagreements between the federal government and local government about the appropriate level of wastewater treatment, with the former arguing for more stringent standards. For example, in the late 1980s, the city of San Diego and EPA were involved in a legal dispute over the requirement to treat sewage at the Point Loma Wastewater Treatment Plant to secondary treatment standards. The city prevailed, saying that it saved ratepayers an estimated $3 billion and that process had proved successful in maintaining a healthy ocean environment. The Point Loma plant uses an advanced primary process. The requirement to perform secondary treatment on wastewater before ocean discharge was waived by the EPA in 1995, "taking into account the city's unique circumstances".

In 1987 Congress passed the Water Quality Act, which replaced the construction grant program with a system of subsidized loans using the Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF). The intention at the time was to completely phase out federal funding after a few years. Funding peaked in 1991 and continued at high levels thereafter, despite the original intentions. New challenges arose, such as the need to address combined sewer overflows for which EPA issued a policy in 1994. In 1996 Congress established the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund, building on the success of the CWSRF, in order to finance investments to improve compliance with more stringent drinking water quality standards.

This section provides a brief overview of the water supply and sanitation infrastructure in the U.S., water sources of some of the main cities, and the main types of residential water use.
The centralized drinking water supply infrastructure in the United States consists of dams and reservoirs, well fields, pumping stations, aqueducts for the transport of large quantities of water over long distances, water treatment plants, reservoirs in the distribution system (including water towers), and 1.8 million miles of distribution lines. Depending on the location and quality of the water source, all or some of these elements may be present in a particular water supply system. In addition to this infrastructure for centralized network distribution, 14.5% of Americans rely on their own water sources, usually wells.

The centralized sanitation infrastructure in the U.S. consists of 1.2 million miles of sewers—including both sanitary sewers and combined sewers, sewage pumping stations and publicly owned treatment works (POTW). EPA estimated that there were at least 16,583 POTWs operating in 2004, serving a population of 222.8 million. About 772 communities in the U.S. have combined sewer systems, serving about 40 million people. In addition, at least 17% of Americans are served by on-site sanitation systems such as septic tanks.

About 90% of public water systems in the U.S. obtain their water from groundwater. However, since systems served by groundwater tend to be much smaller than systems served by surface water, only 34% of Americans (101 million) are supplied with treated groundwater, while 66% (195 million) are supplied with surface water.

For a surface water system to operate without filtration it has to fulfill certain criteria set by the EPA under its Surface Water Treatment Rule, including the implementation of a watershed control program. The water system of New York City has repeatedly fulfilled these criteria.

Boston, New York City, San Francisco, Denver, and Portland, Oregon are among the large cities in the U.S. that do not need to treat their surface water sources beyond disinfection, because their water sources are located in the upper reaches of protected watersheds and thus are naturally very pure. Boston receives most of its water from the Quabbin and Wachusett Reservoirs and the Ware River in central and western Massachusetts. New York City's water supply is fed by a watershed in the Catskill Mountains. The watershed is in one of the largest protected wilderness areas in the United States. San Francisco obtains 85% of its drinking water from high Sierra snowmelt through the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir in Yosemite National Park. However, to supplement the imported water supply, and to help maintain delivery of drinking water in the event of a major earthquake, drought or decline in the snowpack, San Francisco considers the use of alternative locally produced, sustainable water sources such as reclaimed water for irrigation, local groundwater and desalination during drought periods, all as part of its Water Supply Diversification Program. The largest source of water supply for Portland, Oregon, is the Bull Run Watershed. Denver receives its water almost entirely from mountain snowmelt in a number of highly protected watersheds in more than 9 counties. Its water is stored in 14 reservoirs, the largest of which is the Dillon Reservoir on the Blue River in the Colorado River. Water is diverted from there through the Harold D. Roberts Tunnel under the Continental Divide into the South Platte River Basin.

 Cities that rely on more or less polluted surface water from the lower reaches of rivers have to rely on extensive and costly water purification plants. The Las Vegas Valley obtains 90% of its water from Lake Mead on the Colorado River, which has been affected by drought. To supply a portion of the future water supply, Las Vegas plans to buy water rights in the Snake Valley in White Pine County, north of the city straddling the Utah border and other areas, pumping it to Las Vegas through a US$2 billion pipeline. Phoenix draws about half of its drinking water from the Salt River–Verde River watershed, and about 40% from the Colorado River further downstream at Lake Havasu through the Central Arizona Project. Los Angeles obtains about half of its drinking water from the Owens River and Mono Lake through the Los Angeles Aqueduct, with additional supplies from Lake Havasu through the Colorado River Aqueduct. San Diego imports nearly 90 percent of its water from other areas, specifically northern California and the Colorado River.

The cities on the Mississippi River are supplied by water from that river except for Memphis. The metropolitan area of Atlanta receives 70% of its water from the Chattahoochee River and another 28% from the Etowah, Flint, Ocmulgee and Oconee rivers. Chicago is supplied by water from Lake Michigan and Detroit receives its water from the Detroit River. Philadelphia receives 60% of its water from the Delaware River and 40% from the Schuylkill River. Washington, D.C. receives its water from the Potomac River through the Washington Aqueduct.

Miami and its metropolitan area obtain drinking water primarily from the Biscayne Aquifer. Given increasing water demand, Miami-Dade County is considering the use of reclaimed water to help preserve the Biscayne Aquifer. Memphis receives its water from artesian aquifers. San Antonio draws the bulk of its water from the Edwards Aquifer; it did not use any surface water until 2006.

Seventy-one percent of Houston's supply flows from the Trinity River into Lake Livingston, and from the San Jacinto River into Lake Conroe and Lake Houston. Deep underground wells drilled into the Evangeline and Chicot aquifers provide the other 29 percent of the city's water supply.

Domestic water use (also called home or residential water use) in the United States was estimated by the United States Geological Survey at per day in 2005, and per day in 2010 (7 percent lower). The bulk of domestic water is provided through public networks. 13% or of water is self-supplied. The average domestic water use per person in the U.S. was per day in 2005, and per day in 2010. This is about 2.2 times as high as in England (150 Liter) and 2.6 times as high as in Germany (126 Liter).

One of the reasons for the high domestic water use in the U.S. is the high share of outdoor water use. For example, the arid West has some of the highest per capita domestic water use, largely because of landscape irrigation. Per capita domestic water use varied from per day in Maine to per day in Arizona and per day in Utah. According to a 1999 study, on average all over the U.S. 58% of domestic water use is outdoors for gardening, swimming pools etc. and 42% is used indoors. A 2016 update of the 1999 study measured the average quantities and percent shares of seven indoor end uses of water:


Only a very small share of public water supply is used for drinking. According to one 2002 survey of 1,000 households, an estimated 56% of Americans drank water straight from the tap and an additional 37% drank tap water after filtering it. 74% of Americans said they bought bottled water. According to a non-representative survey conducted among 216 parents (173 Latinos and 43 non-Latinos), 63 (29%) never drank tap water. The share is much higher among Latinos (34%) than among non-Latinos (12%). The study concluded that many Latino families avoid drinking tap water because they fear it causes illness, resulting in greater cost for the purchase of bottled and filtered water. This notion is also repeated among Asians.

EPA defines a public water system (PWS) as one that provides water for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances to at least 15 service connections or serves an average of at least 25 people for at least 60 days a year. The agency has defined three types of PWS:

In 2007 there were about 155,000 PWSs in the United States, of which 52,000 CWSs. PWSs are either publicly owned, cooperatives or privately owned, serving a total of about 242 million people in 2000. EPA estimates the number of beneficiaries of community water systems at 288 million in 2007 The United States Geological Survey estimates that "About 242 million people depended on water from public suppliers" in 2000. Four thousand systems provide water in localities with more than 10,000 inhabitants, and the remaining 50,000 systems provide water in localities with less than 10,000 inhabitants. In 2000 15% of Americans (43.5 million people) relied on their own water source, usually a well, for drinking water.

Utilities in charge of public water supply and sanitation systems can be owned, financed, operated and maintained by a public entity, a private company or both can share responsibilities through a public-private partnership. Utilities can either be in charge of only water supply and/or sanitation, or they can also be in charge of providing other services, in particular electricity and gas. In the latter case they are called multi-utilities. Bulk water suppliers are entities that manage large aqueducts and sell either treated or untreated water to various users, including utilities.

Public service providers. Eighty-nine percent of Americans served by a public water system are served by a public or cooperative entity. Usually public systems are managed by utilities that are owned by a city or county, but have a separate legal personality, management and finances. Examples are the District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority, the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and Denver Water. In some cases public utilities span several jurisdictions. An example is the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission that spans two counties in Maryland. Utility cooperatives are a major provider of water services, especially in small towns and rural areas

Private utilities. About half of American drinking water utilities, or about 26,700, are privately owned, providing water to 11% of Americans served by public water systems. Most of the private utilities are small, but a few are large and are traded on the stock exchange. The largest private water company in the U.S. is American Water, which serves 15 million customers in 1,600 communities in the U.S. and Canada. It is followed by United Water, which serves 7 million customers and is owned by the French firm Suez Environnement. Overall, about 33.5 million Americans (11% of the population) get water from a privately owned drinking water utility. In addition, 20% of all wastewater utilities in the U.S. are privately owned, many of them relatively small. About 3% of Americans get wastewater service from private wastewater utilities. In addition, more than 1,300 government entities (typically municipalities) contract with private companies to provide water and/or wastewater services.

Multi-utilities. Some utilities in the U.S. provide only water and/or sewer services, while others are multi-utilities that also provide power and gas services. Examples of utilities that provide only water and sewer services are the Boston Water and Sewer Commission, Dallas Water Utilities, the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, Seattle Public Utilities and the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission. Other utilities, such as the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission, provide power in addition to water and sewer services. Other multi-utilities provide power and water services, but no sewer services, such as the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and the Orlando Utilities Commission. There are also some utilities that provide only sewer services, such as the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago or the sewer utility in the city of Santa Clara.
Bulk water suppliers. There are also a few large bulk water suppliers in the arid Southwest of the United States, which sell water to utilities. The Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD) sells treated water from the Colorado River and Northern California to its member utilities in Southern California through the California Aqueduct. Twenty-six cities and water districts serving 18 million people are members of MWD. The Central Arizona Water Conservation district supplies water from the Colorado River to 80 municipal, industrial, agricultural and Indian customers in Central and Southern Arizona through the Central Arizona Project Aqueduct (CAP).

The economic regulation of water and sanitation service providers in the U.S. (in particular in relation to the setting of user water rates) is usually the responsibility of regulators such as Public Utility Commissions at the state level, which are organized in the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners. (see economic regulator). However, while all investor-owned utilities are subject to tariff regulation, only few public utilities are subjected to the same regulation. In fact, only 12 states have laws restricting pricing practices by public water and sanitation utilities.

The environmental and drinking water quality regulation is the responsibility of state departments of health or environment and the EPA.

There are a number of Professional associations, trade associations and other non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that are actively engaged in water supply and sanitation.

Professional associations include the American Society of Civil Engineers focused on advocacy for state revolving fund and water resource development legislation, American Water Works Association (AWWA) oriented mainly towards drinking water professionals and the Water Environment Federation (WEF) geared mainly at wastewater professionals. The geographical scope of both is greater than the U.S.: AWWA has members in 100 countries, with a focus on the U.S. and Canada, and WEF has member associations in 30 countries.

There are a number of trade associations in the sector, including:

In addition to lobbying, some of these trade associations also provide public education, as well as training and technical assistance to their members.

An example of an NGO active in water supply and sanitation is Food & Water Watch, a consumer rights group created in 2005 which focuses on corporate and government accountability relating to food, water, and fishing. Another example is the Alliance for Water Efficiency (AWE), which was created in 2007 with seed funding from the EPA to "advocate for water efficiency research, evaluation, and education" at the national level. Its Board members "represent water utilities, environmental organizations, plumbing and appliance associations, irrigation manufacturers, the academic community, government, and others."

Among the main issues facing water users and the water industry in the U.S. in 2009 are water scarcity and adaptation to climate change; concerns about combined sewer overflows and drinking water quality; as well as concerns about a gap between investment needs and actual investments. Other issues are concerns about a swiftly retiring workforce, the affordability of water bills for the poor during a recession, and water fluoridation, which is opposed by some mainly on ethical and safety grounds.

With water use in the United States increasing every year, many regions are starting to feel the pressure. At least 36 states are anticipating local, regional, or statewide water shortages by 2013, even under non-drought conditions.

According to the National Academies, climate change affects water supply in the U.S. in the following ways:

An important turning point in managing drinking water pollution in the United States occurred after passage of the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, which required the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to conduct a study of the issue. The NAS found that there really was not a lot of information available on drinking water quality. Perhaps the most important part of the study, according to senior EPA officials responsible for implementing the 1974 law, was that it described some methodologies for doing risk assessments for chemicals that were suspected carcinogens.

Sewer overflows. Combined sewer overflows (CSO) and sanitary sewer overflows affect the quality of water resources in many parts of the U.S. About 772 communities have combined sewer systems, serving about 40 million people, mostly in the Northeast, the Great Lakes Region and the Pacific Northwest. CSO discharges during heavy storms can cause serious water pollution. A 2004 EPA report to Congress estimated that there are 9,348 CSO outflows in the U.S., discharging about of untreated wastewater and storm water to the environment. EPA estimates that between 23,000 and 75,000 sanitary sewer overflows occur each year, resulting in releases of between 3 and of untreated wastewater.

The increased frequency and intensity of rainfall as a result of climate change will result in additional water pollution from wastewater treatment, storage, and conveyance systems." For the most part, wastewater treatment plants and combined sewer overflow control programs have been designed on the basis of the historic hydrologic record, taking no account of prospective changes in flow conditions due to climate change.

Drinking water quality. There are several aspects of drinking water quality that are of some concern in the United States, including Cryptosporidium, disinfection by-products, lead, perchlorates and pharmaceutical substances. However, in almost all cases drinking water quality is in conformity with the norms of the Safe Drinking Water Act, which requires EPA to set Maximum Contaminant Levels for pollutants. In addition, the EPA's Consumer Confidence Rule of 1998 requires most public water suppliers to provide consumer confidence reports, also known as annual water quality reports, to their customers. Each year by July 1 anyone connected to a public water system should receive in the mail an annual water quality report that tells where water in a specific locality comes from and what's in it. Consumers can find out about these local reports on a map provided by EPA. 29% of Americans are reading their water quality reports. A 2003 survey found that customers were generally satisfied with the information they are receiving from their water companies and their local or state environmental offices.

In its Infrastructure Report Card the American Society of Civil Engineers gave both the U.S. drinking water and wastewater infrastructure a grade of D- in 2005, down from D in 2001. According to the report, "the nation's drinking water system faces a staggering public investment need to replace aging facilities, comply with safe drinking water regulations and meet future needs." Investment needs are about $19 billion/year for sanitation and $14 billion/year for drinking water, totaling $33 billion/year. State and local governments invested $35.1 billion in water supply and sanitation in 2008, including 16.3 billion for drinking water supply and 18.8 billion for sanitation.

As of 2013, the American Society of Civil Engineers report card remains a "D", and a recent paper from Stanford University's Center for Reinventing the Nation's Urban Water Infrastructure (ReNUWIt) describes why "water infrastructure is systemically resistant to innovation":

The paper notes that innovations occur when utilities see opportunities for "short-term benefits and immediate savings," when there are water shortages, and in quality of life situations, like Philadelphia's "green infrastructure initiative designed to reduce combined sewer overflow."

Concerning drinking water supply the EPA estimated in 2003 that $276.8 billion would have to be invested between 2003 and 2023. Concerning sanitation, the EPA estimated in 2007 that investment of $202.5 billion is needed over the next 20 years to control wastewater pollution. This includes $134 billion for wastewater treatment and collection, $54.8 billion for resolving unsatisfactory combined sewer overflows and $9 billion for stormwater management. The EPA needs surveys do not capture all investment needs, in particular concerning capital replacement.

In the U.S, in 2015, about 2.7 million people still lacked access to "improved" water. Regarding sanitation, in 2015, only around 36,000 people did not have access to "improved" sanitation.

More than 99% of the U.S. population has access to "complete plumbing facilities", defined as the following services within the housing unit:

However, more than 1.6 million people in the United States, in 630,000 households, still lack basic plumbing facilities. More than a third of them have household incomes below the federal poverty level. They are spread across all racial and ethnic categories, but they are more prominent in the minority groups. Most of the people who lacked plumbing services were elderly, poor, and living in rural areas. Alaska has the highest percentage of households without plumbing – 6.32 percent of all its households.

The median household in the U.S. spent about 1.1% of its income on water and sewerage in 2002. However, poor households face a different situation: In 1997 18% of U.S. households, many of them poor, paid more than 4% of their income on their water and sewer bill.

The mean U.S. water tariff – excluding sewer tariffs – was $2.72 per 1,000 gallons ($0.72 per cubic meter) in 2000, with significant variations between localities. Average residential water tariffs for a monthly consumption of 15 cubic meters varied between $0.35 per cubic meter in Chicago and $3.01 in Atlanta in 2007. The combined water and sewer tariff was $0.64 in Chicago and $3.01 in Atlanta, with Atlanta not charging separately for sewer services. Annual combined water and sewer bills vary between $228 in Chicago and $1,476 in Atlanta in 2008. For purposes of comparison, the average water and sewer bill in England and Wales in 2008 was equivalent to $466.

The average annual increase in typical residential water bills was approximately 5.3 percent from 2001 through 2009, while the increase in typical residential sewer bills was approximately 5.5 percent according to data from the 50 Largest Cities Water and Wastewater Rate Survey by Black & Veatch.

The water community in the US is faced with a swiftly retiring workforce and a tightening market place for new workers. In 2008, approximately one third of executives and managers were expected to retire in the following five years. Water and sanitation utilities in the United States had 41,922 employees in 2002.

Water fluoridation, the controlled addition of moderate concentrations of fluoride to a public water supply to reduce tooth decay, is used for about two-thirds of the U.S. population on public water systems. Almost all major public health and dental organizations support water fluoridation, or consider it safe. Nevertheless, it is contentious for ethical, safety, and efficacy reasons.

Historically the predominant response to increasing water demand in the U.S. has been to tap into ever more distant sources of conventional water supply, in particular rivers. Because of environmental concerns and limitations in the availability of water resources, including droughts that may be due to climate change, this approach now is in many cases not feasible any more. Still, supply-side management is often being pursued tapping into non-conventional water resources, in particular seawater desalination in coastal areas with high population growth. California alone had plans to build 21 desalination plants in 2006 with a total capacity of per day, which would represent a massive 70-fold increase over current seawater desalination capacity in the state. In 2007 the largest desalination plant in the United States is the one at Tampa Bay, Florida, which began desalinating of water per day in December 2007.

In 2005 over 2,000 desalination plants with a capacity of more than 100m3/day had been installed or contracted in every state in the U.S. with a total capacity of more than 6 million m3/day. Only 7% of that capacity was for seawater desalination, while 51% used brackish water and 26% used river water as water source. The contracted capacity corresponds to 2.4% of total municipal and industrial water use in the country in 2000. The actual share of desalinated water is lower, because some of the contracted capacity was never built or never operated, was closed down or is not operated at full capacity.

Demand-side management, including the reduction of leakage in the distribution network and water conservation, are other options that are being considered and, in some cases, also applied to address water scarcity. For example, Seattle has reduced per capita water use from per day in 1990 to per day in 2007 through a comprehensive water conservation program including pricing policies, education, regulations and rebates for water-saving appliances. Other cities such as Atlanta and Las Vegas have also launched water conservation programs that are somewhat less comprehensive than the one in Seattle concerning indoor water use. However, Las Vegas has intentionally focused on curbing outdoor water demand, which accounts for 70% of residential water use in the city, through reductions in turf area and incentives for the use of rains sensors, irrigation controllers and pool covers. At the federal level, the Energy Policy Act of 1992 set standards for water-efficient appliances, replacing the per flush (gpf) toilet with a new 1.6 gpf/6 litres per flush maximum standard for all new toilets.
By 1994, federal law mandated that showerheads and faucets sold in the U.S. release no more than 2.5 and of water per minute respectively. Also in 1994 the AWWA established a clearinghouse for water conservation, efficiency, and demand management, called WaterWiser, to assist water conservation professionals and the general public in using water more efficiently. In 2006 the EPA launched its WaterSense program to encourage water efficiency beyond the standards set by the Energy Policy Act through the use of a special label on consumer products.

Distributional losses in the U.S. are typically 10–15% of total withdrawals, although they can exceed 25% of total water use in older systems.
According to another source unaccounted-for water (UFW) – which includes system losses, water used for firefighting and water used in the treatment process – was estimated to be only 8% in systems with more than 500,000 connections in 2000. In comparison, the level of water losses is 7% in Germany, 19% in England and Wales, and 26% in France. Together with Germany water losses in the U.S. are thus among the lowest in 16 industrial countries.

Low water tariffs and inappropriate tariff structures do not encourage water conservation. For example, decreasing-block rates, under which the unit rate decreases with consumption, offer hardly any incentive for water conservation. In 2000 about 51% of water tariffs in the U.S.were uniform (i.e. the unit tariff is independent of the level of consumption), 12% were increasing-block tariffs (the unit rate increases with consumption) and 19% were decreasing-block tariffs. The use of decreasing-block tariffs declined sharply from 45% of all tariff structures in 1992. Sewer rates are often flat rates that are not linked to consumption, thus offering no incentive to conserve water.

Reuse of reclaimed water is an increasingly common response to water scarcity in many parts of the United States. Reclaimed water is being reused directly for various non-potable uses in the United States, including urban landscape irrigation of parks, school yards, highway medians and golf courses; fire protection; commercial uses such as vehicle washing; industrial reuse such as cooling water, boiler water and process water; environmental and recreational uses such as the creation or restoration of wetlands; as well as agricultural irrigation. In some cases, such as in Irvine Ranch Water District in Orange County it is also used for flushing toilets.

It was estimated that in 2002 a total of per day, or almost 3% of public water supply, were being directly reused. California reused 0.6 and Florida per day respectively. Twenty-five states had regulations regarding the use of reclaimed water in 2002. Planned direct reuse of reclaimed water was initiated in 1932 with the construction of a reclaimed water facility at San Francisco's Golden Gate Park. Reclaimed water is typically distributed with a color-coded dual piping network that keeps reclaimed water pipes completely separate from potable water pipes.

The leaders in use of reclaimed water in the U.S. are Florida and California, with Irvine Ranch Water District as one of the leading developers. They were the first district to approve the use of reclaimed water for in-building piping and use in flushing toilets.

In places like Florida, where it is necessary to avoid nutrient overload of sensitive receiving water, reuse of treated or reclaimed water can be more economically feasible than meeting the higher standards for surface water disposal mandated by the Clean Water Act

In a January 2012 U.S. National Research Council report, a committee of independent experts found that expanding the reuse of municipal wastewater for irrigation, industrial uses, and drinking water augmentation could significantly increase the United States' total available water resources. The committee noted that a portfolio of treatment options is available to mitigate water quality issues in reclaimed water. The report also includes a risk analysis that suggests the risk of exposure to certain microbial and chemical contaminants from drinking reclaimed water is not any higher than the risk from drinking water from current water treatment systems—and in some cases, may be orders of magnitude lower. The report concludes that adjustments to the federal regulatory framework could enhance public health protection and increase public confidence in water reuse.

There are examples of communities that have safely used recycled water for many years. Los Angeles County's sanitation districts have provided treated wastewater for landscape irrigation in parks and golf courses since 1929. The first reclaimed water facility in California was built at San Francisco's Golden Gate Park in 1932. The Water Replenishment District of Southern California was the first groundwater agency to obtain permitted use of recycled water for groundwater recharge in 1962.

The Irvine Ranch Water District (IRWD) was the first water district in California to receive an unrestricted use permit from the state for its recycled water; such a permit means that water can be used for any purpose except drinking. IRWD maintains one of the largest recycled water systems in the nation with more than 400 miles serving more than 4,500 metered connections. The Irvine Ranch Water District and Orange County Water District in Southern California are established leaders in recycled water. Further, the Orange County Water District, located in Orange County, water is given more advanced treatments and is used indirectly for drinking.

The Trinity River in Texas is a representative example of an effluent-dominated surface water system where de facto potable water reuse occurs. The section of the river south of Dallas/Fort Worth consists almost entirely of wastewater effluent under base flow conditions. In response to concerns about nutrients, the wastewater treatment plants in Dallas/Fort Worth that collectively discharge about 2 million m per day of effluent employ nutrient removal processes. Little dilution of the effluent-dominated waters occurs as the water travels from Dallas/Fort Worth to Lake Livingston, which is one of the main drinking water reservoirs for Houston. Once the water reaches Lake Livingston, it is subjected to conventional drinking water treatment prior to delivery to consumers in Houston.


Orange County is located in Southern California, USA, and houses a classic example in IPR. A large-scale artificial groundwater recharge scheme exists in the area, providing a much-needed freshwater barrier to intruding seawater. Part of the injected water consists of recycled water, starting as of 1976 with Water Factory 21, which used RO and high lime to clean the water (production capacity of 19,000 m per day). This plant was de-commissioned in 2004 and has since made place for a new project with a higher capacity (265,000 m per day with an ultimate capacity of 492,000 m per day), under the name of Groundwater Replenishment System. This newer scheme uses the newer technological combination of RO, MF, and ultraviolet light with hydrogen peroxide. Plans are also underway to further increase the capacity of the system, which already provides up to 20% of the water used by the country.

In the USA, San Diego, California is the leading state implementing IPR. MF, RO and UV/HO are employed prior to groundwater replenishment with the treated effluents (CDPH, 2013). In San Diego, the effort to increase the share of recycled water was rekindled with an extensive study in 2006. MF provides substantial removal of the dissolved effluent organic matter (dEfOM), while dEfOM reduction down to 0.5 mg/L (in terms of TOC) is achieved through RO application. The chemical oxidation treatment (UV/HO) following the membrane steps, results in the mitigation of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), as well as in the improvement of the effluent quality with respect to its organic content.

The City of El Paso's (Texas, USA) water sources include groundwater aquifers and surface water from the Rio Grande. In order to increase groundwater levels, the El Paso Water Utilities injects advanced treated reclaimed water into the aquifer. The advanced treatment facilities use two-stage powdered activated carbon (PAC), addition of lime, two-stage recarbonation, sand filtration, ozonation, granular activated carbon (GAC), and chlorination for purifying the water. The Hueco Bolson Recharge Project, which initially began in 1985, currently recharges 1,700 acre-feet per year of reclaimed water at 10 injection wells and 800 acre-feet per year at an infiltration basin for groundwater recharge.

In Colorado, USA, the Colorado River Municipal Water District implemented a project to capture treated municipal effluent from the City of Big Spring, and provide additional advanced treatment prior to blending into their raw surface water delivery system (2012). Advanced treatment of the municipal effluent consisted of MF, RO, and ultraviolet oxidation, producing very high quality water, which is blended with surface water from Lake E.V. Spence for distribution to their member and customer cities (production of 6,700 m per day).

Further examples:

In July 2014, the city of Wichita Falls, Texas (USA), became one of the first in the United States to use treated wastewater directly in its drinking water supply (production of 45,000–60,000 m per day). Treated wastewater is disinfected and pumped to the Cypress Water Treatment Plant where it goes through clarification, microfiltration (MF), reverse osmosis (RO), and ultraviolet light disinfection before being released into a holding lagoon where it is blended with lake water (50:50). The blended water goes through a seven-step conventional surface water treatment.

Proposed projects:

Numerous efforts have been undertaken in the United States to control the pollution of water resources and to make drinking water safe. The most comprehensive federal regulations and standards for the water treatment industry were implemented in the 1970s, in reaction to a huge increase in environmental concerns in the country. In 1972, Congress passed the Clean Water Act (CWA), with the unprecedented goal of eliminating all water pollution by 1985 and authorized expenditures of $24.6 billion in research and construction grants. In 1974, Congress passed the Safe Drinking Water Act, specifying a number of contaminants that had to be closely monitored and reported to residents should they exceed the maximum contaminant levels. The CWA included substantial federal grant funding to improve sewage treatment infrastructure in the form of construction grants to local governments.

The 1987 Water Quality Act amended the CWA, replacing the sewage treatment construction grant program with a system of subsidized loans, using the Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF). The loans use a combination of 80% federal funds and 20% matching funds from states. The intention at the time was to completely phase out federal funding after a few years. Funding for the CWSRF peaked in 1991 and continued at high levels thereafter, despite the original intentions. New challenges arose, such as the need to address combined sewer overflows for which EPA issued a policy in 1994, and which was codified into law by Congress in 2000. In 1996 Congress established the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund, in order to finance investments to improve compliance with more stringent drinking water quality standards.

Today cities make significant investments in the control of combined sewer overflows, including through the construction of storage facilities in the sewerage system in order to allow for the subsequent controlled release of sewage into treatment plants.

One way to address the funding needs of utilities to respond to the various challenges they face without increasing the burden of water bills on users is federal financial assistance.

Centralized water and sanitation infrastructure is typically financed through utilities' own revenue or debt. Debt can be in the form of soft loans from State Revolving Funds (SRF), credits from commercial Banks or – in the case of large utilities – from bonds issued directly in the capital market. In the case of water supply (i.e. excluding sanitation), 42% of investments were financed by private sector borrowing, 39% by current revenues, 13% by government loans including the Drinking Water SRF, 5% by government grants and 1% from other sources. Although federal funding for the main of the two SRFs has declined in real terms by 70% between its peak in 1991 and 2006, SRFs play an important role in financing water and sanitation investments. There are two SRFs: The larger Clean Water State Revolving Fund, created in 1987, and the smaller Drinking Water State Revolving Fund, created in 1997. They receive federal and state contributions and issue bonds. In turn, they provide soft loans to utilities in their respective states, with average interest rates at 2% for up to 20 years in the case of the Clean Water State Revolving Fund. In addition to the SRFs, the United States Department of Agriculture provides grants, loans and loan guarantees for water supply and sanitation in small communities (those with less than 10,000 inhabitants), together with technical assistance and training.

The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of February 17, 2009, provided $4 billion for the Clean Water SRF, $2 billion for the Drinking Water SRF and, among others, $126 million for water recycling projects through the United States Bureau of Reclamation. This program exceeded previous levels of financing, since Congress approved only US$1.5 billion of federal funding for State Revolving Funds in 2008. This was much below the historical average of US$3 billion/year for the Clean Water State Revolving Fund (1987–2006) and US$1.2 billion/year for the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (1997–2005). The share of federal funding for sanitation has declined from almost 50% in the early 1980s to about 20% in the early 1990s. A May 2016 article asserted that there has been "a huge federal retreat from helping cities fund water projects," stating that overall federal spending on water utilities "has dropped 75 percent since 1977," and that experts expect more situations like the Flint water crisis to emerge.

Congress passed the Water Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014 (WIFIA) to provide an expanded credit program for water and wastewater infrastructure projects, with broader eligibility criteria than the previously-authorized revolving funds. Pursuant to the act, EPA established its Water Infrastructure and Resiliency Finance Center in 2015 to help local governments and municipal utilities design innovative financing mechanisms, including public-private partnerships. It is part of the federal government's Build American Investment Initiative. Congress amended the WIFIA program in 2015 and 2016. One of the envisaged instruments to boost financing in water infrastructure are Qualified Public Infrastructure Bonds (QPIBs), tax-exempt municipal bonds that can be used by private companies.




</doc>
<doc id="8720089" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8720089" title="Kõpu lighthouse">
Kõpu lighthouse

Kõpu lighthouse () is one of the best known symbols and tourist sights on the Estonian island of Hiiumaa. It is one of the oldest lighthouses in the world, having been in continuous use since its completion in 1531.

The lighthouse marks the Hiiu Shoal (, ) and warns ships away from the shoreline. Light from Kõpu lighthouse can be used for navigation as far as away, although in 1997 a radar lighthouse largely took over its role as navigation aid.

Kõpu lighthouse was previously known under its Swedish name, "Upper Dagerort lighthouse".

The lighthouse is built at the top of the highest hillock of Hiiumaa island, Tornimägi (, ). The height of the building itself is , and the light is above sea level, making it the highest coastal light on the Baltic Sea.

Kõpu lighthouse has the shape of a square prism, with massive counterforts in the directions of principal divisions of the compass. The tower is laid solely of stone up to the height of . The outside layer of the walls is supported by lime mortar, with the body itself built without mortar.

The body of the tower contains roughly of stone, with its total weight reaching . Local limestone and glacial erratic stones were used as building material.

Originally, the base of the tower was solid stone without any rooms; the top of the lighthouse was reached using external wooden stairs, which were later replaced with iron ones. During reconstruction in the 1800s, a stairway was cut into the tower and has remained in use since.

The most important east–west shipping lane in the Baltic Sea passed the Hiiu sandbank. Already before the year 1490 the Hanseatic merchants were seeking permission to mark this peninsula with an outstanding landmark. Around 1490 they asked the bishop of Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek to let them build a landmark on the Kõpu peninsula which was under the bishop's control. This action had no real results.

At a meeting of the Hanseatic League in Lübeck in 1499, they applied once more to the bishop for permission to build a beacon. On 20 April 1500 Bishop Johannes III Orgas (John Orgies) agreed to allow a massive stone pillar without any openings. To cover the building costs, Tallinn city council had to establish a special lighthouse tax until the sum was complete.

Building of the beacon was supposed to start in the summer of 1500, but the building was stopped when Wolter von Plettenberg, master of the Livonian Order, started a war which lasted until 1503. In the spring of 1504, purchase and delivery of the building materials began, but in the autumn of the same year the plague broke out, stopping the work once more. Building work was discontinued and alderman Lambert Ottingk, the magistrate in charge of the building, died in Tallinn on 28 December 1505.

The account ledgers of Tallinn city council contain entries about the Kõpu lighthouse from 1507 to 1533, showing money was spent on the beacon of Hiiumaa from 13 May 1514 until 12 October 1532. The amounts show the majority of the work took place from 1514 to 1519; later there are only a couple of bigger expenditures on the beacon. A fire was first lit in the autumn of 1531; it was simply a bonfire on top of the tower.

The and tower was visible on a clear day up to offshore.

In August 1649 a wooden staircase was built to the outside wall of the tower and an open iron fire grate affixed to the top. Originally it was planned to burn coal in the lighthouse, but due to high transport costs of coal, wood was used instead.

The fire consumed up to 1000 cords of firewood every year during the 180-day navigation period, a quantity so great that it led to deforestation of most of the Kõpu peninsula. A team of six was on guard every night, but storms extinguished the fire often. A rule passed in 1652 decreed that the fire must be strong and a fathom (~) high.

Count Axel Julius De la Gardie bought the island of Hiiumaa from the King of Sweden for 38,000 thalers and took over management of the Kõpu lighthouse in 1659. He had its height extended to and the wooden stairs replaced with an iron staircase. The light, now visible from as far as away, was lit one hour after the sun set and extinguished one hour before sunrise.

The Russian Empire took over the administration of the lighthouse in 1805. Major reconstruction of the tower began in 1810. A stone staircase was cut to the southern counterfort plus a room large enough for a team of six men. Into the upper part they made two subsidiary rooms, one on top of the other, and another, the topmost room, from the ground, was for the lanterns. The lantern room housed twenty three oil lamps, using silver-plated brass reflectors. The lamps burned hemp oil, requiring yearly.

In 1845, a crack in the upper part of the lighthouse called for extensive reconstruction, which saw part of the tower pulled down and rebuilt. The tower now gained its final height: . A wooden structure with lamp-chimneys was built for the lantern and its optical devices.

The lighthouse came under navy control, and the first maintenance rules were laid down. The fire was to be lit and extinguished in strict accordance to sunrise and sunset. In cloudy weather lighthouse keepers were to consult a calendar for the necessary data. At that time, the fire was kept burning nightly from 1 July to 1 May – 10 months of the year.

As part of his naval reforms, Grand Duke Constantine Nikolaevich of Russia demanded modernization of the Kõpu lighthouse, in 1859. In May 1860, a novel gyratory device (manufactured by Le Paute in Paris) was installed. It rotated at a speed of one revolution per four minutes, using a clockwork pulley-weight system. The device had one Carsel lamp with four concentric light sources and a Fresnel lens. The lamp consumed of rapeseed oil hourly, and the fuel pump was powered by the same clockwork mechanism. It was said to be visible up to away. A team of seven serviced the lighthouse, with one required to be near the light at all times.

The counterfort with the staircase was roofed with wooden boards and tin sheets in 1869. A telegraph installation and rescue stations were established near the lighthouse in the same year; the first-established worked until 1898 when it was replaced by a telephone.

A new light system was bought at the 1900 Paris World Fair, for three million gold rubles. The new apparatus (including the light chamber) was made by Sautter, Marlé & Co. It used a kerosene lamp with an incandescent mantle. A heavy cast iron system floated and rotated in a bath of mercury, which acted as a bearing. The bath contained roughly of mercury. The poisonous mercury from the lighthouse was used for decades by children in the surrounding villages for playing.

The light system was set in rotation by a suspended load; it needed to be rewound every two hours. It was installed during repairs of 1901.

In 1939, the lighthouse underwent major repairs for its anniversary. As part of those renovations, the tower was painted with high quality oil paint, which became the main contributor to the deterioration of the tower in subsequent decades – thick waterproof layers of paint did not allow the limestone to dry. The mortar began to deteriorate rapidly.

The lighthouse was connected to the electricity grid in 1940. German bombers targeted the lighthouse in August 1941, though only the lantern structure and optical system were destroyed.

After World War II, various optical systems were tested. Kohler generators were installed in 1949 along with the stationary electric light system. A new rotating light system (EMV-3) was installed in 1963, making the lighthouse fully automated. It was in use until 1982, when an experimental EMV-930M system (made in Ukraine) was installed. The rotation mechanism of the optical system is a novel solution – there are no electric motors; it uses a revolving magnetic field instead. The optics brought a six to eight hundredfold increase to the efficiency of the light radiated by a 1 kW quartz lamp. The same light system is still in use.

Due to the progressing deterioration, the lighthouse underwent frequent repairs. Major repairs were in 1957, 1970, 1979–1981 and a major overhaul in 1982. The walls crumbled partially during the 1980s. To stop the deterioration, a thick reinforced concrete dress was built to support the foundation and walls (1989–1990). Small air channels were left in the concrete. The top of the lighthouse was renovated in 2001.

Kõpu lighthouse only lost its important role as a primary navigation aid in 1997, when a radar lighthouse took over its duties. Recreational craft and small fishing vessels continue to rely on Kõpu for navigating, as a backup to electronic navigation systems. The Estonian Maritime Administration still classifies it as an active aid to navigation. Its future is ensured by its status as a protected cultural memorial.

Due to its enduring popularity and memorable shape, it is often used as a symbol of Hiiumaa. A major tourist attraction, the tower has been open for tourists since 1999. Together with the nearby Ristna lighthouse, the Kõpu lighthouse was commemorated on a postage stamp in 2000.




</doc>
<doc id="8740696" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8740696" title="HMS Campania (1914)">
HMS Campania (1914)

HMS "Campania" was a seaplane tender and aircraft carrier, converted from an elderly ocean liner by the Royal Navy early in the First World War. After her conversion was completed in mid-1915 the ship spent her time conducting trials and exercises with the Grand Fleet. These revealed the need for a longer flight deck to allow larger aircraft to take off, and she was modified accordingly. "Campania" missed the Battle of Jutland in May 1916, but made a number of patrols with elements of the Grand Fleet. She never saw combat and was soon relegated to a training role because of her elderly machinery. In November 1918 "Campania" was anchored with the capital ships of the Grand Fleet when a sudden storm caused her anchor to drag. With no second anchor being laid, she hit several of the ships and the collisions punctured her hull; she slowly sank, with no loss of life. Her Officer of the Watch had failed to call the Captain, and was dismissed the ship.

Originally built as a passenger liner for Cunard Line's service between Liverpool and New York in 1893, was the holder of the Blue Riband award for speed early in her career. In October 1914, she was sold to the shipbreakers Thos W Ward as she was wearing out.

The Royal Navy purchased "Campania" from the shipbreakers on 27 November 1914 for £32,500, initially for conversion to an armed merchant cruiser equipped with eight quick-firing guns. The ship was converted by Cammell Laird to an aircraft carrier instead and the two forward 4.7-inch guns were deleted in favour of a flying-off deck. Two derricks were fitted on each side to transfer seaplanes between the water and the two holds. The amidships hold had the capacity for seven large seaplanes. The forward hold, underneath the flight deck, could fit four small seaplanes, but the flight deck had to be lifted off the hold to access the airplanes. HMS "Campania" was commissioned on 17 April 1915.

The first takeoff from the flight deck did not occur until 6 August 1915 when a Sopwith Schneider floatplane, mounted on a wheeled trolley, used of the flight deck while the ship was steaming into the wind at . The Sopwith aircraft was the lightest and highest-powered aircraft in service with the Royal Naval Air Service, and the close call in a favourable wind demonstrated that heavier aircraft could not be launched from the flight deck.
By October 1915 "Campania" had exercised with the Grand Fleet seven times, but had only flown off aircraft three times as the North Sea was often too rough for her seaplanes to use. Her captain recommended that the flying-off deck be lengthened and given a steeper slope to allow gravity to boost the aircraft's acceleration and the ship was accordingly modified at Cammell Laird between November 1915 and early April 1916. The forward funnel was split into two funnels and the flight deck was extended between them and over the bridge to a length of , so that aircraft from both holds could use the flight deck. A canvas windscreen was provided to allow the aircraft to unfold their wings out of the wind, and a kite balloon and all of its supporting equipment were added in the aft hold. "Campania" now carried seven Short Type 184 torpedo bombers and three or four smaller fighters or scouts; a Type 184 made its first takeoff from the flight deck on 3 June 1916, also using a wheeled trolley. This success prompted the Admiralty to order the world's first aircraft designed for carrier operations, the Fairey Campania. The ship received the first of these aircraft in late 1917 where they joined smaller Sopwith 1½ Strutter scouts. At various times "Campania" also carried the Sopwith Baby and Sopwith Pup.

"Campania" failed to receive the signal to deploy when the Grand Fleet departed Scapa Flow on 30 May 1916 en route to the Battle of Jutland, but she sailed two hours and fifteen minutes later. Even though she was slowly overtaking the fleet early in the morning of 31 May, she was ordered to return to Scapa Flow as she lacked an escort and German submarines had been reported in the area. The ship participated in some anti-submarine and anti-Zeppelin patrols, but she was later declared unfit for fleet duty because of her defective machinery and became a seaplane training and balloon depot ship. In April 1918 "Campania", along with the Grand Fleet, was transferred from Scapa Flow to Rosyth.

On the morning of 5 November 1918, "Campania" was lying at anchor off Burntisland in the Firth of Forth. A sudden Force 10 squall caused the ship to drag anchor. She collided first with the bow of the nearby battleship , and then scraped along the side of the battlecruiser . "Campania"s hull was breached by the initial collision with "Royal Oak", flooding her engine room and shutting off all main electrical power. The ship then started to settle by the stern, and sank some five hours after breaking free. The ship's crew were all rescued by neighbouring vessels. A Naval Board of Inquiry into the incident held "Campania"s watch officer largely responsible for her loss, citing specifically the failure to drop a second anchor once the ship started to drift.

The wreck of HMS "Campania" was initially afforded protection under the Protection of Wrecks Act, being designated in 2000. This designation was revoked in 2013 when the site was re-designated as a Historic Marine Protected Area under the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. The remains of the four "Campania" aircraft and seven 1½ Strutters that she had on board when she sank are still entombed in her wreck.




</doc>
<doc id="8759210" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8759210" title="TM and Cult Mania">
TM and Cult Mania

TM and Cult Mania is a non-fiction book that examines assertions made by the Transcendental Meditation movement (TM). The book is authored by Michael Persinger, Normand Carrey and Lynn Suess and published in 1980 by Christopher Publishing House. Persinger is a neurophysiologist and has worked out of Laurentian University. He trained as a psychologist and focused on the impacts of religious experience. Carrey is a medical doctor who specialized in psychiatry. He focused his studies into child psychiatry with research at Dalhousie University, and has taught physicians in a psychiatry residency program in the field of family therapy. Suess assisted Persinger in researching effects of geological phenomena on unidentified flying object sightings in Washington; the two conducted similar research in Toronto and Ottawa.

"TM and Cult Mania" analyzes the efficacy or lack thereof of the TM meditation process, concluding that it is, "no more effective than many other meditation techniques". The authors write that, "Transcendental Meditation has achieved international recognition through commercial exploitation" and "poor scientific procedures". The book notes that physiological changes observed due to partaking in TM methodology are very small. Persinger, Carrey, and Suess conclude in "TM and Cult Mania", "science has been used as a sham for propaganda by the TM movement."

A positive capsule review in the "Los Angeles Times" noted that the authors use logic to point out transparencies in the assertions of Transcendental Meditation. John Horgan, in his book "Rational Mysticism", questions Persinger's neutrality and says that in his book he treats religious beliefs and spiritual practices as mental illness.

Michael Persinger is a neurophysiologist who has worked at Laurentian University in Greater Sudbury, Ontario, Canada. He trained as a psychologist and focused on the impacts of religious experience. Persinger is the author of the book "Neuropsychological Basis of Human Belief", and since its publication he has researched and examined the physiological and neurological causes of religious belief systems. Normand Carrey received education as a medical doctor and specialized in psychiatry. He became a child psychiatrist, and worked out of Dalhousie University in Halifax, Canada. Carrey has conducted studies into psychological resilience, and has taught physicians in a psychiatry residency program in the field of family therapy. He has worked in the field of adolescent psychiatry at IWK Health Centre. Lynn Suess assisted Persinger in 1980, in researching geological phenomena which may have affected unidentified flying object sightings in Washington. Suess and Persinger performed similar research in Toronto and Ottawa.

"TM and Cult Mania" takes a look at the assertions made by the Transcendental Meditation movement and analyzes them from a scientific perspective. The book acknowledges that those who practice the Transcendental Meditation technique feel relaxed and experience an increase in creativity. According to the book, the physiological effects reported by the scientific studies on Transcendental Meditation are relatively small from a scientific perspective and "no more effective than many other meditation techniques". Transcendental Meditation is seen as most noteworthy due to its ability to manipulate stress and expectancy.

"Transcendental Meditation has achieved international recognition through commercial exploitation" and "poor scientific procedures", write the authors. The book notes, "Frankly, the reported effects of TM upon human behavior are trivial. Considering the alleged potency of the TM procedure, the changes in physiological and behavioral measures are conspicuously minute." "TM and Cult Mania" comes to the conclusion that, "science has been used as a sham for propaganda by the TM movement."

A capsule review of the book for the "Los Angeles Times", Phil Freshman commented, "Using hard logic and crackling humor, a trio of Canadian laboratory researchers cogently deflates Transcendental Meditation; they spotlight transparencies in its claims and warn of its latent hazards to those in wobbly mental health." In his book "Rational Mysticism", author John Horgan comments that although Persinger says he's neutral toward religious belief, he's more biased than other neurotheologians and that his two books "cast religious belief and spiritual practices in a psychopathological light".




</doc>
<doc id="8793967" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8793967" title="Apocrypha (The X-Files)">
Apocrypha (The X-Files)

"Apocrypha" is the sixteenth episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series "The X-Files". It premiered on the Fox network on . It was directed by Kim Manners, and written by Frank Spotnitz and series creator Chris Carter. "Apocrypha" included appearances by John Neville, Don S. Williams and Brendan Beiser. The episode helped to explore the overarching mythology, or fictional history of "The X-Files". "Apocrypha" earned a Nielsen household rating of 10.8, being watched by 16.71 million people in its initial broadcast.

The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) who work on cases linked to the paranormal, called X-Files. In this episode, Mulder returns from Hong Kong, having found rogue agent Alex Krycek (Nicholas Lea) while investigating a mysterious mind-altering black oil. Meanwhile, Scully pursues the man who she believes killed her sister. "Apocrypha" is the second part of a two-part episode, continuing the plot from the previous episode, "Piper Maru".

"Apocrypha" was the first mythology-centered episode to be directed by Manners, and made use of a mixture of physical and digital effects to create the episode's antagonistic black oil. The episode's sets were also augmented with digital effects, amplifying what could be constructed within the given budget.

On August 19, 1953, a burned crewman talks to three government agents about his experience on the submarine "Zeus Faber", completing the story told in the previous episode. He explains that he and other crew members were locked in with their captain, who was infected by the black oil. After being knocked out from behind, the black oil leaves the captain's body and exits via a grate into the sea. It is revealed that Bill Mulder and the Smoking Man are two of the agents who are interviewing the crewman.

In the present, Fox Mulder and Alex Krycek return to the United States, but are run off the road by another vehicle. The assailants attempt to apprehend Krycek, but are severely injured when he emits a flashing light. The Smoking Man sees their bodies and orders their destruction. Mulder, who was knocked unconscious in the crash, awakens in the hospital. Dana Scully tells Mulder about Walter Skinner's condition, and says that an analysis of saliva has identified his shooter as the same person who killed her sister Melissa.

The Syndicate meets to discuss the events surrounding the "Piper Maru" and realize someone is leaking information. Meanwhile, Skinner tells Scully that he recognizes his shooter as the man who was with Krycek when the digital tape was stolen from him. Mulder believes that the oil found on the diving suit and Gauthier is a medium used by an alien to transfer from body to body, and that Krycek is currently occupied by it. Mulder and the Lone Gunmen use Krycek's key to recover the tape from a locker at an ice rink, but Mulder finds the case empty. Krycek returns the tape to the Smoking Man in exchange for the location of the recovered UFO. 

As Luis Cardinal is identified as Skinner's shooter, the Syndicate admonishes the Smoking Man for moving the UFO to a new location. By rubbing a pencil over the envelope containing the tape case, Mulder finds a phone number which connects him to the Syndicate's office. Mulder speaks to the Well-Manicured Man, who offers to meet with him. The Well-Manicured Man tells Mulder that a UFO was sunk during World War II and that a cover story of a sunken atomic bomb was used to cover up its attempted recovery. He reveals that anyone can be gotten to, causing Mulder to ask Scully to check on Skinner.

Scully accompanies Skinner as he is being transported in an ambulance. When Cardinal attempts to break in, she tracks him down and arrests him. Cardinal tells her that Krycek is headed to an abandoned missile silo in Black Crow, North Dakota. There, the agents are captured by the Smoking Man's men and are escorted away. Deep inside, Krycek sits atop the UFO and coughs out the black oil, which seeps into the ship. Skinner recovers and returns to work. Mulder sees Scully at Melissa's grave, explaining that Cardinal was found dead in his cell. Meanwhile, Krycek is trapped within the silo, banging on the door in an attempt to be let out.

Conception of the episode was based around a visual image series creator Chris Carter had wanted to include in a script "since the beginning of the show". The image was of a black-and-white flashback taking place in a submarine.

The episode's title is a reference to Biblical apocrypha, which series creator Chris Carter felt was appropriate to the episode's thematic concerns—hidden documents and truths not brought to light. Director Kim Manners had directed a number of stand alone "monster of the week" episodes, but this was his first mythology-centered episode. Manners explained that "there is some individual creative contribution from the directors" in stand-alone episodes, but that with mythology episodes "what you need to as a director is to be sure that the performances are there ... and that the yarn is presented in its cleanest and most interesting fashion".

Nicholas Lea was fitted with a mask with tubes for the scene where the alien black oil leaves his body. Lea said filming the scene was horrible, and the scene ended up having to be filmed again a few days later. The similar scene from the start of the episode with the submarine captain was accomplished with a dummy head. The depiction of the oil in this scene was originally filmed using a magnetic fluid pulled along with magnets, although the end result of this was deemed not be "menacing" enough, and looked "a little bit comic". To fix this, the sound stage used to represent the submarine's interior was rebuilt so it could be rocked back and forth, with the movement being used to guide the flow of a different liquid. This effect was then enhanced digitally in post-production. The black oil effect over people's eyes was accomplished by inserting the footage digitally in post production.

The missile silo used for the episode's climactic scene was incomplete when the scene was filmed, as the crew did not have enough time or money left to complete the set. The crew built the incomplete silo on a sound stage around a completed spacecraft prop, and were able to digitally extend the set with computer generated interiors to give the impression of a much larger silo. Exterior shots of the silo building were also enhanced digitally, with various buildings and machinery created with computer generated imagery and composited into the exterior shots.

"Apocrypha" premiered on the Fox network on , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 10.8 with an 18 share, meaning that roughly of all television-equipped households, and of households watching television, were tuned in to the episode. A total of viewers watched this episode during its original airing.

In an overview of the third season in "Entertainment Weekly", "Apocrypha" was rated an A. The review noted that the episode offered "some interesting progressions in the grand theme" of the series, although it was also "worth it just for the awesome missile site finale" alone. Writing for The A.V. Club, Zack Handlen also rated the episode an A. Handlen felt the episode was impressive in its general impression, but that the details were not necessarily important; he also added that the cyclical nature of the plot of most mythology episodes was not something he felt negatively about, noting that although the series' protagonists are often defeated, they "can't be corrupted or dissuaded or undone". Co-writer Frank Spotnitz said of the episode "I actually think you didn't learn a lot more about the conspiracy in these two episodes, but emotionally, I think they were really good episodes ... It is really easy to go through a lot of these action things with people dying and never addressing them. So I thought it was very interesting to do so".




</doc>
