<doc id="28005433" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28005433" title="Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre de Pichilemu">
Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre de Pichilemu

' (, English: "Pichilemu School of the Precious Blood"), often shortened to ', is a coeducational Roman Catholic private state-subsidized day school, serving students in preschool (Chile's ') through twelfth grade ('), located in the commune of Pichilemu, Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins Region, Chile.

It was founded in April 1947 by the Chilean Congregation of the Precious Blood as a girls' school under the name of . The school has been fully coeducational since March 1979, and was renamed to its current name in 1986. Cardenal Caro Province newspaper ' declared to be "the best school in Pichilemu" based on the results of 2011 standardized tests, while O'Higgins Region newspaper ' called the school "a regional icon". It is the largest school in Pichilemu, with 534 students in the 2015 school year.

The school offers students several extracurricular activities, in the sports, religious and humanistic areas. Cheer C.P.S., 's cheerleading squad, has won several national competitions, and has also participated in two international ones. The school's English debate team, informally called Kick-Ass, reached second position in a regional competition in 2011.

After the commune of Pichilemu was officially created in 1891, Agustín Ross Edwards, a wealthy Chilean writer, member of parliament, government minister and politician, wanted to turn the town into "a touristic place, an elite resort, collecting the most important characteristics of European places, which would make it unique." For this purpose, he constructed a hotel, a post office, a park, among other structures and buildings, which attracted wealthy families from Chile and Argentina. One of those families was that of Maria Luisa Lira Errázuriz, widow of Wenceslao Díaz Gallegos, a well-known physician; Lira, with her ten children, came from her estate near San Fernando, and stayed at Ross' facilities in Pichilemu in several occasions.

As years passed, Lira's family decided to visit other beach resorts; however, one of Lira's children, Eugenio, decided to continue visiting Pichilemu, and after he completed his medicine studies in 1904, he constructed a summer house near the center of the town. Eugenio Díaz Lira had a close relationship with several Catholic presbyters and bishops, whom he invited to his summer residence. During his summer stays in Pichilemu, Díaz Lira also created the first medical center in the town called . However, he fell ill, and died on 12 June 1945 in Santiago, at age 65.

After his death, Díaz Lira's wife and his daughters decided to donate his summer residence to the Chilean Congregation of the Precious Blood of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Under the request of the General Superioress of the Congregation Mother María Úrsula Montes Rojas, the house was turned into a free girls' school, which was founded in April 1947 under the name of (English: Doctor Eugenio Díaz Lira 16th Girls' Private School), in honour of the late physician. The school's main goal was to "educate girls in Catholic values," with the "necessary training for their insertion in the society as Christian mothers and workers with a solid Human Christian formation." The school's first principal was Mother María Teresa Corvalán Guzmán.

The school was recognized by the Ministry of Education of Chile by Decree 12,946, on 31 December 1954. It became a coeducational school in March 1979. During the commemoration of the centennial of the Chilean Congregation of the Precious Blood, the school was renamed to , a name which "represented better the school's founders", on 14 November 1986. The school was authorized to dictate secondary education classes on 30 January 1995, and started doing so that same year, with the first class graduating in 1998.

In 2012, Governor of Cardenal Caro Province Julio Ibarra Maldonado announced the Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre, in addition to several other high schools in the province, would host professional institute IPG (), which would let at least 300 people from Pichilemu obtain a technical degree. Also during that year, the school's oldest building, which hosted the preschool classes, was demolished because of the damage it suffered from the 2010 Chile earthquake, and was re-constructed; the new building was inaugurated on 10 September 2012.

As of 2012, 's class schedule varies with the student grade level, up to a maximum of 08:00 to 18:00 with ten periods for high school students. Students are not allowed to leave the school during school hours. aims to give students "integral development, academic excellence", with emphasis in religious values. The school has a Catholic religious orientation.

According to Cardenal Caro Province newspaper "", the school is "the best in Pichilemu", considering the scores obtained in 2011 from the (PSU), a standardized test for university admissions in Chile. From the 2,945 high schools in Chile with students taking the PSU test, ranked 1328th nationally in 2009. It rose to the 849th position in 2010, and in 2011 it placed 738th.

Preciosa Sangre "ranks higher than similar schools" in the (in English: Education Quality Measurement System, SIMCE) standardized tests, taken to students from fourth, eighth, tenth, and eleventh grades. The tests include reading, mathematics, history and social sciences, natural sciences, and English language.


In the 2015 school year, the had an enrollment of 534 students from preschool ("pre-kínder") to twelfth grade (') with an average of 38 per grade. The school serves students aged between 4 and 19 years old. In 2012, 159 students were classified as "prioritary" under the SEP law (', "Preferential Scholar Subsidy Law" in English); "prioritary students" under the SEP law are those whose "homes' socioeconomic status decreases their chance to participate in the educational process." In 2012, 's faculty had 30 full-time teachers. By 2014, the faculty had 29 workers.

Admission begins each 1 November and ends on 9 December. Most people apply for entering the preschool (pre-kinder) class, which has a maximum of 35 students. Preference is given to siblings or brothers of current or former Sangre students. Applicants must be at least four years old, but in exceptional cases, students not meeting the prescribed age may take a test to be admitted. No payment is required for enrollment.

The students' center ("") of the Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre describes itself as a "representation instance for the school's students, acting in different roles." Students' centers are student organizations, whose members (president, vice president, secretary, among others) are elected democratically by their peers.

There are numerous extracurricular activities available to students. Excluding those from the sports area, the activities include choir, instrumental, dancing, scientific ('), musical drama, handicrafts, folkloric dance (cueca), pastoral, catechesis, language, and mathematics workshops. The school also conducts a ', which consists of special courses to prepare the students for the (PSU) test.

Additionally, an activity known as the (School for Parents) takes place every month, in which parents are given advice on how to educate their children.

As of 2012, offers seven workshops related to sports. These sports are run by the (Colegio Preciosa Sangre Cultural-Athletic Club), and include football, tennis, volleyball, basketball, gymnastics, cheerleading, and cheerleading for newbies. 's athletic club also has hosted tournaments, including ', a cheerleading competition which, in 2007, had fifteen participating teams. The club has also organized events such as the first family marathon in Cardenal Caro Province (') in 2011.

's soccer and volleyball teams, or CPS Pichilemu, compete in the (Cardenal Caro Athletic League), a provincial-level league. The girls volleyball team placed second in the provincial league, in 2009.

In 2007, Trinidad Segura from the placed first in the Women category of the (Student Surf Championship), which took place in Matanzas beach, in Navidad, and in La Puntilla beach in Pichilemu. In the Primary Students (Men) category, Felipe Sierra and Washington Saldías placed second and third, respectively. The competition was organized by the Commerce Chambers of Navidad and Pichilemu.

The cheerleading squad of , Cheer C.P.S., is coached by physical education teacher Claudio Rojas Covarrubias, who founded it in 2007. In 2009, it consisted of 27 students. The team has won several national competitions, two of them making them eligible to participate in competitions held in the United States of America.

In 2009, Cheer C.P.S. was the only Chilean team to participate in the JAMfest Nationals international tournament in Tampa, USA, reaching the first place in the Senior All-Music category, and fifth in the Grand Champion category, out of more than 150 teams from several countries. "Diario VI Región" reported Cheer C.P.S. reached the first place of an international team, and fifth overall. The team could participate in the US competition after winning a tournament held in Viña del Mar in 2008.

According to a report by former councilor of Pichilemu Washington Saldías on online newspaper "Pichilemu News", there were massive celebrations after a local radio reported the team's achievement. Upon their arrival at Chile, the squad was received at the Palace of La Moneda by Government General Secretary Minister Carolina Tohá, mayor of Pichilemu Roberto Córdova, and Members of the Parliament, before coming back to Pichilemu, on 22 April 2009. Their return to Pichilemu was described by "Diario VI Región" newspaper as "historic", by saying "at Pichilemu, a historical reception was being prepared, as a multitude of people crowded the streets and avenues at the beach resort, waiting for them, in a journey that ended at Colegio Preciosa Sangre in that city."
In 2013, Cheer C.P.S. participated in two international tournaments after winning a national tournament in 2012: "All Star USA 2013" and "JAMfest Bash Series", both held in Orlando, Florida, United States. The team, composed of 28 teenagers —most of them Preciosa Sangre students— and their teacher Claudio Rojas, collected funds to travel to the United States by participating in several national tournaments and with the help of the municipality of Pichilemu and the O'Higgins Region government. In the "All Star USA 2013" competition, held on 30 March 2013, Cheer C.P.S. made it to the second place, only surpassed by an unspecified Russian team, and cheerleader Noemí Pavez obtained the first place in the Jumping category. In the second competition, "Jamfest Nationals" ("Jam-Bash Series Orlando"), held on 6 April 2013, they obtained the first place in the Senior (Co-Ed) Cheer, Best Choreography category. After taking knowledge of the news of their accomplishment, Governor of Cardenal Caro Province Julio Ibarra Maldonado said that "Pichilemu is celebrating [their triumph]," something which was also reported by the local media. Upon their arrival in Chile on 9 April, they were received by President Sebastián Piñera at the Palace of La Moneda in Santiago, along with the Governor of Cardenal Caro, and Mayor of Pichilemu Roberto Córdova. The team's achievement was described by news program "24 Horas" of state channel Televisión Nacional de Chile as "coming from a distant beach resort in the region of O'Higgins to conquer North American lands."

The cheerleading squad has also organized the "CheerPichilemu" tournament, hosted for the first time on 29 September 2007 at the Municipal Stadium of Pichilemu ("Estadio Municipal de Pichilemu"). According to "Pichilemu News", "CheerPichilemu" was "the first national open cheerleading tournament." There were four categories in the first edition: Senior Women, Senior Co-Ed, Open Women, Open Co-Ed, and Couples. The competition was supported by the Tourism Chamber of Pichilemu, the local government, and several other institutions and individuals.

The English debate team, informally called "Kick-Ass", is led by English teacher Natalia Polanco Pino. The team participated for the first time in the National English Debates Tournament organized by the English Opens Doors program from the Chilean Ministry of Education in 2011, and made it to the regional finals, reaching the second place, losing against the San Fernando College team from San Fernando, discussing the topic "This house believes that unhealthy food should be more expensive than healthy food." Despite they only reached the second place in the competition, they were homaged by mayor of Pichilemu Roberto Córdova Carreño, and the Provincial Education Director, Abelardo Sepúlveda Vargas, in a ceremony held at the school on 26 October of that year.

In the 2012 tournament, 's team Kick-Ass passed to regional finals, along with the Colchagua Province teams from from Santa Cruz, and San Fernando College from San Fernando, and the Cachapoal Province teams from from Requínoa, from San Vicente de Tagua Tagua, and , both from Rancagua. The team reached fourth place in the 2012 regional finals, losing against Liceo Bicentenario Óscar Castro Zúñiga. The topic in the regional finals was "This house believes that social media should be censored."

The English debate team participated once again in 2013. They passed to the Ministry of Education's English Debate Tournament regional finals with 173.5 points, the highest score of any of the Region of O'Higgins participant schools. The team was closely followed by the teams of Instituto San Andrés from Rancagua (173 points), San Fernando College from San Fernando (172.5 points), and Liceo Bicentenario Óscar Castro Zúñiga, also from Rancagua (164.5 points). Kick-Ass, however, ultimately lost the regional finals against Colegio San Fernando College; this latter reached the second national place, in August 2013.

Their final participation in the Ministry's English Debate Tournament was in 2014. After obtaining the highest score in their region during a first round of debates, they ultimately obtained the third place in O'Higgins Region after discussing whether "[a]dvertisement aimed at children should be banned".

A team from , led by Spanish language teacher Fabián Valle Silva, participated in the (News Olympics), a competition organized by the Chilean (National Press Association), INACAP, and " newspaper. participated for the first time in the 2012 edition, reaching the regional finals. The team placed third, losing against from San Vicente de Tagua Tagua and the from Santa Cruz.

Preciosa Sangre participated again in the 2013 edition of the Olimpíadas de Actualidad. However, they did not make it to the second round, obtaining the 19th score (32 points) from 22 participating teams.

Students from Preciosa Sangre have participated in several competitions and activities besides the English Debates Tournament and the . One of those activities was the (MOEA; Model of the Organization of American States), organized by the Institute of Public Affairs of the University of Chile. With the support of the Governor of Cardenal Caro, Julio Ibarra, seven students represented in the activity, in August 2011. The team was led by history teacher Erna Pereira Arenas, and the students represented the country of Trinidad and Tobago. MOEA took place at the former National Congress in Santiago, and 32 other schools participated. According to Mother Loreto Fuentes Parra, principal of the school, was one of the best three teams in the activity.

A team of second graders from participated in the 2008 edition of a competition called (Mining Marathon), organized by the Chilean Ministries of Mining and Education. The competition was a four-stage "marathon of knowledge". From the 98 teams from the O'Higgins Region which participated in the competition, only two were awarded a prize, one of them was , whose team was given an honorific mention.

In the first edition of (Be a Reporter), a competition organized in 2011 by national newspaper " and , Diego Grez Cañete from was awarded the second place in the Opinion Column category, with an article called "" ("Free education?"). In 2012, the same student earned an honorific mention for his tale "" (It's a Beautiful Day) from the Andrés Bello University's (Interschool Contest of Spanish-language Tales). "" was published in a book commemorating the interschool contest of that year.

In October 2012, a group of eleventh and twelfth grade Preciosa Sangre students, led by history teacher Erna Pereira Arenas, organized a debate (Spanish: ) between candidates for mayor of Pichilemu, which was held on the 23 of that month, just five days before the election took place. Candidates Mario Moraga Cáceres (independent), Washington Araneda Carrasco (Progressist Party), Cristián Tamayo Latapiat (independent), and Carlos Acuña Arévalo (National Renewal) participated. According to Jorge Nasser Guerra from "Radio Entreolas", and an article published on "Diario VI Región", Roberto Córdova Carreño, who was eventually elected, rejected to participate in the debate because he "would not attend that kind of events", while Iván Cabrera Martínez "never responded the students' invitation". Some of the issues discussed in the debate were "municipal and higher education, health, urbanization, municipal corruption," amid other topics. The debate was broadcast live on local radio stations "" and " FM". The debate was praised by local online newspaper "Pichilemu News" for being "the first ever debate held in Pichilemu" and "whose planification took care of every detail".

Every year, Preciosa Sangre celebrates its anniversary in October or November, with activities and games during two days; those include basketball, football, and Chilean games. The school is divided in two groups or alliances; in 2011, there was a red and a white alliance. The celebrations conclude with the presentation of carnival floats created by every alliance, and a gala party. During the 2012 celebrations, both alliances recorded a parody of the "Gangnam Style" music video by South Korean entertainer PSY; since the videos were uploaded to YouTube, the red alliance video reached almost 4,000 views as of February 2013, while in contrast, the white alliance video has only reached 1,800 in the same time span.

Among former students of the Colegio de la Preciosa Sangre de Pichilemu are Jorge Vargas González (born 1966), a local politician who served as councilor of Pichilemu between 1992 and 1996, and later as mayor of the commune, between 1996 and 2007; and Rebeca Cofré Calderón (born 1962), current mayor of Chépica, in Colchagua Province, who initially took office in December 2008 and was re-elected in 2012 to a second term.



</doc>
<doc id="28012067" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28012067" title="HolbyBlue">
HolbyBlue

HolbyBlue (also known as Holby Blue) is a British police procedural drama series. The show revolves around the daily lives of a number of police officers working at Holby South police station. The cast for series one included Jimmy Akingbola as PC Neil Parker, Joe Jacobs as PC William "Billy" Jackson, David Sterne as Sergeant Edward 'Mac' McFadden, Cal Macaninch as DI John Keenan, James Hillier as Sergeant Christian Young, Kacey Ainsworth as Inspector Jenny Black, Richard Harrington as DS Luke French, Zöe Lucker as Kate Keenan, Chloe Howman as PC Kelly Cooper, Kieran O'Brien as PC Robert Clifton, Tim Pigott-Smith as DCI Harry Hutchinson, Sara Powell as Rachel Barker and Elaine Glover as PC Lucy Slater. Velibor Topić and Julie Cox joined the cast in a recurring capacity as drug baron Neculai Stenga and Mandy French, Luke French's wife. By the end of series one, Pigott-Smith and Topic both departed the show. Series two saw the introductions of Oliver Milburn as DCI Scott Vaughan and James Thornton as Constable Jake Loughton. Stephanie Langton took over from Julie Cox in series two to continue playing the role of Mandy.

The series was announced on 27 April 2006, and was created by Tony Jordan as a spin-off from the established medical drama "Holby City". The show premiered on 8 May 2007. "HolbyBlue" ran for two series and was cancelled by the BBC on 6 August 2008, after ratings fell from an initial 5.64 million viewers to a low of 2.5 million viewers. Tony Jordan and Karen Wilson served as the show's executive producers, while Claire Phillips was the producer. Jordan spent time with first serving officers and believed that the key to a successful police drama was its ability to reflect a society "in which it existed". Jordan made the decision to emulate two American police dramas: "Hill Street Blues" and "NYPD Blue". The BBC suggested that Jordan used the "Holby" brand to "create a third arm of the successful "Casualty" and "Holby City" format". Jordan questioned whether the series would be "held in disdain" by "soap snobs", but made the ultimate decision to name the drama "HolbyBlue" after remembering the "joy" he took from "surprising the audience by subverting expectation".

"HolbyBlue" received mixed reception. Rachel Cooke from "The Observer" criticised the show's unoriginal characterisation, while "The Times"' Andrew Billen stated that the most that could be said for the show was that it had a healthy pace, and occasionally well-written dialogue. On the contrary, David Chater from the same newspaper praised the show's "high energy level" and casting. Chater also suggested the show would serve to be strong competition for ITV's police drama "The Bill". Jod Mitchell of "The Daily Telegraph" expressed that the series injected "pace and verve" into the BBC One schedule. Mark Wright from "The Stage" branded the opening episode of "HolbyBlue" "boring", with some "duff casting". Wright also criticised the decision to launch the show under the Holby moniker, opining that it is not a true brand as "Casualty" and "Holby City" both possess "distinct personalities".

During its lifespan, "HolbyBlue" was nominated for six awards: Best Drama at the Inside Soap Awards in 2007 and 2008; Best New Drama Series at the TV Quick & TV Choice Awards; actresses Zöe Lucker and Kacey Ainsworth for Best Actress, also at the TV Quick and Inside Soap Awards, and actor Jimmy Akingbola for Best Male Performance in TV at the Screen Nation Awards.

In series one, DI John Keenan learns that his estranged wife, Kate Keenan, is dating a new man. John has sex with senior crown prosecutor Rachel Barker, but quickly regrets his decision to have sex with her. Kate is then employed as a receptionist at the police station, but later attacks Rachel after she is provoked. Kate tenders her resignation, but John manages to convince her to remain at the police station. The pair later reconcile. DS Luke French works with John to take down drugs baron Neculai Stenga. DCI Harry Hutchinson acts as Neculai's informant, but John is convinced that PC Billy Jackson is the informant. John later learns that Harry is Neculai's informant after catching him leaving Neculai's warehouse, which leads to a hostage situation involving Kate and her children. John and Luke rescue Kate and the children; although they are shot in the process, they both survive. Newly appointed PC Lucy Slater is stabbed while out on duty. She recovers, and begins dating a drug dealer. Her former partner, PC Robert Clifton, learns of Lucy's boyfriend's criminal reputation and forces the pair to separate. DS Luke French and his wife, Mandy French, fail their second attempt at IVF. Luke and Mandy argue over Luke's divided priorities between her and his terminally ill mother. Luke agrees to put his terminally ill mother in a care home, but is later heartbroken when she dies following a fall. PC Kelly Cooper struggles with her financial difficulties and considers stealing money she finds while out on duty. Inspector Jenny Black ends her marriage with her husband, Alex Black, when she learns he is having an affair. PC Neil Parker is offered a promotion, but he is dismayed upon learning it is political as opposed to merit-based.

In series two, well-established "Holby City" character Jac Naylor is arrested on suspicion of the murder of Alan Clooney, a well-known sex offender who tried to rape her. She is later released when a mystery witness comes forward. Luke becomes a father for the first time with wife Mandy; she later dies unexpectedly after a roadside incident. Kate flirts with a man she finds at a police event, only to later learn she has been flirting with new boss, DCI Scott Vaughan. Robert is encouraged by Lucy to ask an ex-girlfriend of his to see their son. Robert's ex agrees to allowing him to see their son at the end of his shift. However, while Robert and Lucy are out on duty, gang violence results in the death of one of the gang members. Robert and Lucy visit the relatives of Connor in the aftermath of his death, where Robert is murdered by the victim's brother. John goes to visit his father in jail, which strains his relationship with Kate. It later transpires that John's father was imprisoned for abusing prostitutes. Neil develops feelings for Kelly and inadvertently reveals them to her. Kelly later tells Neil that she is not interested in him, and nothing will develop between them.



The BBC announced the creation of "HolbyBlue" on 27 April 2006. The newly-proposed drama was revealed to be a police spin-off from medical drama "Holby City". It was also confirmed that Tony Jordan had been recruited to work on the scripts and consider "how storylines between the police station and the hospital could be intertwined for the programme." Three production companies were involved in the development of "HolbyBlue": BBC, Kudos and Red Planet Pictures. "The Guardian" picked up on the BBC's reverse tactic of creating a police procedural spin-off drama from a medical drama, compared to ITV, which "spawned a hospital spin-off", "The Royal", from original police procedural drama, "Heartbeat". 

Upon being approached by the BBC to develop a new police procedural drama, Jordan explained that he was conflicted between emulating the former BBC police drama "Dixon of Dock Green", using "a set of flawless characters roaming the streets dispensing justice and words of wisdom", or creating a more modern drama, developing characters who would "snort a line of coke, beat up the missus on the way out and shag each other in the locker rooms". Jordan went on to research his new project by spending time with first serving officers, who "portrayed a world of endless, statistic-led red tape". After spending time with first serving officers, Jordan concluded that he was left with an image "not of a modern-day police force, fighting crime on the streets and keeping us all safe, but some kind of unwieldy, top-heavy administrative process, more concerned with public opinion than dispensing justice."

Jordan felt that the key to a successful police drama was its ability to reflect the society "in which it existed". Answers about what best reflected the society that people lived came from joint head of Kudos, Jane Featherstone. As a result of a conversation with Featherstone, Jordan created a drama in which his characters would be forced to deal with limited resources and bureaucracy stemming from the war on terror, whilst trying to combat domestic crime. Jordan decided to imitate two American police dramas: "Hill Street Blues" and "NYPD Blue", using "flawed characters, who still managed to be heroes", while also aiming to "accurately reflect society".

The final element to the creation of "HolbyBlue" was deciding on a name for the programme. The BBC suggested that Jordan used the "Holby" brand, to "create a third arm of the successful "Casualty" and "Holby City" format". Jordan considered the use of the "Holby" brand, but questioned whether the series would be "held in disdain" by "soap snobs". Jordan decided to use the "Holby" brand after remembering the "joy" he took from "surprising the audience by subverting expectation".

Filming for "HolbyBlue" began at the end of January 2007. "The Guardian" reported that "HolbyBlue" would air on a Wednesday evening, with editor John Plunkett suggesting that the show could be used to solve the BBC's "long-running ratings black hole on Wednesday nights". However, it was also noted that if "HolbyBlue" aired on a Wednesday night, it would clash with ITV's long-running police drama, "The Bill". In order to avoid disruption and clashes between "HolbyBlue" and "The Bill", the first series of "HolbyBlue" was scheduled to air at 8pm on a Tuesday evening, replacing "Holby City" former timeslot, with "Holby City" moving to 8pm on a Thursday night instead. "HolbyBlue" was initially scheduled to commence airing on 1 May 2007, however it was later postponed by one week for unknown reasons. The first series of "HolbyBlue" ran from 8 May 2007 to 26 June 2007.

On 21 June 2007, the BBC announced that "HolbyBlue" would be re-commissioned for an extended second series, increasing from eight to twelve episodes − a 50% increase in the number of episodes. The second series was filmed in Surrey in late 2007 for transmission in early 2008. Jordan commented on the BBC's decision to continue the series, stating that the "vote of confidence" provided by the BBC was "a huge boost for both "HolbyBlue" and Red Planet Pictures". Co-executive producer Karen Wilson added that the re-commissioning was "brilliant news", while then Controller of BBC Drama Production, John Yorke said "BBC One is the perfect home for well-written, stylish and popular drama and we are proud to once again have "HolbyBlue" as a key pre-watershed drama in our schedule for next year." The second series of "HolbyBlue" was rescheduled for 8pm on a Thursday night, and ran from 20 March 2008 to 5 June 2008.

On 6 August 2008, the BBC announced that, due to declining ratings, "HolbyBlue" would not be commissioned for a third series. The second series began with an audience of 5.6 million viewers, however ratings fell to 2.5 million viewers by the series finale. Claire Phillips, Red Planet Picture's drama executive, spoke out about the news of the axing, stating that ""HolbyBlue" set new standards for 8pm dramas, in terms of production values, storytelling and casting." Phillips added that the company was "extremely proud" of the 20 hours of drama that were created, and concluded with Red Planet Pictures' focus turning to "developing shows which will live up to those high standards set out on HolbyBlue."

"The Observer" Rachel Cooke reviewed the first episode negatively, criticising the acting and unoriginal characterisation. Cooke predicted that "HolbyBlue" would be a ratings success, but found the series' lack of originality inexcusable given that the BBC is funded by the television licence fee. "The Times" Andrew Billen commented that John Keenan was "such a cliché that his new deputy Luke French told him that he was a cliché while admitting that, as a graduate recruit, he was a cliché himself". Billen added that the most that could be said for the show was that it had a healthy pace, and occasionally well-written dialogue. David Chater from the same newspaper also commented on the unoriginality of the characterisation, but praised the "high energy level" and casting. He found it "watchable enough", and suggested that it would prove strong competition to "The Bill". Andre Pettie of "The Daily Telegraph" disliked the pacing, observing that the script moved so fast it was hard to judge the quality of the series, concluding that it was overall unsatisfactory. In contrast, "The Guardian" Nancy Banks-Smith reviewed the episode positively, calling it "fast and funny and punctuated with poignancy", and Jod Mitchell of "The Daily Telegraph" praised the intelligent writing and fast direction, writing that despite its familiarity, the series injected "pace and verve" into the BBC One schedule.

"The Guardian" Gareth McLean observed that the opening episode contrasted the typical "cosiness" of "Holby City" and "Casualty", and described "HolbyBlue" as "somewhere between the excellent "City Central" and the appalling "Merseybeat"". McLean later deemed Keenan "two-dimensional", but still found him to be an improvement on the series' female characters, who he felt were extremely under-written. In February 2008, McLean described "HolbyBlue" as "far from perfect", but went on to review the sixth episode of series two positively, commenting that the previously disappointing programme had finally improved, with "a compelling and tense episode that both pleases series regulars and delivers a powerful hour of stand-alone drama." McLean felt that the episode tackled the issue of domestic violence intelligently, and praised "sterling performances" by Macaninch, Lucker, Colley and Drew.

The crossover episode in which "Holby City" Jac Naylor is interrogated by the "HolbyBlue" police officers attracted mixed reviews. Helen Rumbelow of "The Times" reviewed the episode favourably compared to season premiere episodes of "House" and "Grey's Anatomy" which aired on the same evening. Rumbleow praised "HolbyBlue" superior pacing, writing that while it had "clumsy, absurd and predictable" moments, and seemed "amateurish, unsophisticated and old-fashioned" compared to the US dramas, it was still good, with "moments of light and dark in the right place, the characters perfectly introduced and just the right amount of intrigue seeded." In contrast, "The Guardian" Sam Wollaston stated that he was still unconvinced by "HolbyBlue", deeming it inferior to "The Bill". McLean was also unimpressed, writing,

Mark Wright of "The Stage" was a frequent reviewer of "HolbyBlue". He found the opening episode "boring", deeming it "a cliché-ridden disaster with some duff casting decisions and bizarrely clunky dialogue". Wright criticised the decision to launch the show under the "Holby" moniker, opining that it is not a true brand as "Casualty" and "Holby City" both possess "distinct personalities". He noted that he loathes the former and loves the latter, but concluded that despite differing audience demographics, they are both hospital dramas and it does not follow that their audiences would also enjoy a police procedural. Despite his criticism, Wright was pleased when the programme was recommissioned for a second series, hoping that an increased number of episodes would allow the production team to fix issues with "HolbyBlue" and further develop its format. Following the programme's cancellation, Wright gave "HolbyBlue" a mixed review. He described the first series as "disastrous", writing that it was largely unoriginal and impeded by the "Holby" brand, but deemed series two "a great improvement, with some excellent and quite engrossing character drama". 

The first episode of "HolbyBlue" was watched by an audience of 5.46 million viewers on BBC One, making it the fifteenth most-watched programme on the channel for the week of its broadcast. The second episode saw a fall in the ratings by 300,000 viewers, to 5.16 million viewers, making it the seventeenth most-watched programme on the channel for the week of its broadcast. The episode received a 26% audience share for its timeslot. The following episode dropped to 4.42 million viewers and twenty-fifth in the weekly rankings. Despite a 23% decrease in audience share, it continued to lead in its timeslot. By episode five, viewership had declined to 4.10 million and a 21% audience share, but the show remained the most-watched at 8pm. The same was true of episode six, watched by 4 million viewers with a 20% audience share. Viewership for episodes four to six fell below the channel's top thirty in the weekly rankings. The final two episodes of series one experienced an increase in viewership, to 4.13 and 4.36 million respectively, ranking "HolbyBlue" twenty-sixth then twenty-fourth in the channel ratings for the weeks of broadcast.

The first episode of the second series attracted the highest all-time rating of "HolbyBlue", with 5.62 million viewers watching the episode, making the episode the twelfth most-watched programme on the channel for the week of its broadcast. However, the following episode saw a decline in the ratings for "HolbyBlue" after it clashed with ITV's police drama "The Bill", with "The Bill" recording 5.4 million viewers and a 23% audience share, compared to "HolbyBlue" 4.1 million viewers and 18% audience share. Episode three was watched by 3.8 million viewers, attaining an 18% audience share, again beaten in its timeslot by "The Bill". Episodes four and five were watched by 3.5 and 3.4 million viewers respectively; both episodes were again beaten by "The Bill", and while episode six saw a slight rise in viewership to 3.6 million, "The Bill" lengthened its lead against "HolbyBlue", attaining a 23% audience share, compared to "HolbyBlue" 16%. By episode eight, "HolbyBlue" had fallen to 3.2 million viewers. It maintained its 16% share, as opposed to "The Bill" increased audience share, to 26%. With its ninth episode, the series fell even further, to 2.9 million viewers, while its audience share again decreased, this time to 14%. Episodes ten and eleven were watched by 2.8 and 2.6 million viewers respectively, with viewership declining to 2.5 million by the time of the series' cancellation.

The table below shows the two series' average number of viewers.

"HolbyBlue" was nominated for six awards during its lifespan, of which it failed to win any. The series was nominated under the category 'Best Drama' twice at the Inside Soap Awards in 2007 and 2008. Actresses Kacey Ainsworth and Zöe Lucker were both nominated for 'Best Actress' at the TV Quick & TV Choice Awards in 2007, while the drama itself also received a nomination under the 'Best New Drama Series' at the TV Quick & TV Choice Awards in 2007. In 2008, actor Jimmy Akingbola was nominated at the Screen Nation Awards under the 'Best Male Performance in TV' category. 



</doc>
<doc id="28013959" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28013959" title="Lactarius repraesentaneus">
Lactarius repraesentaneus

Lactarius repraesentaneus, commonly known as the northern bearded milkcap, the northern milkcap, or the purple-staining milkcap, is a species of fungus in the Russulaceae family. It has a northerly distribution, and is found in temperate regions of North America and Europe, associated with spruce trees. Distinguishing features of its fruit body include the large orange-yellow cap up to wide, cream to pale yellow gills, and a yellow coarsely-pitted stem that is up to long and thick. Cut fruit bodies ooze a white latex that will stain mushroom tissue lilac to purple. Several chemicals have been isolated and identified from the fruit bodies that can modify the growth of plants, and the mushroom also has antibiotic activity against "Staphylococcus aureus". "L. repraesentaneus" is poisonous, and consumption causes stomach aches.

"Lactarius repraesentaneus" was first described by German mycologist Max Britzelmayr in 1885, based on material collected from Bavaria. The variety "Lactarius scrobiculatus" var. "repraesentaneus", proposed by Killermann in 1933, is considered a synonym. Rolf Singer in 1942 defined the subspecies "L. repraesentaneus" ssp. "speciosus" to include fruit bodies with matted fibers ("felt") arranged in concentric rings on the cap (zonate), in comparison with the nominate subspecies, where in young specimens the felt was evenly distributed on the cap surface, only becoming zonate at the cap margins in maturity.

According to the classification proposed by Lexemuel Ray Hesler and Alexander H. Smith in their 1979 monograph of North American "Lactarius" species, "L. repraesentaneus" belongs in the stirps "Speciosus" of the section "Aspideini", of the subgenus "Piperites" of genus "Lactarius". Other species in stirps "Speciosus" include "L. dispersus", "L. subtorminosus", and "L. speciosus", all of which have a hairy cap edge. Singer's 1986 classification of the Agaricales does not divide subsection "Aspideini" into stirpes, instead grouping "Lactarius repraesentaneus" with "L. aspideus", "L. uvidus", "L. luridis", "L. psammicola", and "L. speciosus".

The mushroom is commonly known as the "northern bearded milkcap", the "northern milkcap", or the "purple-staining milkcap". The specific epithet "repraesentaneus" is Latin for "well-represented".

The cap of "L. repraesentaneus" is wide, convex to broadly funnel-shaped. The margin (the edge of the cap) is conspicuously bearded on young specimens. The cap surface is faintly zoned to azonate, with a thin layer of matted fibers, often becoming scurfy with age. It is dry to somewhat sticky, light yellow to orange-yellow, sometimes with rusty tints when older. The attachment of the gills to the stem is slightly decurrent—running slightly down the length of the stem. The gills are moderately broad, close to crowded, sometimes forked near the stem. Normally a cream to pale ochraceous color, they will stain dull lilac to purple when bruised.

The stem is long, thick, nearly equal in width throughout or enlarged downward, hollow at maturity, sticky to dry, scrobiculate (coarsely pitted), pale yellow to orange-yellow, and stains dull lilac to purple. The flesh is firm, brittle, white, and will stain dull lilac to purple when cut. The odor is sometimes faintly fragrant or not distinctive, but when the mushroom is dry it smells intensely of soap. Its taste is mild to slightly acrid or somewhat bitter, and the flavor has been compared to sweet flag ("Acorus calamus"). The abundant amount of latex produced by the mushroom is white to cream, unchanging, staining all tissues dull lilac to purple. It tastes mild to slightly acrid or somewhat bitter. The spore print is yellowish. The fruit bodies are poisonous and consumption will cause stomach aches, but the nature of the toxic agents has not been identified.

A new form, "Lactarius repraesentaneus" f. "immutabilis", was described from Le Sappey, in the Haute-Savoie department of southeastern France in 2011. It differs in the staining reaction of its injured flesh.

The spores are 8–12 by 6.5–9 µm, broadly ellipsoid to ellipsoid, ornamented with warts and ridges that do not form a reticulum, prominences up to 0.8 µm high, hyaline, and amyloid. The cap cuticle is an ixocutis—with the hyphae embedded in a slimy or gelatinized layer.

"Lactarius repraesentaneus" is similar in appearance to "Lactarius scrobiculatus", which has latex that turns yellow when exposed to air, a different smell, a stinging flesh and a different reaction of the milk to alkali: in "L. scrobiculatus" the milk turns reddish-orange while that of "L. representaneus" does not change color. "Lactarius uvidus" also has a violet reaction but it has a different color and is not hairy at the margin of the cap. "L. flavidus" has a yellowish cap but does not have a hairy margin.

Like other "Lactarius" species, "L. repraesentaneus" is thought to form mycorrhizal relationships with trees. This is a mutually beneficial relationship where the hyphae of the fungus grow around the roots of trees, forming a sheath of tissue. This enables the fungus to receive moisture, protection and nutritive byproducts of the tree, and affords the tree greater access to soil nutrients. The fruit bodies of "L. repraesentaneus" are found scattered or in groups on the ground under spruce from August to September. The fungus is distributed in higher elevations in the northern USA and southern Canada where spruce is present. It has also been reported from Alaska, California, and the Rocky Mountains. The frequency of its appearance is described as occasional to fairly common. In Europe, where it is fairly rare, it is found mainly underneath sallows ("Salix capraea") in forests at the foot of mountains on non-calcareous soil. It has been collected in Czechoslovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, the French Alps and England; overall, it is widely distributed throughout the temperate zone of the northern hemisphere. The fungus has also been collected under birch ("B. pubescens", "B. nana", and "B. glandulosa") in Greenland.

"Lactarius repraesentaneus" was reported to have antibiotic activity against "Staphylococcus aureus" in 1947. The substance responsible for the antibacterial activity, determined to be heat-sensitive, was not identified. A number of chemicals have been isolated and identified from "L. repraesentaneus" that can regulate the growth of plants. The chemicals, in a class called sesquiterpenoids are named repraesentin A, and two related sesquiterpenes, namely repraesentins B and C. These compounds were shown to promote the radicle elongation of lettuce seedlings by 136%, 118% and 184% at 67 ppm, respectively. Other compounds reported in 2006 are repraesentins D, E, and F. Repraesentin E showed the strongest growth promotion activity, 164% at 3.6 µm, of the three compounds toward the radicle elongation of lettuce seedlings.



</doc>
<doc id="28041891" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28041891" title="Saadanius">
Saadanius

Saadanius is a genus of fossil primate dating to the Oligocene that is closely related to the common ancestor of the Old World monkeys and apes, collectively known as catarrhines. It is represented by a single species, Saadanius hijazensis, which is known only from a single partial skull tentatively dated between 29 and 28 mya (million years ago). It was discovered in 2009 in western Saudi Arabia near Mecca and was first described in 2010 after a comparison with both living and fossil catarrhines.

"Saadanius" had a longer face than living catarrhines and lacked the advanced frontal sinus (airspaces in the facial bones) found in living catarrhines. However, it had a bony ear tube (ectotympanic) and teeth comparable to those of living catarrhines. The discovery of "Saadanius" may help answer questions about the evolution and appearance of the last common ancestors of Old World monkeys and apes.

"Saadanius" is known from a single specimen, the holotype, named "SGS-UM 2009-002", stored in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, at the Paleontology Unit of the Saudi Geological Survey (SGS). Its type locality, or the place it was discovered, was on top of an oolitic ironstone fossil bed of the middle Shumaysi Formation located in the southwest corner of Harrat Al Ujayfa, in western Saudi Arabia, close to Mecca. The specimen was discovered in February 2009 by paleontologist Iyad Zalmout, who had traveled to the region to search for ancient whale and dinosaur fossils. While looking for dinosaur fossils in an area that, according to the maps he was working from, contained rock layers that dated to the Cretaceous (145–66 mya), Zalmout found the jawbone of a hippo-like creature, called an anthracotheriid (a close relative of whales and hippos), which dated to Eocene or Oligocene. This indicated that the rock layers were much younger than what was dated on the maps. The following day, he noticed fossil teeth, which he immediately recognized as those of a primate. Zalmout emailed a photo of the teeth to paleontologist Philip D. Gingerich, with whom he was working as a postdoctoral fellow. Gingerich, an expert on ancient primates and whales, confirmed that it was indeed a primate. Due to a tight schedule, Zalmout had to leave the exposed fossil embedded in the rock for the next few days because collecting it would require days of work. The fossil was soon recovered by a joint expedition involving the SGS and the University of Michigan.

The fossil was not formally described until 2010 when its discovery was announced in the journal "Nature". The fossil was dated to about 28 or 29 million years ago based on comparisons of fossils of anthracotheriids and paenungulates (members of the group that includes elephants and hyraxes) found nearby with fossils from similarly aged African deposits. However, the date has yet to be confirmed by other dating techniques. The genus name, "Saadanius", comes from the Arabic word, "saadan" (), which is the collective term for apes and monkeys. The species name, "hijazensis", is a reference to the al Hijaz region, in which it was discovered.

"Saadanius" had a longer face than living catarrhines, more closely resembling New World monkeys in appearance, although it was larger—possibly the size of a gibbon. Its enlarged, deep-rooted canine teeth, the diastema (space) between its canine teeth and second incisors, and its sagittal crest (ridge of bone running lengthwise down the top of the skull) suggest that the specimen was a male. These features are shared among male Old World monkeys. "Saadanius" lacks the advanced frontal sinus found in living catarrhines, but it does possess an ectotympanic, or bony ear tube, found in living catarrhines. Propliopithecoids, the oldest stem group of catarrhines, which date back 35 to 30 mya, lacked a fully developed ectotympanic.

The specimen had serious puncture wounds on the front of the skull, indicating that it had been preyed upon by a large carnivore. One puncture wound was on the right side of the braincase and may have been the fatal blow. There was also a bite mark on the frontal trigon.

Like other catarrhine primates, "Saadanius" was probably a tree-dweller (arboreal). During the time it would have lived, the Red Sea had not yet formed, and new plant and animal species would have been arriving from nearby Eurasia as it converged with the Afro-Arabian landmass.

Comparative anatomy and cladistic analysis indicate that "Saadanius" is more closely related to the last common ancestor of crown catarrhines than any other known fossil catarrhines, placing the common ancestry of Catarrhini in Arabia and Africa. Other stem catarrhines include propliopithecoids, such as "Aegyptopithecus", and pliopithecoids, such as "Pliopithecus". The closer similarities between "Saadanius" and crown catarrhines, particularly its ectotympanic, suggest "Saadanius" of all known fossil primates most closely resembled the last common ancestor of living catarrhines. Its discovery has provided new details about human evolution, particularly the split between the Old World monkeys and the ape lineage that eventually led to humans.
The discovery of "Saadanius" provides new evidence for competing hypotheses about the facial appearance of the ancestral crown catarrhines, or common ancestor. One reconstruction is based on living catarrhine traits and predicts a short face and a rounded braincase, similar to that of a gibbon. Another reconstruction, based on the morphology of early Miocene apes and the basal cercopithecoid "Victoriapithecus", predicts that the last common ancestor had a projecting snout and tall face, like that of living baboons and the oldest fossil apes and Old World monkeys. The conservative features of "Saadanius", similar to those of the older stem catarrhines, support the latter hypothesis, according to Zalmout "et al." However, one palaeontologist, Eric Delson, has cautioned that geological pressure may have distorted the shape of the skull.

According to Zalmout "et al.", "Saadanius" may also help resolve the age of the hominoid–cercopithecoid split. Paleoanthropological work has typically placed the divergence between 25 and 23 mya, but genetic-based estimates have placed it in the early Oligocene, approximately 33 mya. Despite the predictions from the genetic tests, little fossil evidence has been found for a last common ancestor between 30 and 23 mya, favoring a later split. Only isolated teeth of "Kamoyapithecus" hinted at the existence of potential basal hominoids in the late Oligocene (between 24 and 27.5 mya), while the oldest fossil Old World monkey, "Victoriapithecus macinnesi", dates to 19 mya. With the discovery of "Saadanius", Zalmout "et al." suggested a later split than the genetic data, dating between 29–28 and 24 mya. However, Pozzi "et al." later argued that although "Saadanius" is a significant discovery, because it is a stem catarrhine, it could not be used to date the divergence of the crown group. The presence of stem taxa in the fossil record does not indicate that crown groups have evolved, and stem taxa may survive for millions of years after the crown taxa appear. For this reason, the fossil record can only suggest a hard minimum boundary for divergence dates, which corresponds to the first appearance of a crown taxon. Furthermore, Pozzi "et al." pointed out that the supplementary material published by Zalmout "et al." demonstrated that Pliopithecoidea were more closely related to living catarrhines than "Saadanius".

The fossil find has also been seen by the SGS as an important find for Saudi Arabia, because it enriches the fossil record for the region. As a result of the find, both the SGS and the University of Michigan are considering more collaborative field explorations in the country.



</doc>
<doc id="28043770" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28043770" title="Audition (Glee)">
Audition (Glee)

"Audition" is the second season premiere and twenty-third episode overall of the American television series "Glee". The episode was written by Ian Brennan, directed by Brad Falchuk, and premiered on the Fox network on September 21, 2010. In "Audition", the glee club members attempt to attract new recruits, including foreign exchange student Sunshine Corazon (Charice) and transfer student Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet). A new football coach, Shannon Beiste (Dot-Marie Jones), arrives at McKinley High, and school blogger Jacob Ben Israel (Josh Sussman) provides updates on the glee club's summer break.

The episode features eight musical and dance performances, five of which were released as singles, available for download. Musical performances attracted mixed reviews from critics. Lea Michele's rendition of "What I Did for Love" from "A Chorus Line" was described by Robert Bianco of "USA Today" as putting "every amateur musical performance on every TV talent show this year to shame", though both Mary McNamara of the "Los Angeles Times" and Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" found it incongruous in context. Charice's performances were well received by American and Filipino critics, and Alicia Keys expressed approval of the "Glee" cast cover of "Empire State of Mind."

"Audition" was watched by 12.45 million American viewers, and attained "Glee" series high Nielsen rating in the 18–34 demographic. It received generally favorable reviews from critics, and "Entertainment Weekly" Tim Stack and the "New York Post" Jarett Wieselman both stated that it had assuaged their fears of the show declining in quality in its second season. Brett Berk of "Vanity Fair" and "Rolling Stone" Erica Futterman both felt the show had returned to form following an increasingly disappointing first season. Several critics highlighted racial issues with the episode: Fred Topel of "Hollywood News" described a scene involving Sunshine as "downright racist", and Brittany Drye of "The Stir" also questioned the pairing of Asian characters Mike Chang (Harry Shum, Jr.) and Tina Cohen-Chang (Jenna Ushkowitz).

Following New Directions' loss at Regionals, the glee club members attempt to recruit new students to bolster their competition performances. Upon learning that Nationals will be held in New York this year, they decide to perform "Empire State of Mind" in the school courtyard, hoping to pique the interest of their schoolmates. Foreign exchange student Sunshine Corazon (Charice) from the Philippines and transfer student Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet) take notice and are intrigued by the performance. Club co-captain Rachel Berry (Lea Michele) later encounters Sunshine in the girls' bathroom, and they sing an impromptu duet of "Telephone" by Lady Gaga and Beyoncé. Rachel is intimidated by her performance, and directs Sunshine to a crack house instead of the auditorium in an attempt to sabotage her glee club audition. Rachel is reprimanded by glee club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) when this is discovered. Sunshine later auditions successfully, impressing the club members with her rendition of "Listen" from "Dreamgirls".

Co-captain Finn Hudson (Cory Monteith) encourages Sam to audition after overhearing him singing "Every Rose Has Its Thorn" by Poison. In the choir room, Sam, Finn, Mike (Harry Shum Jr.), Artie (Kevin McHale), and Puck (Mark Salling) sing Travie McCoy's "Billionaire" together. However, Sam declines to audition due to the low social status of the glee club members.

Shannon Beiste (Dot-Marie Jones) is appointed as the new coach of McKinley High's failing football team, resulting in reductions to the glee and cheerleading budgets in favor of the football team. Will and cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) team up, hoping to drive Beiste out of the school and have their budgets restored. Amidst her scheming with Will, Sue also demotes Santana (Naya Rivera) from her position as head cheerleader after learning she has had breast implants, replacing her with Quinn (Dianna Agron). Artie asks Finn to help him join the football team. He hopes to win back his girlfriend Tina (Jenna Ushkowitz), who has broken up with him to date Mike. Beiste believes that Finn is colluding against her by forcing her to reject a wheelchair-dependent student, and drops Finn from the team, appointing Sam as the new quarterback. Will is unable to convince her to take Finn back, but realizes that his hostile behavior is hurting his new colleague. Later, he defends Beiste from a Sue-driven sexual harassment accusation by Brittany (Heather Morris), and apologizes, re-earning Sue's enmity.

Acting on her refuelled rivalry with Will, Sue contacts Dustin Goolsby (Cheyenne Jackson), the new director of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline. Dustin is able to secure permanent US residency for Sunshine and her mother on the proviso that she joins his club. Sunshine confesses that she felt driven out of New Directions by Rachel's hostile behavior. After admitting that she values herself above the other club members, Rachel sings "What I Did for Love" from "A Chorus Line" alone in the auditorium, before heading to the choir room to apologize.

On January 11, 2010, Fox President Kevin Reilly announced that "Glee" had been picked up for a second season, and would be holding nationwide, open casting calls to fill three new roles. The auditions were intended to be the subject of a multi-part television special, which would air in the lead-in to the second season premiere, with the new cast members revealed in the first episode. Series creator Ryan Murphy stated that "Glee" aimed to become "the first interactive musical comedy on television". Ultimately, the reality show did not go ahead, due to Murphy's desire to concentrate on the main series and fear that the distraction of the reality show might damage "Glee".

As of "Audition", formerly recurring cast members Heather Morris and Naya Rivera were promoted to series regulars as cheerleaders and glee club members Brittany Pierce and Santana Lopez respectively. The episode introduced four new cast members. Chord Overstreet plays Sam Evans, a recurring character who is initially an athletic protégé of glee club member Finn, but becomes his rival. Charice appears as Sunshine Corazon, a foreign exchange student and rival to Rachel. Charice was a fan of the show during its first season, and had her manager approach Murphy about casting her in season two. Dot-Marie Jones was cast as football coach Shannon Beiste, replacing season one cast member Patrick Gallagher as Ken Tanaka. Cheyenne Jackson appears as Dustin Goolsby, the new director of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline, replacing Shelby Corcoran (Idina Menzel). Jackson was originally considered for the role of Will, and in 2009 was cast in the "Glee" episode "Acafellas" as Vocal Adrenaline choreographer Dakota Stanley, but he was unable to perform due to illness. Murphy described Dustin as "a complete villain", and stated that he would "become very intertwined in Will's life".

The episode featured cover versions of "Empire State of Mind" by Jay-Z featuring Alicia Keys, Lady Gaga's "Telephone" featuring Beyoncé, "Billionaire" by Travie McCoy featuring Bruno Mars and "Every Rose Has Its Thorn" by Poison. "What I Did for Love" from "A Chorus Line", "Getting to Know You" from "The King and I", and "Listen" from the film adaptation of "Dreamgirls" were also performed vocally, while "The Power" by Snap! featured as a dance performance. All of the songs performed in the episode except "Every Rose Has Its Thorn", "Getting to Know You" and "The Power" were released as singles, available for download, and "Empire State of Mind" and "Billionaire" are included on the album "". Following their release, over 250,000 "Glee" tracks were downloaded digitally within the first forty-eight hours, and over 409,000 within the first week, according to Nielsen SoundScan. Additionally, "Empire State of Mind" saw the largest first-day sales for any "Glee" cover released to that point.

Musical performances in the episode attracted mixed reviews. "USA Today" Robert Bianco deemed the highlight "What I Did for Love", and wrote that Michele's performance "puts every amateur musical performance on every TV talent show this year to shame." Raymund Flandez of "The Wall Street Journal" agreed that it was the best song of the episode, "done with smart aplomb [and] heart". In contrast, Mary McNamara of the "Los Angeles Times" called it a "non-sequitur song" which "seemed shoehorned in by Michele's agent", Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" deemed it touching but unmemorable, and Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" stated that it was "well-performed" but "so poorly chosen that an emotional moment becomes unintentionally hilarious".

VanDerWerff felt that there were "some odd song choices" throughout, particularly Overstreet's introductory number, which he called "adequate", though he noted that it "doesn't do nearly as good a job at introducing his character" as Charice's "Listen". "Entertainment Weekly" Tim Stack graded the performance of "Listen" an "A+", and wrote that he wanted to give it a standing ovation. Jacque Wilson of CNN praised both of Charice's performances and hoped that she would reappear in the series, while Ricky Lo of "The Philippine Star" discussed kababayan reception of her role and said that her singing was "drop-dead stunning" and that she "really made Filipinos proud."

MTV's Kyle Anderson commented that the songs overall were "sharp and well-presented"; he highlighted the two hip-hop numbers for particular praise. Anderson felt that the choreography of "Empire State of Mind" compensated for any awkwardness in its delivery, and lauded McHale's "unusual swagger" during "Billionaire". Emily Yahr of the "Washington Post" deemed "Billionaire" the best performance of the episode; her colleague Lisa de Moraes agreed, though she characterized the runner-up performance of "Empire State of Mind" as "maybe-trying-too-hard". Aly Semigran, also writing for MTV, felt "Empire State of Mind" was lacking the gravitas of the original version, but reported that Keys had deemed the "Glee" cover "amazing".

In its original broadcast, "Audition" was watched by 12.45 million American viewers. The episode led in the 18–49 demographic for the night, attaining a 5.6/16 Nielsen rating/share, up 50 percent on the first season premiere, "Showmance", in September 2009. It was "Glee" second-highest rated telecast ever among adults 18–49, and its series high among adults 18–34, attaining a 6.4/20 rating/share. In Canada, "Audition" was watched by 2.24 million viewers. It was the most-watched programme of the night, and beat "Dancing with the Stars", its closest competitor in the 8 pm timeslot, by 170 percent in the 18–49 demographic. In Australia, the episode drew 1.23 million viewers and was the seventh most-watched programme of the night. In the UK, the episode was watched by 2.999 million viewers (2.486 million on E4, and 513,000 on E4+1), becoming the most-watched show on E4 and E4 +1 for the week, and the second most-watched show on cable for the week, as well as hitting a series high for the show.

The episode received generally favorable reviews from critics. VanDerWerff graded the episode "A−". He felt it was imperfect, but that "Audition" demonstrated the "Glee" executives had learned "a surprising amount about what does and doesn't work within its format". He added, "as a season premiere and promise for what's to come? 'Audition' is very good indeed." David Hinckley of the "Daily News" rated "Audition" 4/5. He felt that the episode was "a little self-indulgent" with "a dizzying series of cross-plots", but hoped that it was setting the foundations for an "interesting, evolving story" in the season to come. Bianco called the episode a "heady, sometimes-too-rich mix of song-and-dance magic, high school musical spoof and overall excess", and concluded: "It's a mess, but it's the kind of joyous mess that makes you think order can be overrated." Both Amy Reiter of the "Los Angeles Times" and Jessica Derschwitz of CBS News praised the episode's musical numbers and Sue's lines, while Stack and the "New York Post" Jarett Wieselman deemed the episode to have assuaged their worries about "Glee" experiencing a "sophomore slump" and commented positively on the opening scene that directly addressed criticism of the first season. "Vanity Fair" Brett Berk received the episode positively, despite having been disappointed with the second half of the first season, a sentiment shared by Futterman, who deemed "Audition" a "fresh start" after "a first season that devolved into a frenzy of too many songs and not enough long-term plot".
"TV Guide" Matt Roush wrote that "Audition" was "far from [his] favorite episode", disliking the "cruelty and dirty tricks" employed by the characters, though he commented that "the moments that soar remind us why this is a genuine pop-culture phenom". James Poniewozik of "Time" called it a "solid" episode, one which was "neither awful nor amazing", but set up promising storylines for the season ahead. He felt there were no stand out musical performances, but commented, "it gave the season some emotional grounding [...] It showed us a "Glee" that's not working double-time to give us everything we want all at once, and that's pretty much what I want from it." John Doyle of "The Globe and Mail" wrote that, with "Audition", "Glee" had become formulaic, and asserted that ""Glee" fanatics won't be disappointed. The rest of us are."

In an overall positive review of the episode, Fred Topel of "Hollywood News" wrote that the opening scenes that addressed fan criticisms were a little too harsh on the show's fictional characters, having gone overboard to the point of offensiveness. He highlighted as a concern the "downright racist" scene ten minutes into the show between Rachel and Sunshine which he could have "done without". Meghan Carlson of "BuddyTV" also described Rachel's behavior in the aforementioned scene as "totally, patronizingly racist". Writing for "The Stir", Brittany Drye asked "Is "Glee" racist?", and cited several moments in "Audition" which could be perceived as racist. She found the scene with Rachel screaming at Sunshine in the bathroom in broken English to be distasteful, and also highlighted the pairing of Tina and Mike (noting their shared surname, "Chang") and the joke of Jacob assuming they are a couple because they are both Asian. However, Drye speculated that in attempting "self-aware racism" the show was intentionally trying to point out the inanity of racist beliefs, and concluded that "Glee"s self-awareness in this matter was its saving grace.



</doc>
<doc id="28047642" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28047642" title="Passer predomesticus">
Passer predomesticus

Passer predomesticus is a fossil passerine bird in the sparrow family Passeridae. First described in 1962, it is known from two premaxillary (upper jaw) bones found in a Middle Pleistocene layer of the Oumm-Qatafa cave in Palestine. The premaxillaries resemble those of the house and Spanish sparrows, but differ in having a deep groove instead of a crest on the lower side. Israeli palaeontologist Eitan Tchernov, who described the species, and others have considered it to be close to the ancestor of the house and Spanish sparrows, but molecular data point to an earlier origin of modern sparrow species. Occurring in a climate Tchernov described as similar to but rainier than that in Palestine today, it was considered by Tchernov as a "wild" ancestor of the modern sparrows which have a commensal association with humans, although its presence in Oumm-Qatafa cave may indicate that it was associated with humans.

The known material of "Passer predomesticus" consists of two premaxillary bones in the collections of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. The bones were described by Israeli palaeontologist Eitan Tchernov in 1962 and reviewed by South African zoologist Miles Markus two years later. Tchernov did not unambiguously identify a type specimen and his paper was said by Robert M. Mengel, the editor of "The Auk", to contain "many troublesome lapses and contradictions". In 1975, French palaeontologist Cécile Mourer-Chauviré reported on fossil sparrows from a cave at Saint-Estève-Janson in southeastern France, which could not be identified as either "P. predomesticus" or the house sparrow ("Passer domesticus"). Because no premaxillae were found, the bones could not be distinguished from those of the house sparrow.

Tchernov argued that the house sparrow and related species have undergone considerable morphological changes in adapting to a commensal relationship with humans, with the beak becoming longer and narrower. He wrote that "P. predomesticus" was intermediate between the house sparrow and Spanish sparrow ("Passer hispaniolensis"), and suggested that it may be a primitive relative of the ancestor of the house sparrow that did not become dependent on humans. In a 1984 paper, Tchernov suggested that the period in which the house sparrow and "P. predomesticus" could have separated was the Würm glaciation 70,000–10,000 years ago. Markus found that the fossil species was closest to living house sparrows from Palestine and to the great sparrow ("P. motitensis"), and proposed that the house sparrow evolved in Africa. In a 1977 account of the evolution of the house sparrow, American zoologists Richard F. Johnston and William J. Klitz considered that the house sparrow evolved with the beginning of agriculture, dating any fossils that could even be assigned to the common ancestor of the house and Spanish sparrows as more recent than "P. predomesticus". In his 1988 work "The Sparrows", British ornithologist J. Denis Summers-Smith considered that "P. predomesticus" was roughly contemporary with the common ancestor of the house and Spanish sparrows and that all present-day Palaearctic "Passer" species evolved later. Drawing on more recent studies of molecular data, Ted R. Anderson stated in his 2006 "Biology of the Ubiquitous House Sparrow" that all "Passer" species have a long evolutionary history, with speciation possibly occurring as early as the Miocene.

Premaxillae, the only bones from which "Passer predomesticus" is known, are generally relatively easy to determine in birds. Tchernov found that the two premaxillae of "P. predomesticus" most closely resembled the house and Spanish sparrows, but were distinct from either. In "P. predomesticus", there is a central, longitudinal groove with raised margins running along the lower (ventral) side of the premaxilla. In contrast, the house and Spanish sparrows have a narrow crest in this position, which is more prominent in the house sparrow. In the great sparrow, Cape sparrow ("Passer melanurus"), and southern grey-headed sparrow ("Passer diffusus"), this crest is more poorly developed, and they may even have a shallow groove at the front of the premaxilla, not nearly as well-developed as the groove in "P. predomesticus". In "P. predomesticus", the premaxilla has a maximum width of and the length from the tip of the premaxilla to the back of the nasal bones is .

According to Tchernov's 1962 paper, "Passer predomesticus" was found in the middle Acheulean (middle Pleistocene, probably more than 400,000 years old) layer "E"1 of the Oumm-Qatafa cave in Wadi Khareitoun near Bethlehem. In 1984, however, Tchernov wrote that "P. predomesticus" was about 140,000 years old, from the Yabrudian. Layer "E"1 contained remains of about 40 bird species, including a premaxilla Tchernov described as a precursor of the Dead Sea sparrow ("Passer moabiticus") and a tarsometatarsus and humerus tentatively allied with the house sparrow. An undetermined Acheulean layer of the same cave also contained fossils Tchernov described as precursors of both the house and Spanish sparrows.

Although interpretations of the palaeoclimate at Oumm-Qatafa have differed, Tchernov suggested that the deposits are from a Mediterranean climate, although one rainier than that today. Tchernov considered "P. predomesticus" a "wild" sparrow, but Anderson considered that the occurrence of "P. predomesticus" and the other "Passer" fossils in Oumm-Qatafa indicates that these species lived in association with early Palaeolithic humans.



</doc>
<doc id="28054960" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28054960" title="Miniopterus tao">
Miniopterus tao

Miniopterus tao is a fossil bat in the genus "Miniopterus" from the Pleistocene of Zhoukoudian in China. It is known from a number of mandibles (lower jaws), which were initially identified as the living species "Miniopterus schreibersii" in 1963 before being recognized as a separate species, "M. tao", in 1986. "Miniopterus tao" is larger than living "M. schreibersii" and has more closely spaced lower premolars and more robust talonids (back groups of cusps) on the lower molars. The back part of the mandible is relatively low and on it, the coronoid and condyloid processes are about equally high. The average length of the mandible is 12.0 mm.

In 1934, Chinese paleontologist C.C. Young was the first to describe fossil bats from the fossil site of Zhoukoudian Locality 1, which is famous for Peking Man. However, he did not mention "Miniopterus", which was first recorded by Kazimierz Kowalski and Chuan-kuei Li in 1963 in a description of new material from layer 8 of the cave site. They identified the "Miniopterus" as the widespread living species "Miniopterus schreibersii" on the basis of 48 mandibles (lower jaws) from layer 8 and reassigned another mandible that had previously been identified as "Myotis" to "Miniopterus". In a 1986 paper, however, Bronisław Wołoszyn described the population as a new species, "Miniopterus tao", after examining two mandibles in the collections of the Polish Academy of Sciences. He did place the species in the ""schreibersii" group" of "Miniopterus", but considered it unlikely to be ancestral to living "M. schreibersii". The specific name, "tao", refers to the Chinese philosophical concept, the Tao.

Wołoszyn described the species on the basis of two mandibles, one damaged and with the third premolar (p3) through third molar (m3), and the other intact and with the fourth premolar (p4) through second molar (m2). "Miniopterus tao" is a large member of the ""schreibersii" group" and about as large as "Miniopterus rummeli" from the Miocene of Germany. The mandible is robust and generally resembles "M. schreibersii". The mental foramen (an opening at the outer side of the jaw) is located between the lower canine and second lower premolar (p2). The coronoid process (a projection at the back of the mandible) is low and rounded and is connected to the condyloid process behind it by a nearly horizontal ridge, which contains a slight raising at its back. Compared to "M. schreibersii", the condyloid process is more slender, but the base of the angular process (at the lower back corner of the jaw) is more robust. In "M. rummeli", the back part of the mandible is higher and the coronoid process is distinctly higher than the condyloid process.

The preserved alveoli show that p2 is about as large as p3, not smaller as in the ""tristis" group" of "Miniopterus". The premolars in "M. tao" are placed closely together, which distinguishes the species from "M. schreibersii" and fossil European species, including "M. rummeli". The p3 is robust and surrounded by a well-developed cingulum (shelf). The crown is trapezoid in shape. In p4, there is a clear cingulum at the front and labial (outer) margins. The crown is triangular and the back edge is straight, not saddle-shaped as in "M. schreibersii". The molars resemble those of "M. schreibersii", but are more robust, particularly the talonids (the cusp groups at the back of the teeth).
The total length of the mandible ranges from 11.6 to 12.4 mm and averages 12.0 mm in ten specimens, the coronoid process is 3.1 to 3.3 mm high, averaging 3.2 mm, and the length of the molar row is 4.0 to 4.4 mm, averaging 4.2 mm.

"Miniopterus tao" has only been recorded from Locality 1 at Zhoukoudian; Locality 3 contains a smaller "Miniopterus" identified as "M. schreibersii". Locality 1 is Pleistocene in age (between about 2 million and 10,000 years old) and also contains "Ia io" and species of "Rhinolophus" and "Myotis" among bats, in addition to "Homo erectus".



</doc>
<doc id="28062534" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28062534" title="Michael Rush (rower)">
Michael Rush (rower)

Michael Rush (3 January 1844 – 17 December 1922) was an Irish Australian sculler noted for his one-on-one competitions against champion opponents, which drew vast crowds of spectators. He attempted to win the World Sculling Championship.

Rush arrived in Sydney in 1861 at the age of 16, an assisted immigrant brought to augment Australia's mostly agricultural workforce. Rush was a farm labourer, who knew nothing of boats or boating, but within ten years of his arrival in Australia, Rush was Champion Sculler of the Clarence River, as well as a selector, cattle-raiser and butcher. His interest in the sport of rowing dominated Rush's life, and hampered his prosperity. He repeatedly travelled from his Clarence River home to compete for large money prizes on Sydney's Parramatta River, neglecting his business affairs. Rush became Champion Sculler of Australia in 1873, and defended his championship several times, not always successfully. Rush succeeded on a few occasions in having the Championship venue moved from Sydney to the Clarence River, the first to shift the focus of sculling away from the capital city. From 1874, there was talk of Rush travelling to England to compete for the World Sculling Championship, but this did not eventuate. Instead, Edward Trickett won the World Championship on the Thames in 1876. Rush and Trickett in 1877 competed on the Parramatta River for the World Championship, but Rush lost this race.

Rush was unique in early Australian sculling in that he provided opportunities for others to compete and excel, by organising regattas and other rowing events, though financially he gained little. He raised and raced horses, organised athletic carnivals, and was a generous supporter of charities, churches, and schools. His background as the son of Irish tenant farmers, a class traditionally debarred by law from owning land and hence accumulating wealth, gave Rush little understanding of the management of money. Rush and his wife had fourteen children, and the Rush family lived in grand, if not extravagant style; most Rush enterprises were financed by mortgages or promissory notes. When the Banks Crash of 1893 came, Rush was not only deeply in debt, he did not even own the house he lived in.

Though his finances remained shaky, and his attempts at various business enterprises were unsuccessful, Rush continued to the end of his life to be interested and involved in the sport of rowing and sculling, organising carnivals and umpiring important matches. Rush died on his small farm in Hurstville, in December 1922.

Rush was the second son of William and Margery Rush née McGrath. He was born and spent his early years on a tenant farm in the Townland of Dooish, County Tyrone, in the Province of Ulster, now Northern Ireland. The Rushes were cattle-raisers, but their 26-acre holding was too small to support their family of sons, of whom four have been identified; there were reputedly ten Rush sons. Rush's birth-date is given as 3 January 1844.

Seeking employment and better opportunities than their native land offered, Rush and his brother John emigrated in 1860, arriving in Sydney in February 1861 per "Hotspur", as assisted immigrants. The brothers at first worked in Camperdown for their uncle Michael McGrath, a retail (or ‘cutting’) butcher, who sponsored their immigration. McGrath's brother, Thomas McGrath, was a Champion Sculler of the Colony of New South Wales.

Rush then spent some months as a drover in southern New South Wales, while his brother John, taking advantage of the new Crown Lands Act took up a selection on the Lower Clarence River in 1863. Rush soon joined his brother, at first working for other settlers as a stockman and slaughterman. In 1866, he selected land at Ashby and began business in his own right as a butcher.

During its early days of settlement, the Lower Clarence district lacked roads; virtually all communication within the area and with the outside world depended upon water transport. Lower Clarence settlers were by necessity good oarsmen, and several of them became national and even world champion scullers. Rush, who in his prime was over six feet tall and weighed 13 stone, soon distinguished himself as a powerful 'puller'. He rowed the heavy settlers’ boats, also known as 'butcher boats' delivering meat to Clarence River customers. By 1866, Rush was competing in various regattas regularly held among the riverside settlements of Ulmarra, Lawrence, Brushgrove and Rocky Mouth.

In 1869, Rush won the title of Champion of the Clarence from Prospero Coulon. The two men then joined forces as a rowing team and competed at the Anniversary Day Regatta of 26 January 1870 held at Port Jackson. Rush and Coulon contested several events, notably winning the single-scull and pair-oar races, and while the prize money they received was modest, their performances were noted by Sydney rowers who quickly challenged them to private matches for large stakes. Rush and Coulon remained in Sydney for some months after the January regatta, and continued to win as a team.

Rush then engaged in a series of one-on-one matches with the scullers William Hickey, the Australian champion, and his brother Richard Hickey. Rush, being unfamiliar with rowing outrigger wager boats, on that occasion failed to win the championship from Hickey, but returned to the Lower Clarence with prize money totalling over £700.

Rush set up as a store-keeper in the town of Rocky Mouth (Maclean). He operated a 'floating store' which was anchored at Chatsworth Island during the sugar-cane harvesting season when hundreds of itinerant labourers moved into the district. His steam launch "Jinnie Rush" was used as a mobile general store, delivering goods to farmers and villagers along the river. Rush also bought several racing boats, importing ‘riggers’ from England, as well as ordering them custom-made from local boat-builders.

Rush divided his energies between his business ventures and his sculling contests, organising as well as competing in regattas and 'aquatic carnivals', so much so, that he never achieved the solid prosperity of other Clarence River commercial pioneers. He added the Criterion Hotel and a string of race-horses to his business 'empire' at Rocky Mouth. As a former farm-boy from impoverished Ireland, where he might never have owned even a house plot, Rush now purchased many acres of Clarence River land, much of it having little value. Rush's Irish background of tenant farming gave little understanding of managing capital, property, or conducting a business career. Rush fits an Irish immigrant model offered by historian Patrick O'Farrell:

Rush set his sights on the Australian Sculling Championship, and in February 1873, won it from William Hickey in a controversial match: many claimed that Hickey 'sold' the race. Rush insisted that the championship be contested on his home waters of the Clarence River. To make this condition was his right as the holder of a current championship. Rush's enterprise in arranging for sponsors to provide substantial sums of prizes encouraged Australia's best scullers to compete. These events drew large crowds of spectators and gamblers to the Clarence River, especially the town of Grafton. Rush helped to organise, and took part in, aquatic contests held Grafton in 1874, and 1875 Two of these were held in conjunction with Grafton's celebration of the Queen's Birthday. Rush also organised an Intercolonial Regatta, held at Grafton 7 October 1874 at which he successfully defended his championship. However, at the Queen's Birthday regatta of 1875, Rush, who was ill, lost the race to Elias C. Laycock.

Edward 'Ned' Trickett sought to win the Australian Championship from Rush. Trickett was outclassed by Rush at the 1874 and 1875 events, but afterwards competed at numerous regattas and in private matches, and his form was consistently improving. Trickett and his backers demanded that Rush contest the title on the Parramatta River where he won it from Hickey. Rush declined to row anywhere but on the Clarence River, and demanded that the stakes be not less than £500. By 1875, Rush had a wife and five children to support, as well as many business commitments, and could not afford to undertake a sporting endeavour involving a major investment in time and money, unless there was a chance of an adequate financial return. Dozens of letters and articles in the Australian press debated the issue for nearly two years, as Trickett and his supporters became increasingly incensed at Rush's stalling. Finally, former champion sculler and now a prosperous publican and backer of sculling events, offered to finance an attempt by an Australian sculler to topple the current holder of the World Sculling Championship, Englishman Joseph Sadler. Rush declined to travel to London. Trickett agreed to the journey, went to the Thames, beat Sadler, and brought home the World Championship to Australia. Rush challenged Trickett for the World title. Trickett demanded that the race be rowed on the Parramatta River, and the match came off on the afternoon of 30 June 1877.

The Rush vs. Trickett match attracted the largest number of spectators ever before gathered at a Sydney sporting event, and the event is part of Australian sporting history. Estimates of the size of the crowd range from 30,000 to 70,000. Shops and government offices closed for the event, special trains brought people into the city. Steam-ships carrying spectators accompanied the competing champions, and hundreds of smaller, private vessels crowded the river. Special Regulations were published by the Marine Board of the NSW Government to deal with the problems of regulating maritime traffic during the event.

Rush was soundly beaten, Trickett winning by several lengths. A combination of factors led to Rush's defeat. Trickett had won a World Championship, at an international venue, and he brought home to Australia the polish and self-confidence that arose from this experience. Trickett trained on the Thames, the home of championship sculling, by expert coaches including Harry Kelley. Rush, though trained by the ex-champion Richard Green, remained in effect an amateur, largely self-taught. Rush invented his own sculling technique, based on sheer strength and endurance; his style was often deprecated. Trickett was three inches taller than Rush, and had a longer reach. Finally, Trickett learned on the Thames to use racing-craft fitted with a sliding seat, which allowed a more efficient use of the sculler's whole body when rowing. Before the race, Rush tried a sliding seat racing-shell, but could not discover any advantage, and chose instead to row a fixed-seat outrigger. Once the news of Rush's decision became public, betting odds changed dramatically, favouring Trickett, and the result of the race was considered almost a foregone conclusion. Still, Rush was known as an honest sportsman and was expected to put up a mighty effort to beat Trickett. And so he did, but without success.

The celebrations following the match recalled Trickett's return from his London victory in November 1876. The commercial exploitation of the event had been considerable, and thousands of pounds changed hands in wagers, but Trickett and Rush were out of pocket afterwards, Trickett claiming to be considerably so. The stakes were only £200, and expenses such as training, accommodation, advertising, new boats and incidentals made professional sculling an expensive business, as Rush argued beforehand. Trickett claimed a considerable shortfall in gate money from spectator ships, and a public benefit concert was held for him by actor George Darrell. Others spoke up for Rush as a major financial loser from his endeavour.

Most histories of professional Australian sculling commence with this event. By 1877, Australia had a vigorous interest in sport, and a class of professional athletes was emerging. Far from defeating him, the match of 30 June 1877 gave Rush new energy. After a year or two of retirement, he began to train and compete, mastering the sliding seat. He regained his Australian Championship in September 1881.

Elias C. Laycock was his 'chief rival'. Just a year younger than Rush, and like him, a large and powerful man, Laycock came to live on the Lower Clarence River around 1874. The two scullers met first at the Queen's Birthday regatta in Grafton in May 1874. Laycock, untried at boat racing, was beaten, though undeterred. During the following years, Laycock challenged Rush and others to sculling matches, until in April 1879, he beat World Champion Trickett at a State regatta. A series of matches followed to determine the current Australian sculling Champion, who would defend the World Title. Laycock beat Rush again and again, but Trickett eventually beat Laycock. Trickett once more went to the Thames to row against Ned Hanlan, but these preliminary contests in Sydney marked the end of Rush's World Championship ambitions.

In April 1881, Mason, Brothers offered a cash prize of £300, to be known as the Walker Whiskey Trophy. The cash prizes attracted so many entrants that a series of preliminary heats was held during September 1881. Rush took part, but was eliminated from the final race. Rush also rowed a number of private matches at this time, notably against J. J. Power, Harry Pearce, both of whom he beat, and Elias Laycock. The match against Laycock was for the Championship of Australia, which Laycock won with ease. Rush announced his retirement from sculling contests, not for the first or the last time.

Francis Punch was a younger brother of sculler, publican and promoter James 'Jem' Punch. Following the death of James, Francis bought Punch's Hotel. Punch sponsored a sculling prize and though this event did not attract any international entrants, Rush, Trickett and Laycock competed over the Championship course in early October 1882. Rush won not only the Punch Trophy but regained the Australian Championship.

Following his defeat in the Walker Whiskey Trophy events, a number of Rush's admirers and backers held a banquet in his honour, at which they presented him with an illuminated testimonial along with a sterling silver tea set, salver, and claret jug, valued at £200. These recognised his excellence as a sportsman, and his admirable qualities as a man. The salver was inscribed with a dedication, and each piece bore an inscribed caricature of Rush at the oars of an outrigger skiff. The silver items are now in the collection of the Clarence River Historical Society in Grafton, New South Wales.

Business and family commitments kept Rush busy for the next few years. He moved his home up-river from Maclean to Grafton, the effective 'capital' of the Clarence River district. Rush purchased a hotel and an adjacent store, and a riverside villa which he named 'Clarence House'. Rush took an active part in a great many community and sporting organisations. He was a founder of the Grafton Rowing Club and was several times an office-holder of the Clarence River Jockey Club. He continued to promote and take part in local regattas. One of these was the Clarence River Aquatic Carnival, held on 10 March 1883. The Carnival attracted thousands of spectators. The main event was Rush vs Laycock for a stake of £1000 and the Championship of Australia, which Laycock won convincingly. At a banquet later that week, Rush announced his retirement from professional sculling, but in December of that year, he rowed Trickett on the Parramatta River for a stake of £400, and lost convincingly. The newspapers praised Rush for his valour, but hinted that it was high time he retired.

Rush organised an Aquatic Carnival at Grafton, held on 2 January 1888, as part of the national celebrations marking the centenary of European settlement in Australia. The event attracted many up-and-coming scullers, including future World Champion Henry Searle, and even Ned Hanlan, who declined to compete due to illness, though he gave an exhibition of 'trick' sculling. Rush rowed his last professional match on this occasion, as a member of a pair-oar crew.

Rush remained interested and involved in the sport of sculling. He was in demand as a race official, for example, as a umpire or timekeeper, though he did little coaching.

In 1893, Rush moved his family to Sydney. The Banks Crash reduced many Australian businessmen to ruin, Rush included. His business was built on credit alone: Rush did not even own the Grafton house where he and his family lived, having mortgaged it from the man who sold it to him. He borrowed from local banks, using his store-keeping business as security. In Sydney, Rush took a lease on the York Hotel, at the corner of King and York Streets, which quickly became known as 'Mick Rush's Hotel', a popular venue for meetings of sportsmen. During the next decade, Rush kept several hotels in the city of Sydney, and operated also as a hotel broker.

Rush organised two major Sydney sculling events, held on the Parramatta River. The first was in August 1906 which included a Veterans' Race, and a Ladies' Double Sculling Championship. The Veterans' Race included many old sculling champions, with the exception of Trickett who had retired from sporting activity. In 1907, Rush organised an even more ambitious event, 'Rush's Rowing Carnival', held in February 1907. with a Veteran's Event, and an 'All Comers' Handicap' offering a prize of £50. Rush hoped to 'resuscitate an interest in rowing.' The Carnival attracted several promising scullers, including future champions Richard Arnst and Peter Kemp, but spectator attendance was 'very small'. Rush's last recorded participation in a major sculling event was as umpire of the World Championship match between William Webb and Charles Towns held 3 August 1907, over the Parramatta course.

Rush was a tall, well-built and powerful man. He was described many times in Australia's colonial press, his 'form' being of interest to sports fans. Journalists commented repeatedly on Rush's open and honest manner – 'the genial Mick Rush' – and his honourable conduct in the world of professional sculling, which earned a reputation for dishonesty. He possessed a strong social conscience, and was involved with many community and charitable projects. Some years after his death, a Grafton resident wrote, ‘Mick Rush was the best-hearted Irishman who ever broke bread, and helped many a poor beggar irrespective of colour or creed, and may his descendants follow in his footsteps.’

Rush married Anne Aby (known as Annie) Fitzpatrick on 18 September 1865, at St Mary's Cathedral, Sydney. Annie Fitzpatrick, born 1846, was the daughter of Irish ex-convicts. She bore Rush fourteen children, three of whom died in infancy and two in early adulthood. None of Rush's children became professional sportsmen, though three of his sons competed successfully in various amateur sculling contests and one as a cyclist. His daughter Emily was a well-known amateur singer during her youth. Two Rush sons fought in the Boer War, another went gold-prospecting on the Kalgoorlie gold-fields, and died there. Rush retired around 1913, to a cottage and ten acres of land in Hurstville, New South Wales. He died there on 22 December 1922, after a brief illness. Rush was interred in Sydney's Waverley Cemetery.





</doc>
<doc id="28085067" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28085067" title="Fast Five">
Fast Five

Fast Five (alternatively known as Fast & Furious 5 or Fast & Furious 5: Rio Heist) is a 2011 American heist action film directed by Justin Lin and written by Chris Morgan. It is the fifth installment in "The Fast and the Furious" franchise. It was released first in Australia on April 20, 2011, and then in the United States on April 29, 2011. "Fast Five" follows Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel), Brian O'Conner (Paul Walker), and Mia Toretto (Jordana Brewster) as they plan a heist to steal $100 million from corrupt businessman Hernan Reyes (Joaquim de Almeida) while being pursued for arrest by U.S. Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) agent Luke Hobbs (Dwayne Johnson).

While developing "Fast Five", Universal Studios deliberately departed from the street racing theme prevalent in previous films in the series, to transform the franchise into a heist action series involving cars. By doing so, they hoped to attract wider audiences that might otherwise be put off by a heavy emphasis on cars and car culture. "Fast Five" is considered the transitional film in the series, featuring only one car race and giving more attention to action set pieces such as gun fights, brawls, and the heist of $100 million. The production mounted a comprehensive marketing campaign, marketing the film through social media, virtual games, cinema chains, automobile manufacturers, and at NASCAR races.

"Fast Five" achieved financial success, breaking box office records for the highest-grossing April opening weekend and the second-highest spring opening weekend, and surpassing "Fast & Furious" (2009) to become the highest-grossing film in the franchise. "Fast Five" grossed over $625 million worldwide, making it number 66 on the all-time worldwide list of highest-grossing films, in unadjusted dollars, and the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2011.

"Fast Five" received mostly positive reviews, with critics praising the combination of comedy and "action sequences that toy idly with the laws of physics"; some labeled it the best film in the series. Johnson was singled out for praise in numerous reviews for his performance, with critics calling him "the best thing, by far, in "Fast Five"" and remarking that scenes shared by Johnson and Diesel were often the "best moments". Despite the positive response, many were critical of the film's running time, considering it too long, and others criticized the treatment of women, stating "[Women] cameo strikingly in buttock form. Others actually have first names." South American reviewers were critical of the film's portrayal of Rio de Janeiro as a haven for drug trafficking and corruption, labeling it a "stereotype". A sequel, "Fast & Furious 6", was released in May 2013 to box office success, surpassing "Fast Five" as the highest-grossing film in the franchise. Another sequel, "Furious 7", released in April 2015, soon surpassed "Fast & Furious 6", grossing over $1.5 billion worldwide.

When Dominic "Dom" Toretto is being transported to Lompoc Prison by bus, his sister Mia Toretto and friend Brian O'Conner lead an assault on the bus, causing it to crash and freeing Dom. While the authorities search for them, the trio escapes to Rio de Janeiro. Awaiting Dom's arrival, Mia and Brian join their friend Vince and other participants on a job to steal three cars from a train. Brian and Mia discover that agents from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) are also on the train and that the cars are seized property. When Dom arrives with the rest of the participants, he realizes that the lead participant, Zizi, is only interested in stealing one car - a Ford GT40. Dom has Mia steal the car herself before he and Brian fight Zizi and his henchmen, during which Zizi kills the DEA agents assigned to the vehicles. Dom and Brian are captured and brought to crime lord Hernan Reyes, the owner of the cars and Zizi's boss. Reyes orders the pair be interrogated to discover the location of the car, but they manage to escape and retreat to their safehouse.

While Brian, Dom, and Mia examine the car to discover its importance, Vince arrives and is caught trying to remove a computer chip from it. He admits he was planning to sell the chip to Reyes on his own, and Dom forces him to leave. Brian investigates the chip and discovers it contains the complete financial details of Reyes' criminal empire, including the locations of US$100 million in cash.

Diplomatic Security Service agent Luke Hobbs and his team arrive in Rio to arrest Dom and Brian. With the help of local officer Elena Neves, they travel to Dom's safehouse, but find it under assault by Reyes' men. Brian, Dom and Mia escape; Dom suggests they split up and leave Rio, but Mia announces she is pregnant with Brian's child. Dom agrees to stick together and suggests they steal the money from Reyes to start a new life. They organize a team to perform the heist: Han, Roman, Tej, Gisele, Leo, and Santos. Vince later joins the team after saving Mia from being captured by Reyes' men. The crew infiltrate one of Reyes' facilities and set fire to the money there, baiting him into consolidating his money at a single location - a secure vault inside a police station. 

Hobbs and his team eventually find and arrest Dom, Mia, Brian, and Vince. While transporting them to the airport for extradition to the United States, the convoy is attacked by Reyes' men, who kill Hobbs' team. Hobbs and Elena are saved by Dom, Brian, Mia, and Vince as they fight back and escape, but Vince is shot in the process and dies. Wanting to avenge his murdered team, Hobbs and Elena agree to help with the heist. The gang break into the police station and tear the vault holding Reyes' money from the building using their cars, dragging it through the city. After an extensive police chase, Dom makes Brian continue without him while he attacks the police and the pursuing Reyes, using the vault attached to his car to smash their vehicles. Brian returns and kills Zizi while Reyes is badly injured by Dom's assault. Hobbs arrives on the scene and executes Reyes to avenge his team. Though Hobbs refuses to let Dom and Brian go free, he gives them a 24-hour head start to escape on the condition they leave the vault as it is. However, the vault is empty as it had been switched during the chase. After splitting the cash (Vince's share is given to his family), they go their separate ways.

On a tropical beach, Brian and a visibly pregnant Mia relax. They are met by Dom and Elena. Brian challenges Dom to a final, no-stakes race to prove who is the better driver.

In a mid-credits scene, Hobbs is given a file by Monica Fuentes concerning the hijack of a military convoy in Berlin, where he discovers a recent photo of Dom's former girlfriend Letty, who had been presumed dead.


The central cast is rounded out by Puerto Rican singers Tego Calderón and Don Omar as Leo and Santos respectively, members of the heist team. Michael Irby plays Reyes' right-hand man Zizi. Alimi Ballard, Fernando Chien, Yorgo Constantine, and Geoff Meedy portray Hobbs' team members Fusco, Wilkes, Chato, and Macroy. Michelle Rodriguez appears in photographs as Letty Ortiz, Dominic's girlfriend who is presumed dead following the events of "Fast & Furious". Eva Mendes appears in an uncredited cameo as Agent Monica Fuentes, reprising her role from "2 Fast 2 Furious".

By February 3, 2010, it was confirmed that a fifth film, referred to as "Fast Five", was going into production in the "Fast and Furious" series, and that a sixth film was being planned. It was also confirmed that Diesel, Walker, writer Chris Morgan and producer Neal H. Moritz would all return to their roles for the new installment. Moritz said that, following the success of "Fast & Furious" (2009), which had reunited Diesel, Brewster, Walker and Rodriguez from the original film, the production wanted to bring them back again for the next one. Diesel felt that the story between the characters portrayed by himself and Walker should continue, envisioning it as three chapters, of which "Fast Five" would be the last. Diesel also wanted to bring back a variety of characters that had been in previous films without interacting, put them together and "have a lot of fun".

The production had originally intended to film on location in Rio de Janeiro. However, the Puerto Rican government offered tax incentives totaling nearly $11 million, influencing the decision to film there, using Puerto Rico to represent Rio de Janeiro.

Universal intended to transform the series from street-racing action into a series of heist films with car chases in the vein of "The Italian Job" (1969) and "The French Connection" (1971), with "Fast Five" as the transitional movie. In April 2011, Universal chairman Adam Fogelson said:
The question putting "Fast Five" and "Fast Six" together for us was: Can we take it out of being a pure car culture movie and into being a true action franchise in the spirit of those great heist films made 10 or 15 years ago?

Fogelson said that the racing aspect had put a "ceiling" on the number of people willing to see films in the series, and that, by turning it into a series where car driving ability is just one aspect of the film, he hoped to increase the series' audience.

Lin wanted to explore the elements of "freedom and family" in the film and collaborated with Morgan towards that ideal, both having worked together on previous installments of the franchise. Morgan worked with Diesel to produce a story arc that would further explore and develop Diesel's character. An idea involving heisting a large safe had been conceived by Morgan during the production of "Fast & Furious", but that film's premise did not work with how Morgan envisioned it. He later incorporated it into "Fast Five".

On a budget of $125 million, the shooting of "Fast Five" was scheduled for July and August 2010. Shooting had started by July 14, 2010, but it took longer than forecast: the film was still being shot in early November 2010.

Three film units worked simultaneously. The main cast were required to travel to Rio at the behest of Lin, who felt it important to understand the area and its culture to give the film a good sense of place. Diesel agreed that it was important to shoot key scenes in Brazil, commenting "we were able to shoot where other productions might not be able to shoot because our franchise has such good street cred."

The Rio film unit captured aerial shots of the city including Sugarloaf Mountain, Fort Copacabana, Ipanema Beach, the Dona Marta lookout point and the Christ the Redeemer statue. Establishing shots of the heist team members were taken as each arrived in Rio. Gibson was filmed arriving in character at Galeão International Airport but, when it became publicly known that a scene was being shot at the airport, the cast and crew were mobbed. A similar situation occurred while Ludacris was shooting a scene in which his character buys a car to drive around the city. A scene where the completed heist team walk down a beach was filmed in Copacabana.

The rooftop chase across favelas was filmed in Puerto Rico, where the production could have more control over the area. The main and second filming units began filming in and around the capital, San Juan. The island's mixture of tropical greenery and wide streets allowed the production to re-create the densely populated favelas of Rio while completing the larger action and external scenes without incident. Production designer Peter Wenham had the task of transforming Puerto Rico and Atlanta into the previously scouted Rio locations in four weeks, as the production deemed Rio unsuitable for filming many of the larger scenes. Wenham had to reinforce buildings to support the heavy camera equipment, and to alter the colors of more than 30 buildings in the city to make them suitable for filming. His team needed to alter the buildings and strew debris to make the area look disheveled and appear as a Rio shantytown. Wenham remarked that, though the development was difficult, in part due to the heat, it was "a walk in the park" compared with filming in the Rio favelas themselves. Wenham aimed to maintain a monochromatic color scheme for the film, with muted blacks and grays, including his choice of colors for the cars used. He only chose to add a multitude of colors in the favela set. The Teodoro Moscosco bridge connecting San Juan to neighboring Isla Verde was used to film the final showdown between Dom and Reyes, while a U.S. Navy base pier 60 miles outside San Juan stood in for the bridge for scenes involving the vault smashing cars. Action scenes were also filmed in the Hato Rey and Río Piedras districts of San Juan.

A foot pursuit in which Diesel, Brewster and Walker are chased across favela rooftops by Johnson and his team was filmed over the course of a week in the small hillside town of Naranjito, Puerto Rico. The scene was considered difficult to shoot, as pathways were slippery from moist tropical heat and the scene involved actors and stunt doubles running while avoiding dogs, chickens and other stray animals loose in the area. To capture the scene, a 420-foot cable-camera rig was used to allow for a fast moving, birds-eye view of the action, and cameras on cranes were set up on rooftops and in alleyways. Walker and Brewster made multiple takes of the conclusion of the scene, requiring them to jump nearly 30 feet from a building onto a waiting safety mat. In total the production employed 236 technicians, 13,145 extras, and generated 16,824 room nights at hotels, contributing $27 million to the Puerto Rican community.

Filming moved to Atlanta, Georgia for the final phase. Wenham and his team transformed a defunct train yard into an abandoned auto plant used by the protagonists as their headquarters. Redesigning the train yard took place over several months. It was required to allow enough space for stunt drivers to drive into the building, and it had to include an integrated lighting system. The design team removed walls, hauled out old railway cars, suspended rusted car parts and auto-plant car rails, and constructed smaller buildings within the main building to transform the site. With twenty-five pages of script to shoot in a limited time, cinematographer Stephen Windon and his team spent three weeks setting up a series of high-powered, motorized lights in the rafters of the building, that could be controlled remotely to allow lighting to be altered quickly while fully illuminating the set. An exterior scene involving Diesel and Walker attending a car party, involving several high-performance cars, was filmed near the Georgia Dome. The train heist scene was filmed in Rice, California over three weeks.

A brawl scene between Johnson's and Diesel's characters was considered difficult to choreograph. The characters were written to be equally formidable, so the fight was punctuated with moments of character development, as Moritz felt this made the fight more exciting. The scene required several weeks of rehearsal and more than a week of filming by the actors and their stunt doubles, who incurred several minor injuries.

The climactic vault heist required four weeks of preparation with every scene and camera angle determined in advance. The filmmakers hired stunt director Spiro Razatos and stunt coordinator Jack Gill to direct the second-unit action filming. The pair initially began research for the stunt by testing the capabilities of the prop vaults and the Dodge Chargers driven by Diesel and Walker. Filmed on the streets of Hato Rey, the chaotic scene demanded specific timing that had to be synchronized with the various character interactions also occurring during the scene. Razatos chose to use a series of camera cars including a crane-mounted camera atop a Porsche Cayenne, which allowed him to film from a variety of angles and heights while the vehicles were in motion, and a Subaru Impreza with a steel cage built around it that allowed for tracking shots. The Subaru's driver Allen Padelford would occasionally accidentally collide with the vault, creating a shower of sparks that inadvertently became useful footage. Padelford also developed a top-mount dual-drive system for the Chargers that allowed a stunt driver to control the vehicle from the roof, while the actor focused on their performance inside the car.

Six versions of the 8-foot high vault were built, each with specific uses. One of the vaults was a façade built onto the front of a semitruck and was used for filming close shots of the vault destroying street cars. Another vault was a reinforced, four-wheel self-drive vehicle that was connected to 30-foot cables and dragged through the streets of San Juan by the two stunt Dodge Chargers. The four-ton vault was driven by stunt driver Henry Kingi, who had to wear a temperature controlled suit to compensate for the temperatures within that could exceed 100 degrees. A scene where the vault tumbled as the cars rounded a corner was a practical effect, and the result was more violent than the filmmakers had anticipated. Over 200 vehicles were destroyed by the vault during filming. Several stunts had to be cut including a final scene that would have seen the vault hanging over the edge of the Teodoro Moscoso Bridge. This stunt was abandoned when it was determined that even the powerful Chargers would not be able to support the vault's weight.

The train heist presented several challenges. The filmmakers were required to effectively purchase a length of working railroad for filming and the trains necessary to ride the tracks. Then trucks had to be built that could race the train and meet the needs of the heist itself. Lin also required that the cars being carried on the train be able to jump out of the train at full speed. The scene took precise execution. The filmmakers chose to use cars they could cheaply replicate for the train heist—a 1972 De Tomaso Pantera, a 2007 Chevrolet Corvette GS Roadster, and a Ford GT40—to avoid the expense of replacing a genuine $2 million Ford GT40.

"Fast Five (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)" was released on iTunes on April 25, 2011, and on CD on May 3, 2011, by ABKCO Records. It features many reggaeton and rhythmic Latin tracks, including songs by Don Omar, Busta Rhymes and many others, with three pieces from Tyler's original score for the film: "Assembling the Team", "Mad Skills" and "Fast Five Suite". Music guide AllMusic awarded the album 3 stars out of 5, commenting that "The goal here is to accompany a picture that, as usual, is packed with driving sequences involving flashy cars, beautiful, scantily clad women, and muscled men. That goal is accomplished with this beat-heavy music and the gruff, aggressive Latin rapping." Ludacris collaborated with Slaughterhouse and Claret Jai for the soundtrack's lead single, "Furiously Dangerous".

The film score was released on May 3, 2011, by Varèse Sarabande. The release has 25 tracks and plays for 78 minutes. The score spent four weeks on the "Billboard" 200, peaking as high as number 60 and reaching number 24 on the digital albums chart and number 5 on the soundtrack-only chart.

The first trailer for "Fast Five" was released on Diesel's Facebook page on December 14, 2010, in what was believed to be the first ever use of this marketing approach. At the time, Diesel's page had over 20 million subscribers (one of the top five personal sites of celebrities), providing a wide audience for the trailer. Following this debut, other members of the cast with personal social media platforms released the teaser trailer to their own fans.

The Facebook game "Car Town" by Cie Games and the theater chain Regal Entertainment Group (REG) collaborated with Universal in a cross-media marketing promotion. "Car Town" allowed players to view the trailer for the film in an , in-game drive-in theater and race around a virtual Rio de Janeiro. The game also featured missions and locations based on the plot of the film, while allowing players to race against "Fast Five" characters and take part in a bank heist. REG offered players of "Car Town" the ability to purchase tickets in-game via Fandango for films at REG theaters. By buying these tickets in-game, players were given promotional codes which in turn allowed them to unlock a virtual 1970s Dodge Charger, used by Diesel's character in the original film. REG promoted the partnership between the film and the game in their theaters across 37 states, online and through social media, while Universal promoted it via their own Facebook, Twitter and YouTube sites. In October 2011, it was claimed that over 200 million races had taken place within the virtual Rio de Janeiro environment in the six months since the campaign's April launch.

Automobile manufacturer Dodge collaborated with Universal in marketing the film, supplying several Dodge Chargers to use in it. The partnership with Dodge included the "Fast Five" Dodge Charger driven by Robby Gordon in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series throughout April 2011 – the opening month of "Fast Five". Dodge also sponsored the world premiere of the film in Rio de Janeiro.

The premiere of "Fast Five" took place on April 15, 2011, at the Cinépolis Lagoon theater in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It was hosted by actress Susie Castillo and sponsored by car manufacturer Dodge.

"Fast Five" grossed $209.8 million (33.5%) in the United States and Canada and $416.3 million (66.5%) in other territories for a total of $626.1 million. Worldwide, it is the seventy-first highest-grossing film, the seventh highest-grossing 2011 film, the fourth highest-grossing film in the "Fast & Furious" series (behind "Fast & Furious 6", "The Fate of the Furious", and "Furious 7"), and the fifth highest-grossing Universal film. It achieved a worldwide opening weekend of $109.6 million. The film reached a peak of number 55 on the list of all-time highest-grossing films worldwide in October 2011. It became the highest-grossing film of the series in worldwide grosses (as well as separately in the US and Canada, and outside the US and Canada) but was out-grossed in all three cases by "Fast & Furious 6".

"Fast Five" is the ninth highest-grossing 2011 film, the third highest-grossing film of the "Fast and Furious" franchise (behind "Fast 6" and "Furious 7") and the fifth highest-grossing Universal film. It was initially released in Australia on Wednesday, April 20, 2011 – nine days before the release date in North America – followed by releases in the UK, South Korea and New Zealand. The earlier start in these countries was timed to coincide with their Easter holidays and avoided competition from forthcoming summer films, although this placed it in direct competition with "Thor" in some countries. By the end of its opening weekend, the film had accrued a total of $23.4 million from these countries. On its second weekend, "Fast Five" earned $46.3 million across 3,139 theaters in 14 countries, ranking first at the box office in each of its ten new markets. For the overall weekend, it ranked second behind "Thor". In the third weekend of release, "Fast Five" topped the box office in a further 44 countries, playing in a total of 6,979 theaters across 58 countries. It ranked first during the weekend with $85.8 million. It set an opening-weekend record in the United Arab Emirates ($1.65 million), holding this record for two weeks before being out-grossed by "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" ($2.24 million).

Across all markets, the film scored Universal's highest-grossing opening weekend in Russia, Spain, Turkey, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, France, India, Italy, Malaysia, Mexico, the Netherlands, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates and Vietnam.

"Fast Five" is the third highest-grossing film in the "Fast and Furious" franchise (behind "Fast 6" and "Furious 7"), the sixteenth highest-grossing Universal film, the sixth highest-grossing 2011 film, the second highest-grossing heist/caper film, behind "Inception", and the second highest-grossing car-racing film, behind "Cars". According to Box Office Mojo, "Fast Five" is one of the most successful sequels of 2011, when taking into account that it is one of few to have outperformed the immediately-preceding instalment of its franchise in the US and Canada.

"Fast Five" opened on April 29, 2011, in 3,644 theaters, It took $3.8 million in midnight showings, setting new records for the "Fast and the Furious" series and Universal (both records overtaken by "Fast 6"). By the end of its opening day, it had accrued a total of $34.4 million (including midnight earnings), setting an April opening-day record, replacing "Fast & Furious" ($30.1 million), and marking the third largest Friday outside of the summer and holiday period, behind "The Hunger Games" and "Alice in Wonderland". In total, "Fast Five" earned $86.2 million during its opening weekend, an average of $23,655 per theater, with IMAX showings contributing over $8 million. It thus set an opening-weekend record for the "Fast and Furious" series, for Universal, (both records overtaken by "Fast 6") and for films released in April (the record was surpassed in 2014 by ""). It also achieved the third-largest spring opening, behind "The Hunger Games" and "Alice in Wonderland". The film also set an opening-weekend record among films starring Diesel, Walker, Brewster, Johnson, Moritz and Lin, records overtaken in all cases by "Fast 6".

The film opened dropped 62% on its second weekend, earning $32.4 million, and ranking second behind "Thor". This result was partially attributed to the reduction in IMAX and large-format screens showing the film (reduced from 244 to 20), since IMAX only contributed $510,000 to the film's second-weekend gross. On June 4, 2011, 37 days after release in the US, the film became the first of 2011 to accrue more than $200 million. The film received a one-week re-release in IMAX theaters on September 30, 2011.

"Fast Five" received positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 77%, based on 193 reviews, with an average rating of 6.4/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Sleek, loud, and over the top, "Fast Five" proudly embraces its brainless action thrills and injects new life into the franchise." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 67 out of 100, based on 29 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".

Roger Ebert gave the film 3 out of 4 stars, praising it as "a skillfully assembled 130 minutes at the movies, with actors capable of doing absurd things with straight faces, and action sequences that toy idly with the laws of physics", while Richard Corliss of "Time" considered it "maybe the first great film of the post-human era". "The New York Times" said it deftly combined action and humor, stating "The only time you won't be watching the screen is when your eyes have squeezed shut because you're laughing so hard." "The Telegraph" appreciated the presence of Johnson and Diesel together, calling it a "cosmic event", and added that director Lin had revitalized the series, saying "the start and finish here, defying every imaginable law of physics, are series highs." "Empire" also heaped praise on Johnson, saying "How to re-ignite an ageing franchise? Drop [Johnson] on it. The best thing, by far, in "Fast Five" ... Dwayne Johnson hulks through the movie leaving testosterone trails in his wake." However, "Empire" took the view that the film itself was "not, by any normal criteria, a good film", arguing that it was too long, although conceding that the action scenes, in particular the final car chase, made the film "the most entertaining in the series." Anna Smith of "Time Out London" also commented that the film was too long and criticized the simplistic characters and dialog, but she called the film "slick" and stated that these criticisms could be overlooked because "it doesn't take itself too seriously." "Variety" focused on the roles of Johnson and Diesel, lamenting the current lack of 1980s-style "brawny" leading men and of the "manly men" typical of the 1950s and 1960s, and calling their pairing "a welcome injection of tough-guy vigor". "Variety" commented that, based on "Fast Five", a "sixth entry could be something worth waiting for". "The New Yorker" called the action scenes "spectacular", praising director Lin by saying his "direction and the sharp editing never confuse or lose momentum", but also found the film too long and criticized the dialog, labeling it "subpar "Ocean's Eleven"-style banter". On the characters, "The New Yorker" considered Walker and Diesel "serviceable", but singled out Johnson for praise for bringing a "hip, comic knowingness to his role ... his enjoyment is infectious and keeps the movie speeding along."

"Total Film" welcomed the return of Ludacris and Tyrese Gibson to "[inject] the film with much-needed laughs" and felt that Johnson fit into the established cast with ease, though it believed the film itself was "no mould-breaker." Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone", who disliked the previous movies, gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4, praising the transformation of the series into a heist film ("Damn it, it works"), commenting favorably on scenes between Johnson and Diesel, and judging that ""Fast Five" will push all your action buttons, and some you haven't thought of." The "Los Angeles Times" felt that scenes shared by Diesel and Johnson were the "best moments" and appreciated the humor, but considered the pacing a "strange mix", switching between exposition, comedy scenes and then sudden action. The reviewer echoed other critics' sentiments concerning the running time of the film, but concluded that "the sheer audacity of "Fast Five" is kind of breathtaking in a metal-twisting, death-defying, mission-implausible, B-movie-on-steroids kind of way", labeling it the "best" of the series.

Both "Empire" and "Variety" noted that the final chase scene of "Fast Five" contained allusions to "Bad Boys II" (2003): Variety stated that the scene "seems inspired in part by a similarly spectacular scene in "Bad Boys II""; "Empire" said that it "nearly out-Bad-Boys-2s Bad Boys 2".

Not all reviews were positive, however. Film4 criticized both the film's long running time and its treatment of female characters, remarking "[Females] cameo strikingly in buttock form. Others actually have first names". But Film4 praised Johnson's role as DSS agent Luke Hobbs, saying he "provides a more credible anti-antagonist to our anti-heroes than the straight up villains can manage". The "Boston Herald" gave a more mixed reaction: it derided the lack of realism as removing any sense of threat to the protagonists, but conceded that "these films may be robustly anti-intellectual and deplorably commercialized, but they are the envy of the rest of the world." Despite giving the film a positive review and praising the action, "The Hollywood Reporter" was critical of its stars, saying "it's clear the budget wasn't used on acting lessons for the cast." The "New York Post"s Kyle Smith gave the film a negative review, criticizing the shortage of car-related action before the finale and calling it less a "vroomer" and more a "knucklehead "Ocean's Eleven"". Smith went on to call the film's villain Reyes (Almeida) "unforgivably dull" and considered the long running time a result of taking "that long to read every item in the cliché dictionary." "Time Out New York" stated that "The "Fast and the Furious" movies haven't exactly gotten better as they've gone along" but gave the director a backhanded compliment, saying "Justin Lin, taking his third turn behind the franchise's wheel, is at least a competent hack." Ebert was more complimentary, saying "Justin Lin is emerging as a first-rate director in this second-rate genre" and "Rolling Stone" managed "Justin Lin, who misdirected the last two sequels, finds his pace this time, staging dynamite action."

Brazilian reviewers criticized the use of Rio de Janeiro in the film, claiming it was stereotyped as "dominated by heavily armed drug traffickers, corrupt police, and sexy women". "O Globo" accused the producers of using "aerial shots and quick editing" to "deceive the viewer" into believing that the criminal acts take place in Rio. "Globo" also reacted negatively to the use of "foreigners" to represent Brazilians, "speaking Portuguese with laughable accents". "Veja" agreed with "O Globo", saying, "The city of Rio and the Rio Film Commission supported the production. But the image that will spread across the world is exactly what the city doesn't want."

Tyler's score for "Fast Five" earned him an award at the 2011 BMI Film Music Awards. The marketing components of "Fast Five" were nominated for three Golden Trailer Awards, winning one for Best Summer Blockbuster 2011 TV Spot. For the 2011 Teen Choice Awards, "Fast Five" received five nominations, including Choice Action Movie and Choice Action Movie Actress. Three of the five available nomination slots for Choice Action Movie Actor were taken by actors from "Fast Five": Vin Diesel, Dwayne Johnson and Paul Walker. The film ultimately received one Teen Choice Award, for Choice Action Movie. The film received two nominations for the 2011 People's Choice Awards for Favorite Action Movie, and Favorite Action Movie Star for Diesel. Diesel was nominated for an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actor in a Motion Picture. The film's sound and music editing was nominated for a Golden Reel Award for Sound Effects and Foley in a Feature Film by the Motion Picture Sound Editors society. The film also received two Saturn Award nominations from the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films for Best Action/Adventure Film and Best Editing for Kelly Matsumoto, Fred Raskin, and Christian Watner.

In December, 2011, Richard Corliss ranked the film number 10 on his list of the Top 10 Best Movies of 2011, saying, "A carnival of roguish heroes and pretty girls, car chases and cliffhangers, "Fast Five" is as much a tribute as "The Artist" or "Hugo" to the cinema's primal thrills." "Empire" placed the film number 20 on its list of the Top 20 Films of 2011, while IGN named it the "Best Action Movie" of 2011. "Fast Five" was listed as the number 1 most illegally downloaded film of 2011 on BitTorrent with approximately 9.3 million downloads.

On August 2, 2011, USA Network purchased the rights to the United States network premiere of "Fast Five". The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the United Kingdom on September 5, 2011, and in the United States on October 4, 2011, in 2.35:1 aspect ratio with DTS HD Master Audio 5.1 sound. A triple pack was also released containing a Blu-ray, DVD, and digital copy of the film in either Blu-ray or DVD packaging. The Blu-ray versions contains several exclusive additional features, including behind-the-scenes footage, cast and crew interviews, a "virtual car garage" that provides further details on the vehicles used in the production, and music tracks from the film. Both the DVD and the Blu-ray contain a theatrical and extended cut of the film, director commentary, deleted scenes, a gag reel and features on the three central characters. Commenting on the extended cut, Lin said "this is the version that I prefer." During first week sales in the United States the DVD was the number 1 selling DVD, the number 1 rental DVD, and the number 2 selling Blu-ray disc behind the Blu-ray re-release of "The Lion King". 57% of the total first week disc sales of "Fast Five" were the Blu-ray disc version.

To promote the release of the DVD and Blu-ray, Universal Studios Home Entertainment sponsored the first race of the NASCAR "Camping World Truck Series", at the Chicagoland Speedway. The event, renamed as the ""Fast Five 225"", took place on September 16, 2011, with Gibson and Brewster as Grand Marshals; Gibson sang the American national anthem for the event and Brewster acted as honorary starter. The event served as the kickoff for the first weekend of the Chase for the Sprint Cup and was won by Austin Dillon. The deal marked the first time that a film promotion had been allowed to take over a NASCAR race as a title sponsor. Continuing the partnership with "Car Town", the game was used as the exclusive means of pre-ordering the Blu-ray/DVD combo release at Walmart, via players clicking on a Walmart-themed truck, which in turn provided the player with "Fast Five" branded in-game rewards.
Fast Five will be released on 4K UHD Blu-Ray on June 11 2019.

A sixth film in "The Fast and The Furious" series was planned in February 2010 as development on "Fast Five" began, and in April 2011, it was confirmed that Morgan had begun work on a script for the potential sixth film. Diesel and Moritz returned as producers for the film and Lin would return to direct. "Fast & Furious 6" was released on May 24, 2013.

Documents



</doc>
<doc id="28146264" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28146264" title="Philadelphia transit strike of 1944">
Philadelphia transit strike of 1944

The Philadelphia transit strike of 1944 was a sickout strike by white transit workers in Philadelphia that lasted from August 1 to August 6, 1944.
The strike was triggered by the decision of the Philadelphia Transportation Company (PTC), made under prolonged pressure from the federal government in view of significant wartime labor shortages, to allow black employees of the PTC to hold non-menial jobs, such as motormen and conductors, that were previously reserved for white workers only. On August 1, 1944, the eight black employees being trained as streetcar motormen were due to make their first trial run. That caused the white PTC workers to start a massive sickout strike.
The strike paralyzed the public transport system in Philadelphia for several days, bringing the city to a standstill and crippling its war production. Although the Transport Workers Union (TWU) was in favor of allowing promotions of black workers to any positions they were qualified for, and opposed the strike, the union was unable to persuade the white PTC employees to return to work. (However, historian James Wolfinger asserts that the PTC locked workers out in solidarity with the hate strikers, turning the transit depots over to them and refusing to allow union workers to resume work.) On August 3, 1944, under the provisions of the Smith–Connally Act, President Franklin D. Roosevelt authorized Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson to take control of the Philadelphia Transportation Company, and Major-General Philip Hayes was put in charge of its operations. After several days of unsuccessful negotiations with the strike leaders, Hayes issued an order that the striking workers return to work on August 7, 1944, and that those refusing to comply be fired, stripped of their military draft deferment, and denied job availability certificates by the War Manpower Commission for the duration of the war. This ultimatum proved effective and on August 7 the strike ended and the strikers returned to work. The black workers, whose pending promotions to non-menial jobs triggered the strike, were allowed to assume those jobs.

During the strike, despite considerable tensions, the city of Philadelphia remained mostly calm and there were no major outbreaks of violence. All of the city's newspapers editorialized against the strike and the public was, by and large, opposed to the strike as well. Several of the strike leaders, including James McMenamin and Frank Carney, were arrested for violating the anti-strike act. The NAACP played an active role both in pressuring the PTC and the federal government to institute fair hiring practices at the PTC for several years before the strike, and in maintaining the calm during the strike itself.

The strike received considerable attention in the national media. The Philadelphia transit strike of 1944 is one of the most high-profile instances of the federal government invoking the Smith–Connally Act. The Act had been passed in 1943 over President Roosevelt's veto.

Since even before the official entry of the United States into World War II in December 1941, Philadelphia had been one on the major industrial war production centers in the U.S. By 1944 Philadelphia was regarded as the second largest war production center in the country (after Los Angeles). During that period the black population of the city grew substantially, and tensions with the predominantly white population began to increase. The Philadelphia Transportation Company (PTC) ran the city's huge public transportation system, including subways, buses and trolleys; by the time of the strike, it carried over one million people per day. By 1944, the PTC's eleven thousand strong workforce included 537 black employees. However, the PTC's black workers had been restricted to holding menial jobs; none were allowed to serve as conductors or motormen – positions that were reserved for white employees. As early as August 1941, black employees started pressuring the PTC for fairer employment practices that would allow upgrading of black workers to the more prestigious jobs reserved for whites. Their efforts were rebuffed by PTC management, who claimed that the current union contract contained a clause prohibiting any significant change in employment practices and customs without the union's approval (although the contract said nothing about race). The leader of the Philadelphia Rapid Transit Employees Union (PRTEU), Frank Carney, proved to be equally reticent and claimed that he was not authorized by the union members to consider a request to allow promotions of black employees.

The black PTC employees enlisted the help of the NAACP and started lobbying the federal authorities, particularly the Fair Employment Practices Commission (FEPC), to intervene. The Fair Employment Practices Commission, created by an executive order of the President in 1941, was charged with ensuring non-discrimination employment practices by government contractors. Initially it was a fairly weak agency, but its authority was significantly strengthened in 1943 by a new executive order that required all government contracts to have a non-discrimination clause. As the war progressed, the manpower shortages were getting more severe. In January 1943 the PTC requested 100 white motormen from the United States Employment Service (USES), which was a part of the War Manpower Commission (WMC). The WMC, aware that PTC had a pool of black employees seeking upgrading, asked the PTC to allow hiring of black employees for the vacant motormen positions. The PTC refused, again citing the "customs clause" of its union contract. After a complaint from the NAACP, the matter landed at the FEPC, headed at the time by Malcolm Ross.
The FEPC made a series of unsuccessful attempts to convince the PTC management and the union leadership to change their stance and to allow promotions of black employees to non-menial jobs. The PTC eventually conceded that it would be willing to go along with the government's request and "employ Negroes, provided they are acceptable to fellow-workers", but the PRTEU leadership, particularly Frank Carney, staunchly resisted. On November 17, 1943, the FEPC issued a directive requiring that PTC end its discriminatory employment practices and allow blacks to hold non-menial jobs. The directive also required the PTC to review all job applications from June 1941 and redress earlier employment abuses based on racial discrimination. The union immediately protested and requested a public hearing, which took place on December 8, 1943. At the hearing the union tried to make the argument that hiring blacks who had applied for the non-menial positions since June 1941 but were denied would adversely affect the seniority rights of the presently employed white workers. Malcolm Ross rejected that argument, pointing out that the seniority rights only begin when an employee is actually hired for a particular job. On December 29, 1943, FEPC issued a second directive, reinforcing the first one.

In an attempt to deflect the pressure, Carney and PRTEU contacted Virginia congressman Howard W. Smith, who at the time was the Chair of the House Committee to Investigate Executive Agencies. Smith, known for his segregationist views and eager to embarrass and possibly destroy the FEPC, quickly scheduled a hearing. In the meantime, the union informed the PTC that it refused to comply with the FEPC order, and the PTC management told Ross that, given the union's position, the PTC would not comply with the FEPC directive either. The hearing in front of Smith's committee took place on January 11, 1944. The hearing was inconclusive, with Ross reiterating the FEPC position, and the union representatives falling back on the "customs clause" and their claims about seniority issues. Several white workers testifying at the hearing predicted that there would be trouble and unrest if promotions of black employees at the PTC were allowed: "We are not going to accept them [the blacks] as fellow workers. ... We are not going to work with them. If anybody believe it, let them try it". A petition, signed by 1776 workers, presented at the hearing, read: "Gentlemen: We, the white employees of the Philadelphia Transportation Co., refuse to work with Negroes as motormen, conductors, operators and station trainmen".

After the January 11 congressional hearing, Ross delayed enforcement of the FEPC directive to await the outcome of the upcoming union elections. The PRTEU contract with the PTC was expiring on February 11, 1944 and a union election was called for March 14, 1944. Apart from PRTEU, which was still staunchly opposed to promotions of black employees, there were two other unions competing for the right to represent PTC workers: the Transport Workers Union (TWU), which was a Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) affiliate, and the Amalgamated Association of Street and Electric Railway and Motor Coach Employees of America, an American Federation of Labor (AFL) affiliate. The TWU said that it would allow promotions of black employees while the Amalgamated Association stayed silent on the matter. The PRTEU leadership tried to campaign on the race issue during the union elections, but the topic was overshadowed by other issues, such as the details of a new contract with the PTC. After a bitter campaign, the TWU won the union elections, receiving more votes than both of the other unions combined. At the time of the elections many white workers perceived the contract issue to be more important, where the TWU was promising more attractive terms, and they did not consider promotions of black employees a realistic possibility. Despite the TWU victory, animosities from white workers towards the black employees remained and were largely unabated. The negotiations between the TWU and the PTC on a new contract dragged on, and in the absence of a contract the company continued to resist implementing the FEPC directives.

In view of growing labor shortages, on July 1, 1944 the War Manpower Commission made an important decision, ruling that from then on all hiring of male employees in the country was to be done through the United States Employment Service (USES). By that time the USES followed strict anti-discrimination employment practices. The PTC management finally gave in and within a week posted notices about available skilled positions that would be open to all applicants, regardless of race. The company accepted eight black applicants (three from the USES and five from its own ranks) to train as streetcar coachmen. Their training was to take place in late July, and they were to start taking an empty streetcar on the lines from August 1. It was that impending trial run of the streetcars by the eight black trainees that finally triggered the strike.

As the news spread, resentment among the white PTC workers began to grow. There were postings on PTC bulletin boards urging non-compliance with the new policy, and a petition was circulated calling for a strike to protest job upgrades of black employees. There were also several meetings called by agitators for the strike to discuss the plan of action. Frank Carney played an active role in these meetings. At the last such meeting, on July 31, Carney announced that the "D-Day" for white workers had arrived. The TWU and the NAACP representatives warned the PTC about impending trouble, but the company management ignored those warnings, maintaining that there was nothing to fear.

At 4:00 a.m. on August 1, 1944 most trolleys, buses and subways in Philadelphia stopped running. Strike agitators blocked access to PTC depos with vehicles and advised the arriving workers of a sickout strike. By noon of August 1 the entire PTC transportation system was paralyzed.
James McMenamin, a veteran PTC white motorman, organized a 150-member strike steering committee and became one of the main leaders of the strike. Frank Carney, the ousted union boss, was another key strike leader. At the end of the day the strikers held a large meeting, attended by more than 3,500 employees, outside the PTC carbarn on Luzerne Street. The racial rhetoric was escalating. At the meeting, Frank Carney declared that driving a streetcar was a white man's job and said: "put the Negroes back where they belong, back on the roadway". McMenamin declared that "the strike was a strictly black and white issue".

The PTC's response to the strike was anemic and was interpreted by some contemporary observers and later historians as tacitly supporting the strike. Arthur Mitten, chairman of the company's Industrial Relations Division, stopped by the Luzerne carbarn and asked the workers to return to work. Subsequently, he suggested that WMC temporarily suspend the non-discrimination order, and even brought a pile of freshly printed fliers with a suspension announcement to the WMC offices. However, the WMC officials refused to approve suspension of the FEPC order and Mitten's suspension fliers were not distributed. On the morning of August 1, PTC officials immediately shut down the high-speed lines, even before the strike had spread, and instructed the company supervisors to stop selling tickets. The PTC left its carbarns open, which allowed the strikers to use the carbarns as rallying points and coordinating centers for their activities. The company also cancelled the regularly scheduled meeting of its executive committee, where the response to the strike could have been discussed, and refused to join the TWU in a radio broadcast urging the strikers to return to work.

The TWU officials denounced the strike and pleaded with the PTC employees to resume work, but without success. The city's mayor, Bernard Samuel, closed all alcohol-selling establishments in an effort to prevent drunken crowds. Governor Edward Martin followed suit and closed the state liquor stores in the area. The city deployed its full police force, with extra police officers posted at major intersections and other vital points. The NAACP, as well as other black civic groups, worked energetically to maintain calm among the black people of Philadelphia. They distributed more than 100,000 posters in black sections of the city, which read "Keep Your Heads and Your Tempers! ... Treat other people as you would be treated".

The strike continued on August 2. About 250 TWU members initiated a back-to-work movement but were quickly forced to back down by the strike's leaders and supporters. At the end of the day, William H. Davis, head of the War Labor Board, wrote to President Roosevelt that the WLB had no jurisdiction over the situation and that it was up to the President to intervene. Representatives of the WMC and the FEPC had reached a similar conclusion about the need for the President's intervention the day before.

The Roosevelt administration felt that it needed to act quickly to stop the strike. War plants in Philadelphia reported debilitating absentee rates in their workforce due to the strike, which was causing significant damage to the city's war production. The military reported delays in delivery of fighter planes, radar equipment, flamethrowers and numerous other items. Rear Admiral Milo Draemel complained that the strike so significantly slowed the war production in the area that "it could delay the day of victory". The strike was also negatively affecting America's image abroad, particularly in Europe, where the U.S. was fighting Nazi Germany under the slogans of freedom and racial justice. Germany, as well as Japan, were apt to use every instance of racial unrest in the U.S. for propaganda purposes. Official reaction by the White House was somewhat delayed by the President Roosevelt's absence: at the time he was on a warship on his way from Hawaii to the Aleutian islands. At 7:45 p.m. on August 3, in his twenty-fifth seizure order under the Smith–Connally Act, President Roosevelt authorized the Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson to take control of the Philadelphia Transportation Company. Major-General Philip Hayes, head of the Army's Third Service Command, was put in charge of the PTC's operations.
The troops were elements from the 309th regiment of the 78th infantry division stationed in Virginia. The men were bivouacked in Fairmount Park, George's Hill, above Parkside Ave., West Philadelphia. Hayes acted quickly to take control of the situation. He posted the President's order on the PTC carbarns and announced that the Army hoped to avoid using the troops and would try to rely on the local and state police to the extent possible. Hayes also announced that he had no intention of canceling or suspending the WMC hiring order. At 10:00 p.m. on August 3, mistakenly believing that the government had agreed to the strikers' demands, McMenamin declared the end of the strike. The mistake was quickly discovered, and over 1000 strikers voted in the early hours of August 4 to continue the strike.

On August 4 limited transportation service resumed but largely dwindled as the day progressed. Hayes and his staff warned the strikers about the severe penalties provided by the Smith–Connally Act for disruption of the war production: the instigators could be subject to a fine of $5,000, one year in prison, or both. This prospect was made more real when the United States Attorney General Francis Biddle started an inquiry into possible violations of federal laws by the strike organizers. On August 4 the strike committee again voted to continue the strike, but, in view of the possible Smith–Connally Act penalties, told the workers to make up their own minds and follow the committee if they chose. The maneuver worked and the strike continued.

On Saturday, August 5, with his patience exhausted, Hayes moved 5,000 army troops into the city. He announced that they would operate all idle PTC vehicles and ride as guards on active vehicles. He also made a plea to the strikers to support the war effort: "We cannot kill any Germans or Japs with the troops who drive transit vehicles in Philadelphia". Later on August 5, Hayes issued an ultimatum to the strikers, which was posted at all carbarns. The PTC workers were given a deadline of 12:01 a.m. on August 7 to resume their work. Those who refused would be fired and refused the WMC job availability certificates for the duration of the war; those between the ages of 18 and 37 would also lose their military draft deferments. The Justice Department obtained federal warrants for McMenamin, Carney and two other strike leaders; they were quickly arrested, and McMenamin finally told his followers to return to work on Monday, August 7, as the government demanded. However, he expressed no regret for his actions before and during the strike.

The strike was essentially over. On Sunday, August 6, the PTC workers signed cards pledging to return to work on Monday. 
On Monday, August 7, normal PTC operations resumed and the absentee rate was significantly lower than on a typical work day before the strike.
As the strike ended, twenty-four strikers were dropped from the PTC rolls and six were immediately drafted into the military.

The enhanced police presence throughout the city during the strike helped to keep the calm, and the restrained approach of the police officers generally won praise from all sides, even though many of the policemen were seen as sympathetic to the striking white workers. The administration of Philadelphia's Republican mayor Bernard Samuel was also seen as quietly sympathetic to the strikers. Throughout the strike, Mayor Samuel, who was also a member of the PTC board of directors, avoided any attempts of mediation. He refused to call a meeting of the PTC board of directors or to discuss the crisis with the TWU leaders. The mayor denied police protection to the two TWU officials who were willing to travel throughout the city and advocate an end to the strike. Samuel also refused to grant air time to War Production Board representatives who wanted to make a radio plea to end the strike. On August 2, the mayor declined, without an explanation, the NAACP request for permission to send two sound-trucks into black neighborhoods to broadcast appeals for calm. The city's black population felt disappointed and disenchanted with the actions of the local administration.

Except for a few incidents, the city of Philadelphia remained calm during the strike and, despite considerable fears of race riots, there were no major outbreaks of violence.
At the start of the strike there were some incidents of vandalism and store window smashing, and the police arrested about 300 people, most of them blacks. In a nastier episode, three white motorists drove a car through a black neighborhood and, without stopping or warning, shot at a 13-year-old black boy, who received non-critical injuries. The most visible episode of unrest came when a black war factory worker, whose brother was in the Army, threw a paperweight at the Liberty Bell shouting "Liberty Bell, oh Liberty Bell—liberty, that's a lot of bunk!" He was arrested and sent by the magistrate for a psychiatric evaluation. However, by and large, calm prevailed and there were no major outbreaks of violence and no deaths or critical injuries among the public.

The public opinion and the media in the city were overwhelmingly against the strikers. All the city's newspapers ran editorials denouncing the strike, which was perceived as unpatriotic and harmful to the war effort; a number of editorials also decried the racial nature of the strike. Most of the letters to the editor condemned the strike. The radio stations in the city denounced the strike as well, as did the national press. The New York Times wrote: "It would be hard to find in the whole history of American labor a strike in which so much damage has been done for so base a purpose". The Wall Street Journal editorial condemned the strike but stated that the powers exercised by the government in ending the strike were only justified by the war time conditions. The Los Angeles Times and the Chicago Tribune, while denouncing the strike, tried to put the blame for causing it on the CIO-affiliated Transport Workers Union, and accused the Roosevelt administration of acting too slowly because of its support for the CIO.

While critical of the strike, the public did not necessarily support the cause of equal employment opportunities for black workers. A public opinion poll conducted in Philadelphia during the strike showed that only a slim majority of the city's population felt that blacks should be hired as motormen and conductors, but that a significant majority opposed having a strike over this issue.

The strikers directed much of their anger at the federal government, which they accused of overreaching and of refusing to listen to legitimate complaints by white workers.
This view resonated with many white Philadelphians and with conservative politicians nationally. On August 8, Senator Richard Russell from Georgia, one of the leaders of the conservative coalition in Congress, gave a seventy-minute speech on the Senate floor, blaming the FEPC for causing the strike. Russell finished his speech by calling the FEPC "the most dangerous force in existence in the United States today".
Some of the newspapers in the South also blamed the incident on the Roosevelt administration and even on First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, with "Savannah News" claiming that the episode was caused by "Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt's persistent efforts to force social equality on the American people".

Starting with August 7, the PTC resumed its normal schedule and there were no further disruptions. The troops remained in Philadelphia for another week and a half and rode as guards on PTC vehicles, but encountered no further problems. Seven of the eight black trainees resumed their training (one withdrew voluntarily because his duties as Jehovah's Witness minister conflicted with the PTC work schedule). On August 9, the PTC finally agreed to a favorable contact which had been approved by the TWU in June. On August 17, Hayes returned full control of the public transportation network to the PTC. Subsequent integration of black employees into the PTC workforce proceeded with no further trouble. By December 1944 the PTC had 18 black streetcar operators. An attractive new union contract helped quell the remaining discontent among the white PTC workers. Within a year, the company had over 900 black employees working in a variety of positions, including as drivers and conductors.

The NAACP later blamed the PTC management for intentionally dragging its feet on the contract that the TWU approved in late June. The NAACP claimed that the PTC management had hoped to undermine the TWU's position with the workers and to possibly oust TWU in favor of the more pliable PRTEU. The PTC was aware that the Smith–Connally Act forbade strikes harming war production and that if, with a contract impasse, TWU itself had initiated a contract strike, the union might have been tossed out. This analysis of the situation was shared later by several historians, particularly by James Wolfinger. Another historian, Alan M. Winkler, also had a largely negative view of the company's role in the conflict and concluded that PTC management, while not overtly conspiring with the strikers, reacted feebly to the strike and tried to opportunistically exploit the situation and the racist attitudes of many white workers for their own purposes.

The leaders of the strike, including McMenamin and Carney, were charged in federal court under the Smith–Connally Act; some thirty strikers were also indicted later. The federal grand jury was convened on August 9 and heard testimony for two months. However, the grand jury returned inconclusive findings; their report stated that most of the striking workers knew nothing about the strike at the start, and blamed a few instigators for escalating the situation, but did not detail the instigators' activities. The report was also critical of the PTC's response to the strike, characterizing it as inadequate and ineffective. The government dropped its charges against the defendants on March 12, 1945, with most of them pleading "nolo contendere" and receiving a fine of $100 each.

As labor historian James Wolfinger observed, the strike "demonstrated the profound racial cleavages, that divided the working class, not just in the South but across the nation".

Although brief, the Philadelphia transit strike of 1944 had significant negative impact on the war effort, resulting in a loss of four million work hours in war plants alone. The War Manpower Commission estimated that the Philadelphia strike cost the nation's war production the equivalent of 267 Flying Fortresses or five destroyers. Malcolm Ross later characterized the strike as "the most expensive racial dispute of World War II". The strike also exposed the limitations of the FEPC's power. The FEPC did not possess the final authority to enforce its decisions and only the executive intervention of the President made the resolution of the dispute possible. Nevertheless, the strike demonstrated that a combination of black activism, particularly by the NAACP, together with resolute federal policies, were able to break long standing racial barriers in employment.





</doc>
<doc id="28152745" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28152745" title="Britney/Brittany">
Britney/Brittany

"Britney/Brittany" is the second episode of the second season of the American television series "Glee", and the twenty-fourth episode overall. Written and directed by series creator Ryan Murphy, it premiered on the Fox network on September 28, 2010, and pays tribute to Britney Spears. Glee club member Brittany S. Pierce (Heather Morris) experiences an anesthesia-induced hallucination in which she recreates iconic Spears moments, and comes to self-realization, and several club members follow suit. Co-captains Rachel (Lea Michele) and Finn (Cory Monteith) experience difficulties in their relationship, and club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) becomes jealous of guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury's (Jayma Mays) new boyfriend, Dr. Carl Howell (John Stamos).

Following the first season episode "The Power of Madonna", which served as an homage to Madonna, Murphy planned two tribute episodes for "Glee" second season, of which "Britney/Brittany" is the first. He was approached by Spears about using her songs, and deemed her one of the most important female musicians of the decade, having inspired many of the show's young cast to pursue musical careers. Spears makes several cameos in the episode, appearing in the students' dream sequences. "Britney/Brittany" was also intended as a showcase for Morris, whose character was originally a background character on the show, but was promoted to a series regular after her character proved to be a fan favorite.

The episode features seven musical performances, six of which were released as singles. It was watched by 13.51 million American viewers, "Glee" third largest audience ever, and attracted mixed reviews from critics. ToddVanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" criticized its slightness of plot and incongruous musical numbers. However, James Poniewozik of "Time" praised the episode for embracing its fantasy nature; Bobby Hankinson of the "Houston Chronicle" brought up similar thoughts, therefore calling the episode brilliant. "Entertainment Weekly" Tim Stack was dismayed by the close recreations of Spears videos, preferring "Glee" more original interpretations of its cover versions, yet MTV's Aly Semigran felt that the performance of "I'm a Slave 4 U" was one of the best sequences in the show's history. Michele's rendition of "...Baby One More Time" attracted negative reviews, though her performance of Paramore's "The Only Exception" was generally well received. Spears' cameo received mixed reviews, with even those critics who received it favorably supposing that she better did not appear for longer. Morris' performance attracted critical praise, particularly for her dancing skills.

Glee club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) attempts to set New Directions an easy listening adult contemporary assignment, but Kurt (Chris Colfer) informs them there is a Facebook group petitioning the club to perform a Britney Spears number at the McKinley High homecoming assembly. Will refuses, stating that Spears is a bad role model. He is supported by club member Brittany (Heather Morris), who reveals that her full name is Brittany Susan Pierce and as such she has always been dismayed that she will never be as successful as the similarly named pop star.

Will then discusses Spears with school guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays). While in her office, he meets her new boyfriend, dentist Carl Howell (John Stamos), who offers to talk to the glee club about dental hygiene. A plaque test reveals that Brittany, Rachel (Lea Michele) and Artie (Kevin McHale) all require dental work. When Brittany is put under general anesthesia so Carl can fill her cavities, she experiences a hallucination in which she performs Spears' "I'm a Slave 4 U". She later returns to Carl's practice with her friend Santana (Naya Rivera) and they share a hallucination in which they duet on "Me Against the Music". Brittany feels empowered by the encounter, and begins to act more assertively in glee club.

Rachel feels threatened by her boyfriend Finn's (Cory Monteith) desire to re-join the school football team, fearing that their relationship will not work if he becomes popular again. After visiting the dentist and experiencing her own hallucination, in which she performs "...Baby One More Time", Rachel begins dressing more provocatively. Her new look is received positively and cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) finds school blogger Jacob Ben Israel (Josh Sussman) masturbating to a video of Rachel in the library. Rachel relents and encourages Finn to re-join the team. Artie's dental visit results in a hallucination of "Stronger" in which he is also a member of the football team. Football coach Shannon Beiste (Dot-Marie Jones) accepts both Finn and Artie, despite the fact Artie is in a wheelchair. Rachel becomes jealous of the attention Finn is receiving now that he is back on the team and to test Finn's fidelity, she has his ex-girlfriend Quinn (Dianna Agron) attempt to seduce him. She is relieved when Finn turns Quinn down, and sings Paramore's "The Only Exception" to him in apology.

Advised by Emma to relax, Will learns that Carl recently purchased a new Chevrolet Corvette and buys one for himself. He is confronted by his ex-wife Terri (Jessalyn Gilsig), who insists that he return it and cease wasting their savings. Seeing the positive effect Spears has had on the glee club members, Will relents and allows them to perform a Bob Fosse-inspired rendition of "Toxic" at the homecoming assembly, joining them on stage in an effort to impress Emma. When multiple students, including Jacob and Lauren Zizes (Ashley Fink), become sexually aroused by the performance, Sue sets off the fire alarm and has the student body evacuate the auditorium. She later threatens to sue Will after being injured in the stampede. Emma tells Will to stop trying to be someone he is not, and he returns his new car. He also tells the club they will not be performing any more Spears numbers.

During the first season of "Glee", the show paid tribute to Madonna with the episode "The Power of Madonna". Murphy planned two tribute episodes for the second season: "Britney/Brittany", and a second, originally planned to air after Super Bowl XLV in February 2011. Many of the show's young cast members were inspired to pursue musical careers by Spears. Murphy stated that it was Spears' idea for "Glee" to use her songs, explaining: "I think she loves what the show's about, paying tribute to pop culture in a very loving, respectful, kind way. She responded to that." He described Spears as "arguably the most important female [musician] other than Lady Gaga in the last 10 years," commenting that the episode is not only concerned with her music, but also her public image.

In May 2010, Morrison told "US Weekly" that he hoped no Spears songs would be performed on "Glee". Based on his comments, Murphy had Morrison's character Will spend the episode resisting his students' desire to perform her songs. Will's storyline featuring a Chevrolet Corvette involved product placement for the Chevrolet division of General Motors, who became an advertiser and event sponsor for "Glee" prior to its 2009 launch.

The cast received their scripts for the episode on July 26, 2010, and Murphy began directing it on August 2, 2010. Spears filmed her guest starring scenes on August 18 and 19, 2010. Murphy commented that: "At the heart of it, it's a show designed to show off the skills of Heather Morris". Prior to appearing in "Glee", Morris was a back-up dancer for Beyoncé Knowles. She was originally hired as a choreographer to teach cast members Colfer and Jenna Ushkowitz the "Single Ladies" dance. A week later, she was cast as cheerleader Brittany. Morris had a recurring role throughout the first season, and was promoted to a series regular for season two. At the 2010 Television Critics Association Summer Press Tour, Murphy stated that Brittany would have "big storylines" in the new season, as viewers want to know more about her.

Stamos makes his first "Glee" appearance in "Britney/Brittany" playing Carl Howell, a dentist and Emma's love-interest. Other recurring characters who appear in the episode are glee club member Mike Chang (Harry Shum, Jr.), Principal Figgins (Iqbal Theba), Coach Shannon Beiste (Jones), school reporter Jacob Ben Israel (Sussman), cheerleader Becky Jackson (Lauren Potter), school bullies Dave Karofsky (Max Adler) and Azimio (James Earl) and student Lauren Zizes (Fink). "So You Think You Can Dance" contestant Mark Kanemura appears as a backing dancer.

The episode featured cover versions of five Spears songs, two of which were performed by Morris. "Stronger", "...Baby One More Time", "Toxic", "I'm a Slave 4 U", and "Me Against the Music" (featuring Madonna) were covered. "The Only Exception" by Paramore and "Sailing" by Christopher Cross were also performed. All songs except "Sailing" were released as singles, available for download, and all songs except "I'm a Slave 4 U", "...Baby One More Time", and "Sailing" are included on the album "". Both Spears and Paramore's Hayley Williams praised the episode via the social networking website Twitter, approving of the use of their songs. All singles managed to chart on the "Billboard" Hot 100, selling 406,000 downloads collectively. The cast's cover of "Toxic" charted as the highest of the six, at number sixteen with 109,000 downloads.

Tim Stack of "Entertainment Weekly" felt that the performances of "I'm a Slave 4 U" and "Me Against the Music" fell flat, opining that "Glee" best musical numbers are the ones which twist, rather than imitate the original versions. Though he praised Morris' dancing, he felt the episode revealed her to be "not a standout vocalist." Conversely, Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" enjoyed the direct recreations of iconic Spears moments in "I'm a Slave 4 U", and MTV's Aly Semigran called it one of the best sequences in the show's history. Futterman was also impressed by the "Me Against the Music" recreation, highlighting the way it played on the ambiguous Brittany/Santana relationship, complimenting Morris' dancing and Rivera's vocals.

Raymund Flandez of "The Wall Street Journal" criticized Michele's rendition of "...Baby One More Time", writing, "Her earnestness, her adoring look and her intelligent voice bumps up against the breathless sound of breathy pop. It's like a YouTube spoof, an opera singer trying to make a barmaid's ditty on Oktoberfest more appealing—by shedding her clothes." Futterman was left wanting by the number, feeling that "the tune lost all of its scandalous sexuality with Rachel's octaves-higher singing."

Stack deemed "Stronger" his favorite performance of the episode, as well as the best incorporation of Spears' music, as the song served Artie's storyline. He praised the increased use of McHale as a vocalist in the second season, enjoying his soulful voice. Flandez also enjoyed "Stronger", appreciating the twist of having males sing a feminist empowerment song. Semigran wrote that it was "Toxic" which provided the best Spears cover of the episode, commenting that it "took on its own fresh sound all while honoring the original". She disapproved of "The Only Exception" as the closing song, feeling that the use of another Spears song such as "Everytime" would have been more appropriate. However, Flandez called Michele's Paramore rendition "suitably earnest", Futterman described it as "gorgeous and tender", and Stack felt it served as a "nice, emotional capper" to the episode.

During its original broadcast, "Britney/Brittany" was watched by 13.51 million American viewers. It drew "Glee" second largest audience to date behind "Hell-O", which was watched by 13.66 million viewers in April 2010, following a four-month hiatus. Viewership was up 1.06 million over the previous episode, "Audition", 0.5 million over the Madonna tribute episode "The Power of Madonna", and 2.1 million over the Lady Gaga-themed episode "Theatricality". The episode attained "Glee" series high rating to date in the 18–49 demographic, with a 5.9/17 Nielsen rating/share—it was subsequently beaten by "The Sue Sylvester Shuffle", which aired on February 6, 2011, immediately following the Super Bowl, and was watched by 26.8 million viewers and garnered an 11.1/29 rating/share—also making it the highest-rated show on the night of broadcast. "Britney/Brittany" was Fox's highest-rated live-action comedy episode of the fall in eight years among adults 18–49, and nine years among total viewers. It was the first time in seventeen years that the highest-rated entertainment show of premiere week grew in its second week among adults 18–49 and total viewers. In Canada, the episode was the most-watched show of the night, attaining 2.4 million viewers. In the 18–49 demographic, it was up 18% on "Audition", and outperformed "No Ordinary Family", its closest competitor in the 8:00 p.m. timeslot, by 73%. In Australia, the episode was watched by 1.171 million viewers, making "Glee" the seventh most-watched show of the night. In the UK, the episode was watched by 3.068 million viewers (2.634 million on E4, and 451,000 on E4+1), becoming the most-watched show on E4 and E4 +1 for the week, and the most-watched show on cable for the week, as well as the most-watched episode of the series at the time, and the first episode of the entire series to draw over 3 million viewers.

"Britney/Brittany" received mixed reviews from critics. Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" graded the episode "D+", commenting that it was "what people who say "Glee" is awful are talking about when they say "Glee" is awful." He criticized the lack of plot and coherence in the musical numbers, feeling that storyline and character arcs were ignored in favor of showcasing Spears covers. Stack described the episode as a "monumental television event,"; however, he also expressed his lingering sense of "slight disappointment." While he enjoyed the episode overall, Stack wrote that Spears' songs felt forced into the storyline, and that the episode was neither as iconic nor as exhilarating as "Glee" Madonna tribute. The Parents Television Council slammed the episode, accusing the presentation of Spears as a "symbol of empowerment and self-esteem" problematic, observing that the young audience "basically witnessed an endorsement of narcotics abuse, public masturbation, and school-sanctioned burlesque."

James Poniewozik of "Time", who disliked the Madonna episode, was "pleasantly surprised" by "Britney/Brittany." He deemed it one of the funniest and most entertaining episodes of the series, crediting Morris' performance and the "fortunately limited" Spears cameos. Responding to criticism of the episode, Poniewozik conceded that the storylines were slender and Spears remakes dominated the episode, however felt that unlike "The Power of Madonna," it worked because "it owned its slightness: it kept the videos (and Britney's appearances) where they belonged as fantasy." Bobby Hankinson of the "Houston Chronicle" described the episode as brilliant, and felt that presenting the Spears performances as a series of unrelated hallucinations was "an inspired choice." IGN's Robert Canning rated "Britney/Brittany" 8/10, signifying an "Impressive" episode. He described it as fun, but close to being "too much of a gimmick," with incongruous song choices.

VanDerWerff deemed Spears' cameo "totally useless," criticizing the singer's "flat, listless dialogue." Lisa de Moraes of "The Washington Post" graded her cameo a "C," commenting "at least she didn't have to try to be funny" as in her "How I Met Your Mother" guest-spot. Flandez was disappointed that Spears did not appear for longer, yet he concluded that given the acting demonstrated in her 2002 film "Crossroads," it was better that the pop star did not. Conversely, Jenna Mullins of "E! Online" appreciated the fact that Spears did not appear as a background character, writing that she is "best when she is playing herself", Stack felt her appearances were well-handled, "with a nice level of restraint," and Canning felt they were kept to a "perfect minimum."

Morris' performance attracted critical praise, with de Moraes calling "Britney/Brittany" a "great showcase" for the actress, praising her "spectacular dance moves" and "deadpan flare". In his otherwise negative review, VanDerWerff deemed Morris "hysterical throughout" and the cast's best dancer. He stated, "Murphy seems intent on running this character into the ground, but Morris isn't going to have her stop being funny without a fight." Mullins observed, "When Ryan Murphy said this episode was a celebration of Heather, he wasn't kidding", commending her musical performances. Canning was initially concerned that the episode would diminish Morris' appeal by elevating her from a background role, but was ultimately pleased that it managed to retain her "fan favorite" secondary character status.



</doc>
<doc id="28173739" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28173739" title="Remember Paul?">
Remember Paul?

"Remember Paul?" is the seventh season premiere episode of the American comedy-drama television series "Desperate Housewives", and the 135th overall episode of the series. It was originally broadcast in the United States on September 26, 2010, on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC). In the episode, Paul (Mark Moses) announces his return to Wisteria Lane while Carlos (Ricardo Antonio Chavira) learns that his daughter was accidentally switched with another baby at the hospital eight years earlier.

The episode was written by series creator Marc Cherry and directed by David Grossman. It included the introduction of Renee Perry (Vanessa Williams), Lynette's (Felicity Huffman) former college roommate. "Remember Paul?" also dealt with Bree's (Marcia Cross) divorce and continued the storyline of the financial problems of Susan (Teri Hatcher) and Mike (James Denton).

"Remember Paul?" garnered generally mixed reviews. Many critics drew both favorable and unfavorable comparisons between Williams' performance in the episode and her portrayal of Wilhelmina Slater in "Ugly Betty". According to Nielsen ratings, the episode drew just over 13 million viewers, making it the least watched season premiere at the time.

"Desperate Housewives" focuses on the lives of several residents in the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane, as narrated by their deceased neighbor, Mary Alice Young (Brenda Strong). In past episodes, a local hospital discovered that a nurse had accidentally switched two children at birth years earlier and that one of the involved families lives in town on Wisteria Lane. Bree Hodge (Marcia Cross) decided to confess to Gabrielle Solis (Eva Longoria) that her son, Andrew (Shawn Pyfrom), was driving the car that killed Gabrielle's mother-in-law eleven years earlier. As a result, her husband Orson (Kyle MacLachlan) decided to leave her. Susan (Teri Hatcher) and Mike Delfino (James Denton) slipped into financial crisis and decided to move into a small apartment across town. Mary Alice's husband, Paul (Mark Moses), avenged her suicide by killing her blackmailer, Martha Huber (Christine Estabrook). In response, her sister, Felicia Tilman (Harriet Sansom Harris), framed Paul for her own death and fled town. Ten years later, Paul was released from jail and returned to Wisteria Lane.

News of Paul's return jolts the neighborhood, including Susan, who did not know that she had rented her home to him. Paul expresses interest in buying his old home across the street, despite just having signed a lease for Susan's house. Felicia, whose plan was foiled when she was pulled over by a police officer for speeding, is now incarcerated and swears that Paul will be dead within six months.

Jack Pinkham (Kevin Symons), a lawyer for Fairview Memorial Hospital, tells Carlos Solis (Ricardo Antonio Chavira) that his daughter, Juanita (Madison De La Garza), is not their biological child and was accidentally switched at birth with their daughter. Carlos decides to keep this information from Gabrielle to spare her the pain. Meanwhile, Bree tells Gabrielle that Andrew ran over Carlos' mother, but Gabrielle decides not to tell Carlos because she does not want to upset him.

Despite downsizing to a small apartment, Susan and Mike are still struggling financially. Susan receives an offer from her landlord, Maxine Rosen (Lainie Kazan), to appear on her home-run erotic website—"Va-Va-Va-Broom!"—for which she would film herself doing housework in lingerie. She initially refuses the offer, but when Mike considers taking a job on an oil rig in Alaska, Susan agrees to appear on the website; however, she conceals her new job from her friends and family.

Bree struggles with her impending divorce. However, when Orson reveals that he has already begun dating his physical therapist, Bree takes an interest in her contractor, Keith (Brian Austin Green). Meanwhile, Lynette's old college frenemy Renee Perry (Vanessa Williams), wife of New York Yankees player Doug Perry, comes to visit her, but their friendly bickering quickly escalates into an argument. Lynette threatens to kick her out but changes her mind when Renee reveals that Doug has left her for another woman.

"Remember Paul?" was written by series creator and executive producer Marc Cherry and directed by David Grossman. It marked the debut of Vanessa Williams as Renee Perry, an old college rival of Lynette Scavo. The addition of Williams to the cast was announced after the close of the series' sixth season, as well as the finale of the ABC series "Ugly Betty", in which Williams starred as Wilhelmina Slater. The character, who was originally named Renee Filmore-Jones, was conceived as a trouble-making vixen, similar to the Edie Britt character (Nicollette Sheridan), who appeared on the series until the fifth season. Following the casting announcement, Williams admitted to having been a fan of the series during its first year, but stopped watching because of the racially insensitive second season mystery storyline. It focused on Betty Applewhite (Alfre Woodard), the series' first black main character. Williams explained to "Entertainment Weekly", "[Betty] had her son in chains in the basement. It was like, 'Really? Do we have to go there with our first Black character?' I honestly fell off the show after that. I think it was just so implausible and just an image that Black folks don't want to see their child chained and shackled in the basement." Cast member Felicity Huffman commented on Williams' addition to the cast, saying "She's such a great dash of vinegar to Wisteria Lane! It's going brilliantly—she's a wonderful woman, she's really smart, she's really strong, a real team player. She's a great addition."

The episode also reintroduced the storyline of Paul Young and Felicia Tilman's rivalry. Mark Moses returned to the series as a series regular after appearing briefly as Paul in the sixth season finale. On his return, Moses commented, "There was some talk about [me coming back] a year ago. And there’s often talk in Hollywood. Sometimes it pans out, sometimes it doesn’t. I don’t get super-excited about a 'maybe' in this town, because there are lots of maybes that don’t happen. But then this last year they called up my agent and said, 'We're really thinking seriously about [this].' And eventually, they made an offer, and I was very pleased." Harriet Samson Harris also returned to reprise her role as Felicia, while Steven Culp and Christine Estabrook returned as Rex Van de Kamp and Martha Huber respectively in flashback sequences. Kyle MacLachlan, who left "Desperate Housewives" as a series regular at the end of season six, reprised his role as Orson Hodge in this episode.

Kevin Rahm and Tuc Watkins, who have been portraying gay couple Bob Hunter and Lee McDermott since the series' fourth season, were both promoted to series regulars for the seventh season. Darcy Rose Byrnes also joined the main cast as Penny Scavo, a role previously portrayed by Kendall Applegate. Brian Austin Green made his series debut in the episode as Keith Watson, "a new contractor and charming playboy" who catches the attention of both Bree and Renee, while Lainie Kazan began a multi-episode guest appearance as Maxine Rosen, Susan's landlady.

According to Nielsen ratings, "Remember Paul?" was watched by 13.056 million viewers and held an 8.1 rating/12 share on its original American broadcast on September 26, 2010. Among viewers between 18 and 49 years of age, the episode drew a 4.3 rating, making it the twelfth most-watched show for the week in that demographic. The premiere was outperformed by "Sunday Night Football" on NBC and "Family Guy" on Fox, which respectively drew a 7.3 and 4.5 rating in the 18 to 49 demographic in the "Desperate Housewives" time slot. At the time, the episode was the least-watched season premiere of "Desperate Housewives", with an eleven percent decrease in viewership from the sixth season premiere one year earlier. ABC reported that the episode gained an additional 2.1 million viewers and 1.0 rating in the week following the original broadcast due to DVR recordings. "Remember Paul?" was outperformed by the following episode, "You Must Meet My Wife", which drew 13.234 million viewers and scored 8.2 rating/12 share in total viewers and a 4.4 rating in viewers between 18 and 49 years of age.

The episode received mixed reviews. Tanner Stransky of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the premiere a positive review. He praised Williams' performance, stating that she brought back a "brand of bitchery" that had been missing from the series since Nicollette Sheridan's departure; additionally, he favorably compared the performance to Williams' portrayal of Wilhelmina Slater on "Ugly Betty". He also complimented Harriet Sansom Harris' performance, naming her "the creepiest character... in the best possible way." Stransky called the Gabrielle and Carlos storyline "sweet," but criticized the ridiculousness of Susan's storyline. Neal Justin of the "Star Tribune" said, "the premiere is packed with the zippy zingers that made us fall in love with the dramedy in the first place," accrediting the series' improved quality over season six to the return of Mark Moses as Paul Young. He also commented that Vanessa Williams gave "a repeat performance" of her character on "Ugly Betty". Damian Holbrook of "TV Guide" also drew a comparison between Williams' performances in the episode and on "Ugly Betty", stating the two characters "have the same stiletto-sharp tongue and prickly chemistry with everyone who enters her orbit."

John Griffiths of "Us Weekly" gave the premiere a negative review, awarding it only two stars. He stated the show had turned into "a run-of-the-mill sitcom" and criticized the writers for not being able to develop material to match the "venerable cast capable of great things." He called the Paul storyline "corny" and the switched-baby storyline "as compelling as a manicure," and commented that both Williams and Brian Austin Greene deliver underwhelming performances. Isabelle Carreau of TV Squad called the episode "a solid season premiere for the series." She was surprised by both the identity of the switched child and its early revelation. Carreau also praised Williams' performance, writing: "The banter between Lynette and Renee was priceless!"



</doc>
<doc id="28175879" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28175879" title="Wishin' and Hopin' (Grey's Anatomy)">
Wishin' and Hopin' (Grey's Anatomy)

"Wishin' and Hopin'" is the fourteenth episode of the third season of the American television medical drama "Grey's Anatomy", and the show's 50th episode overall. It was written by Tony Phelan and Joan Rater and directed by Julie Anne Robinson. The episode originally aired on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) in the United States on February 1, 2007. In the episode, Dr. Meredith Grey (Ellen Pompeo) struggles with her Alzheimer's-stricken mother, Ellis Grey (Kate Burton), becoming temporarily lucid. Further storylines include Dr. Izzie Stevens (Katherine Heigl) and Dr. Miranda Bailey (Chandra Wilson) continuously seeking patients for their new clinic, Dr. Richard Webber (James Pickens, Jr.) dealing with the repercussions of his upcoming retirement, and Dr. George O'Malley (T.R. Knight) facing negative response from colleagues on his unexpected marriage to Dr. Callie Torres (Sara Ramirez).

Although the episode was fictionally set in Seattle, filming occurred in Los Angeles, California. Burton reprised her role as Dr. Ellis Grey in a guest star capacity, in addition to Sarah Utterback, who portrayed Olivia Harper. The title of the episode refers to the song "Wishin' and Hopin'", by British pop musician Dusty Springfield. The episode received mixed to favorable reviews, with the storyline involving Ellis being particularly praised by television critics. Upon its original airing, the episode was watched by 24.18 million viewers in the United States, ranked first in its time-slot and garnered an 8.5 Nielsen rating in the 18–49 demographic.

"Wishin' and Hopin'" opens to a voice-over narration from Dr. Meredith Grey (Ellen Pompeo) about extraordinary events. The Denny Duquette Memorial Clinic has been opened, after a US$8 million funding from Dr. Izzie Stevens (Katherine Heigl). Four of the hospital's attending surgeons, Dr. Derek Shepherd (Patrick Dempsey), Dr. Preston Burke (Isaiah Washington), Dr. Addison Montgomery (Kate Walsh), and Dr. Mark Sloan (Eric Dane) are all seen competing for the position of chief of surgery, after the current chief Dr. Richard Webber (James Pickens, Jr.) announces his plans for retirement. Meredith arrives to the Alzheimer's support home that her ill mother Dr. Ellis Grey (Kate Burton) is living at, and to her surprise, her mother has become lucid, but faints. Ellis is taken to Seattle Grace Hospital, her former source of employment. Dr. Cristina Yang (Sandra Oh), Dr. Miranda Bailey (Chandra Wilson), and Dr. Alex Karev (Justin Chambers) are awaiting the arrival of patients at the clinic, and Dr. George O'Malley (T.R. Knight) walks in to announce his unexpected marriage with Dr. Callie Torres (Sara Ramirez).

A cancerous patient, Marina Wagner (Amanda Collins), is admitted into the hospital and is revealed to have toxic blood - presumably caused by a chemical reaction between an herbal supplement and chemotherapy - making several physicians fall ill. O'Malley is exposed to the neurotoxin, and quickly becomes anxious, fearing that his marriage is the cause of the sickness. Ellis is diagnosed with a heart condition, in which surgery or medication are options. Ellis does not want the surgery, but Meredith fears that she will not be compliant with her medication. Shepherd and Burke try to close up Wagner as the OR was evacuated before her surgery was completed, by entering the operating room with sealed, airtight suits. Ellis agrees to the surgery, but opts to speak with Webber, her former lover. A teenage patient is brought into the clinic by her father, hoping that a doctor can teach her how to use tampons. When her father leaves the room, she explains to Bailey that she had sex, but her pregnancy test is negative. Shepherd and Burke run out of air whilst operating on Wagner, so Yang, Stevens, and Meredith enter holding their breath to close the patient's incision. O'Malley's colleagues act in a rude manner to his new marriage, and displeased, he lectures them, standing up for Torres. Sloan is seen to be having sex with Montgomery, and Yang agrees to marry Burke. At the conclusion of the episode, Ellis' lucidity has vanished, leaving Meredith and Webber distraught.

The episode was written by co-executive producer Tony Phelan and Joan Rater, while filmmaker Julie Anne Robinson directed it. Featured music includes Psapp's "King of You", The Whitest Boy Alive's "Fireworks", Iain Archer's "Canal Song", Miho Hatori's "Barracuda" and Sybarite's "Runaway". Rater described that she got the idea after being told that her husband had to undergo a craniotomy. She noted that the plan for the episode was to focus on Ellis' inner feelings, mainly her fright, frustration and stress. "The concept of someone with this disease having a lucid day is real. The disease varies for everyone, but experts we talked to said that patients have bad days and good days and then sometimes they have great days where it seems like they are their old selves. Maybe it's a moment, maybe an hour, for some a whole afternoon, but we were fascinated with the idea of getting this time, this gift, and knowing that it's only temporary. What would you do with that one day? And what would it mean for Meredith?", stated Rater, explaining the premise of the episode. She also stated that "the cool idea" to have Meredith and Ellis connect again had been considered for almost a year before the actual concept of the episode was written, after numerous attempts to include the storyline in other episodes that "didn't feel quite right": "If you're going to give Meredith her mother back and then take her away again, you'd better have a pretty good reason." Rater also explained that, in her vision, the episode introduces a new period in the interns' lives, focusing on their finding an identity as surgeons, becoming more central than in the beginning of the season, which revolved around the aftermath of Denny Duquette (Jeffrey Dean Morgan)'s death and Meredith's involvement in the love triangle between her, Shepherd and Finn Dandridge (Chris O'Donnell).

Rater noted that the balance Meredith had just found in her life, finally having a chance at happiness with the man she loves, is shaken by her mother's unexpected lucidity, which was stated to have been written in the series in order to remind Meredith about the troubled years of her growing up: "If Meredith is ever going to be happy, she's got to deal with the fact that she had a really terrible childhood." In addition, Rater explained that Ellis' "awful, raw, ugly and terrible" statements towards her daughter were intended to make everyone realize the reason behind Meredith's alcoholism in college and her continuous one-night stands with inappropriate men. She also deemed Pompeo's performance in the episode "exceptional", describing what she regarded an "exceptional moment" which sees Meredith stand up to her mother. In response to the scene that sees Ellis interacting with Webber, Rater wrote that it is the first time she lets her guard down, exposing the previously hidden vulnerability, which allows her express the desire to be as happy and ordinary as her daughter. She also praised the performances of the cast, by deeming their acting "remarkable". "That is really what it's all about. We have to cherish the time that we have here, and love the people who surround and support us, even if they make us crazy, because things happen. Brain surgery, Alzheimer's and weddings. And the worst thing is to come to the end of your life, and realize, like Ellis, that you should have tried harder", stated Rater, putting the emphasis on the main aspects of the episode, characterizing it as "not ordinary".

On its original broadcast on February 1, 2007 at 9:00 ET, the episode averaged 24.18 million viewers, ranking ninth in weekly viewership with an 8.5 rating, according to Nielsen. The episode was the fifth most-watched episode of the season, airing in the fourth week after the winter hiatus. The episode showed a significant increase in ratings, attracting 2.68 million more viewers than "Great Expectations", which received a 7.6 rating. "Wishin' and Hopin'" was also the leading show in the time slot, with 2.69 more million viewers than CBSs' "", which ranked tenth in weekly viewership with a 7.6 rating. Kate Burton, who portrayed Ellis Grey, received a nomination at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards in the Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series category, but ultimately lost to "" Leslie Caron. "Variety" listed the episode in its top 10 most bizarre medical maladies encountered in the series.

Staci Krause of "IGN" had a positive outlook on the episode, mainly due to the heavy development the episode's plot had in the season's progressive arc. She described the storylines involving the cancer patient's intoxication and Ellis' lucidity as achieving a balance, and moving the show "at a lightning quick pace". Krause deemed the episode "stellar", noting how it avoided the possibility of having negative points. Regarding the episode an "epic" one, she praised the scene which depicts O'Malley realizing the intoxication provoked by the patient's blood. "This is what we come to expect from medical dramas and it is great to see "Grey's" get back to this, while not sacrificing the personal stories", stated Krause, putting the emphasis on how "this case brought out the hore in just about everyone, pushing their limits for a patient". Krause noted that O'Malley has developed into a hero, stating that "pulling all the people in the operating room out, even though he was already sick and could have easily died from the effort" in a comparison to Sloan, described as being a man with no appealing traits and "unlikable ways", which attracted criticism from Krause.

On the topic, Krause elaborated: "The only one who didn't do anything particularly heroic was Sloan. That made him being with Addison at the end even better, because she was using him to sate a desire and that was very clear." Krause positively reviewed the idea of Ellis Grey's becoming temporarily lucid, deeming it "amazing": "She was not very endearing when she was lucid, that's for certain. She was unbelievably cruel to Meredith, telling her how disappointed she was that Meredith was merely ordinary. Ouch. But she did a great thing this episode too, during her short time as a sane person. She gave Cristina the answer she was looking for." The arc involving Callie and George's sudden marriage, named by Krause "a roller coaster", was described as being a way to emphasize the contrast between the two. Krause also noted the contrast between Stevens' kindhearted personality in the past, and the cruelty she proves to have in the episode, which was noted to have been "a highlight in perfect fashion", as well as a reminder for the multi-dimensional personalities of the characters. Also noted was Cristina's way of accepting Burke's proposal, following Ellis' answer, which gave her the hope she had been previously looking for.

Kelly West of "Cinema Blend" also expressed a good perspective on the episode, considering it to have been the best episode of the season. Deeming the episode an "eye-opening experience", West described Ellis' surprising personality as having worse repercussions on her daughter than the control issues and the intense disapproval that had previously been noted on the character: "You would think after Ellis had a few hours to digest the news that she has essentially lost her mind, she would take advantage of the gift that is her brief lucidity to patch things up with Meredith. Meredith was hesitant to sit and talk with her mother about the last five years but finally she decides this could be her only chance." Comparing Ellis' previous appearances in the series with the version presented in the episode, West stated she is "far worse" as a lucid person, noting how frustration and confusion are her main characteristics.

Also noted was the "completely erratic and borderline insane" behavior of Ellis at the realization that her daughter is focusing more on her love life than on her career, learning that the specialty, which she considers to be defining for a surgeon, is not a concern of Meredith's: "If this is how she was treating Meredith during her childhood and adolescence, it completely explains why Meredith is so dark and twisty." In addition, West noted the realism in Ellis' troubled personality, when she considers refusing the heart surgery, due to not being sure of wanting to continue her life in a state of forgetfulness and confusion. The scene which depicts Ellis interacting with Webber was negatively received by West, which regarded the whole conversation to have been based on his convincing lies, determined to give her peace. In response to Miranda Bailey's storyline in the episode, involving the sexually active teenager, West noted how the character was "direct, somewhat stern, but not unkind about the subject as she educates and consoles the girl".



</doc>
<doc id="28182107" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28182107" title="A Change Is Gonna Come (Grey's Anatomy)">
A Change Is Gonna Come (Grey's Anatomy)

"A Change Is Gonna Come" is the fourth season premiere of the American television medical drama "Grey's Anatomy", and the 62nd episode of the overall series. The premiere focused on the aftermath of the main characters' promotion to residency, following the conclusion of their internship. The episode was the first not to feature Isaiah Washington, portraying Preston Burke, due to his being fired from the series at the conclusion of the third season. The installment marked Chyler Leigh's promotion to series regular status, following her guest appearances in the last two episodes of the previous season. Also featured were one-time guest actors Mark Pellegrino, Stephania Childers, Sandra Thigpen, and Steven Porter.

The story arcs which provided a particular focus on individual characters include Cristina Yang (Sandra Oh) dealing with the aftermath of Burke's (Washington) departure, and the dissolution of their engagement, Izzie Stevens, (Katherine Heigl) struggling with her romantic feelings towards the married George O'Malley (T.R. Knight), and Callie Torres (Sara Ramirez) learning to deal with her new position of Chief Resident. Also dealt with was Alex Karev (Justin Chambers) coping with Rebecca Pope's (Elizabeth Reaser) departure, and Meredith Grey (Ellen Pompeo) facing the conclusion of her relationship with Derek Shepherd (Patrick Dempsey), while dealing with the arrival of her half-sister, Lexie Grey (Leigh), who enrolls in the surgical program at the hospital.

The script for the premiere was written by series creator Shonda Rhimes, while Rob Corn served as the director. The episode aired on September 27, 2007 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), with an approximated 20.93 million viewers tuning in. Ranking second in the time-slot and third for the week, the episode garnered a 7.3 Nielsen rating in the 18–49 demographic, seeing a decrease from the previous episode, which received an 8.0 rating. Critical response of the episode ranged from mixed to negative, with Yang's storyline being a particular source of critical acclaim from television reviewers. Although the episode was fictionally set in Seattle, Washington, filming occurred in Los Angeles, California.

"A Change Is Gonna Come" opens to a voice-over narrative from Meredith Grey (Ellen Pompeo) about change, the episode's main theme. Following the conclusion of their internship, Meredith, along with her colleagues, Cristina Yang (Sandra Oh), Izzie Stevens (Katherine Heigl), and Alex Karev (Justin Chambers) commence their residency in the department of surgery, and start dealing with new responsibilities, including the new generation of interns, to whom they have been assigned as mentors. After failing his post-internship exam in the season three finale, George O'Malley (T.R. Knight) must repeat his internship, in order to avoid being forced to leave the medical field. It is revealed that among the new interns is Lexie Grey (Chyler Leigh), Meredith's half-sister, who previously had an encounter with Derek Shepherd (Patrick Dempsey), despite his unawareness of her identity. Callie Torres (Sara Ramirez), whom Richard Webber (James Pickens, Jr.) chose for Miranda Bailey's (Chandra Wilson) righteous position of Chief Resident, finds difficulty in exposing an authoritative behavior, getting no respect from her subordinates.

It is explained that, in the aftermath of her being left by Preston Burke (Isaiah Washington) at the altar, Yang spent her honeymoon travelling with Meredith. Having just returned, she is shocked to learn that Burke has resigned from Seattle Grace, and relocated to an unknown location. Stevens has to deal with her romantic feelings for O'Malley, whose marriage to Torres is being threatened by his yet to be exposed affair. O'Malley, who finds himself in the unpleasant situation of repeating his internship, quickly gains support in Lexie, who decides not to tell the fellow interns about his failed exam. Karev is revealed to have visited Rebecca Pope (Elizabeth Reaser), following her departure. In the absence of Addison Montgomery (Kate Walsh), who relocated to Los Angeles, California, Mark Sloan (Eric Dane) seeks reconciliation with Shepherd, formerly his closest friend and confidant. Initially unwilling to resume his friendship with Sloan, Shepherd ultimately gives him a second chance. Bailey manifests a cold attitude towards Webber, in order to express her disappointment in not being considered for the position of Chief Resident, in spite of her enviable reputation among the hospital staff. Lexie meets Meredith for the first time, but is demoralized when she becomes aware of her apparent discomfort. Meredith and Shepherd encounter difficulty in being broken up, realizing that their mutual romantic feelings are an impediment in their attempt at having separate lives.

The emergency room is filled with victims from a chain car accident, one of whom is admitted in the department of neurosurgery, under the care of Shepherd and Yang. As the physicians soon discover that he has been internally decapitated, they come to the conclusion that even a minor move would result in irreparable damage. A pregnant woman is admitted in plastic surgery, after having her arm severed. Meredith is assigned to work for Sloan during the day, and is immediately told to find the arm, much to the fascination of her interns. Despite trying to deal with her trainees in a strict manner, Stevens is looked upon as unprofessional by the interns she was assigned to. Her image is further deteriorated when she decides to abandon her hospital duties, in order to perform surgery on a deer, once again letting her emotional involvement interfere with her career. Meredith and Shepherd discuss the repercussions of their breakup, and realize that they cannot reconcile. However, the two engage in sexual intercourse, as a manner to express their mutual feelings for the last time. O'Malley comes to the realization of his love for Stevens, and quickly discloses to her that he shares her romantic feelings.

"A Change Is Gonna Come" was written by series creator and executive producer Shonda Rhimes, whereas filmmaker and series veteran Rob Corn served as the director. The soundtrack used in the episode included Mat Kearney's "Breathe In, Breathe Out", I'm from Barcelona's "Oversleeping", Meiko's "Reasons to Love You" and Cinematic Orchestra's "To Build A Home". Also featured in the episode was "Knock 'Em Out", the second track from British pop singer-songwriter Lily Allen's debut album, "Alright, Still". Several one-time guest stars appeared in the episode, including Mark Pellegrino, who played Chris, Stephania Childers, portraying Nancy Walters, Sandra Thigpen in the role of Clara, and Steven Porter, who acted as Joey. Although fictionally set in Seattle, Washington, filming primarily occurred in Los Angeles, California. Scenes in the operating room were filmed at the Prospect Studios in Los Feliz, Los Angeles.

The fourth-season premiere saw Leigh's first appearance as a main cast member. Leigh first appeared on the show during the last two episodes of the third season as Meredith's half-sister, Lexie. Following Washington's departure, it was reported that show's executives were planning on adding new cast members, such as Lexie. She was officially upgraded to a series' regular on July 11, 2007, for the fourth season. On casting Leigh as Lexie, "Grey's Anatomy" creator Shonda Rhimes stated, "We met with a lot of young actresses, but Chyler stood out. She had a quality that felt right and real to me. It felt like she could be Meredith's sister, but she had a depth that was very interesting." Leigh offered her insight on her first days working with the main cast of the series, "It was like coming into somebody else's group or circle. It was a little daunting in the beginning. But I have had such a great time." "A Change Is Gonna Come" was the first episode in two years not to feature the character of Montgomery, due to her portrayer, Walsh, leaving the series in order to launch the "Grey's Anatomy" spin-off, medical drama "Private Practice." However, the character continued to be prominent throughout the run of the series, appearing sporadically as a guest star in the following seasons. Also introduced in "A Change Is Gonna Come" is the new generation of interns, all of whom were portrayed in co-star capacity, with the exception of Lexie.

"A Change Is Gonna Come" was the first episode not to feature Washington's character, Burke. Washington was officially fired from the series, following an on-set incident with Knight and Dempsey, which had been in the media attention since the commencement of the production for the third season. News reports surfaced that Washington had insulted co-star Knight with a homophobic slur. Following the exposure of the argument, Knight publicly disclosed his homosexuality, which led to Washington's issuing an apology statement, regarding his inappropriate use of words during the incident. The controversy later resurfaced when the cast appeared at the 65th Golden Globe Awards ceremony, which saw Washington ridiculing homosexuality during an interview, following the statement that denied the occurrence of an on-set incident. After being rebuked by his studio, Touchstone Television, Washington publicly apologized at length for using the epithet in reference to Knight. An issue of "People" disclosed Washington's presence at executive counseling, which led to an undetermined hiatus of his contract. After "Didn't We Almost Have It All?", the last episode Washington appeared in, was filmed, the network decided not to give Washington the possibility of a renewal. In a statement released by his publicist, Washington assessed, "I'm mad as hell and I'm not going to take it anymore". In another report, Washington stated he was planning to spend the summer pursuing charity work in Sierra Leone, while working on an independent film. In a subsequent interview, Washington highlighted the unfairness in his being let go from the series, considering filing a lawsuit as a result. He also accused Knight of using the controversy to bolster his own career and increase his salary on the series. Following his firing, Washington began asserting that racism within the broadcasting media was a primary factor in his dismissal from the series, which drew a critical perspective from Rhimes. During his appearance on "Larry King Live", Washington once again denied using a homophobic epithet in reference to Knight.

While writing the episode, Rhimes put an emphasis on the character of O'Malley, detailing his relationships with both Stevens and Torres. On the topic, Rhimes elabroated, "The interns are residents now, with interns of their own. Except for George, poor George, who is stuck repeating his intern year. It's not easy being a repeater. He's the only who hasn't gone through any change when we begin the episode. But by the end, he has. He tells Izzie that he loves her too. Which takes guts. Because he knows what he is getting into. He's a married man with a great wife, and he never intended to be a married man who loved another woman." Regarding Meredith's story arc, Rhimes felt that she cannot deal with all that is expected of her in her relationship with Shepherd, choosing their genuine love as the greatest obstacle in their decision to break up. Writing for Yang's storyline, Rhimes focused on her unsuccessful attempts at moving on, exposing her devastation at the realization of Burke's departure, which would be the main seasonal storyline for the character. The episode also deals with Sloan and Shepherd's path to reconciliation. Rhimes disclosed that the concept for the plot point was to have the two characters go back to being friends, as a result of Montgomery's departure. Rhimes offered her insight on Lexie's arrival, "Lexie Grey is here now. And she's here to stay. I love that she's a bit of a dork. Being a dork myself, I am fond of the girls with verbal diarrhea. Because it's not easy to keep all your words in, believe me." Regarding Webber and Bailey's storyline, Rhimes noted that the latter's intentions are not to let the former "off the hook" for choosing Torres over her for the position of Chief Resident, which was righteously hers. Rhimes highlighted the unfairness in Webber's choice, noting his unusual manner of comprehending the situation. "She's Bailey. She's worked hard, she's been the best. And isn't it just like the Chief to decide what is best for her? It's his flaw, the Chief. He's an old school man and like an old school man, he's taking care of his women. Whether they like it or not. This isn't gonna be an easy pill for Bailey to swallow."

"A Change Is Gonna Come" was originally broadcast in the United States on September 27, 2007, airing on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) in its regular 9:00 Eastern time-slot. Viewed by a total of 20.93 million viewers, the episode is the series' second most-watched season premiere, just behind the third season opener, which had been watched live by 25.41 million American viewers. In comparison to the previous episode, which was watched by 22.57 million viewers, "A Change Is Gonna Come" made a 21% decrease in terms of viewership. However, the viewership of the episode ranked second in both its time-slot and the entire night, being beaten out by its airtime rival, "" on CBS, which was watched by 25.22 million viewers. In the entire week, the episode ranked third, being beaten out by both "CSI" and fellow ABC show "Dancing With the Stars". In addition to being a success in viewership, the episode also did well in ratings. "A Change Is Gonna Come" garnered a 7.3 Nielsen rating in household viewership, ranking second in its time-slot, and third for the week.

The premiere generally received mixed to negative feedback from television critics. Debbie Chang on BuddyTV deemed the episode "dsyfunctional and ridiculous", being particularly critical of the story arc involving Stevens, whom she described as not being worthy of being promoted to the residency level. Chang expressed disagreement with the manner Bailey and Shepherd's characters were dealt with by the writers, feeling that the former's anger should have been targeted at herself, and criticizing the exaggerated exposure of the latter's "first grader emotional maturity". However, Yang's character was praised, with Chang choosing her manner of repressing her feelings as a highlight. Chang expressed a general disappointment in the episode, disapproving the choice for the episode as a season opener, a topic in regard to which she elaborated, "I can see already that this season will continue to bring us medical cases that are so blatantly about the doctors' pathetic lives." In September 2009, the inclusion of the deer ranked twelfth in "Entertainment Weekly" "Most Memorable Cases of "Grey's Anatomy"".

Eileen Lulevitch, entertainment reviewer for "TV Guide", was generally favorable of the episode, writing, "Watching the season premiere tonight was like welcoming an old friend back into your home. It was so easy to slip back into Grey's world and get caught up in all of the amazing moments that make this show so much fun to watch. And while I expected the night to start off on a somber note, by addressing Cristina and Burke's fallout, I was pleasantly surprised by the way the attendees paid tribute to Bailey, by giving their new interns the same exact first-day speech Bailey had given them." Lulevtich praised Meredith's story arc, noting the surprising turn her character evolution has taken, as she praised Lexie's introduction. While expressing a negative perspective on the writers' decision to have Torres be the Chief Resident, instead of Bailey, Lulevitch described Torres' adjustment to her new position as one of the episode's focal points. Despite praising Yang's storyline in the personal background, the concept of her interaction with the patient she was assigned to was regarded as predictable and obvious, "When the man's family came to see him, and Cristina told them it could be for the very last time. It was that moment that really got Cristina thinking about how much she did in fact miss Burke, as we later learned in the episode." Writing for "IGN", Laura Burrows was favorable of the episode. Regarding the storylines developed in "A Change Is Gonna Come", Burrows elaborated, "The season opener was promising in that it had the interns in a new role and introduced a new side of George. As all of his friends progressed from interns to residents, George was forced to re-sit his internship. This created new drama and also opened up the hospital to a whole new set of interns rife with their own set of emotional baggage and drama. There were a series of interesting and new plots."

Heigl, who portrayed Stevens, was particularly critical of her character's relationship with O'Malley, deeming it "a ratings ploy". Heigl further explained her outlook on the progression of her character, "They really hurt somebody, and they didn't seem to be taking a lot of responsibility for it. I have a really hard time with that kind of thing. I'm maybe a little too black and white about it. I don't really know Izzie very well right now." Former "The Star-Ledger" columnist Alan Sepinwall expressed a negative perspective on the episode, deeming it childish and ridiculous. He disliked Rhimes' conception of the story arc involving Stevens, elaborating, "If there's a doctor on this show who should be forced to repeat their intern year, if only to prevent them from being allowed to influence younger doctors, it's Izzie, not George. She proves her unfitness for this role with her first patient of the day, the deer. Not cute, not character-illuminating, just dumb." Also criticized was Torres, whose regression from a "cool, rocking, outgoing, cofident and full of life" role was highlighted, receiving negative feedback from Sepinwall, who wrote "Now the character exists entirely so the writers can dump on her, in a devolution far worse than anything. I just don't get it, and it pains me to watch any scene with Callie in it. Despite expressing a negative outlook on Meredith's story arc which dealt with Shepherd, noting that the "constant break-ups and reunions are as silly as if Shonda Rhimes had just kept them apart for three seasons before letting them kiss", Sepinwall was favorable of Lexie's arrival at Seattle Grace, feeling that "she's still being written as Meredith circa season one in an attempt to make us like her, but I didn't mind the manipulation, if only because there are so few characters left on this show to like." The "Buzzsugar" television reviewer was mainly critical of the episode, describing it as a departure from "the old show". However, Lexie's introduction was praised in the "Buzzsugar" review.



</doc>
<doc id="28225514" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28225514" title="Trapalcotherium">
Trapalcotherium

Trapalcotherium is a fossil mammal from the Cretaceous of Argentina in the family Ferugliotheriidae. The single species, T. matuastensis, is known from one tooth, a first lower molar. It is from the Allen Formation, which is probably Maastrichtian in age, and was first described in 2009. The tooth bears two rows of cusps, one at the inner (lingual) side and the other at the outer (labial) side, which are connected by transverse ridges separated by deep valleys. This pattern is reminiscent of "Ferugliotherium", a gondwanathere mammal from similarly aged deposits in Argentina, and "Trapalcotherium" is therefore recognized as a member of the same family Ferugliotheriidae. Ferugliotheriidae is one of two families of gondwanatheres, an enigmatic group without close relationships to any living mammals.

The only known fossil of "Trapalcotherium" was found at Cerro Tortuga in Río Negro Province, southern Argentina. This locality is in the Allen Formation, one of three formations (rock units) that have yielded Late Cretaceous gondwanathere fossils from Argentina (the others are the Los Alamitos and La Colonia Formations). All three are probably about equally old, from the Maastrichtian (latest Cretaceous, about 71–66 million years ago, mya) and perhaps partly the Campanian (84–71 mya). The mammals from the Allen Formation are known from seven teeth, six of which represent four species of dryolestoids—a group of primitive mammals that dominates the Late Cretaceous mammalian faunas of Argentina. The fauna was described in a 2009 paper by Guillermo Rougier and colleagues, who named "Trapalcotherium" as well as several new dryolestoids. The generic name, "Trapalcotherium", combines the name of the basin where Cerro Tortuga is located, Bajo Trapalca, with the Greek "therion" "beast", commonly used to mean "mammal" in scientific names. The specific name, "matuastensis", derives from Puesto El Matuesto, a shed used by the paleontologists who collected the fossils from the Allen Formation.

The single tooth of "Trapalcotherium" is identified as a lower molar because it has two longitudinal rows of cusps; as a first molar because it is longer than wide; and as a left tooth because the left side (interpreted as labial, in the direction of the lips) bears more cusps than the right side (lingual, the direction of the tongue). The tooth is 2.48 mm long and 2.07 mm wide. Part of the back labial corner is missing.

The lingual row contains three cusps and the labial probably five (the broken corner renders the number uncertain). Transverse ridges, separated by deep valleys, connect the lingual and labial cusps; therefore, the cusps are not strongly separate, but rather fused. The lingual cusps are larger and separated by larger valleys than the labial ones. At the front of the tooth is a triangular structure consisting of the first lingual and the first two labial cusps. A low crest connects the first lingual to the first labial cusp and a stronger crest, separated from the first by a relatively shallow valley, connects the second lingual to the first labial cusp. Behind this structure, a second triangle is formed by two crests passing from the second lingual cusp to two cusps at the labial side (the back of the two is broken away, but its existence is presumed from the crown pattern). The front of these two crests is interrupted by a groove. The third lingual cusp is also connected to two crests, which encircle a small depression and presumably connected to one or more labial cusps, which are missing from the fossil.

"Trapalcotherium" is identified as a member of Gondwanatheria—a small and enigmatic group of mammals from Cretaceous and Paleogene of the southern continents (Gondwana)—on the basis of the transverse ridges and triangle on its crown. It resembles "Ferugliotherium" from the Los Alamitos Formation, the only previously known uncontroversial member of the family Ferugliotheriidae, but differs in some characters: the triangle at the front is narrower in "Trapalcotherium"; the valley behind the front triangle is less curved; the ridges attached to the second lingual cusp form another triangle; the tooth is relatively shorter; "Trapalcotherium" does not have the Y-shaped valleys between cusps seen in "Ferugliotherium"; and the tips of the lingual cusps are more labially placed. The evolutionary affinities of gondwanatheres, which include the Ferugliotheriidae and the higher-crowned Sudamericidae, are controversial, though a relationship with multituberculates (a large group mainly known from the northern continents of Laurasia) has repeatedly been proposed; the identification of "Trapalcotherium" does not provide additional information that has a bearing on the relationships of the gondwanatheres.



</doc>
<doc id="28262214" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28262214" title="Jet Moto (video game)">
Jet Moto (video game)

Jet Moto (known as Jet Rider in Europe) is a racing video game developed by SingleTrac and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation video game console and PC. The PlayStation version was released in North America on October 31, 1996, in Europe in February 1997, and Japan on August 7, 1997. The PC version was released on November 30, 1997. On February 4, 2007 "Jet Moto" was made available for the PlayStation Portable and PlayStation 3 via the PlayStation Network. Developers chose fictional hovering bikes instead of wheeled motorcycles initially to resolve performance concerns. Other performance concerns led the team to develop two different physics systems—one for the player, and one for the 19 computer racers.

Gameplay in "Jet Moto" revolves around the use of hoverbikes to traverse a race course, similar to modern day motorcross, but with the added ability to traverse water. Reviews for the game were mixed, with the PC version holding 75% and the PlayStation version 78.9% at gaming aggregator GameRankings. Reviewers felt the game had solid gameplay, but criticized its high difficulty. "Jet Moto"s popularity would earn it a spot in the PlayStation Greatest Hits in August 1998, and it went on to gain two additional sequels, "Jet Moto 2" and "Jet Moto 3".

"Jet Moto" differs from that of a traditional racing game with cars or motorcycles. Players are introduced to the fictional sport of "Jet Moto". The bikes, known as jet motos, are hovercraft which can traverse both land and water. The bikes race in groups of twenty in the game's equivalent of motorcross. Characters are split into teams, and bikes are adorned with logos of products such as Mountain Dew, Butterfinger and K2 Sports similar to real-life sponsored racing.

In "Jet Moto" players control hoverbikes in a fictional motor sport. Players race three laps on a given course and earn series points based on their placement at the end of the race. Players can choose to race a single race, a season of races, or a custom season. Players can also unlock additional tracks and a stunt mode by doing well in season competitions.

Courses range from beaches with debris-littered water to swamps and ice-covered mountains. The game has its variant of the traditional race track, but also introduces a new course type known as a Suicide course. Instead of being a continuous loop, these tracks have checkpoints at either end of the course, and the starting grid in the center. Riders race to one end, then turn around to head for the other checkpoint, repeating the process until all laps are complete. This provides a new gameplay dynamic as often the player must navigate oncoming traffic.

The PlayStation version of the game allows for two player splitscreen multiplayer; however, no AI racers are present, which limits the competitors to two. A cheat code would allow two human players to race with the entire field. The PC version allows for fourteen players over an IPX network, Internet TCP/IP and modem-to-modem connections.

"Jet Moto" was conceived as a "science fiction motorcross." The developers chose to create jet motos instead of wheeled motorcycles due to concerns over polygon limitations. Travis Hilton, one of the programmers for the game designed "Jet Moto"s physics engine. Due to hardware limitations of the PlayStation, only the player used this physics system. Programmer Jay Barnson was tasked with developing a simpler physics system to handle the nineteen AI riders. During development a set of courses set in a stadium were dropped as the developers felt it did not fit the theme of the game.

Developers originally intended for players to be permanently out of a race when falling far off a track, however they came to realize that it was not fun for players "to be forced to go slow or suffer an instant defeat." An attempt was made to give three "strikes" to a rider. Once the rider fell for the third time they were out of the race. However once implemented developers noticed that the number of racers remaining at the end of the race was too random to be deemed any fun. In the end the decision was made to simply respawn the character on the track. The PC version was ported in large part by John Olsen, who worked on the port as his first task at SingleTrac. The PC version also features 3Dfx hardware acceleration, which allows for higher resolution gameplay and visual enhancements such as reflective water. Axiom Design created the user interface shell for the game, which has a comic book-inspired feel. The music for "Jet Moto" was produced by Big Idea Music Productions.

Another SingleTrac game released for the PlayStation at roughly the same time, "Twisted Metal 2", allows players to race on a track from "Jet Moto" by entering a code which appeared in advertisements for the game.

"Jet Moto" received varied reviews among critics, with the PC version averaging 75% and the PlayStation version averaging 78.9% at gaming aggregator GameRankings. Due to the game's popularity it was re-released on Sony's budget line, PlayStation Greatest Hits, in August 1998.

The game was most often criticized for its controls and unusual physics, which some reviewers said never feel quite right no matter how long the game is played. Both a "Next Generation" critic and Air Hendrix of "GamePro" likened the overall sensation to riding through an atmosphere made of molasses. The controls, along with the opponent AI, contributed to some reviewers concluding the game had an excessively high degree of difficulty. However, the grappling feature was praised for its innovation and for adding greater depth to the challenge.

Several reviewers commented that the graphics are highly uneven, looking impressive in some points and embarrassingly poor in others. GameSpot's review of the PC port praised the 3Dfx support.

Several reviewers praised the soundtrack to the game. Mark Cooke of "Game Revolution" said the spy film-like title screen music in particular both sounded cool and was appropriate for the game. The surf guitar was a strong point for Electric Playground's Victor Lucas, who cited it as one of the best video game soundtracks of 1996. "GameSpot" reviewer Shane Mooney also praised the energy of the soundtrack. However, Air Hendrix said that though the menu music is decent, the in-game music is weak.

While Lucas and "GameSpot"s Glenn Rubenstein compared "Jet Moto" unfavorably to "Wave Race 64", "Next Generation"s reviewer argued that "in all fairness, the comparison isn't truly appropriate: where "Wave Race" is based around an existing vehicle that provides a basis of reference, there is no actual criterion for criticism on whether a jet moto game accurately emulates the 'jet motoing' experience." He concluded that "despite [its] odd control and graphic characteristics, "Jet Moto" remains a lot of fun. With intense, challenging races featuring twenty competitors on ten unique tracks, it never fails to be compelling." Chris Roper of IGN called it one of the best racing games available for the PlayStation. In contrast, Air Hendrix assessed that it "wipes out all over the pavement with finicky, mushy controls and painful gameplay." Lucas praised the design of the jet moto bikes, stating the design was imaginative and vibrant. Todd Mowatt and Joe Rybicki of "Electronic Gaming Monthly" gave the game laudatory reviews, saying the track design is its best aspect. Rubenstein concluded that while devout racing game enthusiasts would be pleased at how long it takes to complete the game, the general gamer would have more fun with a game that's easier to learn.

In its PlayStation 3 Retro Roundup, IGN opined the game held up well to its direct competitors at the time, "Wave Race 64" and the Wipeout series, then stated "Jet Moto" was "still a pretty fun experience more than 10 years after its original release."

"Jet Moto"s popularity would spawn two additional sequels, "Jet Moto 2", also developed by SingleTrac, and "Jet Moto 3", developed by Pacific Coast Power & Light. Two other titles were cancelled during their development. Pacific Coast Power & Light was also developing "Jet Moto 2124" for the PlayStation, set over a century after the first three games, however the game was cancelled when "Jet Moto 3" showed poor sales. "", developed by RedZone Interactive, was also cancelled. "SOLAR" would have been the first title in the series to appear on the PlayStation 2.

Present-day wishlists for video game sequels have often included "Jet Moto". 1UP.com listed a fourth "Jet Moto" in their "Sequels We Want, and the Formulas They Need" feature, stating that "Jet Moto" "symbolized everything that made the original PlayStation cooler than anything else at the time". IGN felt similarly, listing "Jet Moto" in their "Dirty Dozen: Revival of the Fittest" feature, calling the game "a novel racer with enough staying power to make it an instant hit".


</doc>
<doc id="28300000" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28300000" title="Michael Bostwick">
Michael Bostwick

Michael Paul Trevor Bostwick (born 17 May 1988) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for club Lincoln City.

Bostwick started his career at Millwall, and played regularly for the club's under-18 team and reserve team. At the age of 17, he joined Conference National club Crawley Town on work experience during the latter stages of 2005–06 season. On return to Millwall, Bostwick signed a new one-year contract with the club, but was sent back to Crawley Town on loan in August 2006. Bostwick played regularly for Crawley until he was recalled by Millwall in January 2007, and was told he was surplus to requirements at the club. He subsequently signed for Rushden & Diamonds on an 18-month contract, but only played eight matches before falling out of favour at Nene Park, and was released by Rushden at the end of the 2006–07 campaign.

He joined Ebbsfleet United in August 2007 ahead of the 2007–08 season, playing regularly throughout the campaign, helping Ebbsfleet win the FA Trophy at Wembley Stadium in May 2008. Bostwick rejected a contract offer from Ebbsfleet, and signed for Stevenage just ten days after the FA Trophy success. He was a regular fixture in the club's defence and midfield throughout the season, winning the FA Trophy once more in May 2009. His second season at the club was a successful one, helping the Hertfordshire club earn promotion to the Football League for the first time in the club's history. The following season, Bostwick played an instrumental part in Stevenage earning back-to-back promotions following their sixth-place finish and subsequent League Two play-off victory in May 2011. After four years at Stevenage, Bostwick signed for Peterborough United in July 2012, where he spent five seasons. He then joined Lincoln City ahead of the 2017–18 season.

Bostwick began his career as a trainee with Millwall, and was a regular in the club's Under-18 team, as well as playing several times for the reserve team. During the latter stages of the 2005–06 season, Bostwick joined Conference National club Crawley Town on work experience. The move counted as work experience, as opposed to a loan, because of Bostwick's age – subsequently he could not appear for the first team of another Football League club, but was eligible to play for the first team of a non-league club. He made his debut for Crawley a week after joining the club, coming on as an 89th minute substitute in a 1–0 victory against Forest Green Rovers. He came on in the 83rd minute in the following match against Southport at Haig Avenue, as well as playing for 25 minutes against Burton Albion, setting up Tony Scully's 89th-minute equaliser. He subsequently started his first match in April 2006, playing the whole match in a 2–0 win against Aldershot Town, scoring Crawley's second. A week later, Bostwick scored both of Crawley's goals in the club's 2–2 draw against Halifax Town, netting in quick succession to give Crawley a two-goal lead. He played a total of eight matches for Crawley during his two-month work experience, scoring three times.<ref name="Crawley Town 2005/2006 player appearances"></ref> On return to his parent club in May 2006, Bostwick signed a one-year contract with Millwall. Shortly before the start of the 2006–07 season, Bostwick was loaned out to Crawley Town for a second spell at the club. He played in the club's first five matches of the season, scoring twice from midfield in a 3–2 away win at Stevenage. In late August 2006, Crawley Town extended the loan deal until the end of the season, although Millwall were able to recall him in the January transfer window if they deemed it necessary. Bostwick played a total of 25 times during the first half of the season, scoring twice, before Millwall recalled him in January 2007.<ref name="Crawley Town 2006/2007 player appearances"></ref>

Bostwick returned to Millwall, but failed to make any first-team appearances.<ref name="Millwall 2006/2007 player appearances"></ref> In late January 2007, he was allowed to leave the club on a free transfer to sign for Rushden & Diamonds on an 18-month contract. Rushden were managed by Graham Westley, who had previously written about Bostwick's credentials in his weekly column in "The Non-League Paper" when Westley was out of work. Bostwick made his Rushden debut in the club's 2–1 away win at league leaders Dagenham & Redbridge, and came off the bench in the following match against St Albans City. He was sent-off for the first time in his career in Rushden's 2–2 draw with Aldershot Town, receiving a red card for two bookable offences. Bostwick played eight matches for Rushden, but fell out of favour at the club in March 2007 after Westley was fired. As a result, Bostwick did not play for Rushden again, and was released by the club at the end of the 2006–07 season.<ref name="Rushden 2006/2007 player appearances"></ref>

At the start of the 2007–08 season, Bostwick signed for Ebbsfleet United on an initial three-month contract, with a view to a contract extension after the three-month period. He was signed to add "depth to the squad", as well as to "provide cover at the back and midfield areas". He made his Ebbsfleet debut a day after signing for the club, starting the match in central defence in a 1–0 victory at Nene Park against his former employers, Rushden. He scored his first goal for the club in a 1–1 draw against Exeter City in September 2007, turning in Stacy Long's corner to give Ebbsfleet the lead. A month later, he was sent-off in the club's 3–1 away win against Altrincham for picking up two yellow cards. He returned to the first team in November 2007, assisting Stacy Long's goal in the club's 2–1 win against Stafford Rangers. Shortly before the match, Bostwick signed a new contract at Ebbsfleet, keeping him at the club until the end of the season. In January 2008, Bostwick netted Ebbsfleet's third goal in a 4–1 victory against Grays Athletic at Stonebridge Road, and scored again just four days later in another 4–1 win, this time in the 90th minute against Weymouth. He scored his fourth league goal of the season against Stevenage at Broadhall Way in March 2008, scoring with a close-range header in a 3–1 defeat. Bostwick also came off the bench on the hour mark against Farsley Celtic to assist two of Ebbsfleet's goals in a 3–1 victory – with Liam Daish saying Bostwick "changed the game". He made another assist in the club's next home fixture, a 2–0 win against Altrincham. Bostwick was also instrumental in the club's FA Trophy campaign during the season, playing in seven of the club's eight FA Trophy matches, and scoring in a 1–1 draw against Aldershot Town in the semi-final second leg. He also played the whole match in the Final as Ebbsfleet ran out 1–0 winners against Torquay United at Wembley Stadium. He made 51 appearances for Ebbsfleet in all competitions during the season, scoring five times.<ref name="Ebbsfleet 2007/2008 player appearances"></ref>

Bostwick was offered a new deal by Ebbsfleet ahead of the 2008–09 season, but rejected the offer and instead opted to join Stevenage on a two-year deal, playing under the management of Graham Westley once more. He made his debut for Stevenage in the club's opening match of the season, a 5–0 defeat to Wrexham at the Racecourse Ground. Bostwick was used in both the centre of defence and the centre of midfield during the first half of the 2008–09 season, as well as playing at full back in the club's 1–0 defeat to Kettering Town in September 2008. Bostwick provided the assist for Lee Boylan's second-minute goal against Forest Green Rovers in a 3–0 victory. A month later, he scored his first goal for the club, scoring in the 80th minute against Mansfield Town to give Stevenage a 3–2 lead. He scored his second goal of the season against Weymouth in February 2009, latching onto a long pass and sliding the ball past the goalkeeper to secure a 3–0 away win. Bostwick also scored Stevenage's first in a 2–0 away win at Crawley Town, scoring with a strike from just outside the area as Stevenage finished in the final play-off spot. He subsequently played in both of Stevenage's Conference Premier play-off matches against Cambridge United in April 2009, as the club lost 4–3 on aggregate. Bostwick played in all seven of the club's successful FA Trophy campaign, as well as playing the whole match in Stevenage's 2–0 win against York City in the Final at Wembley Stadium. The FA Trophy win meant that Bostwick had won the competition in consecutive years. Bostwick made a total of 49 appearances in his first season at Stevenage, scoring three times.<ref name="Stevenage Borough 2008/2009 player appearances"></ref>

Bostwick started in Stevenage's first match of the 2009–10 season, in a 1–1 draw against Tamworth, and also provided the assist for Joel Byrom's goal in Stevenage's next home fixture against Ebbsfleet United. His first goal of the season came in the club's 2–1 home win against Rushden & Diamonds, scoring from the edge of the area to give Stevenage the lead. He also provided an assist in the club's 3–2 away fixture against Mansfield Town at Field Mill, as Stevenage came from two goals down to win the match. A week later, Bostwick scored a volley away at Chester City, although due to Chester City being expelled from the league, Bostwick's goal, and subsequently Stevenage's 1–0 win, were removed from the records. Bostwick continued his goalscoring form, scoring from 25 yards after a well-worked corner in injury time, in a 4–0 win against Hayes & Yeading United. He scored a similar goal against Gateshead in November 2009, his fifth of the season. His next goal came in March 2010, scoring the opener from 30 yards against Crawley Town as Stevenage won 2–0, and he scored another goal two weeks later, heading in an Andy Drury corner as Stevenage came from behind to win 2–1 at Grays Athletic. Bostwick also played in the club's 2–0 win against Kidderminster Harriers at Aggborough in April 2010 – the match that secured Stevenage's place in the Football League for the first time in the club's history. He played in five of the club's FA Trophy fixtures during the 2009–10 season, scoring once in a match against Dover Athletic in January 2010. He also played in the Final at Wembley Stadium, but was unable to record a third Wembley victory as Stevenage lost 2–1 to Barrow after extra-time. In total, Bostwick played 52 matches in all competitions, scoring eight times.<ref name="Stevenage Borough 2009/2010 player appearances"></ref> At the end of the season, Bostwick was out of contract and Westley announced that he expected him to leave, saying it would be "very difficult" to keep hold of him. However, in June 2010, Bostwick signed a new two-year deal with Stevenage, despite attracting interest from several League One clubs.

Ahead of the 2010–11 season, Bostwick scored in a pre-season friendly against Hitchin Town, and made his first league appearance in the club's 2–2 draw with Macclesfield Town, playing the whole match. He scored his first goal of the season in the club's first ever Football League victory, in a 3–1 win against Stockport County, scoring with a shot from 30 yards to double Stevenage's lead just before the interval. In November 2010, Bostwick provided two assists for Stevenage's goals in the club's 3–0 win away at local rivals Barnet. Bostwick scored his second goal of the 2010–11 season in Stevenage's 3–1 FA Cup win over Newcastle United in January 2011. Bostwick picked up a loose pass and rifled a shot that went in off the post from 25 yards out to give Stevenage a two-goal lead. A month later, he scored his third goal of the season in a 4–0 win against Cheltenham Town, cutting in from the right and drilling a low shot across the face of goal and past the goalkeeper. Bostwick played a total of 51 matches during the 2010–11 season, scoring three goals.<ref name="Stevenage 2010/2011 player appearances"></ref> This included three appearances in the 2010–11 League Two play-offs following Stevenage's sixth-placed finish. Following a 3–0 aggregate victory over Accrington Stanley, Stevenage earned promotion to League One after a 1–0 win against Torquay United at Old Trafford on 28 May 2011, with Bostwick playing the whole match.

Prior to the start of the 2011–12 season, Bostwick scored in Stevenage's 2–1 pre-season victory at Dagenham & Redbridge on 30 July 2011. A week later, he started in Stevenage's first ever League One fixture, a 0–0 draw against Exeter City. Three days after the draw, on 9 August, Bostwick scored his first goal of the campaign in a 4–3 extra-time defeat to Championship team Peterborough United, scoring with a 25-yard shot that took the match to extra-time. In Stevenage's next league fixture, a 1–1 draw away at Chesterfield, he was sent-off after receiving two yellow cards, resulting in a one-match suspension. Bostwick signed a two-year contract extension with the club on 26 August 2011. He scored his second goal of the 2011–12 season in Stevenage's 5–1 home win over Sheffield Wednesday, with his 25-yard half-volley rebounding off of the post and into the net to give Stevenage a three-goal lead in the first-half. Bostwick was also instrumental in the club's 6–1 away victory at Colchester United on 26 December, scoring one goal and assisting another. His goal restored Stevenage's two-goal cushion in the match on the hour mark, before he assisted Scott Laird from a well-worked free-kick routine ten minutes later. He beat his goal tally from the previous season when he scored his fourth goal of the campaign in Stevenage's 4–2 victory against Milton Keynes Dons at Broadhall Way on 24 January 2012, with Bostwick restoring parity in the first-half with a long-range strike. Bostwick also scored in a 2–2 draw against Huddersfield Town on 28 February 2012, heading in Joel Byrom's cross to half the deficit as Stevenage fought back to earn a point after being two goals down. He scored two goals in as many matches in late March 2012, both of which were long-range strikes that drew Stevenage level in matches against Walsall and AFC Bournemouth respectively. Four days after the goal against Bournemouth, Bostwick was on the scoresheet once again, his third goal within the space of a week, scoring late-on to give Stevenage a brief lead in an eventual draw against Wycombe Wanderers. He was almost ever-present during the campaign, playing 53 times and scoring eight goals, as Stevenage narrowly lost over two legs in the play-off semi-final. During his successful four seasons with the club, Bostwick made 207 appearances, scoring 22 goals.

In July 2012, Bostwick signed for Championship club Peterborough United on a three-year contract, for an undisclosed fee. Peterborough chairman Darragh MacAnthony stated that Bostwick was manager Darren Ferguson's "number one transfer target for the summer". He made his Peterborough debut in the club's first match of the 2012–13 season, playing the whole match in a 4–0 home win over Southend United in the League Cup. Bostwick scored his first goal for the club in his fourth appearance, halving the deficit with a "stunning volley from the edge of the area" as Peterborough lost 2–1 at home to Leeds United on 25 August 2012. He was made captain ahead of Peterborough's home match against Derby County in October 2012, and opened the scoring in the match with a volley, his second goal of the season, in a 3–0 victory. Bostwick's third goal of the campaign came in Peterborough's surprise victory over table-topping Cardiff City, scoring a powerful 30-yard free-kick in a 2–1 win. He added another goal to his tally in the club's important 2–1 win over Barnsley at London Road on 1 January 2013, again scoring courtesy of a free-kick.

On 20 July 2017, Bostwick signed for newly promoted League Two club Lincoln City on a two-year contract for an undisclosed fee. After contributing to City's league and EFL Trophy campaigns, appearing 51 times, keeping 17 clean sheets and being featured in the EFL League Two Team of the Season, on 26 April 2018, Bostwick extended his contract with the Imps for an extra year, keeping him at the club until June 2020.

Bostwick was called up to play for the England C team, who represent England at non-league level, in a match against Italy C in Benevento in November 2008. He came on as a 56th-minute substitute in a match that ended 2–2. He was called up again to represent England C in a match against Belgium U23 at the Kassam Stadium in May 2009. However, he was forced to withdraw due to injury, and was subsequently replaced by fellow Stevenage midfielder Joel Byrom. Bostwick was called up once more to play against Poland U23 in Grodzisk Wielkopolski, but again had to withdraw due to injury.

Bostwick was born in Eltham, London and grew up in South East London. He supports West Ham United, and states that his footballing hero when growing up was Rio Ferdinand. He has one daughter, whom his partner gave birth to in 2007.

Ebbsfleet United

Stevenage

Lincoln City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="28300005" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28300005" title="Lawrie Wilson">
Lawrie Wilson

Lawrie Robert Wilson (born 11 September 1987) is an English footballer who plays as a right-back for National League club Ebbsfleet United.

Wilson started his career at Charlton Athletic, and played regularly for the club's Under-18 side and reserve team until he was released in 2006. He joined Colchester United ahead of the 2006–07 season, but did not make any first-team appearances during his one-year stay with the club. During his time at Colchester he was loaned out to Conference South side Welling United, making four appearances during his one-month loan spell.

Wilson signed for Hertfordshire side Stevenage in August 2007, and featured regularly for the club for two seasons, playing in the club's successful FA Trophy campaign in May 2009. However, he suffered a dislocated ankle and broken leg in three places in August 2009, ruling him out for eight months, but returned to first-team action in April 2010 as Stevenage won promotion to the Football League for the first time in the club's history. He then played a key part during the club's 2010–11 campaign, helping Stevenage earn promotion to League One.

In July 2012, Wilson rejoined Charlton for an undisclosed fee. He stayed with the club for three seasons, making 96 appearances in the Championship. He signed with Bolton Wanderers in August 2015, but was loaned out to Peterborough United in January 2016, who were managed by former Stevenage boss Graham Westley. Bolton were relegated at the end of the 2015–16 season, before he featured 26 times throughout the 2016–17 campaign as they won promotion out of League One at the first attempt. He signed with Port Vale in July 2017, before moving on to Ebbsfleet United six months later. He was loaned out to Maidstone United in September 2018.

Wilson began his career as a trainee with Charlton Athletic, and was a regular in the club's Under-18 team, where he played in defence. He progressed through the club's youth system, and featured in Charlton's reserve side throughout the club's 2005–06 campaign, making a total of 16 appearances for the reserve side as a second-year scholar. However, he failed to make any first-team appearances and was subsequently allowed to search for a new club. In February 2006, he played for Luton Town's reserve side in a match against Stevenage Borough reserves at Kenilworth Road, although no transfer materialised. He was officially released by Charlton in April 2006. A month later, Wilson went on trial at League Two side Shrewsbury Town, and played the whole match in Shrewsbury's 2–1 pre-season friendly home win against Rotherham United, although he was unsuccessful in his attempt to earn a professional contract with the club. In August 2006, Wilson signed a one-year deal with Colchester United. Similarly to his time at Charlton, Wilson featured regularly for the club's reserve side throughout the 2006–07 season, but failed to make any first-team appearances, making the substitute's bench once in a 1–0 loss to MK Dons in the League Cup. He was loaned out to Conference South side Welling United in December 2006. He made his debut for Welling in the club's 1–0 win away at Cambridge City, but was sent-off after just 27 minutes for violent conduct. He returned to first-team action in Welling's 0–0 draw with Basingstoke Town at Park View Road in the FA Trophy, and also played the whole match in Welling's 2–1 away win against Thurrock. Wilson played his last game for Welling in the club's 2–0 win at home to Fisher Athletic in early January 2007. He played a total of four times for Welling during his one-month loan spell at the club. On returning to Layer Road, Wilson was released at the end of the 2006–07 season, and failed to make a first-team appearance for Colchester. Ahead of the 2007–08 season, Wilson spent pre-season trialling at Brentford and Stockport County respectively, training with Stockport for a number of weeks and playing in several pre-season friendlies, but was ultimately not offered a contract.

Wilson signed for Stevenage on 16 August 2007, joining on a one-year contract. Manager Mark Stimson handed him his Stevenage debut just a day after signing for the club, coming on as an 86th-minute substitute in Stevenage's 3–0 win against Weymouth. Wilson played in a total of 27 games during his first season at Stevenage, with the majority of his appearances coming in the second half of 2007–08 season.<ref name="Stevenage Borough 2007/2008 player appearances"></ref> The following season under the new management of Graham Westley, Wilson featured regularly in both the full-back position and at right midfield.<ref name="Stevenage Borough 2008/2009 player appearances"></ref> In August 2008, Wilson scored his first ever professional goal in Stevenage's 3–1 away win at Barrow, taking advantage of a goalkeeping error in the 75th minute of the match to seal Stevenage's first win of the 2008–09 campaign. He made assists in games against Burton Albion and Forest Green Rovers respectively. He was also sent-off for the first time in Stevenage colours in the club's 3–1 home defeat to Histon in November 2008, picking up the red card for "offensive language". Wilson returned to the first team at the start of December and remained in the first-team until the end of the season,<ref name="Stevenage Borough 2008/2009 player appearances"></ref> assisting goals in important wins against Woking and Cambridge United as Stevenage finished in the final play-off spot. He subsequently played in both of Stevenage's Conference Premier play-off games against Cambridge United in April 2009, as the club lost 4–3 on aggregate. Wilson's versatility also came into use during the club's successful FA Trophy campaign during the same season, as he played in four different positions in six of Stevenage's FA Trophy fixtures. He was deployed at left midfield in Stevenage's 2–0 win against York City in the Final at Wembley Stadium.

Wilson started in Stevenage's first game of the 2009–10 season in a 1–1 draw against Tamworth, adopting a much more attacking midfield role on the right wing. In the following game, Wilson's through pass assisted Andy Drury's goal against Hayes & Yeading United, and Wilson continued his impressive start to the season by assisting Chris Beardsley's goal against Ebbsfleet United. In the same game, Wilson scored his first goal of the season, latching onto Ronnie Henry's ball before lashing the ball past the goalkeeper to give Stevenage a three-goal lead. Two weeks later, in Stevenage's 2–1 victory against Rushden & Diamonds, Wilson suffered a "career threatening injury" following a tackle from Michael Corcoran, which resulted in Wilson suffering a dislocated ankle and broken leg in three places. Wilson had a successful operation the following day and was expected to miss the rest of the 2009–10 season. Wilson returned earlier than expected, playing in a reserve match against Ipswich Town in March 2010, and he made his return to the first-team a week later against Luton Town, coming on as a 65th-minute substitute. Two days later, Wilson started his first game in just over eight months against AFC Wimbledon. He scored Stevenage's second goal, scoring on the half volley from Joel Byrom's chipped pass in Stevenage's 3–0 win at Kingsmeadow. He also played in the club's 2–0 win against Kidderminster Harriers at Aggborough in April 2010 – the game that secured Stevenage's place in Football League for the first time in the club's history. Wilson played a total of 13 matches during the season, scoring twice.<ref name="Stevenage Borough 2009/2010 player appearances"></ref> At the end of the season, it was announced that Wilson had signed a contract to keep him at the club until July 2011.<ref name="Stevenage Borough 2009/2010 player appearances"></ref>

Wilson played in Stevenage's first fixture of the 2010–11 season, playing 72 minutes in the club's 2–2 draw with Macclesfield Town. In September 2010, he was sent-off in a game against Cheltenham Town at Whaddon Road, receiving a red card for two bookable offences. He subsequently missed Stevenage's 0–0 draw against Torquay United as a result of the suspension. Shortly after, he signed a new contract with the club, keeping him at Stevenage until 2012. He returned to the first-team in Stevenage's win against Lincoln City, and provided two assists in Stevenage's 4–1 win away at Hereford United three days later. Wilson's fine form continued, as he was on hand to assist both of Stevenage's goals in a 2–1 win over Burton Albion – firstly being fouled in the area to earn Stevenage a penalty, and secondly crossing the ball into the box for Chris Holroyd to volley home. He scored his first goal of the 2010–11 season in Stevenage's 2–2 draw against Accrington Stanley in February 2011. A month later, Wilson scored both of Stevenage's goals in a 2–1 home win against Lincoln City, his second goal coming from 25 yards out after a neat interchange with John Mousinho. He scored his fourth goal of the season on 9 April, netting an injury-time equaliser in a 2–2 draw at Stockport County. Wilson scored his fifth goal of the season on 25 April, scoring the only goal of the game in Stevenage's 1–0 home win against Port Vale. He scored five goals in 50 appearances during the club's 2010–11 campaign, a season that witnessed Stevenage earn promotion to League One for the first time in their history.

Wilson was part of the starting eleven in Stevenage's first ever League One fixture at the start of the 2011–12 season, playing the whole game as the club drew 0–0 at home to Exeter City. In Stevenage's next game, Wilson provided the assist for Stacy Long's goal in a 4–3 extra-time defeat to Peterborough United in the League Cup. He also assisted Craig Reid in the club's 3–1 away win at Bournemouth on 16 August 2011. Three days later, on 19 August, Wilson signed a contract extension at the club. He added to his two previous assists by assisting Craig Reid's first goal in the club's 4–2 home win against Rochdale on 3 September. Wilson scored his first goal of the 2011–12 season in a 5–1 home win over Sheffield Wednesday, scoring Stevenage's fourth goal of the match just before half-time. In the same game, Wilson provided the run and pass to assist Darius Charles' second-half goal, Stevenage's fifth of the game. He added a second goal to his goal tally in Stevenage's League Trophy penalty loss against League Two side AFC Wimbledon — opening the scoring after seven minutes when Brett Johnson's clearance cannoned off of Wilson's leg and beat the stranded Seb Brown in the AFC Wimbledon goal. His fine form for the season continued, and he was pivotal in Stevenage's 2–1 home win against Sheffield United, assisting Mark Roberts' goal, before winning a penalty late-on, which was duly converted by Scott Laird. He also set-up Chris Beardsley's 38th-minute strike, to open the scoring, in an eventual 2–1 win against Tranmere Rovers at Broadhall Way. In the club's last game of 2011, on 31 December, Wilson scored the only goal of the game as Stevenage defeated Wycombe Wanderers 1–0 at Adams Park. The goal came in the 82nd minute of the match, with Wilson powerfully beating Nikki Bull from close-range following Luke Freeman's precise cross. He was also on hand to score two of Stevenage's five goals in a 5–1 victory against Rochdale at Spotland on 14 January 2012. Both of Wilson's goals came in the second-half; the first came shortly after the interval, when he ran onto Chris Beardsley's rolled pass to fire the ball into the net, with his second coming after he ran onto Mark Roberts' clearance to calmly beat Péter Kurucz in the Rochdale goal. Wilson scored one further goal during the campaign, scoring a diving header in injury-time in a 1–0 win over Oldham Athletic at Broadhall Way. It took Wilson's goal tally to six for the season,<ref name="Games played by Lawrie Wilson in 2011/2012"></ref> with the player being ever-present during the campaign under both Westley and new manager Gary Smith, playing in all 56 of the club's games, as Stevenage narrowly lost in the play-off semi-finals.<ref name="Games played by Lawrie Wilson in 2011/2012"></ref>

In the summer of 2012, Wilson was strongly linked to Peterborough United, as well as Charlton Athletic. Stevenage confirmed that they had received two bids for the player, both of which from Championship clubs. In July 2012, Wilson signed for Chris Powell's Charlton, the club he began his football career with, for an undisclosed fee. He made his debut for Charlton in the club's opening game of the 2012–13 season, a 1–1 draw with Leyton Orient in the League Cup at The Valley on 14 August, which Charlton went on to lose 4–3 on penalties after extra-time. During the match, Wilson gave away a penalty after fouling David Mooney, although Mooney missed the subsequent spot-kick. Wilson scored his first goal for the "Addicks" during his tenth league appearance, scoring from close range to restore parity in a 1–1 draw with Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux on 27 October. After a month out of first-team action, Wilson returned for Charlton's 2–2 home draw with Brighton & Hove Albion on 8 December, and scored the first goal of the match courtesy of a glancing header from Dale Stephens' cross. It turned out to be Wilson's last goal of the season, a campaign in which he made 32 appearances as Charlton finished in ninth position in the Championship, just three points behind the final play-off place.<ref name="Games played by Lawrie Wilson in 2012/2013"></ref>

He made a total of 49 appearances across the 2013–14 campaign as Charlton posted an 18th-place finish under new manager José Riga. He competed with Chris Solly and Joe Gomez at the start of the 2014–15 season, but speaking in November manager Bob Peeters dismissed reports that he was willing to allow Wilson to leave on loan. On 20 March 2015, Wilson joined Championship rivals Rotherham United on an emergency loan. Manager Steve Evans hinted that the loan move would allow him to evaluate whether or not to sign Wilson permanently in the summer. However he would play just three games for the "Millers" in a brief stay at the New York Stadium.

Wilson signed for Bolton Wanderers on 5 August 2015, joining on a two-year deal. Initially the club's first choice right-back, he was frozen out of the first team picture by manager Neil Lennon after putting in a poor performance during a 4–1 defeat at Huddersfield Town on 19 September. On 2 January 2016, Wilson joined League One side Peterborough United on a one-month loan. He said that re-uniting with former Stevenage manager Graham Westley was a factor in the move to the London Road Stadium. Wilson played just four times for the "Posh", starting as a substitute in their game with Sheffield United, and made his final appearance in the 2–2 draw with West Bromwich Albion in the FA Cup. He was recalled to the first team at the Macron Stadium by interim manager Jimmy Phillips for the final two games of the 2015–16 season following injuries to Oscar Threlkeld and Josh Vela and a suspension for Niall Maher.

Wilson regained his first team place at Bolton following an injury to Lewis Buxton in September, and then established himself at right-back under manager Phil Parkinson, who he said had a "good approach" to management. However, he was ruled out of action for 10 weeks with a hamstring injury he picked up during a 1–1 draw at Milton Keynes Dons on 4 February. The "Trotters" went on to secure promotion at the end of the 2016–17 campaign, though Wilson was released after the club decided not to offer him a new contract.

Following his departure from Bolton, Wilson signed a two-year contract with newly relegated League Two side Port Vale on 15 July 2017, after manager Michael Brown needed to replace departing right-back and club captain Ben Purkiss. However, he was frozen out of the first-team picture under new manager Neil Aspin, and was not in the matchday squad despite suspensions for James Gibbons and injuries to Adam Yates and Joe Davis.

Having not played for Port Vale in over three months, Wilson joined National League club Ebbsfleet United on 9 January 2018. He was signed by manager Daryl McMahon, his former teammate at Stevenage. He made his Ebbsfleet debut on the same day his signing was announced, playing the whole match in a 2–1 victory at Maidstone United.

Wilson struggled for first-team action at Stonebridge Road at the start of the 2018–19 season. On 20 September 2018, he joined Maidstone United on a month long loan.

Wilson was called up to play for the England C team on 27 August 2009, who represent England at non-league level, in a game against Hungary C in Budapest. However, he was forced to pull out of the team after suffering a dislocated ankle and broken leg just three days later.

Wilson is primarily a right-back, but is also adept at playing on the right-side of midfield, and can also fill in at left-back, central midfield or the left-hand side of midfield if needed.

Stevenage

Bolton Wanderers



</doc>
<doc id="28335087" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28335087" title="Toxin-antitoxin system">
Toxin-antitoxin system

A toxin-antitoxin system is a set of two or more closely linked genes that together encode both a "toxin" protein and a corresponding "antitoxin". When these systems are contained on plasmids – transferable genetic elements – they ensure that only the daughter cells that inherit the plasmid survive after cell division. If the plasmid is absent in a daughter cell, the unstable antitoxin is degraded and the stable toxic protein kills the new cell; this is known as 'post-segregational killing' (PSK). Toxin-antitoxin systems are widely distributed in prokaryotes, and organisms often have them in multiple copies.

Toxin-antitoxin systems are typically classified according to how the antitoxin neutralises the toxin. In a type I toxin-antitoxin system, the translation of messenger RNA (mRNA) that encodes the toxin is inhibited by the binding of a small non-coding RNA antitoxin that binds the toxin mRNA. The toxic protein in a type II system is inhibited post-translationally by the binding of an antitoxin protein. Type III toxin-antitoxin systems consist of a small RNA that binds directly to the toxin protein and inhibits its activity. There are also types IV-VI, which are less common. Toxin-antitoxin genes are often inherited through horizontal gene transfer and are associated with pathogenic bacteria, having been found on plasmids conferring antibiotic resistance and virulence.

Chromosomal toxin-antitoxin systems also exist, some of which are thought to perform cell functions such as responding to stresses, causing cell cycle arrest and bringing about programmed cell death. In evolutionary terms, toxin-antitoxin systems can be considered selfish DNA in that the purpose of the systems are to replicate, regardless of whether they benefit the host organism or not. Some have proposed adaptive theories to explain the evolution of toxin-antitoxin systems; for example, chromosomal toxin-antitoxin systems could have evolved to prevent the inheritance of large deletions of the host genome. Toxin-antitoxin systems have several biotechnological applications, such as a maintaining plasmids in cell lines, targets for antibiotics, and as positive selection vectors.

As stated above, toxin-antitoxin systems are well characterized as plasmid addiction modules. It was also proposed that toxin-antitoxin systems have evolved as plasmid exclusion modules. A cell that would carry two plasmids from the same incompatibility group will eventually generate two daughters cells carrying either plasmid. Should one of these plasmids encode for a TA system, it's "displacement" by another TA-free plasmid system will prevent its inheritance and thus induce post-segregetational killing. This theory was corroborated through computer modelling. Toxin-antitoxin systems can also be found on other mobile genetic elements such as conjugative transposons and temperate bacteriophages and could be implicated in the maintenace and competition of these elements.

Toxin-antitoxin systems could prevent harmful large deletions in a bacterial genome, though arguably deletions of large coding regions are fatal to a daughter cell regardless. In "Vibrio cholerae", multiple type II toxin-antitoxin systems located in a super-integron were shown to prevent the loss of gene cassettes.

"mazEF", a toxin-antitoxin locus found in "E. coli" and other bacteria, was proposed to induce programmed cell death in response to starvation, specifically a lack of amino acids. This would release the cell's contents for absorption by neighbouring cells, potentially preventing the death of close relatives, and thereby increasing the inclusive fitness of the cell that perished. This would be an example of altruism and how bacterial colonies could resemble multicellular organisms. However, the ""mazEF"-mediated PCD" has largely been refuted by several studies.

Another theory states that chromosomal toxin-antitoxin systems are designed to be bacteriostatic rather than bactericidal. RelE, for example, is a global inhibitor of translation, is induced during nutrient stress. By shutting down translation under stress, it could reduce the chance of starvation by lowering the cell's nutrient requirements. However, it was shown that several toxin-antitoxin systems, including "relBE", do not give any competitive advantage under any stress condition.

It has been proposed that chromosomal homologues of plasmid toxin-antitoxin systems may serve as anti-addiction modules, which would allow progeny to lose a plasmid without suffering the effects of the toxin it encodes. For example, a chromosomal copy of "the ccdA" antitoxin encoded in the chromosome of "Erwinia chrysanthemi" is able to neutralize the "ccdB" toxin encoded on the F plasmid and thus, prevent toxin activation when such a plasmid is lost. Similarly, the "ataR" antitoxin encoded on the chromosome of is able neutralize the "ataT" toxin encoded on plasmids found in other enterohemorragic "E. coli".

Type III toxin-antitoxin systems have been shown to protect bacteria from bacteriophages. During an infection, bacteriophages hijack transcription and translation, which could prevent antitoxin replenishment and release toxin, triggering what is called an "abortive infection". Similar protective effects have been observed with type I and type II toxin-antitoxin systems.

When bacteria are challenged with antibiotics, a small and distinct subpopulation of cells is able to withstand the treatment by a phenomenon dubbed as "persistence" (not to be confused with resistance). Due to their bacteriostatic properties, type II toxin-antitoxin systems have previously been tought to be responsible for persistence, by switching a fraction of the bacterial population to a dormant state. However, this hypothesis has been widely invalidated.

Toxin-antitoxin systems have been used as examples of selfish DNA as part of the gene centered view of evolution. It has been theorised that toxin-antitoxin loci serve only to maintain their own DNA, at the expense of the host organism. Thus, chromosomal toxin-antitoxin systems would serve no purpose and could be treated as "junk DNA". For example, the "ccdAB" system encoded in the chromosome of has been shown to be under negative selection, albeit at a slow rate due to its addictive properties.

Type I toxin-antitoxin systems rely on the base-pairing of complementary antitoxin RNA with the toxin mRNA. Translation of the mRNA is then inhibited either by degradation via RNase III or by occluding the Shine-Dalgarno sequence or ribosome binding site of the toxin mRNA. Often the toxin and antitoxin are encoded on opposite strands of DNA. The 5' or 3' overlapping region between the two genes is the area involved in complementary base-pairing, usually with between 19–23 contiguous base pairs.

Toxins of type I systems are small, hydrophobic proteins that confer toxicity by damaging cell membranes. Few intracellular targets of type I toxins have been identified, possibly due to the difficult nature of analysing proteins that are poisonous to their bacterial hosts.

Type I systems sometimes include a third component. In the case of the well-characterised "hok"/"sok" system, in addition to the "hok" toxin and "sok" antitoxin, there is a third gene, called "mok". This open reading frame almost entirely overlaps that of the toxin, and the translation of the toxin is dependent on the translation of this third component. Thus the binding of antitoxin to toxin is sometimes a simplification, and the antitoxin in fact binds a third RNA, which then affects toxin translation.

Type II toxin-antitoxin systems are generally better-understood than type I. In this system a labile proteic antitoxin tightly binds and inhibits the activity of a stable toxin. The largest family of type II toxin-antitoxin systems is "vapBC", which has been found through bioinformatics searches to represent between 37 and 42% of all predicted type II loci.Type II systems are organised in operons with the antitoxin protein typically being located upstream of the toxin, which helps to prevent expression of the toxin without the antitoxin. The proteins are typically around 100 amino acids in length, and exhibit toxicity in a number of ways: CcdB, for example, affects DNA replication by poisoning DNA gyrase whereas the MazF and RelE toxins are endoribonuclease that cleaves cellular mRNAs at specific sequence motifs. The most common toxic activity is the protein acting as an endonuclease, also known as an interferase.

A third protein can sometimes be involved in type II toxin-antitoxin systems. in the case of the ω-ε-ζ (omega-epsilon-zeta) system, the omega protein is a DNA binding protein that negatively regulates the transcription of the whole system. Similarly, the "paaR2" protein regulates the expression of the "paaR2-paaA2-parE2" toxin-antitoxin system. Other toxin-antitoxin systems can be found with a chaperone as a third component. This chaperone is essential for proper folding of the antitoxin, thus making the antitoxin addicted to its cognate chaperone.

Type III toxin-antitoxin systems rely on direct interaction between a toxic protein and an RNA antitoxin. The toxic effects of the protein are neutralised by the RNA gene. One example is the ToxIN system from the bacterial plant pathogen "Erwinia carotovora". The toxic ToxN protein is approximately 170 amino acids long and has been shown to be toxic to "E. coli". The toxic activity of ToxN is inhibited by ToxI RNA, an RNA with 5.5 direct repeats of a 36 nucleotide motif (AGGTGATTTGCTACCTTTAAGTGCAGCTAGAAATTC). Crystallographic analysis of ToxIN has found that ToxN inhibition requires the formation of a trimeric ToxIN complex, whereby three ToxI monomers bind three ToxN monomers; the complex is held together by extensive protein-RNA interactions.

Type IV toxin-antitoxin systems are similar to type II systems, because they consist of two proteins. Unlike type II systems, the antitoxin in type IV toxin-antitoxin systems counteracts the activity of the toxin, and the two proteins do not directly interact.

"ghoST" is a type V toxin-antitoxin system, in which the antitoxin (GhoS) cleaves the "ghoT" mRNA. This system is regulated by a type II system, "mqsRA".

"socAB" is a type VI toxin-antitoxin system that was discovered in "Caulobacter crescentus". The antitoxin, SocA, promotes degradation of the toxin, SocB, by the protease ClpXP.

The biotechnological applications of toxin-antitoxin systems have begun to be realised by several biotechnology organisations. A primary usage is in maintaining plasmids in a large bacterial cell culture. In an experiment examining the effectiveness of the "hok"/"sok" locus, it was found that segregational stability of an inserted plasmid expressing beta-galactosidase was increased by between 8 and 22 times compared to a control culture lacking a toxin-antitoxin system. In large-scale microorganism processes such as fermentation, progeny cells lacking the plasmid insert often have a higher fitness than those who inherit the plasmid and can outcompete the desirable microorganisms. A toxin-antitoxin system maintains the plasmid thereby maintaining the efficiency of the industrial process.

Additionally, toxin-antitoxin systems may be a future target for antibiotics. Inducing suicide modules against pathogens could help combat the growing problem of multi-drug resistance.

Ensuring a plasmid accepts an insert is a common problem of DNA cloning. Toxin-antitoxin systems can be used to positively select for only those cells that have taken up a plasmid containing the inserted gene of interest, screening out those that lack the inserted gene. An example of this application comes from the "ccdB"-encoded toxin, which has been incorporated into plasmid vectors. The gene of interest is then targeted to recombine into the "ccdB" locus, inactivating the transcription of the toxic protein. Thus, cells containing the plasmid but not the insert perish due to the toxic effects of CcdB protein, and only those that incorporate the insert survive.

Another example application involves both the CcdB toxin and CcdA antitoxin. CcdB is found in recombinant bacterial genomes and an inactivated version of CcdA is inserted into a linearised plasmid vector. A short extra sequence is added to the gene of interest that activates the antitoxin when the insertion occurs. This method ensures orientation-specific gene insertion.

Genetically modified organisms must be contained in a pre-defined area during research. Toxin-antitoxin systems can cause cell suicide in certain conditions, such as a lack of a lab-specific growth medium they would not encounter outside of the controlled laboratory set-up.




</doc>
<doc id="28335207" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28335207" title="Angel Bakeries">
Angel Bakeries

Angel Bakeries ( "Ma'afiyot Anjel"), also known as Angel's Bakery, is the largest commercial bakery in Israel, producing 275,000 loaves of bread and 275,000 rolls daily and controlling 30 percent of the country's bread market. With a product line of 100 different types of bread products and 250 different types of cakes and cookies, Angel sells its goods in 32 company-owned outlets nationwide and distributes to 6,000 stores and hundreds of hotels and army bases. It also exports to the United States, United Kingdom, France, Belgium and Denmark.

Founded in 1927 in Jerusalem by Salomon Angel, Angel Bakeries introduced to the Israeli market the first sliced bread, plant-based emulsifiers, and new baking technologies. It has always been family-run, at first by Salomon with his brothers and sons, then by Salomon's grandsons, and today by Salomon's great-grandsons. The company, Salomon A. Angel Ltd., is publicly traded on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, with a turnover of $180 million in 2008.

The original Angel's Bakery was established in Bayit VeGan by Salomon (Shlomo) Angel, a seventh-generation Jerusalemite and scion of a Sephardi family that traced its lineage back to Jews who were expelled from Spain in 1492. Born in the Mishkenot Sha'ananim neighborhood of Jerusalem, Angel was originally a teacher in an Alliance school in Jerusalem, where he fell in love with the principal’s daughter. But principal Chaim Farhi would only allow him to marry his daughter, Esther, if he left teaching and "earned a livelihood". Salomon agreed and became a dry-goods merchant. The couple married in 1916 and had three sons and three daughters.
Angel became a successful dry-goods merchant, traveling regularly to Alexandria, Damascus, and Beirut to buy flour and other basic foodstuffs to sell in Jerusalem. In 1927 one of Angel's customers, the Trachtenberg Bakery in Bayit VeGan, went bankrupt. Angel decided to pay off the bakery's debts and assume ownership, bringing in his father Avraham and three brothers as partners. A few years later, two of his brothers, Leon and Refael, left to open their own bakery in Haifa.

Angel improved the bread-making operation by introducing Israel's first automated weighing machines and investing in new production lines. He often slept overnight at the bakery during the week and returned to his home in Talpiot when the bakery was closed on Shabbat. Later he built an apartment over the bakery to house his family. In the 1930s, the bakery employed 25 workers and had one production line that turned out 8,500 loaves per day. It delivered bread to stores in two trucks and a horse and wagon. During World War II, the bakery contracted to supply bread to the British army, necessitating the purchase of large American-made ovens that could turn out 540 loaves per hour.

Angel's Bakery played a key role in feeding Jerusalem residents during the 1948 War of Independence. When Arabs lay siege to the city and attacked convoys that attempted to bring food and supplies through the narrow mountain pass from Tel Aviv, water and flour were in short supply. Fire trucks were employed to shuttle water to the bakery and "flour was swept up off the bakery floor". Angel's son Danny, who was a Haganah fighter defending the besieged Old City, recalled that the bakery would send bread in convoys to the fighters in the Old City and Mount Scopus, and hide guns and ammunition in the sacks of bread. One of the first horses used for the Jewish assault on the Arabs' Old City positions came from Angel's Bakery; its feet were wrapped in old flour sacks so the British wouldn't detect it.

In the 1950s Salomon's three sons, Avraham, Ovadia and Danny, assumed managerial positions; they became co-CEOs after Salomon's death in 1966. In 1958 Angel's Bakery moved to its present location in the Givat Shaul industrial zone at the corner of Beit Hadfus and Farbstein Streets. The site was chosen because it stood across the street from a flour mill. The Angel brothers built Israel's first flour silo and commissioned a Texas company to construct a 750-foot pipeline to convey flour directly from the mill to the silo to the bakery. Today this pipeline brings 120 tons of flour to the bakery daily. The invention, initially opposed by the Jerusalem municipality for being above-ground, won the Kaplan Prize for distinction in productivity and efficiency.
Also in 1965, the brothers introduced new long ovens and kneading machines. That same year, they produced the country's first sliced bread and bread containing soy flour.

To enter the whole wheat bread market, the bakery imported its own wheat-cleaning machine from Hungary; the machine actually had to be smuggled out since Hungary did not have diplomatic relations with Israel at the time. However, health-food consumers were wary of the first whole-wheat loaves because they were white, not brown. Working with the Health Food Association, Angel's came up with the solution of adding all-natural molasses to the bread to give it a brown color.

Angel's developed the only production line in Israel with the capacity to produce 3,300 loaves of bread per hour. Thirteen other bread production lines in its various plants each yield over 2,000 loaves per hour. One production line in Jerusalem has the capacity to turn out 10,000 pitas in three hours. On each day of the eight-day Hanukkah festival, the Jerusalem plant also fries up 250,000 sufganiyot, the jelly-filled doughnut favored by Israelis at this season.

The bakery's digitally controlled ovens continually adjust temperatures to accommodate the fermenting and baking processes; these ovens can also bake different types of bread at different temperatures on the top and bottom of each oven. Despite the emphasis on innovation and automation, Angel's challahs are still braided by hand.

Angel's Bakery opened its landmark factory store adjacent to the Givat Shaul plant in 1984. The store offers a full selection of packaged breads, rolls, and muffins, bourekas, danishes, fancy cakes, handmade pastries, coffee and soft drinks. For many years, visitors could watch bakers braid challot through a large side window. At the end of the Passover holiday, a long line of customers traditionally forms outside the store after midnight, waiting to buy the first bread off the production line.

Also in 1984, the company began producing pastries and cakes in a factory in Jerusalem, and beginning in the 1990s it began building and acquiring other bakeries in a move to diversify its products and marketing base. It built a new bakery in Lod in 1995 and purchased the Tuv Tam bakery in Netivot in 1999. Today the company owns and operates five plants:


The company has branched into the baking of breads with special grains and added dietary fibers, reduced-calorie and vitamin-fortified breads, and certified organic products.

In 2002, it introduced parbaked pita, challah, rolls, ciabatta, "artisan" breads, and pizza bases, which are flash frozen and sold to customers or stores that complete the baking process themselves for a fresher product.
In keeping with government regulations, Angel Bakeries also produces several varieties of price-controlled bread (, "lechem achid") for the low-income sector.

In the late 1990s, the company opened a chain of cafe/bakeshops in four Jerusalem shopping districts. Besides selling the company's bakery-fresh goods, the Angel Cafe serves salads, sandwiches, pasta dishes, desserts, coffees, teas, and soft drinks.

Angel Bakeries owns a fleet of 200 trucks that transport its products to 32 company-owned outlets, 6,000 stores, and hundreds of hotels and army bases throughout Israel. The distribution schedule is fully computerized and designed to operate on a "just in time" basis: All the bread that needs to be delivered to a specific location is programmed to come off the production line right before it is loaded onto a truck and sent off, guaranteeing maximum freshness.

Angel Bakeries is an approved supplier to the Domino's Pizza chain in Israel, and the sole supplier of hamburger buns to McDonald's restaurants in Israel. It also exports to the United States, United Kingdom, France, Belgium and Denmark. In terms of input, the company uses over 5,000 tons of flour per month.

In the interests of keeping the bread kosher (Angel Bakeries carries the hechsher of both the Edah HaChareidis and the Orthodox Union), Angel's son Ovadia, a trained chemist, collaborated with others at the Angel's-owned Adumim Chemicals plant to develop a new formula for the emulsifiers that bind water and oil in the bread-making process. In those early days, emulsifiers were made with animal-based fats which were not kosher. Ovadia Angel and his team produced emulsifiers from hydrogenated fats, a vegetable-based source, and later sold this new knowledge to other companies.

Another kashrut challenge which the bakery overcame in the early 1950s concerned the ability to produce fresh bread for sale on Sunday mornings after the plant had been closed for Shabbat in accordance with Jewish law. Normally dough takes four to six hours to rise, but the bakery acquired a mixer made by Tweedy of Burnley, England, which could produce dough in only two hours, thus allowing the bakery to bake bread on Saturday night in time for Sunday-morning deliveries. Today Angel Bakeries owns nine such mixers, five of which are used in its Jerusalem plant.

Angel Bakeries operates year-round except for Shabbat, Yom Tov, and Passover week. In accordance with Jewish law, it annually sells its stock to a non-Jew before Passover so that it does not own chametz over the holiday.

Angel's was the first Israeli bakery to go public on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, in 1984. However, it remains a family business. In the 1980s Salomon’s grandchildren moved into managerial positions. Avraham, the eldest brother, who headed the financial division, was succeeded by his daughter Ruthie. Ovadia passed down the directorship of production and technology to his son Gadi. Danny handed over the company directorship to his son Yaron.

Angel Bakeries employs 1,800 workers, including Israelis, Palestinians, and new immigrants. Some of its workers are third-generation employees. In its over 80-year history, the bakery has never had a strike.


The intersection of Kanfei Nesharim and Farbstein Streets, on the northeastern corner of the bakery, was named Shlomo Angel Square by the Jerusalem municipality in honor of the company's founder.

Danny Angel (1920–2009), who worked in the family business from the age of 7 until his death at age 89 was the public face of the company. He was the recipient of many awards, including the Jerusalem Prize, Worthy Citizen of Jerusalem, and Notable Industrialist. He was president of the Manufacturers Association of Israel, the Rotary Club of Israel, and the Variety Club of Israel, which he helped found. He had many friends in the political echelon as well. In recognition of their longtime friendship, Jerusalem mayor Teddy Kollek always gave Danny Angel an honorary spot at the bottom of his electoral list. In 2008, mayoral candidate Nir Barkat continued the tradition and placed Angel's name at the bottom of his electoral list. Angel's funeral was attended by Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, Likud party leader Benjamin Netanyahu, and other government officials.

Joe Angel, a great-great-grandson of Salomon Angel who, like his cousins, helped out at the family bakery in Jerusalem, moved to the United States in 1969 and earned a degree in bakery management from Kansas State University. In 1981 he opened his own Angel's Bakery in Brooklyn, New York, specializing in muffins, cookies and cakes.




</doc>
<doc id="28347058" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28347058" title="Kevin Lowe (lacrosse)">
Kevin Lowe (lacrosse)

Kevin E. Lowe is a finance executive and retired professional lacrosse player who played professional box lacrosse in the National Lacrosse League and professional field lacrosse in Major League Lacrosse from 1995 to 2006. He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men's lacrosse team from 1991 through 1994 and was inducted into the Lacrosse Museum and National Hall of Fame in 2009, joining his brother and father. He was a high school and college lacrosse United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association (USILA) All-American. Lowe has the distinction of being the only player in lacrosse history to score an overtime goal in an NCAA Men's Lacrosse Championship game and a Major League Lacrosse Steinfeld Cup championship game. He holds numerous Princeton scoring records and formerly held the Ivy League single-season assists record. As a college senior, he was honored as the National Collegiate Athletic Association's best lacrosse attackman and the Ivy League's best player. In his four-year college career, Princeton won its first two NCAA tournament Championship, two Ivy League Championships and earned four NCAA Men's Lacrosse Championship tournament invitations.

He is the brother of 1992 Division I Player of the Year and Hall of Famer Darren Lowe and son of Hall of Famer Alan Lowe. Alan, who was the longtime Manhasset High School coach, had won both a World Lacrosse Championship and NCAA Men's Lacrosse Championship. Lowe was a high school All-American from Mineola, New York who received numerous prep accolades: National High School North/South Lacrosse All-Star Game (1990), Nassau County All-Star Game (1990) and Empire State Games (1989). Lowe is currently married with three children. As a youth he played soccer, the quarterback position in American football and the point guard position in basketball. He is currently a stockbroker on Wall Street.

Including the 2009 season, Lowe holds the 5th highest career total in NCAA Division I with 174 assists. Lowe holds numerous Princeton University scoring records (career points, career assists, single-game assists, consecutive games with a point, and points by a freshman). He formerly held the school records for single-season points and single-season assists. Lowe formerly held the Ivy League career assists record. However, since the Ivy League uses conference games only, Ryan Boyle now holds the career assists record although Lowe holds the school record. Lowe is the only Tiger to have scored a point in all of Princeton's games during his career (Boyle scored in all games he played but missed 4 games). His final career goal clinched the 1994 NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship for the Tigers in overtime. Princeton was 52–8 during Lowe's career, including a 7–2 record in four NCAA tournaments. The 1992 and 1993 teams were undefeated 6–0 outright Ivy League champions,

As a freshman, on April 6, 1991, he led number three ranked Princeton to a 17–9 victory over Yale. It was Princeton's first victory over Yale since 1986. Lowe had nine assists, which set a school single-game record. As of 2010, this continues to be a Princeton single-game record. After the tenth game of the season, Lowe continued to lead the nation in assists. He was the leading scorer on Princeton's team that won the 1992 NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship to win its first NCAA tournament. As a senior in 1994, his 73 assists in league games broke his brother Darren's 1992 Ivy League single season record and earned him Ivy League Player of the Year honors. In the 1994 NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship game, he scored the game-winning goal in sudden death overtime against Virginia. After Princeton won the face-off, the goal came on the first shot on goal of overtime. When his collegiate eligibility ended, he had the four highest single-season assist totals in school history.

Lowe was the Jack Turnbull Award and Men's Ivy League Player of the Year Award winner for 1994. He was a first team USILA All-American Team selection in 1994 and a second team selection in 1992 and 1993. He was a four-time All-Ivy League selection and three-time first team All-Ivy League selection (1992, 1993, & 1994)

Lowe played in the indoor National Lacrosse League from 1995 to 2001 and the outdoor Major League Lacrosse from 2003 to 2006. He played with the New York Saints of the NLL in 1995, 1996, 2000 and 2001. Then he played in the MLL with the Long Island Lizards in 2003 and 2004 and the Philadelphia Barrage in 2006. In 2003, he was selected to his first MLL All-Star Game, he was injured and instead served as an assistant coach during the game. He was leading the league in assists and had tied the league single-game assists record (6) prior to injury. He and his brother were teammates for the United States at the 2002 World Lacrosse Championship, where they won the championship. In the semifinal match against the Iroquois Nation, he scored four goals and had an assist. His overtime goal in the 2003 MLL Championship game earned the Long Island Lizards the Steinfeld Cup. It occurred only 22 seconds into the overtime period to give the Lizards the victory over the Baltimore Bayhawks whom they had met in each of the first three MLL championships. Lowe scored four goals and added an assist in the 15–14 victory to earn the MLL Championship MVP award. Lowe, who was second in the MLL with 20 assists, injured his knee during the 2004 season and missed the rest of the year.

The following are his NLL career stats:
The following are his MLL career stats:


</doc>
<doc id="28386410" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28386410" title="Horrible Bosses">
Horrible Bosses

Horrible Bosses is a 2011 American black comedy film directed by Seth Gordon, written by Michael Markowitz, John Francis Daley, and Jonathan Goldstein, based on a story by Markowitz. It stars Jason Bateman, Charlie Day, Jason Sudeikis, Jennifer Aniston, Colin Farrell, Kevin Spacey, and Jamie Foxx. The plot follows three friends, played by Bateman, Day, and Sudeikis, who decide to murder their respective overbearing, abusive bosses, portrayed by Spacey, Aniston, and Farrell.

Markowitz's script was bought by New Line Cinema in 2005 and the film spent six years in various states of pre-production, with a variety of actors attached to different roles. By 2010, Goldstein and Daley had rewritten the script, and the film finally went into production.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on June 30, 2011, and was released on July 8, 2011. The film exceeded financial expectations, accruing over $28 million in the first three days, making it the number two film in the United States during its opening weekend, and going on to become the highest-grossing black comedy film of all-time in unadjusted dollars, breaking the record previously set by "The War of the Roses" in 1990. The film grossed over $209 million worldwide by the end of its theatrical run.

The film received generally positive reviews, with critics praising the ensemble cast, and each lead being singled out for their performances across reviews. The plot received a more mixed response; some reviewers felt that its dark, humorous premise was explored well, while others felt the jokes were racist, homophobic, or misogynistic. A sequel, "Horrible Bosses 2", was released on November 26, 2014.

Nick Hendricks and Dale Arbus are friends who despise their bosses. Nick works at a financial firm for the sadistic David Harken, who implies the possibility of a promotion for Nick for months, only to award it to himself. Dale is a dental assistant being sexually harassed by his boss, Dr. Julia Harris; she threatens to tell his fiancée Stacy that he had sex with her unless he actually has sex with her. Nick and Dale's accountant friend Kurt Buckman enjoys working for Jack Pellitt at a chemical company, but after Jack unexpectedly dies of a heart attack, the company is taken over by Jack's cocaine-addicted son Bobby, whose apathy and incompetence threaten the future of the company.

At night, over drinks, Kurt jokingly suggests that their lives would be happier if their bosses were no longer around. Initially hesitant, they eventually agree to kill their employers. In search of a hitman, the trio meet Dean "Muthafuckah" Jones, an ex-con who agrees to be their "murder consultant". Jones suggests that Dale, Kurt and Nick kill each other's bosses to hide their motive while making the deaths look like accidents.

The three reconnoiter Bobby's house, and Kurt steals Bobby's phone. They next go to Harken's house, where Kurt and Nick go inside while Dale waits in the car. Harken returns home and confronts Dale for littering, but then has an allergy attack from the peanut butter on the litter. Dale saves Harken by stabbing him with an EpiPen. Nick and Kurt think Dale is stabbing Harken to death and flee, with Kurt accidentally dropping Bobby's phone in Harken's bedroom. The next night, Kurt watches Julia's home, but she seduces and has sex with him. Nick and Dale reluctantly wait outside Bobby's and Harken's houses, respectively, to commit the murders, despite neither of them wanting to. Harken discovers Bobby's cellphone in his bedroom and uses it to find his address, suspecting his wife Rhonda is having an affair. He drives over and kills Bobby, with Nick as a secret witness.

Nick flees at high speed, setting off a traffic camera. The trio meet to discuss their reservations about continuing with their plan. They are questioned by the police, who believe the camera footage makes them suspects in Bobby's murder. Lacking evidence, the police are forced to let the trio go free. The trio consult with Jones again, but learn that he never actually killed anyone, having been imprisoned for bootlegging a film. Jones suggests that they get Harken to confess and secretly tape it. The three accidentally crash Harken's surprise birthday party, where Nick and Dale get Harken to confess to the murder before realizing that Kurt, who has the audio recorder, is elsewhere having sex with Rhonda. Harken threatens to kill all three for attempting to blackmail him. They flee by car, but Harken gives chase and repeatedly rams their vehicle. Believing they have committed a crime, the car's navigation-system operator remotely disables Kurt's car, allowing Harken to catch and hold them at gunpoint. Harken shoots himself in the leg as he boasts about his plan to frame them for murdering Bobby and attempting to kill him to get rid of the witness.

The police arrest Nick, Dale and Kurt, but the navigation-system operator, Gregory, reveals that it is his company's policy to record all conversations for quality assurance. Gregory plays the tape that has Harken confessing he murdered Pellitt. Harken is sentenced to 25 years to life in prison, while the friends get their charges waived. Nick is promoted to president of the company under a sadistic CEO, Kurt retains his job under a new boss, and Dale, with the help of Jones, blackmails Julia into ending her harassment.

During the six-year development of the film, several actors were in negotiations to star, including Owen Wilson, Vince Vaughn, Matthew McConaughey, Ryan Reynolds, Dax Shepard, and Johnny Knoxville.

Donald Sutherland portrays Jack Pellitt, Bobby's father and Kurt's boss. On July 27, 2010, Isaiah Mustafa was confirmed as joining the cast. Mustafa was quoted as saying "It's a smaller role". He appears as Officer Wilkens. Julie Bowen appears in the film as Rhonda, Harken's wife. Bowen stated that her character "may or may not be a hussy", the character described as intentionally making her husband jealous. Ioan Gruffudd has a cameo as a male prostitute erroneously hired as a hitman. Lindsay Sloane appears as Dale's fiancée Stacy. P. J. Byrne plays Kenny Sommerfeld, a former investment manager, now scrounging for drinks, while Wendell Pierce and Ron White play a pair of cops. Bob Newhart makes a cameo as sadistic Comnidyne CEO Louis Sherman. John Francis Daley, a screenwriter on the film, cameos as Nick's co-worker Carter. Meghan Markle has a role in the film as Jaime.

Markowitz's script for "Horrible Bosses" was sold at auction to New Line Cinema by Ratner's production company Rat Entertainment in 2005 for a six-figure amount. Ratner initially was interested in directing, but became occupied with directing the comedy "Tower Heist". Frank Oz and David Dobkin were in talks to direct. Jonathan Goldstein and John Francis Daley rewrote the script in 2010, and the project went into production with Seth Gordon directing.

Production designer Shepherd Frankel specifically set out to create distinctly different environments for the three employees and their respective bosses' homes and offices. Nick and Harken's workplace is the "Comnidyne" bullpen, which was designed to "enhance the discomfort and anxiety of lower-level employees clustered in the center of the room where every movement is monitored by the boss from his corner office." The design team met with financial strategists and management companies to learn about the architecture of their office layouts to visually represent the experience of starting from a low-ranking position in a cubicle and aspiring to an office. Costume designer Carol Ramsey worked with Frankel and set decorator Jan Pascale to match Harken's suit to that of the surrounding "cold grey and blue" color palette of his office. Harken's home was described as "equally lacking in warmth" as the office but more lavishly decorated and "for show", including an intentionally oversized portrait of him with his "trophy wife".

Designing Julia's office was described as a "challenge", infusing a "sensual vibe" into a dental office. Frankel approached the design through Julia's mentality, stating, "She's a Type A professional at the top of her game, who likes to play cat-and-mouse, so it's a completely controlled environment, with apertures and views into other rooms so she always knows what's going on". "It's highly designed, with rich wallpaper and tones, sumptuous artwork and subtle lighting—all very
disarming till you step into her private office. The blinds close, the door locks and you think, 'It's the Temple of Doom.'" Similarly approaching the character's home, the design allowed for wide windows which face onto a public street "which afford her the opportunity to put on the kind of show she couldn't get away with at work."

Bobby's environments were designed with more contrast, the character being new to the work area. Frankel described the contrast as "the company reflects [Jack Pellitt's] human touch, whereas [Bobby Pellitt's] home is a shameless shrine to himself and his hedonistic appetites." Frankel continued, "It features a mishmash of anything he finds exotic and erotic, mostly Egyptian and Asian motifs with an '80s Studio 54 vibe, a makeshift dojo, lots of mirrors and a massage table." Some parts of the house design were provided by Farrell and Gordon's interpretation of the character and his "infatuation" with martial arts and "his delusions of prowess".

Filming of "Horrible Bosses" took place in and around Los Angeles. The production team attempted to find locations "that people haven't already seen a hundred times in movies and on TV", aiming for the film to appear as if it could be taking place anywhere in America "where people are trying to pursue the American dream but getting stopped by a horrible boss." "Comnidyine" was represented by an office building in Torrance, California, with the crew building the set on a vacant floor. For "Pellitt Chemical", the production team found a "perfect landscape of pipes and containers" in Santa Fe Springs, surrounding an unoccupied water cleaning and storage facility. To take advantage of the surrounding imagery, the warehouse required an extensive series of overhauls, including cutting windows into concrete walls and creating new doorways to allow for visuals of the warehouse exterior and provide a setting for the final scene of Sutherland's character. A T.G.I. Friday's in Woodland Hills, Los Angeles, was used as a bar frequented by Nick, Dale, and Kurt, while the bar scene where they meet with Jones was staged in downtown Los Angeles.

The film was shot digitally using the Panavision Genesis camera. Gordon encouraged the actors to improvise, though Aniston claimed to not have taken advantage of the offer as much as her co-stars, stating, "My dialogue was just so beautifully choreographed that there wasn’t much that I needed to do”.

The soundtrack was composed by award-winning composer Christopher Lennertz, with music contributed by Mike McCready of Pearl Jam, Stefan Lessard of Dave Matthews Band and Money Mark—a collaborator with the Beastie Boys. McCready, Lessard, and Mark worked with musicians Matt Chamberlain, David Levita, Aaron Kaplan, Victor Indrizzo, Chris Chaney, Davey Chegwidden and DJ Cheapshot to develop the music. Major contributions were provided by Mark on keyboard, McCready and Levita on guitar, Chaney and Lessard on bass, Indrizzo on drums and DJ Cheapshot on turntables.

Lennertz recorded the soundtrack at The Village recording studio in West Los Angeles and Capitol Records. Lennertz attempted to remain "authentic" to the characters' progression from average worker to calculated killer. To achieve this aim, he decided against recording digitally, instead recording the tracks on two-inch analog tape, intending each musical cue to sound as if it was emanating from a vinyl record. He explained, "The idea was to put together a band that would record the score together the same way that they would make an album. It isn't over-produced or shiny and digital in any way. It's brash, noisy, and full of bravado and swagger. I knew that if we could harness some of this sonic magic in the score, then the toughness and confidence of the music would play against Bateman, Sudeikis, and Charlie Day to really emphasize and elevate the humor in the situations that transpire." Lennertz continued, "We tracked through tape before Pro Tools to get that fat sound, and made every choice based on feel rather than perfection. We even used the same Wurlitzer that Money Mark played on Beck's classic ‘Where It's At’. At the end of the day, Seth [Gordon] and I wanted to produce a score that is as irreverent and full of attitude as the movie itself. I think we did it...and most of all, everyone had a blast in the process."

"Horrible Bosses: The Original Motion Picture Soundtrack" was released in physical and digital formats on July 5, 2011, by WaterTower Music. The soundtrack consists of 33 tracks with a runtime of 63 minutes.

The world premiere of "Horrible Bosses" took place on June 30, 2011 at Grauman's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood, California.

"Horrible Bosses" grossed $117.5 million (56.1%) in the North America and $92.2 million (43.9%) in other territories for a worldwide gross of $209.6 million, against its budget of $35 million.

"Horrible Bosses" was released on July 8, 2011 in the United States and Canada across 3,040 theaters. It grossed $9.9M on the first day, giving it the second largest opening gross for an original R-rated comedy of the summer, behind "Bad Teacher" ($12.2M). For the opening weekend, the film took in a total of $28,302,165, an average of $9,310 per theater, making it the number two film for the weekend, behind "" ($47.1M), the second highest-grossing opening weekend for an original R-rated comedy, again behind "Bad Teacher" ($31.6M), and the highest-grossing opening weekend ever for a dark/black comedy film, overtaking the 2004 "The Stepford Wives" ($21.4M). The opening weekend audience was 51% male, and 64% of the audience were over 25 years of age. The second weekend (15–17 July) saw a further 94 theaters added, for a total of 3,134. Box office revenue dropped by a "respectable" 38%, taking $17.6M for a total gross of $60M in ten days. The film ranked third for the weekend. It remained in the top five films during its third week, dropping 33% and leaving thirty theaters from the previous weekend, to take in $11.9M for a gross of $82.6M in 17 days. On July 28, 2011, with $87.6M after 20 days, "Horrible Bosses" surpassed "The War of the Roses" ($86.8M) to become the highest grossing dark/black comedy film in unadjusted dollars.

"Horrible Bosses" was released on July 7, 2011, in the United Arab Emirates ($258,108), and on July 8 in Estonia ($24,471), Latvia ($15,750), Lebanon ($36,316) and Lithuania ($13,676), grossing $348,321 for the opening weekend and accruing a total of $855,009 in the first 17 days. On the weekend of July 21–24, the film opened in the United Kingdom ($3,386,876), Greece ($367,845), Israel ($200,372), South Africa ($193,632), Norway ($109,252) and East Africa ($7,324).

"Horrible Bosses" received generally positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 69% based on 215 reviews, with an average rating of 6.2/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "It's nasty, uneven, and far from original, but thanks to a smartly assembled cast that makes the most of a solid premise, "Horrible Bosses" works." Review aggregate Metacritic gave the film a score of 57 out of 100, based on 40 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". On CinemaScore, audiences gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale. Male audience members gave the film an "A-" compared to females giving it an average rating of "B+".

Roger Ebert gave the film three and a half stars out of four, calling it "well-cast" and commending it for playing to each actor's strengths. Ebert gave particular praise to Spacey, labeling him "superb", and Aniston, judging her performance to be a "surprise" and a return to form, stating "she has acute comic timing and hilariously enacts alarming sexual hungers". Ebert called "Horrible Bosses" "cheerful and wicked". Lisa Schwarzbaum of "Entertainment Weekly" reacted positively, calling the film "a bouncy, well-built, delightfully nasty tale of resentment, desperation, and amoral revenge" and complimented the casting of the protagonists and antagonists. "The A.V. Club"s Nathan Rabin also praised the cast, stating that the picture "succeeds almost entirely on the chemistry of its three leads, who remain likeable even while resorting to homicide", adding the "acting more than compensates for the film's other failings." Rabin singled out Day's performance as "a potent illustration of how a brilliant character actor with a spark of madness can elevate a ramshackle lowbrow farce into a solid mainstream comedy through sheer force of charisma." Edward Douglas of ComingSoon.net credited director Seth Gordon with having assembled "the perfect cast", claiming "the six leads kill in every scene", but echoed Nathan Rabin's sentiments that Day is the "real standout". Douglas summarized the picture as "dark fun that works better than expected due to a well-developed script, an impeccable cast and a director who knows how to put the two together". A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" stated "the timing of the cast...is impeccable" and appreciated that the script did not attempt "to cut its coarseness with a hypocritical dose of sweetness or respectability". The review concluded that "in the ways that count and even when it shouldn’t, "Horrible Bosses" works."

"USA Today"s Scott Bowles awarded the film three out of four stars, labeling it a "surprising comedy that rivals "Bridesmaids" as the funniest film of the summer, if not the year." Bowles added that "the characters are so likable", giving particular credit to Sudeikis though also adding praise for the performances of Bateman and Day. The dialogue was also lauded by Bowles, which commented that "Seth Gordon has a deft touch with water-cooler talk—even when the water cooler might be spiked with poison." Leonard Maltin of indieWire considered Day to have had the "breakout role" and offered praise to the performances of the cast, but lamented the lack of screen time for Farrell's character. Maltin concluded "the movie has just enough raunchiness to identify it as a 2011 comedy, just enough cleverness to admire, and just the right camaraderie among its three male stars, which turns out to be the movie’s greatest strength." "Rolling Stone"s Peter Travers gave kudos to the "killer cast", with specific credit given to Bateman and Day, but was critical of the movie, stating "it wussies out on a sharp premise" and that it is a "hit-and-miss farce that leaves you wishing it was funnier than it is" "The Guardian"s Philip French called "Horrible Bosses" "a lumbering, misogynistic affair", but admitted "I laughed frequently, probably to the detriment of my self-respect." Nicholas Barber of "The Independent" gave a positive review, complimenting Gordon for not allowing the actors' improvisation to be detrimental to the pacing, but felt the movie was not as "dark" as its premise required, saying "what edginess the film does have comes instead from the inordinate quantity of swearing, plus a smattering of homophobia and misogyny."

"Salon"s Andrew O'Hehir offered a mixed response, characterizing the film as a "lot funnier in theory than in practice, but it won't ruin your Saturday night". "Salon" appreciated the "effortless comic chemistry" between Sudeikis, Bateman and Day and singled out Bateman, Aniston and Spacey for their performances. O'Hehir was however critical of the perceived homophobia, sexism and racism. "The Hollywood Reporter"s Kirk Honeycutt responded negatively, stating the jokes failed to be funny, stating "Seth Gordon shows no flair for turning the absurdities and cartoonish characters in the script...into anything more than a collection of moments in search of laughs." Karina Longworth of "The Village Voice" was critical of the premise, which she felt lacked any legitimate "rage" against the characters' bosses, stating "...there's every sign that, even without these particular emasculators, Dale, Kurt and Nick would still be—for lack of a better word—total pussies." Longworth felt that the humor was "rarely actually laugh-out-loud funny, and never truly dark or daring". She particularly criticized the all-white, male protagonists and a plot she deemed racist and filled with "stereotypes". Justin Chang of "Variety" praised the performance of the ensemble cast, but considered the plot to be "predictably moronic, vulgar and juvenile". Chang echoed the sentiments of "The Village Voice" in lamenting that the film failed to pursue the premise to "darker, more daring territory" and faulted it for falling back on "over-the-top comic exaggeration".

The film received several award nominations, including a Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor for Colin Farrell, and three nominations from the 2012 Comedy Awards, including Comedy Actor for Bateman, Comedy Actress for Aniston, and best Comedy Film. Farrell and Aniston were both nominated for Best On-Screen Dirt Bag at the 2012 MTV Movie Awards, with Aniston claiming the award. Farrell also received a nomination for Best On-Screen Transformation.
On July 26, 2011, "FX" obtained the rights to the network premiere of the film.

"Horrible Bosses" was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc in the United States on October 11, 2011. The DVD version sold an estimated 400,682 units in the United States during its first week, earning approximately $6.1 million. It was the number 2 best selling DVD of the week, finishing behind "Green Lantern", and the number 3 Blu-ray disc film behind "Green Lantern" and "The Lion King". As of , it has sold an estimated 1.3 million units and earned $18.3 million.

The DVD contains the theatrical cut of the film and deleted scenes. The Blu-ray Disc edition contains the Blu-ray Disc, the DVD and a digital version of the film in a single pack. The Blu-ray Disc version is an unrated, extended cut (the "Totally Inappropriate Edition") with a runtime of 106 minutes compared to the theatrical 98 minutes. The Blu-ray Disc contains deleted scenes and four featurettes: "My Least Favorite Career", "Surviving a Horrible Boss", "Being Mean Is So Much Fun", and "The Making of the Horrible Bosses Soundtrack". Both the theatrical and extended cuts are presented in the film's original aspect ratio of 2.39:1 with DTS-HD Master Audio sound. Beginning with the Blu-ray Disc release of "Horrible Bosses" and "Green Lantern", Warner Bros. included a code that allows the owner to access a version of the film via UltraViolet, a cloud storage service which allows streaming or downloading to a variety of devices.

Seth Gordon confirmed in July 2011 that talks were underway for a sequel, after the financial success of the film in the United States, saying: "Yeah, we've definitely discussed it. It's done well in the States, the film has, so that's becoming a more concerted effort now, we're trying to figure out what the sequel could be." On January 4, 2012, it was confirmed that a sequel was moving forward, and that Goldstein and Daley would be returning to write the script. New Line was reported to be negotiating with Gordon to return as director, with Bateman, Day, and Sudeikis also expected to return to their roles. On February 27, 2012, it was confirmed that Goldstein and Daley were in the process of writing the new script. In March 2013, Goldstein and Daley confirmed that they had submitted multiple draft scripts for the sequel, and that production had moved towards finalizing the budget. Later in the same month Bateman, Day, and Sudeikis were confirmed to be reprising their roles, with Foxx negotiating to return. The film will again be produced by Brett Ratner and Jay Stern. In August 2013, it was announced that Gordon would not be returning to direct because of scheduling conflicts and that the studio was actively searching for a replacement. In September 2013, Sean Anders was announced as Gordon's replacement, with John Morris joining the production as a producer. The pair had previously performed a rewrite on Goldstein's and Daley's sequel script. Filming had been scheduled to begin in summer 2013, but began in November 2013. Foxx, Aniston, and Spacey reprised their roles, with Christoph Waltz and Chris Pine joining the cast.



</doc>
<doc id="28433748" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28433748" title="HSwMS John Ericsson">
HSwMS John Ericsson

HSwMS "John Ericsson" was the lead ship of the monitors built for the Royal Swedish Navy in the mid-1860s. She was designed under the supervision of the Swedish-born inventor, John Ericsson, and built in Sweden. "John Ericsson" made one foreign visit to Russia in 1867, but remained in Swedish or Norwegian waters (at the time, Sweden and Norway were united in personal union) for the rest of her career. The ship was reconstructed between 1892 and 1895, but generally remained in reserve. She was mobilized during World War I and sold in 1919 for conversion to a barge.

The "John Ericsson"-class ironclads were designed to meet the need of the Swedish and Norwegian navies for small, shallow-draft armored ships capable of defending their coastal waters. The standoff between and the much larger during the Battle of Hampton Roads in early 1862 roused much interest in Sweden in this new type of warship as it seemed ideal for coastal defense duties. John Ericsson, designer and builder of the "Monitor", had been born in Sweden, although he had become an American citizen in 1848, and offered to share his design with the Swedes. In response they sent Lieutenant John Christian d'Ailly to the United States to study monitor design and construction under Ericsson. D'Ailly arrived in July 1862 and toured rolling mills, gun foundries, and visited several different ironclads under construction. He returned to Sweden in 1863 having completed the drawings of a "Monitor"-type ship under Ericsson's supervision.

The ship measured long overall, with a beam of . She had a draft of and displaced . "John Ericsson" was divided into nine main compartments by eight watertight bulkheads. Over time a flying bridge and, later, a full superstructure, was added to each ship between the gun turret and the funnel. Initially her crew numbered 80 officers and men, but this increased to 104 as she was modified with additional weapons.

The "John Ericsson"-class ships had one twin-cylinder vibrating lever steam engines, designed by Ericsson himself, driving a single four-bladed, propeller. Their engines were powered by four fire-tube boilers at a working pressure of . The engines produced a total of which gave the monitors a maximum speed of in calm waters. The ships carried of coal, enough for six day's steaming.

The lead ship, "John Ericsson", carried a pair of smoothbore Dahlgren muzzleloaders, donated by John Ericsson, in her turret. Each gun weighed approximately and fired solid shot and a explosive shell. The massive shells took 5–6 minutes to reload. They had a maximum muzzle velocity of . These guns were designated as the M/65 by the Swedes.

In 1877 "John Ericsson" received a pair of 10-barreled M/75 machine guns designed by Helge Palmcrantz. Each machine gun weighed and had a rate of fire of 500 rounds per minute. Its projectiles had a muzzle velocity of and a maximum range of . These guns were replaced during the 1880s by the 4-barreled M/77 Nordenfeldt gun, which was an enlarged version of Palmcrantz's original design. The gun had a rate of fire of 120 rounds per minute and each round had a muzzle velocity of . Its maximum range was .

"John Ericsson" was rearmed in 1881 with two M/76 rifled breech loaders, derived from a French design. They weighed and had a muzzle velocity of . Coupled with the increased elevation of 11.29°, this gave them a range of .

The "John Ericsson"-class ships had a complete waterline armor belt of wrought iron that was high and thick. The armor consisted of five plates backed by of wood. The lower edge of this belt was thick as it was only three plates thick. The maximum thickness of the armored deck was in two layers. The gun turret's armor consisted of twelve layers of iron, totalling in thickness on the first four monitors. The inside of the turret was lined with mattresses to catch splinters. The base of the turret was protected with a glacis, high, and the turret's roof was 127 millimeters thick. The conning tower was positioned on top of the turret and its sides were ten layers () thick. The funnel was protected by six layers of armor with a total thickness of up to half its height.

"John Ericsson" had her keel laid down in June 1864 and was launched 17 March 1865. She was commissioned on 13 November 1865. In July 1867 Crown Prince Oscar, later King Oscar II, inspected "John Ericsson", ,
, the steam frigates "Thor" and , and the Norwegian monitor in the Stockholm archipelago before they departed for port visits in Helsingfors, later known as Helsinki, and Kronstadt in August, where they were visited by Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich of Russia, head of the Imperial Russian Navy. This was the only foreign visit ever made by the ship.
Generally the monitors were kept in for most of the year; only being commissioned for two to four months during the summer and fall. "John Ericsson" kept up the pattern between 1865 and 1873, but remained in reserve afterward until 1882. She was rearmed with two M/76 guns in 1881 while her original Dahlgren guns became part of the Ericsson monument at Filipstad. She was reactivated in 1882 and 1883, but only sporadically thereafter. The ship was reconstructed between 1892 and 1895; her gun turret was fixed in place and modified to serve as a barbette for her two new Bofors M/89 guns. The guns could depress to −5° and elevate to +13°, and they had a firing arc of 290°. Two Nordenfeldt M/92 quick-firing guns were also added on the superstructure. The ship's boilers were replaced by new cylindrical ones that had a working pressure of and "John Ericsson" reached on sea trials on 14 May 1901. During the early 1900s the two 25-millimeter machine guns were removed and four, later six, more 57-millimeter guns added to the superstructure. The ship was assigned to the Karlskrona local defense force during 1913–18, and she was sold to the Gotland Cement Company () in November 1919. The company converted her to a barge and used her for the next forty years; her final fate is unknown.



</doc>
<doc id="28434131" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28434131" title="HNoMS Mjølner (1868)">
HNoMS Mjølner (1868)

HNoMS "Mjølner" was the fourth of five ships of the s built for the Royal Swedish Navy and the Royal Norwegian Navy in the mid-1860s. Impressed by the use of ironclads during the American Civil War, the design was based on that of the . They were designed under the supervision of the Swedish-born inventor, John Ericsson—coincidentally, designer of the "Monitor"—, and built in Sweden. "Mjølner" was delivered in 1868 and ran aground the following year, although she was not seriously damaged. The ship was reconstructed in 1897 and given modern breech-loading guns. "Mjølner" was sold for scrap in 1909.

The "John Ericsson"-class ironclads were designed to meet the need of the Swedish and Norwegian Navies for small, shallow-draft armored ships capable of defending their coastal waters. The standoff between the and the much larger during the Battle of Hampton Roads in, early 1862, roused much interest in Sweden in this new type of warship, as it seemed ideal for coastal defense duties. John Ericsson, designer and builder of the "Monitor", born in Sweden—although becoming an American citizen in 1848—offered to share his design with the Swedes. In response, they sent Lieutenant John Christian d'Ailly to the United States to study monitor design and construction under Ericsson. D'Ailly arrived in July 1862 and toured rolling mills, gun foundries, and visited several different ironclads under construction. He returned to Sweden in 1863 having completed the drawings of a "Monitor"-type ship under Ericsson's supervision.

The ship measured long overall, with a beam of . She had a draft of and displaced . "Mjølner" was divided into nine main compartments by eight watertight bulkheads. Over time a flying bridge and, later, a full superstructure, was added to each ship between the gun turret and the funnel. Initially her crew numbered 80 officers and men, but this increased to 104 as she was modified with additional weapons.

The "John Ericsson"-class ships had one twin-cylinder vibrating lever steam engines, designed by Ericsson himself, driving a single four-bladed, propeller. Their engines were powered by four fire-tube boilers at a working pressure of . The engines produced a total of which gave the monitors a maximum speed of in calm waters. The ships carried of coal, enough for six day's steaming.

"Mjølner" was armed with a pair of Armstrong rifled muzzle-loading guns. Each gun was constructed of steel and weighed . The ship also carried a gun. During "Mjølner"s reconstruction in 1897 her gun turret was fixed in place and modified to serve as a barbette for her two new breech-loading Cockerill guns. She also received two and Cockerill guns mounted in her superstructure. In addition two Hotchkiss 5-barrel revolving guns were mounted in the superstructure. They fired a shell weighing about at a muzzle velocity of about . This gave them a range of about . They had a rate of fire of about 30 rounds per minute

The "John Ericsson"-class ships had a complete waterline armor belt of wrought iron that was high and thick. The armor consisted of five plates backed by of wood. The lower edge of this belt was thick as it was only three plates thick. The maximum thickness of the armored deck was in two layers. The gun turret's armor consisted of twelve layers of iron, totalling in thickness on the first four monitors. The inside of the turret was lined with mattresses to catch splinters. The base of the turret was protected with a glacis, high, and the turret's roof was 127 millimeters thick. The conning tower was positioned on top of the turret and its sides were ten layers () thick. The funnel was protected by six layers of armor with a total thickness of up to half its height.

The Norwegians had built one monitor-type ship of their own, , in 1865, and laid down several others, but the Norwegian Parliament authorized construction of "Mjølner" in 1867 in Sweden at the cost of 1,102,000 Norwegian krone. She was launched in 1868 and completed on 7 September of that year. The ship ran aground at Kragerø on 21 June 1869. "Mjølner" could not be pulled off the rocks until the ship's ammunition, iron ballast and of coal were removed. Her repairs were completed on 7 July 1869 by the Royal Dockyard at Horten, at the cost of 5,000 krone. The court of inquiry found the ship's commander and the pilot liable for the repairs, but the parliament released the two from their obligation two years later. She was visited by King Charles XV of Sweden on one occasion when visiting one of Sweden's west-coast ports in the early 1870s. "Mjølner" was after her refit in 1897, but was mobilized during 1905 when the personal union between Sweden and Norway was dissolved. She returned to reserve afterward before being sold for scrap in 1909.




</doc>
<doc id="28469573" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28469573" title="Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie">
Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie

Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie (1971) is the first collection of poems by African-American writer and poet Maya Angelou. Many of the poems in "Diiie" were originally song lyrics, written during Angelou's career as a night club performer, and recorded on two albums before the publication of Angelou's first autobiography "I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings" (1969). Angelou considers herself a poet and a playwright, but is best known for her seven autobiographies. Early in her writing career she began a practice of alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry. Although her poetry collections have been best-sellers, they have not received serious critical attention and are more interesting when read aloud.

"Diiie" is made up of two sections of 38 poems. The 20 poems in the first section, "Where Love is a Scream of Anguish", center on love. Many of the poems in this section and the next are structured like blues and jazz music, and have universal themes of love and loss. The eighteen poems in the second section, "Just Before the World Ends", focus on the experience of the survival of African Americans despite living in a society dominated by whites.

Angelou uses the vernacular of African Americans, irony, understatement, and humor to make her statements about race and racism in America. She acts as a spokesperson for her race in these poems, in which her use of irony and humor allows her to speak for the collective and to assume a distance in order to make comments about her themes, topics, and subjects. Critic Kathy M. Essick have called the poems in "Diiie" "protest poems". The metaphors in her poetry serve as "coding", or litotes, for meanings understood by other Blacks, although her themes and topics are universal for most readers to understand.

"Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie" has received mixed reviews from critics, but was a best-seller and was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize. Many critics expected that the volume would be popular despite their negative reviews, but others considered it well written, lyrical, and a moving expression of social observation.

"Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie" is Maya Angelou's first volume of poetry. She studied and began writing poetry at a young age. After her rape at the age of eight, as recounted in her first autobiography "I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings", she dealt with her trauma by memorizing and reciting great works of literature, including poetry, which helped bring her out her self-imposed muteness.

Angelou recorded two albums of poetry and songs she wrote during her career as a night club performer; the first in 1957 for Liberty Records and the second "The Poetry of Maya Angelou", for GWP Records the year before the publication of her first autobiography "I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings" (1969). They were later incorporated into her volumes of poetry, including "Diiie", which was published the year after "Caged Bird" became a best-seller. "Diiie" also became a best-seller, and was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize. Despite thinking of herself a playwright and poet when her editor Robert Loomis challenged her to write "Caged Bird", she has been best known for her autobiographies. Many of Angelou's readers identify her as a poet first and an autobiographer second, yet like Lynn Z. Bloom, many critics consider her autobiographies more important than her poetry. Critic William Sylvester agrees, and states that although her books have been best-sellers, her poetry has not been perceived as seriously her prose. Bloom also believes that Angelou's poetry is more interesting when she recites them. Bloom considers her performances dynamic, and says that Angelou "moves exuberantly, vigorously to reinforce the rhythms of the lines, the tone of the words. Her singing and dancing and electrifying stage presence transcend the predictable words and phrases".

Early in her writing career, Angelou began alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry. Her publisher, Random House, placed the poems in "Diiie", along with her next four volumes, in her first collection of poetry, "The Complete Collected Poems of Maya Angelou" (1994), perhaps to capitalize on her popularity following her reading of her poem "On the Pulse of Morning" at President Bill Clinton's inauguration in 1993. A year later, in 1995, Angelou's publisher placed four more poems in a smaller volume, entitled "Phenomenal Woman".

Angelou chose "Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie" as the volume's title because of her interest in unconscious innocence, which she says is "even lovelier than trying to remain innocent." The title is a reference to her belief that "we as individuals ... are still so innocent that we think if we asked our murderer just before he puts the final wrench upon the throat, 'Would you please give me a cool drink of water?' and he would do so'". Angelou has said that if she "didn't believe that, [she] wouldn't get up in the morning".

Angelou uses rhyme and repetition throughout all her works, yet rhyme is only found in seven of the poems in "Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie"; critic Lyman B. Hagen calls her use of rhythm "rather ordinary and unimaginative". Death is an important theme throughout many of Angelou's works, especially in "Caged Bird", which opens with it and, according to scholar Liliane K. Arensberg, is resolved at the book's end, when her son is born. Death is directly mentioned in 19 of the 38 poems in "Diiie". According to scholar Yasmin Y. DeGout, many of the poems in "Diiie", along with those in Angelou's second volume "Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well", "lack the overt empowerment themes of her later, better known works", especially "And Still I Rise" (1978) and "I Shall Not Be Moved" (1990).

The themes in the first section of "Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie" focus on love. In "Southern Women Writers", Carol Neubauer states that the first twenty poems in the volume "describe the whole gamut of love, from the first moment of passionate discovery to the first suspicion of painful loss". "Kirkus Reviews" finds more truth in the poems in this section, which describe love from the perspective of a Black woman, compared to those in the second section. Hagen feels that Angelou's best love poem in "Diiie" is "The Mothering Blackness", which uses repetition and biblical allusions to state that the Black mother loves and forgives her children unconditionally.

In "To a Husband", Angelou praises the Black slaves who helped in the development and growth of America. She idealizes Black men, especially in "A Zorro Man" and "To a Man"; she dedicates "Diiie" to the subjects of both poems. DeGout views "A Zorro Man" as an example of Angelou's ability to translate her personal experience into political discourse and the "textured liberation" she places in all her poetry. The use of concrete imagery and abstract symbolism to describe emotional and sexual experience, but also has another meaning, that of liberation from painful and poignant memories. According to DeGout, "A Zorro Man" lacks the clear themes of liberation that Angelou's later poems such as "Phenomenal Woman" have, but its subtle use of themes and techniques infer the liberation theme and compliment her poems that are more overtly liberating. The poem and others in "Diiie", with its focus on women's sexual and romantic experiences, challenges the gender codes of poetry written in previous eras. She also challenges the male-centered and militaristic themes and messages found in the poetry of the Black Arts movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Angelou's use of sexual imagery, from a woman's point of view, provides new interpretations" and excavates it from derogatory assessments". Although the poem's speaker feels trapped, women's sexuality is depicted as powerful and controls her partner, which moves away from "the patriarchal assumption of male control over the sexual act". Angelou's depiction allows her readers, mostly women, to identify, celebrate, and universalize their sexuality to all races. DeGout states that "A Zorro Man" "enact[s] empowerment by liberating the reader from stigmas placed on women's sexuality from gender assumptions of male (sexual) power, and from racialized notions of women's experience".

Librarian John Alfred Avant states that many of Angelou's poems could be set to music like that of jazz singer and musician Nina Simone, especially the first poem in this section, "They Went Home," which he says "fits into the torchy unrequited love bag". Hagen considers Angelou's best poems to be the ones meant to be song lyrics, such as "They Went Home". In his analysis of "They Went Home", Hagen calls Angelou a realist because she recognizes that the married man who dates other women usually returns to his wife. He states, "While the sentiment is psychologically sound, the lines are prosaic, reflecting the pitiful state of the abandoned". Essick, when analyzing "When I Think About Myself", states that the poem central theme is "one's self-exultation and self-pride that prevent one from losing her will in spite of experiences involving pain and degradation".

According to Hagen, in his analysis of "No Loser, No Weeper", the speaker expresses the common experience of loss, beginning with childish and minor ones such as losing a dime, a doll, and a watch, and ending with the loss of the speaker's boyfriend. "Kirkus Reviews" considers this poem, along with "They Went Home", both slight and carrying "the weight of experience".

The poems in the second section of "Diiie" are more militant in tone; according to critic Lyman B. Hagen, the poems in this section have "more bite" and express the experience of being Black in a white-dominated world. He states that Angelou acts as a spokesperson, especially in "To a Freedom Fighter", when she acknowledges a debt owed to those involved in the civil rights movement. According to Bloom, the themes in Angelou's poetry, which tend to be made up of short lyrics with strong, jazz-like rhythms, are common in the lives of many American Blacks. Angelou's poems commend the survivors who have prevailed despite racism and a great deal of difficulty and challenges. Neubauer states that Angelou focuses on the lives of American Black people from the time of slavery to the 1960s, and that her themes "deal broadly with the painful anguish suffered by blacks forced into submission, with guilt over accepting too much, and with protest and basic survival".

Critic William Sylvester states that the metaphors in Angelou's poetry serve as "coding", or litotes, for meanings understood by other Blacks. In her poem "Sepia Fashion Show", for example, the last lines ("I'd remind them please, look at those knees / you got a Miss Ann's scrubbing") is a reference to slavery, when Black women had to show their knees to prove how hard they had cleaned. Sylvester states that this is true in much of Angelou's poetry, and that it elicits a change in the reader's emotions; in this poem, from humor to anger. Sylvester says that Angelou uses the same technique in "Letter to an Aspiring Junkie", in which understatement contained in the repeated phrase "nothing happens" is a litotes for the prevalence of violence in society. Hagen connects this poem with the final scene in her second autobiography, "Gather Together in My Name", which describes her encounter with her friend, a drug addict who shows her the effects of his drug habit. According to Hagen, the poem is full of disturbing images, such as drugs being a slave master and the junkie being tied to his habit like a monkey attached to the street vendor's strap.

Hagen calls Angelou's coding "signifying" and states, "A knowledge of black linguistic regionalisms and folklore enhances the appreciation of Angelou's poems". Line six in "Harlem Hopscotch," for example ("If you're white, all right / If you're brown, hang around / If you're black stand back"), is a popular jingle used by African Americans that people of other cultures might not recognize. Hagen believes that despite the signifying that occurs in many of Angelou's poems, the themes and topics are universal enough that all readers would understand and appreciate them.

In "When I Think About Myself", Angelou presents the perspective of an aging maid to make an ironic statement about Blacks surviving in a world dominated by whites, and in "Times-Square-Shoeshine-Competition", a Black shoeshine boy defends his prices to a white customer, his words punctuated by the "pow pow" of his shoeshine rag. Her poems, such as "Letter to an Aspiring Junkie", in this and other volumes deal with universal social problems from a Black perspective. African-American literature professor Priscilla R. Ramsey, when analyzing the poem "When I Think About Myself," states that the first-person singular pronoun "I", which Angelou uses often, is a symbol that refers to all her people. Ramsey calls this "a self-defining function", in which Angelou ironically views the world as an outsider, resulting in the loss of her direct and literal relationship to the world and providing her with the ability to "laugh at its characteristics no matter how politically and socially devastating". Scholar Kathy M. Essick discusses the same poem, calling it and most of the poems in "Diiie", Angelou's "protest poems".

According to critic Harold Bloom, in his analysis of "Times-Square", the first line of the fourth stanza ("I ain't playing dozens mister") is an allusion to the Dozens, a game in which the participants insult each other. The game is mentioned in later poems, "The Thirteens (Black)" and "The Thirteens (White)." According to critic Geneva Smitherman, Angelou uses the Thirteens, a twist on the Dozens, to compare the insults of blacks and whites, which allows her to compare the actions of the two races. Bloom compares "Times-Square" to Langston Hughes' blues/protest poetry. He suggests that the best way to analyze the subjects, style, themes, and use of vernacular in this and most of Angelou's poems is to use "a blues-based model", since like the blues singer, Angelou uses laughter or ridicule instead of tears to cope with minor irritations, sadness, and great suffering. Hagen compares the themes in "The Thirteens (Black and White)" with Angelou's poems "Communication I" and "Communication II", which appear in "Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well", her second volume of poetry.

Neubauer analyzes two poems in "Diiie", "Times-Squares" and "Harlem Hopscotch", that support her assertion that for Angelou, "conditions must improve for the black race" She states, "Both [poems] ring with a lively, invincible beat that carries defeated figures into at least momentary triumph". In "Times-Squares", the shoeshiner claims to be the best at his trade and retains his pride despite his humiliating circumstances. "Harlem Hopscotch" celebrates survival and the strength, resilience, and energy necessary to accomplish it. Its rhythm echoes the beat of the player, and compares life to a brutal match. By the end of the poem, however, the speaker wins, both the game and in life. Neubauer states, "These poems are the poet's own defense against the incredible odds in the game of life".

Essick also analyzes "Times-Square", stating that the language and rhythm used by the poem's subject, especially the repetitive onomatopoeia ("pow pow") that punctuates the end of each line, parallels the sound of his work. The shoeshiner relies on the rhythm and repetition of his song to maintain his pace and to relieve his boredom. It also provides a way to help him brag about his abilities and talents. The shoeshiner takes on the role of the trickster, a common character in Black folklore, and demonstrates his control of vernacular language, especially when he refers to the Dozens.

"Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie" was a best-seller and was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize. The poems in the volume have received mixed reviews. Critic John Alfred Avant recognized that the volume would be popular due to the success of "Caged Bird", but he characterized it as "rather well done schlock poetry, not to be confused with poetry for people who read poetry" and stated, "This collection isn't accomplished, not by any means; but some readers are going to love it." Martha Liddy, who reviewed the collection in the same issue of the "Library Journal" in 1971, classified it, like "Caged Bird", in the young adult category and called "Diiie" a "volume of marvelously lyrical, rhythmical poems". "Kirkus Reviews" also found the poems in the volume unsophisticated yet sensitive to the spoken aspects of poetry, such as rhythm and diction, and considered her prose more poetic and unrestrained than her poetry.

A reviewer from "" called the poems in "Diiie" "craftsmanlike and powerful though not great poetry", and recommended it for libraries with a collection of African-American literature. Critic William Sylvester, who says that Angelou "has an uncanny ability to capture the sound of a voice on a page", places her poems, especially the ones in this volume, in the "background of black rhythms". Chad Walsh, reviewing "Diiie" in "Book World", calls Angelou's poems "a moving blend of lyricism and harsh social observation".

Of the 38 poems in "Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Diiie", twenty are in the first part, "Where Love is a Scream of Anguish," and the remaining eighteen are in the second part, "Just Before the World Ends." The volume is dedicated "to Amber Sam and the Zorro Man," a reference to the poems "A Zorro Man" and "To a Man," both of which are in the first part of the book. According to Liddy, "Part One contains poetry of love, and therefore of anguish, sharing, fear, affection and loneliness. Part Two features poetry of racial confrontation—of protest, anger, and irony". Most of the poems are short in length and are freeform.

Part One: Where Love is a Scream of Anguish
Part Two: Just Before the World Ends
Notes
Works cited


</doc>
<doc id="28476411" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28476411" title="David Watts Morgan">
David Watts Morgan

David Watts Morgan, (18 December 1867 – 23 February 1933), who later in life hyphenated his name to Watts-Morgan, was a Welsh trade unionist, a Labour politician, and a Member of Parliament (MP) from 1918 to 1933.

Described as "[straddling] the transition in south Wales miners' politics from Lib-Labism to socialism, but ... never fully representative of either", Morgan encouraged Rhondda miners to enlist in the army in 1914 following the outbreak of the First World War, and was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his efforts. He initially served in the Welsh Regiment, before becoming a lieutenant-colonel in the Labour Corps. Morgan was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for bravery at the Battle of Cambrai in 1917, earning him the nickname "Dai Alphabet" in South Wales.

David Watts Morgan was born in Skewen, Wales, in 1867 to Thomas and Margaret Morgan. He was educated at Skewen Elementary School until the age of eleven, when he began work as a pit boy, helping miners with the less strenuous work such as manning ventilation doors. At the age of seventeen he was employed as a coal miner in Ynyshir in the Rhondda. In 1880 Watts Morgan became a checkweighman at the newly opened National Colliery in Wattstown, a responsible position that involved tallying the weight of coal extracted by each miner when it reached the surface. During his time at Wattstown he took evening classes to become a mining engineer. He never practised once qualified, but the knowledge he gained was useful to him in his role as the leader of several mine rescues, and gave him a practical knowledge that informed his later political life.

From checkweighter Watts Morgan rose to the position of district miners' agent in 1898, becoming a member of the Rhondda Labour and Liberal Association (RLLA). Watts Morgan followed in the political Liberalism of William "Mabon" Abraham, and began speaking at RLLA meetings and banquets. In 1899 the Porth and Cymmer seat for the Glamorgan County Council (GCC) fell vacant, and Watts Morgan was seen as a viable candidate from both Liberal and Labour standpoints, but was surprisingly defeated at the by-election by local timber merchant David Jenkins. The next year Jenkins declined to stand for re-election, but the miners' district committee refused Watts Morgan time off from his agent's duties and the seat was won uncontested by colleague James Baker.

In 1902, James Baker died at the age of 41, leaving an opening in the GCC. On this occasion Watts Morgan was permitted to advance as a Labour candidate and was returned unopposed. By 1903 he was being talked of as a possible candidate for a south Wales parliamentary constituency. He joined the South Wales Miners' Federation at its inception and by 1902 he was pushing for a greater political role for the organisation. By 1908 the Federation was making great headway in the Rhondda and was substantially improving conditions for the miners. At this time Watts Morgan was Agent and District Secretary at No.1 Rhondda District under William Abraham.

A moderate leader, he worked fruitlessly alongside William Abraham to resolve the 1910–11 Cambrian Combine dispute, after the two men were shunned by the more radical miners' leaders. Although espousing Gladstonian Liberalism and opposing the affiliation of The Miners' Federation of Great Britain to the Labour Party, Watts Morgan joined the more radical and Marxist Plebs' League and sat on the board of governors for the Central Labour College.

On 4 August 1914, Watts Morgan enlisted as a private in the 10th Battalion (1st Rhondda) of the Welsh Regiment, one of the service battalions formed as part of Kitchener's Army. He was commissioned as a lieutenant in the 17th Battalion (1st Glamorgan) on 7 October, and was promoted to captain on 16 January 1916. Watts Morgan was not initially sent to France, being used instead as a strong voice in the recruitment of men from the Rhondda into the British Army. He also took part in recruitment campaigns in North Wales, where his fluency in the Welsh language was invaluable. Watts Morgan regularly made known his opposition to "peace cranks" who were "insulting the boys of whom we are all so proud." In March 1915, a committee of Rhondda figures presented Morgan with a cheque for 100 guineas to mark his contribution to recruiting, and the "Western Mail" named him "The Organiser of Victory".

On 15 May 1916 Watts Morgan transferred to a Works Battalion of the King's Liverpool Regiment, he was promoted to major on 24 November 1916, and went to serve in France. The Works Battalions were absorbed by the Labour Corps (forerunner of the Royal Pioneer Corps) in 1917. Watts Morgan was three times Mentioned in Despatches, and on 4 May 1918 was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for leading his pioneer unit in a counter-attack against German forces that were breaking through British lines. The citation for this award was published on 5 July 1918 and read:

After the armistice he commanded a demobilisation station; for his work there he received a letter of thanks from the king. Despite the "Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" reporting Watts Morgan being promoted to lieutenant-colonel on 8 March 1919, his retirement from the forces, the "London Gazette" entry of May 1919 describes him as major. Until early June 1921 he is described in "The Times" and "London Gazette" as Major D. Watts Morgan, later in the month this changed to Lieutenant-Colonel Watts Morgan. On 30 March 1920 was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire for "services in connection with recruiting in South Wales".

In February 1918, Watts Morgan was selected as the Labour candidate for the newly formed Rhondda East constituency. As one of the "patriotic" miners' leaders, the Lloyd George coalition did not run a candidate against him, therefore Watts Morgan was elected to the seat unopposed. There was evidence that some wished to run a Liberal candidate against Watts Morgan, but nothing came of it. Watts Morgan made his maiden speech in the House of Commons in April 1919, on one of his special interests, housing. He addressed the House on the state and shortage of housing in the Welsh coalfields as "the chief cause of the industrial unrest. People have been herded together, and that is the reason why there is much unrest in our district at present".

Not a regular speaker in the House, Watts Morgan busied himself with work on various committees, dealing mainly with gas, electricity, river pollution, the Home Office and the Police Council. Despite his work on private bills and his friendly relationship with Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald he was never considered for office. In the 1922 election, Watts Morgan was forced to contest his seat for the first time when he was challenged by Frederick William Heale. Watts Morgan made it clear that he would defend the interests of ex-servicemen and those injured in industry; he opposed the temperance demand for the local veto. It was a close result for a Rhondda election; Heale lost by just over 3,000 votes. The 1923 election was a different affair, with Watts Morgan defeating Conservative candidate Alfred John Orchard by nearly 13,000 votes.

Watts Morgan was a socialist and trade unionist, but he was also a strong anti-communist and opposed "the local men of Moscow", trade unionists who had embraced communism and whom he saw as extremists. In the 1929 election his main rival was well-known local Liberal Dr. R. D. Chalke, but the biggest interest came from the first communist challenger in the Rhondda, Arthur Horner. Although Watts Morgan had been unwell for the first few months of the year, he roused himself to attend the Ferndale May Day demonstration. When he discovered he was sharing the platform with Communist Party of Great Britain members, Horner, A. J. Cook and Dai Lloyd Davies, he left the stage and joined the crowd so he could heckle Horner's speech from the floor. Watts Morgan described Horner as "the emissary of the blood-stained Comintern of Russia ... working to break down the democratic Government and Trades Union organization of this country." He had little cause for concern, and was re-elected to Rhondda East by a majority of almost 9,000. A smaller turnout in the 1931 election and the absence of a Liberal candidate may have led to Horner making a considerable advance against Watts Morgan in the number of votes polled, but Watts Morgans' majority remained substantial. Watts Morgan's death in 1933 forced a by-election, which was won by William Mainwaring.

Watts Morgan was married twice, first to Elizabeth Williams then to Blanche Amy Morgan. Blanche was herself a strong campaigner for miners' rights, and was among a group of agents' wives who promoted the provision of pithead baths, bathing areas for the miners at the surface. She was outspoken in her views, and once supported a political rival of her husband's party, forcing Watts Morgan to make a public apology.

Watts Morgan was a keen sportsman and enjoyed playing golf and bowls. He was a member of several organisations including the Freemasons', Ivorites' and Foresters' friendly societies and was president of the Rhondda and Pontypridd district of the British Legion. A Calvinist Methodist his local place of worship was Bethlehem Church in Porth.

Watts Morgan died at his home in Porth on 23 February 1933 while still in office. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and four daughters. Thousands of people lined the route along which his funeral cortege passed on its way to his burial at Llethr Du cemetery in Trealaw. Local shops and businesses closed as a mark of respect.



</doc>
<doc id="28486339" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28486339" title="Georgia Institute of Technology">
Georgia Institute of Technology

The Georgia Institute of Technology, commonly referred to as Georgia Tech, is a public research university and institute of technology in Atlanta, Georgia. It is part of the University System of Georgia and has satellite campuses in Savannah, Georgia; Metz, France; Athlone, Ireland; Shenzhen, China; and Singapore.

The school was founded in 1885 as the Georgia School of Technology as part of Reconstruction plans to build an industrial economy in the post-Civil War Southern United States. Initially, it offered only a degree in mechanical engineering. By 1901, its curriculum had expanded to include electrical, civil, and chemical engineering. In 1948, the school changed its name to reflect its evolution from a trade school to a larger and more capable technical institute and research university.

Today, Georgia Tech is organized into six colleges and contains about 31 departments/units, with emphasis on science and technology. It is well recognized for its degree programs in engineering, computing, business administration, the sciences and design. Georgia Tech is ranked 8th among all public national universities in the United States, 7th in the Best Engineering Schools ranking, 35th among all colleges and universities in the United States by "U.S. News & World Report" rankings, and 34th among global universities in the world by Times Higher Education rankings. Georgia Tech has been ranked as the "smartest" public college in America (based on average standardized test scores).

Student athletics, both organized and intramural, are a part of student and alumni life. The school's intercollegiate competitive sports teams, the four-time football national champion Yellow Jackets, and the nationally recognized fight song "Ramblin' Wreck from Georgia Tech", have helped keep Georgia Tech in the national spotlight. Georgia Tech fields eight men's and seven women's teams that compete in the NCAA Division I athletics and the Football Bowl Subdivision. Georgia Tech is a member of the Coastal Division in the Atlantic Coast Conference.

The idea of a technology school in Georgia was introduced in 1865 during the Reconstruction period. Two former Confederate officers, Major John Fletcher Hanson (an industrialist) and Nathaniel Edwin Harris (a politician and eventually Governor of Georgia), who had become prominent citizens in the town of Macon, Georgia after the Civil War, strongly believed that the South needed to improve its technology to compete with the industrial revolution, which was occurring throughout the North. However, because the American South of that era was mainly populated by agricultural workers and few technical developments were occurring, a technology school was needed.

In 1882, the Georgia State Legislature authorized a committee, led by Harris, to visit the Northeast to see firsthand how technology schools worked. They were impressed by the polytechnic educational models developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Worcester County Free Institute of Industrial Science (now Worcester Polytechnic Institute). The committee recommended adapting the Worcester model, which stressed a combination of "theory and practice", the "practice" component including student employment and production of consumer items to generate revenue for the school.

On October 13, 1885, Georgia Governor Henry D. McDaniel signed the bill to create and fund the new school. In 1887, Atlanta pioneer Richard Peters donated to the state of the site of a failed garden suburb called Peters Park. The site was bounded on the south by North Avenue, and on the west by Cherry Street. He then sold five adjoining acres of land to the state for US$10,000, (). This land was near Atlanta's northern city limits at the time of its founding, although the city has expanded several miles beyond it. A historical marker on the large hill in Central Campus notes the site occupied by the school's first buildings once held fortifications to protect Atlanta during the Atlanta Campaign of the American Civil War. The surrender of the city took place on the southwestern boundary of the modern Georgia Tech campus in 1864.

The Georgia School of Technology opened in the fall of 1888 with two buildings. One building (now Tech Tower, an administrative headquarters) had classrooms to teach students; The second building featured a shop and had a foundry, forge, boiler room, and engine room. It was designed for students to work and produce goods to sell and fund the school. The two buildings were equal in size to show the importance of teaching both the mind and the hands, though, at the time, there was some disagreement to whether the machine shop should have been used to turn a profit.

On October 20, 1905, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited Georgia Tech. On the steps of Tech Tower, Roosevelt delivered a speech about the importance of technological education. He then shook hands with every student.

Georgia Tech's Evening School of Commerce began holding classes in 1912. The evening school admitted its first female student in 1917, although the state legislature did not officially authorize attendance by women until 1920. Annie T. Wise became the first female graduate in 1919 and was Georgia Tech's first female faculty member the following year. In 1931, the Board of Regents transferred control of the Evening School of Commerce to the University of Georgia (UGA) and moved the civil and electrical engineering courses at UGA to Tech. Tech replaced the commerce school with what later became the College of Business. The commerce school would later split from UGA and eventually become Georgia State University. In 1934, the Engineering Experiment Station (later known as the Georgia Tech Research Institute) was founded by W. Harry Vaughan with an initial budget of $5,000 () and 13 part-time faculty.

Founded as the Georgia School of Technology, Georgia Tech assumed its present name in 1948 to reflect a growing focus on advanced technological and scientific research. Unlike most similarly named universities (such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the California Institute of Technology), the Georgia Institute of Technology is a public institution.

Tech first admitted female students to regular classes in 1952, although women could not enroll in all programs at Tech until 1968. Industrial Management was the last program to open to women. The first women's dorm, Fulmer Hall, opened in 1969. Rena Faye Smith, appointed as a research assistant in the School of Physics in 1969 by Dr. Ray Young, in X-Ray Diffraction, became the first female faculty member (research) in the School of Physics. She went on to earn a Ph.D. at Georgia State University and taught physics and instructional technology at Black Hills State University – 1997–2005 as Rena Faye Norby. She served as a Fulbright Scholar in Russia 2004–2005. Women constituted 30.3% of the undergraduates and 25.3% of the graduate students enrolled in Spring 2009.

In 1959, a meeting of 2,741 students voted by an overwhelming majority to endorse integration of qualified applicants, regardless of race. Three years after the meeting, and one year after the University of Georgia's violent integration, Georgia Tech became the first university in the Deep South to desegregate without a court order. There was little reaction to this by Tech students; like the city of Atlanta described by former Mayor William Hartsfield, they seemed "too busy to hate". In the 1967-68 academic year 28 students out of 7,526 were black. In 1968, William Peace became the first black instructor and Marle Carter became the first black member of the homecoming court. In 1964, Dr. Calvin Huey became the first black player to play at Bobby Dodd stadium when he took the field for Navy. The first black person to play for Georgia Tech was Eddie McAshan in 1970.

In 1965 the university bought the former Pickrick Restaurant, a site of confrontation in the Civil Rights Movement, which it first used as a placement center. Later, it was known as the Ajax Building. The building was razed in 2009.

Similarly, there was little student reaction at Georgia Tech to the Vietnam War and United States involvement in the Cambodian Civil War. The student council defeated a resolution supporting the Vietnam Moratorium, and the extent of the Tech community's response to the Kent State shooting was limited to a student-organized memorial service, though the Institute was ordered closed for two days, along with all other University System of Georgia schools.

In 1988, President John Patrick Crecine pushed through a restructuring of the university. The Institute at that point had three colleges: the College of Engineering, the College of Management, and the catch-all COSALS, the College of Sciences and Liberal Arts. Crecine reorganized the latter two into the College of Computing, the College of Sciences, and the Ivan Allen College of Management, Policy, and International Affairs. Crecine never asked for input regarding the changes and, consequently, many faculty members disliked his top-down management style; despite this, the changes passed by a slim margin. Crecine was also instrumental in securing the 1996 Summer Olympics for Atlanta. A large amount of construction occurred, creating most of what is now considered "West Campus" for Tech to serve as the Olympic Village, and significantly gentrifying Midtown Atlanta. The Undergraduate Living Center, Fourth Street Apartments, Sixth Street Apartments, Eighth Street Apartments, Hemphill Apartments, and Center Street Apartments housed athletes and journalists. The Georgia Tech Aquatic Center was built for swimming events, and the Alexander Memorial Coliseum was renovated. The Institute also erected the Kessler Campanile and fountain to serve as a landmark and symbol of the Institute on television broadcasts.

In 1994, G. Wayne Clough became the first Tech alumnus to serve as the president of the Institute; he was in office during the 1996 Summer Olympics. In 1998, he separated the Ivan Allen College of Management, Policy, and International Affairs into the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts and returned the College of Management to "College" status (Crecine, the previous president, had demoted Management from "College" to "School" status as part of a controversial 1990 reorganization plan). His tenure focused on a dramatic expansion of the Institute, a revamped Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program, and the creation of an International Plan. On March 15, 2008, he was appointed secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, effective July 1, 2008. Dr. Gary Schuster, Tech's provost and executive vice president for Academic Affairs, was named interim president, effective July 1, 2008.

On April 1, 2009, G. P. "Bud" Peterson, previously the chancellor of the University of Colorado at Boulder, became the 11th president of Georgia Tech. On April 20, 2010, Georgia Tech was invited to join the Association of American Universities, the first new member institution in nine years. In 2014, Georgia Tech launched the first "massive online open degree" in computer science by partnering with Udacity and AT&T; a complete degree through that program costs students $7,000. It eventually expanded this program with its online masters in analytics in January 2017, as well as providing the option for advanced credits with a MicroMasters in collaboration with edX.

On September 16, 2017, a 21-year-old computer engineering major, Scout Schultz, was shot dead by the Georgia Tech Police Department after approaching officers while holding a closed multi-tool and saying "Shoot me." The incident lead to a protest attended by approximately 50 individuals that lead to three arrests and property damage in the form of a burned campus police car.

On January 7, 2019, President G.P. Bud Peterson announced his intention to retire in the Summer of that year.

The Georgia Tech campus is located in Midtown, an area slightly north of downtown Atlanta. Although a number of skyscrapers—most visibly the headquarters of AT&T, The Coca-Cola Company, and Bank of America—are visible from all points on campus, the campus itself has few buildings over four stories and has a great deal of greenery. This gives it a distinctly suburban atmosphere quite different from other Atlanta campuses such as that of Georgia State University.

The campus is organized into four main parts: West Campus, East Campus, Central Campus, and Technology Square. West Campus and East Campus are both occupied primarily by student living complexes, while Central Campus is reserved primarily for teaching and research buildings.

West Campus is occupied primarily by apartments and coed undergraduate dormitories. Apartments include Crecine, Center Street, 6th Street, Maulding, Undergraduate Living Center (ULC), and Eighth Street Apartments, while dorms include Freeman, Montag, Fitten, Folk, Caldwell, Armstrong, Hefner, Fulmer, and Woodruff Suites. The Campus Recreation Center (formerly the Student Athletic Complex); a volleyball court; a large, low natural green area known as the Burger Bowl; and a flat artificial green area known as the CRC (formerly SAC) Fields are all located on the western side of the campus. In 2017, West Village, a multipurpose facility featuring dining options, meeting space, School of Music classrooms, and offices to West Campus, opened. 

The Robert C. Williams Paper Museum is located on West Campus.

West Campus was formerly home to Under the Couch, which relocated to the Student Center in the fall of 2010. Also within walking distance of West Campus are several late-night eateries. West Campus was home to a convenience store, West Side Market, which closed following the opening of West Village in the fall of 2017. Due to limited space, all auto travel proceeds via a network of one-way streets which connects West Campus to Ferst Drive, the main road of the campus. Woodruff Dining Hall, or "Woody's", was the West Campus Dining Hall, before closing after the opening of West Village. It connected the Woodruff North and Woodruff South undergraduate dorms.

East Campus houses all of the fraternities and sororities as well as most of the undergraduate freshman dormitories. East Campus abuts the Downtown Connector, granting residences quick access to Midtown and its businesses (for example, The Varsity) via a number of bridges over the highway. Georgia Tech football's home, Bobby Dodd Stadium is located on East Campus, as well as Georgia Tech basketball's home, McCamish Pavilion (formerly Alexander Memorial Coliseum).

Brittain Dining Hall is the main dining hall for East Campus. It is modeled after a medieval church, complete with carved columns and stained glass windows showing symbolic figures. The main road leading from East Campus to Central Campus is a steep ascending incline commonly known as "Freshman Hill" (in reference to the large number of freshman dorms near its foot). On March 8, 2007, the former Georgia State University Village apartments were transferred to Georgia Tech. Renamed North Avenue Apartments by the institute, they began housing students in the fall semester of 2007.

Central Campus is home to the majority of the academic, research, and administrative buildings. The Central Campus includes, among others: the Howey Physics Building; the Boggs Chemistry Building; the College of Computing Building; the Klaus Advanced Computing Building; the College of Design Building; the Skiles Classroom Building, which houses the School of Mathematics and the School of Literature, Media and Culture; the D. M. Smith Building, which houses the School of Public Policy; and the Ford Environmental Science & Technology Building. In 2005, the School of Modern Languages returned to the Swann Building, a 100-year-old former dormitory that now houses some of the most technology-equipped classrooms on campus. Intermingled with these are a variety of research facilities, such as the Centennial Research Building, the Microelectronics Research Center, the Neely Nuclear Research Center, the Nanotechnology Research Center, and the Petit Biotechnology Building.

Tech's administrative buildings, such as Tech Tower, and the Bursar's Office, are also located on the Central Campus, in the recently renovated Georgia Tech Historic District. The campus library, the Fred B. Wenn Student Center, and the Student Services Building ("Flag Building") are also located on Central Campus. The Student Center provides a variety of recreational and social functions for students including: a computer lab, a game room ("Tech Rec"), the Student Post Office, a music venue, a movie theater, the Food Court, plus meeting rooms for various clubs and organizations. Adjacent to the eastern entrance of the Student Center is the Kessler Campanile (which is referred to by students as "The Shaft"). The former Hightower Textile Engineering building was demolished in 2002 to create Yellow Jacket Park. More greenspace now occupies the area around the Kessler Campanile for a more aesthetically pleasing look, in accordance with the official Campus Master Plan. In August 2011, the G. Wayne Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons opened next to the library and occupies part of the Yellow Jacket Park area.

Technology Square, also known as "Tech Square", is located across the Downtown Connector and embedded in the city east of East Campus. Opened in August 2003 at a cost of $179 million, the district was built over run-down neighborhoods and has sparked a revitalization of the entire Midtown area. Connected by the recently renovated Fifth Street Bridge, it is a pedestrian-friendly area comprising Georgia Tech facilities and retail locations. One complex contains the College of Business Building, holding classrooms and office space for the Scheller College of Business, as well as the Georgia Tech Hotel and Conference Center and the Georgia Tech Global Learning Center. The Scheller College of Business is also home to three large glass chandeliers made by Dale Chihuly. This is one of the few locations of Chihuly's works found in the state of Georgia.

Another part of Tech Square, the privately owned Centergy One complex, contains the Technology Square Research Building (TSRB), holding faculty and graduate student offices for the College of Computing and the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, as well as the GVU Center, a multidisciplinary technology research center. The "Advanced Technology Development Center" (ATDC) is a science and business incubator, run by the Georgia Institute of Technology, and is also headquartered in Technology Square's Centergy One complex.

Other Georgia Tech-affiliated buildings in the area host the Center for Quality Growth and Regional Development, the Georgia Tech Enterprise Innovation Institute, the Advanced Technology Development Center, VentureLab, and the Georgia Electronics Design Center. Technology Square also hosts a variety of restaurants and businesses, including the headquarters of notable consulting companies like Accenture and also including the official Institute bookstore, a Barnes & Noble bookstore, and a Georgia Tech-themed Waffle House.

In 1999, Georgia Tech began offering local degree programs to engineering students in Southeast Georgia, and in 2003 established a physical campus in Savannah, Georgia. Until 2013, Georgia Tech Savannah offered undergraduate and graduate programs in engineering in conjunction with Georgia Southern University, South Georgia College, Armstrong Atlantic State University, and Savannah State University. The university further collaborated with the National University of Singapore to set up The Logistics Institute–Asia Pacific in Singapore. The campus now serves the institute's hub for professional and continuing education and is home to the regional offices of the Georgia Tech Enterprise Innovation Institute, the Savannah Advanced Technology Development Center, and the Georgia Logistics Innovation Center.

Georgia Tech also operates a campus in Metz, in northeastern France, known as Georgia Tech Lorraine. It was opened in October 1990, it offers master's-level courses in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering and Ph.D. coursework in Electrical and Computer Engineering and Mechanical Engineering. Georgia Tech Lorraine was the defendant in a lawsuit pertaining to the language used in advertisements, which was a violation of the Toubon Law".

The College of Design (formerly College of Architecture) maintains a small permanent presence in Paris in affiliation with the École d'architecture de Paris-La Villette and the College of Computing has a similar program with the Barcelona School of Informatics at the Polytechnic University of Catalonia in Barcelona, Spain. There are additional programs in Athlone, Ireland, Shanghai, China, and Singapore. Georgia Tech was supposed to have set up two campuses for research and graduate education in the cities of Visakhapatnam and Hyderabad, Telangana, India by the year 2010, but it appears the plans have been set on hold .

Georgia Tech Cable Network, or GTCN, is the college's branded cable source. Most non-original programming is obtained from Dish Network. GTCN currently has 100 standard-definition channels and 23 high-definition channels.

The Office of Information Technology, or OIT, manages most of the Institute's computing resources (and some related services such as campus telephones). With the exception of a few computer labs maintained by individual colleges, OIT is responsible for most of the computing facilities on campus. Student, faculty, and staff e-mail accounts are among its services. Georgia Tech's ResNet provides free technical support to all students and guests living in Georgia Tech's on-campus housing (excluding fraternities and sororities). ResNet is responsible for network, telephone, and television service, and most support is provided by part-time student employees.

Georgia Tech's undergraduate and graduate programs are divided into six colleges. Collaboration among the colleges is frequent, as mandated by a number of interdisciplinary degree programs and research centers. Georgia Tech has sought to strengthen its undergraduate and graduate offerings in less technical fields, primarily those under the Ivan Allen College of Liberal Arts, which saw a 20% increase in admissions in 2008. Also, even in the Ivan Allen College, the Institute does not offer a Bachelor of Arts degree, only a Bachelor of Science. Georgia Tech's honors program is highly selective and designed to cater to the most intellectually curious undergraduates from all six colleges.

The student body consists of more than 29,000 graduate and undergraduate students (Fall 2017), and there are around 1,740 full-time academic faculty (Fall 2017). The student body at Georgia Tech is 69% male and 31% female (Fall 2017). Female enrollment has historically been low; however, this is slowly changing due to the university's growing liberal arts programs and outreach programs to encourage more female high school students to consider careers in science and engineering as well as changes in the admissions process. These include the "Women In Engineering" program and sponsorship of a chapter of The Society of Women Engineers. For the fall of 2014, over 40% of incoming freshmen were female students.

Around 50–55% of all Georgia Tech students are residents of the state of Georgia, around 20% come from overseas, and 25–30% are residents of other U.S. states or territories. The top states of origin for all non-Georgia US students are Florida, Texas, California, North Carolina, Virginia, New Jersey, and Maryland. Students at Tech represent 114 countries and all 50 states.

The Georgia Institute of Technology is a public institution that receives funds from the State of Georgia, tuition, fees, research grants, and alumni contributions. In 2014, the Institute's revenue amounted to about $1.422 billion. Fifteen percent came from state appropriations and grants while 20% originated from tuition and fees. Grants and contracts accounted for 55% of all revenue. Expenditures were about $1.36 billion. Forty-eight percent went to research and 19% went to instruction. The Georgia Tech Foundation runs the university's endowment and was incorporated in 1932. It includes several wholly owned subsidiaries that own land on campus or in Midtown and lease the land back to the Georgia Board of Regents and other companies and organizations. Assets totaled $1.882 billion and liabilities totaled $0.478 billion in 2014. Georgia Tech has the most generous alumni donor base, percentage wise, of any public university ranked in the top 50. In 2015, the university received a $30 million grant from Atlanta philanthropist Diana Blank to build the "most environmentally-sound building ever constructed in the Southeast."

Georgia Tech is consistently ranked among the best universities in the United States and the world. For over a decade, Georgia Tech has remained in the top ten public universities in the United States, and as of 2014 is listed as the smartest public college in the United States. In 2012, The Times Higher Education World University Rankings ranked Georgia Tech 19th in the United States and 25th in the world; its engineering program was ranked 9th in the world in 2013. , Tech's undergraduate engineering program is ranked 4th and its graduate engineering program is ranked 7th by "U.S. News & World Report". Tech's undergraduate engineering programs include aerospace (2nd), biomedical (1st), chemical (3rd), civil (2nd), computer (6th), electrical (4th), environmental (2nd), industrial (1st), materials (5th), and mechanical (3rd). Tech's graduate engineering programs include aerospace (2nd), biomedical/bioengineering (2nd), chemical (8th), civil (4th), computer (6th), electrical (6th), environmental (5th), industrial (1st), materials (8th), mechanical (6th), and nuclear (6th).

In 2010, Georgia Tech's College of Business rose from 31st to 28th, continuing its rapid upward trend. "Diverse Issues in Higher Education" has ranked Tech No. 1 at the bachelor's level, No. 2 at the master's level, and No. 1 at the doctoral level in terms of producing African American engineering graduates. In 2010, "U.S. News & World Report" ranked Tech as the No. 28 MBA program. Tech also boasts the No. 29 physics program in the nation, specializing in nonlinear dynamics (in which it ranks 5th nationwide) and condensed matter physics. "U.S. News & World Report" ranked the graduate chemistry program at No. 26 overall with the physical chemistry specialty ranked at No. 14. The math department is ranked at No. 30 overall and at No. 8 in discrete math and combinatorics. Georgia Tech ranks #9 among "Best Engineering Colleges By Salary Potential" in the United States. In 2015, Georgia Tech was ranked 2nd among public universities and 8th among all universities in the United States for students' return on investment.

Georgia Tech is classified by The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching as a university with very high research activity. Much of this research is funded by large corporations or governmental organizations. Research is organizationally under the Executive Vice President for Research, Stephen E. Cross, who reports directly to the institute president. Nine "interdisciplinary research institutes" report to him, with all research centers, laboratories and interdisciplinary research activities at Georgia Tech reporting through one of those institutes.

The oldest of those research institutes is a nonprofit research organization referred to as the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI). GTRI provides sponsored research in a variety of technical specialties including radar, electro-optics, and materials engineering. Around forty percent (by award value) of Georgia Tech's research, especially government-funded classified work, is conducted through this counterpart organization. GTRI employs over 1,700 people and had $305 million in revenue in fiscal year 2014. The other institutes include: the Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering & Bioscience, the Georgia Tech Institute for Electronics and Nanotechnology, the Georgia Tech Strategic Energy Institute, the Brook Byers Institute for Sustainable Systems, the Georgia Tech Manufacturing Institute, the Institute of Paper Science and Technology, Institute for Materials and the Institute for People and Technology.
Many startup companies are produced through research conducted at Georgia Tech, with the Advanced Technology Development Center and VentureLab ready to assist Georgia Tech's researchers and entrepreneurs in organization and commercialization. The Georgia Tech Research Corporation serves as Georgia Tech's contract and technology licensing agency. Georgia Tech is ranked fourth for startup companies, eighth in patents, and eleventh in technology transfer by the Milken Institute. Georgia Tech and GTRI devote of space to research purposes, including the new $90 million Marcus Nanotechnology Building, one of the largest nanotechnology research facilities in the Southeastern United States with over of clean room space.
Georgia Tech encourages undergraduates to participate in research alongside graduate students and faculty. The Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program awards scholarships each semester to undergraduates who pursue research activities. These scholarships, called the President's Undergraduate Research Awards, take the form of student salaries or help cover travel expenses when students present their work at professional meetings. Additionally, undergraduates may participate in research and write a thesis to earn a "Research Option" credit on their transcripts. An undergraduate research journal, "The Tower", was established in 2007 to provide undergraduates with a venue for disseminating their research and a chance to become familiar with the academic publishing process.
Recent developments include a proposed graphene antenna.

Georgia Tech and Emory University have a strong research partnership and jointly administer the Emory-Georgia Tech Predictive Health Institute. They also, along with Peking University, administer the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering. In 2015, Georgia Tech and Emory were awarded an $8.3 million grant by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to establish a National Exposure Assessment Laboratory. In July 2015, Georgia Tech, Emory, and Children's Healthcare of Atlanta were awarded a four-year, 1.8 million dollar grant by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation in order to expand the Atlanta Cystic Fibrosis Research and Development Program. In 2015, the two universities received a five-year, $2.9 million grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF) to create new bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degree programs and concentrations in healthcare robotics, which will be the first program of its kind in the Southeastern United States.

The Georgia Tech Panama Logistics Innovation & Research Center is an initiative between the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, the Ecuador National Secretariat of Science and Technology, and the government of Panama that aims to enhance Panama's logistics capabilities and performance through a number of research and education initiatives. The center is creating models of country level logistics capabilities that will support the decision-making process for future investments and trade opportunities in the growing region and has established dual degree programs in the University of Panama and other Panamanian universities with Georgia Tech. A similar center in Singapore, The Centre for Next Generation Logistics, was established in 2015 and is a collaboration between Georgia Tech and the National University of Singapore. The Center will work closely with government agencies and the industry to perform research in logistics and supply chain systems for translation into innovations and commercialization to achieve transformative economic and societal impact.

Georgia Tech maintains close ties to the industrial world. Many of these connections are made through Georgia Tech's cooperative education and internship programs. Georgia Tech's Division of Professional Practice (DoPP), established in 1912 as the Georgia Institute of Technology Cooperative Division, operates the largest and fourth-oldest cooperative education program in the United States, and is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Cooperative Education. The DoPP is charged with providing opportunities for students to gain real-world employment experience through four programs, each targeting a different body of students. The Undergraduate Cooperative Education Program is a five-year program in which undergraduate students alternating between semesters of formal instruction at Georgia Tech and semesters of full-time employment with their employers.

The Graduate Cooperative Education Program, established in 1983, is the largest such program in the United States. It allows graduate students pursuing master's degrees or doctorates in any field to spend a maximum of two consecutive semesters working full- or part-time with employers. The Undergraduate Professional Internship Program enables undergraduate students—typically juniors or seniors—to complete a one- or two-semester internship with employers. The Work Abroad Program hosts a variety of cooperative education and internship experiences for upperclassmen and graduate students seeking international employment and cross-cultural experiences. While all four programs are voluntary, they consistently attract high numbers of students—more than 3,000 at last count. Around 1,000 businesses and organizations hire these students, who collectively earn $20 million per year.

Georgia Tech's cooperative education and internship programs have been externally recognized for their strengths. The Undergraduate Cooperative Education was recognized by "U.S. News & World Report" as one of the top 10 "Programs that Really Work" for five consecutive years. "U.S. News & World Report" additionally ranked Georgia Tech's internship and cooperative education programs among 14 "Academic Programs to Look For" in 2006 and 2007. On June 4, 2007, the University of Cincinnati inducted Georgia Tech into its Cooperative Education Hall of Honor.

Georgia Tech students benefit from many Institute-sponsored or related events on campus, as well as a wide selection of cultural options in the surrounding district of Midtown Atlanta, "Atlanta's Heart of the Arts". Just off campus, students can choose from several restaurants, including a half-dozen in Technology Square alone. Home Park, a neighborhood that borders the north end of campus, is a popular living area for Tech students and recent graduates.

Georgia Tech has a number of legends and traditions, some of which have persisted for decades. Some are well-known; for example, the most notable of these is the popular but rare tradition of stealing the 'T' from Tech Tower. Tech Tower, Tech's historic primary administrative building, has the letters "TECH" hanging atop it on each of its four sides. There have been several attempts by students to orchestrate complex plans to steal the huge symbolic letter T, and on occasion they have carried this act out successfully. 

One of the cherished holdovers from Tech's early years, a steam whistle blew five minutes before the hour, every hour from 7:55 a.m. to 5:55 p.m. However, starting in the fall semester of 2017, due to a new classroom scheduling template, the whistle no longer adheres to this convention and follows a modified schedule. The whistle also blows every spring during the "When the Whistle Blows" remembrance ceremony. The faculty newspaper is named "The Whistle."

Georgia Tech students hold a heated, long and ongoing rivalry with the University of Georgia, known as Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate. The first known hostilities between the two institutions trace back to 1891. The University of Georgia's literary magazine proclaimed UGA's colors to be "old gold, black, and crimson". Dr. Charles H. Herty, then President of the University of Georgia, felt that old gold was too similar to yellow and that it "symbolized cowardice". After the 1893 football game against Tech, Herty removed old gold as an official color. Tech would first use old gold for their uniforms, as a proverbial slap in the face to UGA, in their first unofficial football game against Auburn in 1891. Georgia Tech's school colors would henceforth be old gold and white.

Georgia Tech Housing is subject to a clear geographic division of campus into eastern and western areas that contain the vast majority of housing. East Campus is largely populated by freshmen and is served by Brittain Dining Hall and North Avenue Dining Hall. West Campus houses some freshmen, transfer, and returning students (upperclassmen), and is served by West Village Graduate students typically live off-campus (for example, in Home Park) or on-campus in the Graduate Living Center or 10th and Home.

The Institute's administration has implemented programs in an effort to reduce the levels of stress and anxiety felt by Tech students. The Familiarization and Adaptation to the Surroundings and Environs of Tech (FASET) Orientation and Freshman Experience (a freshman-only dorm life program to "encourage friendships and a feeling of social involvement") programs, which seek to help acclimate new students to their surroundings and foster a greater sense of community. As a result, the Institute's retention rates improved.

In recent years , Georgia Tech Housing has been at or over capacity. In Fall 2006, many dorms housed "triples", which was a project that put three residents into a two-person room. Certain pieces of furniture were not provided to the third resident as to accommodate a third bed. When spaces became available in other parts of campus, the third resident was moved elsewhere. In 2013, Georgia Tech provided housing for 9,553 students, and housing was 98% occupied.

In the fall of 2007, the North Avenue Apartments were opened to Tech students. Originally built for the 1996 Olympics and belonging to Georgia State University, the buildings were given to Georgia Tech and have been used to accommodate Tech's expanding population. Georgia Tech freshmen students were the first to inhabit the dormitories in the Winter and Spring 1996 quarters, while much of East Campus was under renovation for the Olympics. The North Avenue Apartments (commonly known as "North Ave") are also noted as the first Georgia Tech buildings to rise above the top of Tech Tower. Open to second-year undergraduate students and above, the buildings are located on East Campus, across North Avenue and near Bobby Dodd Stadium, putting more upperclassmen on East Campus. Currently, the North Avenue Apartments East and North buildings are undergoing extensive renovation to the façade. During their construction, the bricks were not properly secured and thus were a safety hazard to pedestrians and vehicles on the Downtown Connector below.

Two programs on campus as well have houses on East Campus: the International House (commonly referred to as the I-House); and Women, Science, and Technology. The I-House is housed in 4th Street East and Hayes. Women, Science, and Technology is housed in Goldin and Stein. The I-House hosts an International Coffee Hour every Monday night that class is in session from 6 to 7 pm, hosting both residents and their guests for discussions.

Single graduate students may live in the Graduate Living Center (GLC) or at 10th and Home. 10th and Home is the designated family housing unit of Georgia Tech. Residents are zoned to Atlanta Public Schools. Residents are zoned to Centennial Place Elementary, Inman Middle School, and Grady High School.

Several extracurricular activities are available to students, including over 350 student organizations overseen by the Office of Student Involvement. The Student Government Association (SGA), Georgia Tech's student government, has separate executive, legislative, and judicial branches for undergraduate and graduate students. One of the SGA's primary duties is the disbursement of funds to student organizations in need of financial assistance. These funds are derived from the Student Activity Fee that all Georgia Tech students must pay, currently $123 per semester. The ANAK Society, a secret society and honor society established at Georgia Tech in 1908, claims responsibility for founding many of Georgia Tech's earliest traditions and oldest student organizations, including the SGA.

Georgia Tech's Music Department was established as part of the school's General College in 1963 under the leadership of Ben Logan Sisk. In 1976, the Music Department was assigned to the College of Sciences & Liberal Studies, and in 1991 it was relocated to its current home in the College of Design. In 2009, it was reorganized into the School of Music. The Georgia Tech Glee Club, founded in 1906, is one of the oldest student organizations on campus, and still operates today as part of the School of Music. The Glee Club was among the first collegiate choral groups to release a recording of their songs. The group has toured extensively and appeared on "The Ed Sullivan Show" twice, providing worldwide exposure to "Ramblin' Wreck from Georgia Tech". Today, the modern Glee Club performs dozens of times each semester for many different events, including official Georgia Tech ceremonies, banquets, and sporting events. It consists of 50 to 70 members and requires no audition or previous choral experience.

The Georgia Tech Band Program, also in the School of Music, represents Georgia Tech at athletic events and provides Tech students with a musical outlet. It was founded in 1908 by 14 students and Robert "Biddy" Bidez. The marching band consistently fields over 300 members. Members of the marching band travel to every football game.

The School of Music is also home to a number of ensembles, such as the 80-to-90-member Symphony Orchestra, Jazz Ensemble, Concert Band, and Percussion and MIDI Ensembles. Students also can opt to form their own small Chamber Ensembles, either for course credit or independently. The contemporary Sonic Generator group, backed by the GVU and in collaboration with the Center for Music Technology, performs a diverse lineup of music featuring new technologies and recent composers.

Georgia Tech also has a music scene that is made up of groups that operate independently from the Music Department. These groups include four student-led a cappella groups: Nothin' but Treble, Sympathetic Vibrations, Taal Tadka, and Infinite Harmony. Musician's Network, another student-led group, operates Under the Couch, a live music venue and recording facility that was formerly located beneath the Couch Building on West Campus and is now located in the Student Center.

Many music, theatre, dance, and opera performances are held in the Ferst Center for the Arts. DramaTech is the campus' student-run theater. The theater has been entertaining Georgia Tech and the surrounding community since 1947. They are also home to Let's Try This! (the campus improv troupe) and VarietyTech (a song and dance troupe). Momocon is an annual anime/gaming/comics convention held on campus in March hosted by Anime O-Tekku, the Georgia Tech anime club. The convention has free admission and was held in the Student Center, Instructional Center, and surrounding outdoor areas until 2010. Beginning in 2011, the convention moved its venue to locations in Technology Square.

WREK is Georgia Tech's student run radio station. Broadcast at 91.1 MHz on the FM band the station is known as "Wrek Radio". The studio is on the second floor of the Student Center Commons. Broadcasting with 100 kW ERP, WREK is among the nation's most powerful college radio stations. WREK is a student operated and run radio station. In April 2007, a debate was held regarding the future of the radio station. The prospective purchasers were GPB and NPR. WREK maintained its independence after dismissing the notion with approval from the Radio Communications Board of Georgia Tech. The Georgia Tech Amateur Radio Club, founded in 1912, is among the oldest collegiate amateur radio clubs in the nation. The club provided emergency radio communications during several disasters including numerous hurricanes and the 1985 Mexico earthquake.

"The Technique", also known as the ""Nique"", is Tech's official student newspaper. It is distributed weekly during the Fall and Spring semesters (on Fridays), and biweekly during the Summer semester (with certain exceptions). It was established on November 17, 1911. "Blueprint" is Tech's yearbook, established in 1908. Other student publications include "The North Avenue Review", Tech's "free-speech magazine", "Erato", Tech's literary magazine, "The Tower", Tech's undergraduate research journal and "T-Book", the student handbook detailing Tech traditions. The offices of all student publications are located in the Student Services Building.

Greek life at Georgia Tech includes over 50 active chapters of social fraternities and sororities. All of the groups are chapters of national organizations, including members of the North-American Interfraternity Conference, National Panhellenic Conference, and National Pan-Hellenic Council. The first fraternity to establish a chapter at Georgia Tech was Alpha Tau Omega in 1888, before the school held its first classes. The first sorority to establish a chapter was Alpha Xi Delta in 1954. Students with Greek affiliation make up around 26 percent of the undergraduate student body.

Georgia Tech teams are variously known as the Yellow Jackets, the Ramblin' Wreck and the Engineers; but the official nickname is "Yellow Jackets". They compete as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I level (Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) sub-level for football), primarily competing in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) for all sports since the 1979–80 season (a year after they officially joined the conference before beginning conference play), Coastal Division in any sports split into a divisional format since the 2005–06 season. The Yellow Jackets previously competed as a charter member of the Metro Conference from 1975–76 to 1977–78, as a charter member of the Southeastern Conference (SEC) from 1932–33 to 1963–64, as a charter of the Southern Conference (SoCon) from 1921–22 to 1931–32, and as a charter member of the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association (SIAA) from 1895–96 to 1920–21. They also competed as an Independent from 1964–65 to 1974–75 and on the 1978–79 season. Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, swimming & diving, tennis and track & field; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, softball, swimming and diving, tennis, track & field and volleyball.

The Institute mascots are Buzz and the Ramblin' Wreck. The Institute's traditional football rival is the University of Georgia; the rivalry is considered one of the fiercest in college football. The rivalry is commonly referred to as Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate, which is also the title of a book about the subject. There is also a long-standing rivalry with Clemson. Tech has seventeen varsity sports: football, women's and men's basketball, baseball, softball, volleyball, golf, men's and women's tennis, men's and women's swimming and diving, men's and women's track and field, and men's and women's cross country. Four Georgia Tech football teams were selected as national champions in news polls: 1917, 1928, 1952, and 1990. In May 2007, the women's tennis team won the NCAA National Championship with a 4–2 victory over UCLA, the first ever national title granted by the NCAA to Tech.

Tech's fight song "I'm a Ramblin' Wreck from Georgia Tech" is known worldwide. First published in the 1908 "Blue Print", it was adapted from an old drinking song ("Son of a Gambolier") and embellished with trumpet flourishes by Frank Roman. Then-Vice President Richard Nixon and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sang the song together when they met in Moscow in 1958 to reduce the tension between them. As the story goes, Nixon did not know any Russian songs, but Khrushchev knew that one American song as it had been sung on "The Ed Sullivan Show".

"I'm a Ramblin' Wreck" has had many other notable moments in its history. It is reportedly the first school song to have been played in space. Gregory Peck sang the song while strumming a ukulele in the movie "The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit". John Wayne whistled it in "The High and the Mighty". Tim Holt's character sings a few bars of it in the movie "His Kind of Woman". There are numerous stories of commanding officers in Higgins boats crossing the English Channel on the morning of D-Day leading their men in the song to calm their nerves. It is played after every Georgia Tech score in a football game.

Another popular fight song is "Up With the White and Gold", which is usually played by the band preceding "Ramblin' Wreck". First published in 1919, "Up with the White and Gold" was also written by Frank Roman. The song's title refers to Georgia Tech's school colors and its lyrics contain the phrase, "Down with the Red and Black", an explicit reference to the school colors of the University of Georgia and the then-budding Georgia Tech–UGA rivalry.
Georgia Tech participates in many non-NCAA sanctioned club sports, including airsoft, crew, cricket, cycling (winning three consecutive Dirty South Collegiate Cycling Conference mountain bike championships), disc golf, equestrian, fencing, field hockey, gymnastics, ice hockey, kayaking, lacrosse, paintball, roller hockey, soccer, rugby union, sailing, skydiving, swimming, table tennis, triathlon, ultimate, water polo, water ski, and wrestling. Many club sports take place at the Georgia Tech Aquatic Center, where swimming, diving, water polo, and the swimming portion of the modern pentathlon competitions for the 1996 Summer Olympics were held. In 2018, the first annual College Club Swimming national championship meet was held at the McAuley Aquatic Center and the hosts, the Georgia Tech Swim Club, were crowned the first-ever club swimming and diving national champions.

There are many notable graduates, non-graduate former students and current students of Georgia Tech. Georgia Tech alumni are known as Yellow Jackets. According to the Georgia Tech Alumni Association:

The first class of 95 students entered Georgia Tech in 1888, and the first two graduates received their degrees in 1890. Since then, the institute has greatly expanded, with an enrollment of 14,558 undergraduates and 6,913 postgraduate students .

Many distinguished individuals once called Georgia Tech home, the most notable being Jimmy Carter, former President of the United States and Nobel Peace Prize winner, who briefly attended Georgia Tech in the early 1940s before matriculating at and graduating from the United States Naval Academy. Juan Carlos Varela, a 1985 industrial engineering graduate, was elected president of Panama in May 2014. Another Georgia Tech graduate and Nobel Prize winner, Kary Mullis, received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1993. A large number of businesspeople (including but not limited to prominent CEOs and directors) began their careers at Georgia Tech. Some of the most successful of these are Charles "Garry" Betty (CEO Earthlink), David Dorman (CEO AT&T Corporation), Mike Duke (CEO Wal-Mart), and James D. Robinson III (CEO American Express and later director of The Coca-Cola Company).

Tech graduates have been deeply influential in politics, military service, and activism. Atlanta mayor Ivan Allen Jr. and former United States Senator Sam Nunn have both made significant changes from within their elected offices. Former Georgia Tech President G. Wayne Clough was also a Tech graduate, the first Tech alumnus to serve in that position. Many notable military commanders are alumni; James A. Winnefeld, Jr. who currently serves as the ninth Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Philip M. Breedlove who currently serves as the Commander, U.S. Air Forces in Europe, William L. Ball was the 67th Secretary of the Navy, John M. Brown III is the Commander of the United States Army Pacific Command, and Leonard Wood was Chief of Staff of the Army and a Medal of Honor recipient for helping capture of the Apache chief Geronimo. Wood was also Tech's first football coach and (simultaneously) the team captain, and was instrumental in Tech's first-ever football victory in a game against the University of Georgia. Thomas McGuire was the second-highest scoring American ace during World War II and a Medal of Honor recipient.

Numerous astronauts and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) administrators spent time at Tech; most notably, Retired Vice Admiral Richard H. Truly was the eighth administrator of NASA, and later served as the president of the Georgia Tech Research Institute. John Young walked on the moon as the commander of Apollo 16, first commander of the space shuttle and is the only person to have piloted four different classes of spacecraft. Georgia Tech has its fair share of noteworthy engineers, scientists, and inventors. Nobel Laureate Kary Mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction, Herbert Saffir developed the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale, and W. Jason Morgan made significant contributions to the theory of plate tectonics and geodynamics. In computer science, Krishna Bharat developed Google News, and D. Richard Hipp developed SQLite. Architect Michael Arad designed the World Trade Center Memorial in New York City.
Despite their highly technical backgrounds, Tech graduates are no strangers to the arts or athletic competition. Among them, comedian/actor Jeff Foxworthy of Blue Collar Comedy Tour fame and Randolph Scott both called Tech home. Several famous athletes have, as well; about 150 Tech students have gone into the National Football League (NFL), with many others going into the National Basketball Association (NBA) or Major League Baseball (MLB). Well-known American football athletes include all-time greats such as Joe Hamilton, Pat Swilling, Billy Shaw, and Joe Guyon, former Tech head football coaches Pepper Rodgers and Bill Fulcher, and recent students such as Calvin Johnson and Tashard Choice. Some of Tech's recent entrants into the NBA include Josh Okogie, Chris Bosh, Derrick Favors, Thaddeus Young, Jarrett Jack, and Iman Shumpert. Award-winning baseball stars include Kevin Brown, Mark Teixeira, Nomar Garciaparra, and Jason Varitek. In golf, Tech alumni include the legendary Bobby Jones, who founded The Masters, and David Duval, who was ranked the No. 1 golfer in the world in 1999.




</doc>
<doc id="28537869" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28537869" title="Inland Customs Line">
Inland Customs Line

The Inland Customs Line which incorporated the Great Hedge of India (or Indian Salt Hedge) was a customs barrier built by the British across India primarily to collect the salt tax. The customs line was begun while India was under the control of the East India Company but continued into the period of direct British rule. The line had its beginnings in a series of customs houses that were established in Bengal in 1803 to prevent the smuggling of salt to avoid the tax. These customs houses were eventually formed into a continuous barrier that was brought under the control of the Inland Customs Department in 1843.

The line was gradually expanded as more territory was brought under British control until it covered a distance of more than , often running alongside rivers and other natural barriers. At its greatest extent it ran from the Punjab in the northwest until it reached the princely state of Orissa, near the Bay of Bengal, in the southeast. The line was initially made of dead, thorny material such as the Indian plum but eventually evolved into a living hedge that grew up to high and was compared to the Great Wall of China. The Inland Customs Department employed customs officers, jemadars and men to patrol the line and apprehend smugglers, reaching a peak of more than 14,000 staff in 1872. The line and hedge were considered to be an infringement on the freedom of Indians and in opposition to free trade policies and were eventually abandoned in 1879 when the tax was applied at point of manufacture. The salt tax itself would remain in place until 1946.

When the Inland Customs Line was first conceived, British India was governed by the East India Company. This situation lasted until 1858 when the responsibility for government of the colony was transferred to the Crown following the events of the Indian Rebellion of 1857. By 1780 Warren Hastings, the Company's Governor-General of India, had brought all salt manufacture in the Bengal Presidency under Company control. This allowed him to increase the ancient salt tax in Bengal from 0.3 rupees per maund (37 kg) to 3.25 rupees per maund by 1788, a rate that it remained at until 1879. This brought in a huge amount of revenue for the company, amounting to 6,257,470 rupees for the 1784–85 financial year, at the cost of the Indian consumer, who would have to expend around two rupees per year (two months' income for a labourer) to provide salt for his family. There were taxes on salt in the other British India territories but the tax in Bengal was the highest, with the other taxes at less than a third of the Bengal tax rate.
It was possible to avoid paying the salt tax by extracting salt illegally in salt pans, stealing it from warehouses or smuggling salt from the princely states which remained outside of direct British rule. The latter was the greatest threat to the company's salt revenues. Much of the smuggled salt came into Bengal from the west and the company decided to act to prevent this trade. In 1803 a series of customs houses and barriers were constructed across major roads and rivers in Bengal to collect the tax on traded salt as well as duties on tobacco and other imports. These customs houses were backed up by "preventative customs houses" located near salt works and the coast in Bengal to collect the tax at source.

These customs houses alone did little to prevent the mass avoidance of the salt tax. This was due to the lack of a continuous barrier, corruption within the customs staff and the westward expansion of Bengal towards salt-rich states. In 1823 the Commissioner of Customs for Agra, George Saunders, installed a line of customs posts along the Ganges and Yamuna rivers from Mirzapur to Allahabad that would eventually evolve into the Inland Customs Line. The main aim was to prevent salt from being smuggled from the south and west but there was also a secondary line running from Allahabad to Nepal to prevent smuggling from the Northwest frontier. The annexation of Sindh and the Punjab allowed the line to be extended north-west by G. H. Smith, who had become Commissioner of Customs in 1834. Smith exempted items such as tobacco and iron from taxation to concentrate on salt and was responsible for expanding and improving the line, increasing its budget to 790,000 rupees per year and the staff to 6,600 men. Under Smith's leadership the line saw many reforms and was officially named the Inland Customs Line in 1843.

Smith's new Inland Customs Line was first concentrated between Agra and Delhi and consisted of a series of customs posts at one mile intervals, linked by a raised path with gateways (known as "chokis") to allow people to cross the line every four miles. Policing of the barrier and surrounding land, to a distance of , was the responsibility of the Inland Customs Department, headed by a Commissioner of Inland Customs. The department staffed each post with an Indian Jemadar (approximately equivalent to a British Warrant Officer) and ten men, backed up by patrols operating 2–3 miles behind the line. The line was mainly concerned with the collection of the salt tax but also collected tax on sugar exported from Bengal and functioned as a deterrent against opium, bhang and cannabis smuggling.
The end of company rule in 1858 allowed the British government to expand Bengal through territorial acquisitions, updating the line as needed. In 1869 the government in Calcutta ordered the connection of sections of the line into a continuous customs barrier stretching from the Himalayas to Orissa, near the Bay of Bengal. This distance was said to be the equivalent of London to Constantinople. The north section from Tarbela to Multan was lightly guarded with posts spread further apart as the wide Indus River was judged to provide a sufficient barrier to smuggling. The more heavily guarded section was around long and began at Multan, running along the rivers Sutlej and Yamuna before terminating south of Burhanpur. The final section reverted to longer distances between customs posts and ran east to Sonapur.

In the 1869–70 financial year the line collected 12.5 million rupees in salt tax and 1 million rupees in sugar duties at a cost of 1.62 million rupees in maintenance. In this period the line employed around 12,000 men and maintained 1,727 customs posts. By 1877 the salt tax was worth £6.3 million (approx 29.1 million rupees) to the British government in India, with the majority being collected in the Madras and Bengal provinces, lying on either side of the customs line.

It is not known when an actual live hedge was first grown along the customs line but it is likely that it began in the 1840s when thorn bushes, cut and laid along the line as a barrier (known as the "dry hedge", see also dead hedge), took root. By 1868 it had become of "thoroughly impenetrable" hedge. The original dry hedge consisted mainly of samples of the dwarf Indian plum fixed to the line with stakes. This hedge was at risk of attack by white ants, rats, fire, storms, locusts, parasitic creepers, natural decay and strong winds which could destroy furlongs at a time and necessitated constant maintenance. Allan Octavian Hume, Commissioner of Inland Customs from 1867–70, estimated that each mile of dry hedge required 250 tons of material to construct and that this material had to be carried to the line from between away. The amount of labour involved in such a task was one of the reasons that a live hedge was encouraged, particularly as damage required the replacement of around half of the dry hedge each year.

In 1869 Hume, in preparation for a rapid expansion of the live hedge, began trials of various indigenous thorny shrubs to see which would be suited to different soil and rainfall conditions. The result was that the main body of the hedge was composed of Indian plum, babool, karonda and several species of "Euphorbia". The prickly pear was used where conditions meant that nothing else could grow, as was found in parts of the Hisar district, and in other places bamboo was planted. Where the soil was poor it was dug out and replaced or overlain with better soil and in flood plains the hedge was planted on a raised bank to protect it. The hedge was watered from nearby wells or rainwater collected in large, purpose built trenches and a "well made" road was constructed along its entire length.

Hume was responsible for transforming the hedge from "a mere line of persistently dwarf seedlings, or of irregularly scattered, disconnected bushes" into a formidable barrier that, by the end of his tenure as commissioner, contained of "perfect" hedge and of "strong and good", but not impenetrable hedge. The hedge was nowhere less than high and thick and in some places was high and thick. Hume himself remarked that his barrier was "in its most perfect form, ... utterly impassable to man or beast".

Hume also substantially realigned the Inland Customs Line, joining together separate sections and removing some of the spurs that were no longer necessary. Where this happened, whole runs of hedge were abandoned, and the men would have to construct a hedge from scratch on the new alignment. The living hedge was terminated at Burhanpur in the south, beyond which it could not grow, and at Layyah in the north where it met the River Indus, whose strong current was judged sufficient to deter smugglers. Historian Henry Francis Pelham compared the use of the Indus in this way to that of the River Main, in modern Germany, for the Roman Limes Germanicus fortifications.
Hume was replaced as Commissioner of Customs in 1870 by G. H. M. Batten who would hold the post for the next six years. His administration saw little realignment of the hedge but extensive strengthening of the existing run, including the building of stone walls and ditch and bank systems where the hedge could not be grown. By the end of Batten's first year he had increased the length of "perfect" hedge by , and by 1873 the central portion between Agra and Delhi was said to be almost impregnable. The line was altered slightly in 1875-6 to run alongside the newly built Agra Canal, which was judged a sufficient obstacle to allow the distance between guard posts to be increased to .

Batten's replacement as Commissioner was W. S. Halsey who would be the last to be in charge of the Great Hedge. Under Halsey's control the hedge grew to its greatest extent, reaching a peak of of "perfect" and "good" live hedge by 1878 with a further of inferior hedge, dry hedge or stone wall. The live hedge extended to at least and in places was backed up with an additional dry hedge barrier. All maintenance work was halted on the hedge in 1878 after a decision was made to abandon the line in 1879.

Carissa carandas (Karonda or Carvanda), easy to grow draught resistant sturdy shrub that grows in a varity of soil and produces berry size fruits rich in iron and vitaminc C which is used for pickle, was one of the shrubs used because it is ideal for hedges, growing rapidly, densely and needing little attention. Senegalia catechu (babool or Kikar), zizyphues jujube (amla), prickly pear (opuntia, three species of this cactus), and Euphorbia (thuer, several species) were some of other shrubs plants and trees used for the hedge. Capparis decidua (kair) and Calotropis gigantea (aak pkant) were also used.

The customs line and hedge required a large number of staff to patrol and maintain it. The majority of the staff were Indian, with their officers coming mainly from the British. In 1869 the Inland Customs Department employed 136 officers, 2,499 petty officers and 11,288 men on the line, reaching a peak of 14,188 men of all ranks in 1872, after which staff numbers declined to around 10,000 as expansion slowed and the hedge matured. The Indian staff were recruited disproportionately from the Muslim population, who constituted 42 percent of the customs men. The men were intentionally stationed in areas away from their home towns which, together with their removal of local wood for the hedge, made them unpopular among local people. To encourage co-operation, those Indians who lived in villages near the line were allowed to carry up to of salt across for free.

The job of customs man was highly desirable due to its high pay of five rupees per month (agricultural wages were around three rupees a month), which could be topped up with the proceeds from the sale of seized salt. However the men were forced to live away from their families in order to minimise distractions and were not provided with houses, being expected to build their own from mud or wood. In 1868 the Inland Customs department allowed the men's families to join them on the line, as the previous order had led to customs men straying from their posts and associating too closely with local women. The men worked twelve-hour days consisting of two equal day and night shifts. The principal tasks were patrolling and maintaining the hedge; in 1869 alone the customs men carried out 18 million miles (29 million km) of patrols, dug 2 million cubic feet (57,000 cubic metres) of earth and carried over 150,000 tons of thorny material for the hedge. There was a fairly high level of turnover in the staff; for example, in 1876-7 more than 800 men left the service. This included 115 customs men who died on the line, 276 dismissed, 30 deserted on duty, 360 failing to rejoin after leave and 23 removed for being unfit.

The officer corps was almost entirely British; attempts to attract Indian men to the post proved unsuccessful, as the officers were required to be fluent in English, and such men could easily find better paid work in other fields. The job was tough, with each officer responsible for 100 men on of the line, and working through Sundays and holidays. The officers undertook at least one customs excursion per day on average, weighing and applying tax to almost of goods, in addition to personally patrolling around of the line. The only other British men they would meet while on the line would typically be officers of adjacent beats and senior officers who visited about three times a year.

Several British viceroys considered dismantling the line, as it was a major obstacle to free travel and trade across the subcontinent. This was partly due to the use of the line for the collection of taxes on sugar (which made up 10 percent of the revenues) as well as salt, meaning that traffic had to be stopped and searched in both directions. In addition the line had created a confusing number of different customs jurisdictions in the area surrounding it.

The Viceroy from 1869 to 1872, Lord Mayo, took the first steps towards abolition of the line, instructing British officials to negotiate agreements with the rulers of princely states to take control of salt production. The process was speeded up by Mayo's successor, Lord Northbrook, and by the loss of revenue caused by the Great Famine of 1876–78 that reduced the land tax and killed 6.5 million people. Having secured salt production, British India's Finance Minister, Sir John Strachey, led a review of the tax system and his recommendations, implemented by Viceroy Lord Lytton, resulted in the increase of the salt tax in Madras, Bombay and northern India to 2.5 rupees per maund and a reduction in Bengal to 2.9 rupees. This reduced difference in tax between neighbouring territories made smuggling uneconomical and allowed for the abandonment of the Inland Customs Line on 1 April 1879. The tax on sugar and 29 other commodities had been abolished a year earlier. Strachey's tax reforms continued, and he brought an end to import duties and almost complete free trade to India by 1880. In 1882 Viceroy Lord Ripon finally standardised the salt tax across most of India at a rate of two rupees per maund. However the trans-Indus districts of India continued to be taxed at eight annas (½ rupee) per maund until 23 July 1896 and Burma maintained its reduced rate of just three annas. The equalisation of tax cost the government 1.2 million rupees of lost revenue. The potential for salt to be smuggled from the Kohat (trans-Indus) region meant that the north-western section of the line, some 325 miles long from Layyah to Torbela, continued to be policed by the Department of Salt Revenue in Northern India until at least 1895.

The principal function of the line was to prevent smuggling, often the only way to procure affordable salt, and in this respect it was fairly successful. Smugglers who were caught by customs men were arrested and fined around 8 rupees, those that could not pay being imprisoned for around 6 weeks. The number of smugglers caught increased as the line was lengthened and improved. In 1868 2,340 people were convicted of smuggling after being caught on the line, this rose to 3,271 smugglers in 1873–74 and to 6,077 convicted in 1877–78.

Several methods of smuggling were employed. Early on, when patrols were patchy, large scale smuggling was common, with armed gangs breaking through the line with herds of salt-laden camels or cattle. As the line was strengthened, smugglers changed tactics and would try to disguise salt and bring it through the line or throw it over the hedge. Scams were also attempted with salt being hidden within the jurisdiction of the customs department to collect the 50 percent finders fee.

Clashes between smugglers and customs men were often violent, with the deaths of customs men in the line of duty not being uncommon. A large incident occurred in September 1877 when two customs men attempted to apprehend 112 smugglers and were both killed. More than half of the gang were later caught and either imprisoned or transported. Another customs man lost his life near Sohar when he attempted, with seven colleagues, to capture a gang of 30 smugglers. Fourteen of the gang were later captured and, again, imprisoned or transported. Many of the smugglers also died, with examples including one killed by his fellow smugglers in a fight with customs men and another drowning while trying to escape by swimming an irrigation tank.

Writers have described the line as infringement of the principles of free trade and the freedom of the people of India. Sir John Strachey, the minister whose tax review led to the abolition of the line, was quoted in 1893 describing the line as "a monstrous system, to which it would be almost impossible to find a parallel in any tolerably civilised country". This has been echoed by modern writers such as journalist Madeleine Bunting, who wrote in "The Guardian" in February 2001 that the line was "one of the most grotesque and least well known achievements of the British in India".

The massive scale of the undertaking has also been commented upon, with both Hume, the customs commissioner, and M. E. Grant Duff, who was Under-Secretary of State for India from 1868 to 1874, comparing the hedge to the Great Wall of China. The abolition of the line and equalisation of tax has generally been viewed as a good move, with one writer of 1901 stating that it "relieved the people and the trade along a broad belt of country, 2,000 miles long, from much harassment". Sir Richard Temple, governor of the Bengal and Bombay Presidencies, wrote in 1882 that "the inland customs line for levying the salt-duties has been at length swept away" and that care must be taken to ensure that the "evils of the obsolete transit-duties" did not return.

The use of the customs line to maintain the higher salt tax in Bengal is likely to have had a detrimental effect on the health of Indians through salt deprivation. The higher prices within the area enclosed by the line meant that the average annual salt consumption was just compared with up to outside the line. Indeed, the British government's own figures showed that the barrier directly affected salt consumption, reducing it to below the level that regulations prescribed for English soldiers serving in India and that supplied to prisoners in British jails. The consumption of salt was further lowered during the periods of famine that affected India in the 19th century.

It is impossible to know how many died from salt deprivation in India as a result of the salt tax as salt deficiency was not often recorded as a cause of death and was instead more likely to worsen the effects of other diseases and hinder recoveries. It is known that the equalisation of tax made salt cheaper on the whole, decreasing the tax imposed on 130 million people and increasing it on just 47 million, leading to an increase in the use of the mineral. Consumption grew by 50 percent between 1868 and 1888 and doubled by 1911, by which time salt had become cheaper (relatively) than at any earlier stage of Indian history.

The rate of salt tax was increased to 2.5 rupees per maund in 1888 to compensate for the loss of revenue from falling silver prices, but this had no adverse effect on salt consumption. The salt tax remained a controversial means of collecting revenue and became the subject of the 1930 Salt Satyagraha, a civil disobedience movement led by Mohandas Gandhi against British rule. During the Satyagraha Gandhi and others marched to the salt producing area of Dandi and defied the salt laws, leading to the imprisonment of 80,000 Indians. The march drew significant publicity to the Indian independence movement but failed to get the tax repealed. The salt tax would finally be abolished by the Interim Government of India, led by Jawaharlal Nehru, in October 1946. The government of Indira Gandhi overlaid much of the old route with roads.

Despite its scale, the customs line and associated hedge were not widely known in either Britain or India, the standard histories of the period neglecting to mention them. Roy Moxham, a conservator at the University of London library, wrote a book on the customs line and his search for its remains that was published in 2001. This followed his finding, in 1995, of a passing mention of the hedge in Major-General Sir William Henry Sleeman's work "Rambles and Recollections of an Indian Official". Moxham looked up the hedge in the India Office Records of the British Library and determined to locate its remnants.

Moxham conducted extensive research in London before making three trips to India to look for any remains of the line. In 1998 he located a small raised embankment in the Etawah district in Uttar Pradesh which may be all that remains of the Great Hedge of India. Moxham's book, which he claims to be the first on the subject, details the history of the line and his attempts to locate its modern remains. The book was translated into Marathi by Anand Abhyankar in 2007 and into Tamil by Cyril Alex in 2015.



</doc>
<doc id="28543061" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28543061" title="Hygrophorus eburneus">
Hygrophorus eburneus

Hygrophorus eburneus, commonly known as the ivory waxy cap or the cowboy's handkerchief, is a species of edible mushroom in the waxgill family of fungi. It is widespread in Europe and North America, and has also been collected in northern Africa. The fruit bodies are medium-sized, pure white, and when wet are covered in a layer of slime thick enough to make the mushroom difficult to pick up. The gills are broadly attached to the stem or running down it; as the family name suggests, they feel waxy when rubbed between the fingers. Like all "Hygrophorus" species, the fungus is mycorrhizal—a symbiotic association whereby the underground fungal mycelia penetrate and exchange nutrients with tree roots. They are common in a variety of forest types, where they grow on the ground in thickets or grassy areas. "Hygrophorus eburneus" is the type species of the genus "Hygrophorus". A number of biologically active chemicals have been purified from the fruit bodies of the fungus, including fatty acids with bactericidal and fungicidal activity.

The species was first named as "Agaricus eburneus" by French botanist Jean Bulliard in 1783. Elias Fries divided the large genus "Agaricus" into a number of "tribes" (taxonomically equivalent to modern sections) in his "Systema Mycologicum I", and classified "A. eburneus" in the tribe "Limacium". When In 1836, Fries first defined the genus "Hygrophorus" in his "Epicrisis Systematis Mycologici", "H. eburneus" was included. The fungus has also been named "Limacium eburneum" by Paul Kummer in 1871, when he raised the tribes of Fries to the rank of genus, and "Gymnopus eburneus" by Samuel Frederick Gray in 1821. "H. eburneus" is the type species of the genus "Hygrophorus", and is classified in the section "Hygrophorus", subsection "Hygrophorus". This includes species with non-amyloid, smooth spores, and divergent hyphae in the tissue of the hymenium. Other species in this subsection include "H. eburneiformis", "H. coccus", "H. ponderatus", "H. chrysaspis", and "H. glutinosus".

The mushroom is commonly known as the "ivory waxy cap", the "white waxy cap", or the "cowboy's handkerchief". The specific epithet "eburneus" is a Latin adjective meaning "of ivory".

The cap of "H. eburneus" is broad, with a shape ranging from convex to flattened, sometimes with an umbo (a raised area in the center of the cap). In age the cap margin sometimes becomes elevated and the center of the cap depressed. The cap is pure white, and depending on the moisture in the environment, may be glutinous to sticky. The cap surface is smooth, the margin is even and in young specimens, rolled inward and covered with short fibrils. The flesh is white, thick in the center of the cap but thinning toward the margin. The odor and taste are mild. The gills are somewhat arcuate-decurrent, meaning they are shaped like a bow, curving upward and then running down the stem for a short distance. In terms of spacing, they are subdistant to distant, so that space can be seen between them. The gills are moderately broad, broadest near the stem, narrowed in front, pure white, slightly yellowish or buff with age or when dried. The stem is long, thick, equal in width throughout its length to somewhat tapered downward or with a greatly attenuated base, and glutinous. Its surface is silky beneath the gluten. The top of the stem is covered with short fibrils, pure white, sometimes becoming grayish or dirty with age. It is initially stuffed with cotton-like mycelia, then later becomes hollow. The caps of dried fruit bodies will typically remain white, while the stems will dry darker, especially if they are initially waterlogged.

When they are viewed in mass, such as with a spore print, the spores appear white. Observing with a light microscope reveals additional details: spores are ellipsoid, smooth, and measure 6–8 by 3.5–5 µm. They are pale yellow in Melzer's reagent. The basidia (spore-bearing cells) are 42–52 by 608 µm, and four-spored. There are no pleurocystidia or cheilocystidia. The gill tissue is made of branching hyphae about 7–12 µm wide. The cap cuticle is made of gelatinous, narrow (3–6 µm) hyphae which are repent (bent over) but typically with some erect free ends. Clamp connections are present in the hyphae.

The mushroom is edible, although it may not be appealing to many due to its sliminess. In China, a yak milk beverage is made with "H. eburnus" and yak milk, by lactic acid fermentation with "Lactobacillus bulgaricus", "Streptococcus thermophilus" and "Lactobacillus acidophilus" as mixed starter.

A lookalike species of "Hygrophorus eburneus" is "H. piceae", which differs by having a less slimy cap, dry to slightly viscid stem, and frequent association with spruce. "H. gliocyclus" is just as slimy, but has a cream-colored cap, thicker stalk, and grows with pine. The "snow white waxy cap" ("H. borealis") is also similar in appearance, but has a smaller cap diameter of up to —and is not slimy. "Hygrophorus cossus", which typically grows with "Quercus" species, differs in its pale pinkish-buff cap and gills, and has a distinct sour odor; also, "H. cossus" does not have a potassium hydroxide reaction on the stem as does "H. eburneus". The "white slime mushroom" ("Limacella illinita") has non-waxy gills that are free from attachment to the stalk.

The fruit bodies of "H. eburneus" grow on the soil, mostly in coniferous woods, thickets and grassy areas. The fungus prefers soil that is moist, mesic, loamy and calcareous.

The fungus is widely distributed in North America. It is also found in Europe (Poland and Portugal), Israel and North Africa.

Several fatty acids with bactericidal and fungicidal activity have been isolated and identified from the fruit bodies of "H. eburneus". The bioactive fatty acids are built upon a chemical structure called γ-oxocrotonate. The following gamma-oxocrotonate derivatives have been identified from the mushroom: (2"E",9"E")-4-oxooctadeca-2,9,17-trienoic acid, (2"E",11"Z")-4-oxooctadeca-2,11,17-trienoic acid, ("E")-4-oxohexadeca-2,15-dienoic acid, ("E")-4-oxooctadeca-2,17-dienoic acid, (2"E",9"E")-4-oxooctadeca-2,9-dienoic acid, (2"E",11"Z")-4-oxooctadeca-2,11-dienoic acid, ("E")-4-oxohexadec-2-enoic acid, and ("E")-4-oxooctadec-2-enoic acid. The compound ("E")-4-oxohexadec-2-enoic acid has been investigated for potential use as a fungicide against the oomycete species "Phytophthora infestans", a causal agent of potato and tomato late blight disease.

Additional secondary metabolites discovered in "H. eburneus" include the ceramide compound named "hygrophamide" ((2"S",3"R",4"R",2’"R")-2-(2’-hydroxy-9’"Z"-ene-tetracosanoylamino)-octadecane-1,3,4-triol), and the β-carboline alkaloids known as "harmane" and "norharmane". The report of discovery of the latter two compounds in 2008 represents their first known occurrence in fungal fruit bodies.
List of "Hygrophorus" species




</doc>
<doc id="28544110" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28544110" title="Coprinellus impatiens">
Coprinellus impatiens

Coprinellus impatiens is a species of fungus in the Psathyrellaceae family. First described in 1821, it has been classified variously in the genera "Psathyrella", "Pseudocoprinus", "Coprinarius", and "Coprinus", before molecular phylogenetics reaffirmed it as a "Coprinellus" species in 2001. The fungus is found in North America and Europe, where the mushrooms grow on the ground in deciduous forests. The fruit bodies have buff caps that are up to in diameter, held by slender whitish stems that can be up to tall. Several other "Coprinopsis" species that resemble "C. impatiens" may be distinguished by differences in appearance, habit, or spore morphology.

The species was first described in 1821 as "Agaricus impatiens" by Swedish mycologist Elias Magnus Fries in his "Systema Mycologicum". In 1886, Lucien Quélet transferred the species to "Coprinarius" (a defunct genus now synonymous with "Panaeolus") and then to "Coprinus" a couple of years later in his "Flore Mycologique de la France". In 1936, Robert Kühner segregated the genus "Pseudocoprinus" from "Coprinus", including species that did not have deliquescent gills (that is, gills that "melt" into liquid), and he included "Coprinus impatiens" in this generic transfer. He later changed his mind about the taxonomic separation of "Coprinus" and "Pseudocoprinus". Gillet transferred the species to "Psathyrella" in 1936. In 1938 Jakob Emanuel Lange published the new combination "Coprinellus impatiens". Despite the taxonomic shuffling, the species was popularly known as "Coprinus impatiens" until 2001, when a large-scale phylogenetic analysis resulted in the splitting of the genus "Coprinus" into several smaller genera, and the authors confirmed the validity of the generic placement in "Coprinellus". The specific epithet "impatiens" is derived from the Latin word for "impatient".

A 2005 phylogenetics study proposed that "C. impatiens" was sister (closely related on the phylogenetic tree) to a large "Psathyrella" clade, and that consequently, the genus "Coprinellus" was polyphyletic. A later (2008) study suggested, however, that these results were due to an artifact of taxon sampling—not enough species were analyzed to adequately represent the genetic variation in the genera. The 2008 study demonstrated that "Coprinellus", including "C. impatiens", was monophyletic, descended from a common ancestor. In their analysis, "C. impatiens" was most closely related to "C. congregatus", "C. bisporus", "C. callinus", and "C. heterosetulosus".

The cap of the fruit bodies is initially egg-shaped, then conical to convex before flattening out, reaching diameters between . It has deep narrow grooves reaching almost as far as the center of the cap. The surface color is a pale buff, tawny or cinnamon towards the center, but the color loses intensity when the mushroom is dry. The flesh is whitish, thin, fragile and barely deliquescent (auto-digesting). The gills are initially buff, then turn grayish brown. They are either free from attachment to the stem, or "adnexed", meaning only a small portion of the gill is attached. The stem is whitish, very slender, and more or less equal in width throughout its length, or slightly thicker at the base; its dimensions are by thick. The stem surface of young specimens are "pruinose"—appearing to be coated with a minute layer of fine white particles; this eventually is sloughed off, leaving a smooth or silky surface. The odor and taste of the fruit bodies are not distinctive. The gills of this species do not autodigest with age, or barely do so; the fruit bodies tend to become more fragile with age.

The spore print is dark brown. The spores are smooth, ellipsoid or almond-shaped, with a germ pore; they measure 9–12 by 5–6 μm. The spore-bearing cells, the basidia, are four-spored and tetramorphic (the spores lie on several different levels, and mature at different times). The cheilocystidia (cystidia found on the gill edge) are roughly spherical, 20–35 μm broad, or lageniform (flask-shaped), 36–64 by 10–15 μm, with the apex often rather acute, about 3–5 μm wide. Pleurocystidia (cystidia found on the gill face) are absent in this species.

"Coprinellus disseminatus" resembles "C. impatiens", but may be distinguished by its slightly larger fruit body, somewhat deliquescent gills, and tendency to fruit in smaller groups on the ground, rather than on or around rotting wood. Also, "C. disseminatus" has smaller spores than "C. impatiens", typically 6.6–9.7 by 4.1–5.8 μm. "C. eurysporus" is similar to "C. disseminatus" but usually grows in groups on fallen branches, and has broader spores that measure 8.3–10.3 by 6.7–8.4 µm. "C. hiascens" usually grows in small dense clumps, has narrower spores (typically 9–11 by 4.5–5.5 μm, and produces smaller fruit bodies.

"Coprinellus impatiens" is found in North America and Europe (including Germany, Poland, and the Ukraine) including northern Turkey. In the Pacific Northwest region of the United States, it is found in Oregon and Idaho. Fruit bodies grow solitarily, or rarely in small bundles, on forest litter in deciduous forests, especially ones dominated by beech.




</doc>
<doc id="28603210" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28603210" title="Caernarfon Castle">
Caernarfon Castle

Caernarfon Castle (), often anglicized as Carnarvon Castle, is a medieval fortress in Caernarfon, Gwynedd, north-west Wales cared for by Cadw, the Welsh Government's historic environment service. It was a motte-and-bailey castle in the town of Caernarfon from the late 11th century until 1283 when King Edward I of England began replacing it with the current stone structure. The Edwardian town and castle acted as the administrative centre of north Wales and as a result the defences were built on a grand scale. There was a deliberate link with Caernarfon's Roman past and the Roman fort of Segontium is nearby.

While the castle was under construction, town walls were built around Caernarfon. The work cost between £20,000 and £25,000 from the start until the end of work in 1330. Despite Caernarfon Castle's external appearance of being mostly complete, the interior buildings no longer survive and many of the building plans were never finished. The town and castle were sacked in 1294 when Madog ap Llywelyn led a rebellion against the English. Caernarfon was recaptured the following year. During the Glyndŵr Rising of 1400–1415, the castle was besieged. When the Tudor dynasty ascended to the English throne in 1485, tensions between the Welsh and English began to diminish and castles were considered less important. As a result, Caernarfon Castle was allowed to fall into a state of disrepair. Despite its dilapidated condition, during the English Civil War Caernarfon Castle was held by Royalists, and was besieged three times by Parliamentarian forces. This was the last time the castle was used in war. Caernarfon Castle was neglected until the 19th century when the state funded repairs. In 1911, Caernarfon Castle was used for the investiture of the Prince of Wales, and again in 1969. It is part of the World Heritage Site "Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd".

The first fortifications at Caernarfon were built by the Romans. Their fort, which they named "Segontium", is on the outskirts of the modern town. The fort sat near the bank of the River Seiont; it is likely that the fort was positioned here due to the sheltered nature and as traffic up the Seiont would have been able to supply "Segontium". Caernarfon derives its name from the Roman fortifications. In Welsh, the place was called "y gaer yn Arfon", meaning "the stronghold in the land over against Môn"; Môn is the Welsh name for Anglesey. Little is known about the fate of "Segontium" and its associated civilian settlement after the Romans departed from Britain in the early 5th century.

Following the Norman Conquest of England, William the Conqueror turned his attention to Wales. According to the Domesday Survey of 1086, the Norman Robert of Rhuddlan was nominally in command of the whole of northern Wales. He was killed by the Welsh in 1088. His cousin Hugh d'Avranches, Earl of Chester, reasserted Norman control of north Wales by building three castles: one at an unknown location somewhere in Meirionnydd, one at Aberlleiniog on Anglesey, and another at Caernarfon. This early castle was built on a peninsula, bounded by the River Seiont, the Menai Strait; it would have been a motte and bailey, defended by a timber palisade and earthworks. While the motte, or mound, was integrated into the later Edwardian castle, the location of the original bailey is uncertain, although it may have been to the north-east of the motte. Excavations on top of the motte in 1969 revealed no traces of medieval occupation, suggesting any evidence had been removed. It is likely that the motte was surmounted by a wooden tower known as a keep. The Welsh recaptured Gwynedd in 1115, and Caernarfon Castle came into the possession of the Welsh princes. From contemporary documents written at the castle, it is known that Llywelyn the Great and later Llywelyn ap Gruffudd occasionally stayed at Caernarfon.

War broke out again between England and Wales on 22 March 1282. The Welsh leader, Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, died later that year on 11 December. His brother Dafydd ap Gruffydd continued to fight against the English, but in 1283 Edward I was victorious. Edward marched through northern Wales, capturing castles such as that at Dolwyddelan, and establishing his own at Conwy. War finally drew to a close in May 1283 when Dolbadarn Castle, Dafydd ap Gruffudd's last castle, was captured. Shortly after, Edward began building castles at Harlech and Caernarfon. The castles of Caernarfon, Conwy and Harlech were the most impressive of their time in Wales, and their construction — along with other Edwardian castles in the country — helped establish English rule. The master mason responsible for the design and orchestrating the construction of the castle was probably James of Saint George, an experienced architect and military engineer who played an important role in building the Edwardian castles in Wales. According to the "Flores Historiarum", during the construction of the castle and planned town, the body of the Roman emperor Magnus Maximus was discovered at Caernarfon and Edward I ordered his reburial in a local church.

The construction of the new stone castle was part of a programme of building which transformed Caernarfon; town walls were added, connected to the castle, and a new quay was built. The earliest reference to building at Caernarfon dates from 24 June 1283, when a ditch had been dug separating the site of the castle from the town to the north. A "bretagium", a type of stockade, was created around the site to protect it while the permanent defences were under construction. Timber was shipped from as far away as Liverpool. Stone was quarried from nearby places, such as from Anglesey and around the town. A force of hundreds worked on the excavation of the moat and digging the foundations for the castle. As the site expanded, it began to encroach on the town; houses were cleared to allow the construction. Residents were not paid compensation until three years later. While the foundations for the stone walls were being created, timber-framed apartments were built for Edward I and Eleanor of Castile, his queen. They arrived at Caernarfon on either 11 or 12 July 1283 and stayed for over a month.
Construction at Caernarfon Castle continued over the winter of 1283–84. The extent of completion is uncertain, although architectural historian Arnold Taylor speculated that when Edward and Eleanor visited again in Easter 1284 the Eagle Tower may have been complete. The Statute of Rhuddlan, enacted on 3 March 1284, made Caernarfon a borough and the administrative centre of the county of Gwynedd. According to tradition, Edward II was born at Caernarfon on 25 April 1284. Edward was created Prince of Wales in 1301, with control over Wales and its incomes. Since then the title has traditionally been held by the eldest son of the monarch. According to a famous legend, the king had promised the Welsh that he would name "a prince born in Wales, who did not speak a word of English" and then produced his infant son to their surprise; but the story may well be apocryphal, as it can only be traced to the 16th century. In 1284, Caernarfon was defended by a garrison of forty men, more than the thirty-strong garrisons at Conwy and Harlech. Even in peace time, when most castles would have a guard of only a few men, Caernarfon was defended by between twenty and forty people due to its importance.

By 1285, Caernarfon's town walls were mostly complete. At the same time work continued on the castle. Spending on construction was negligible from 1289 and accounts end in 1292. Edward I's campaign of castle-building in Wales cost £80,000 between 1277 and 1304, and £95,000 between 1277 and 1329; by 1292 £12,000 had been spent on the construction of Caernarfon's castle — of which the southern facade was furthest along — and town walls. As the southern wall and town walls completed a defensive circuit around Caernarfon, the plan was to build the castle's northern facade last.
In 1294, Wales broke out in rebellion led by Madog ap Llywelyn, Prince of Wales. As Caernarfon was the centre of administration in Gwynedd and a symbol of English power, it was targeted by the Welsh. Madog's forces captured the town in September, and in the process heavily damaged the town walls. The castle was defended by just a ditch and a temporary barricade. It was quickly taken and anything flammable was set alight. Fire raged across Caernarfon, leaving destruction in its wake. In the summer of 1295, the English moved to retake Caernarfon. By November the same year, the English began refortifying the town. Rebuilding the town walls was a high priority, and £1,195 (nearly half the sum initially spent on the walls) was spent on completing the job two months ahead of schedule. Attention then shifted to the castle and on finishing the work that had halted in 1292. Once the rebellion was put down, Edward began building Beaumaris Castle on the Isle of Anglesey. The work was overseen by James of Saint George; as a result, Walter of Hereford took over as master mason for the new phase of construction. By the end of 1301, a further £4,500 had been spent on the work with the focus of work on the northern wall and towers. The accounts between November 1301 and September 1304 are missing, possibly because there was a hiatus in work while labour moved north to help out with England's war against Scotland. Records show that Walter of Hereford had left Caernarfon and was in Carlisle in October 1300; he remained occupied with the Scottish wars until the autumn of 1304 when building at Caernarfon resumed. Walter died in 1309 and his immediate subordinate, Henry of Ellerton, took over the position of master mason. Construction continued at a steady rate until 1330.
From 1284 to 1330, when accounts end, between £20,000 and £25,000 was spent on Caernarfon's castle and town walls. Such a sum was enormous and dwarfed the spending on castles such as Dover and Château Gaillard, which were amongst the most expensive and impressive fortifications of the later 12th and early 13th centuries. Subsequent additions to Caernarfon were not major, and what remains of the castle is substantially from the Edwardian period. Despite the expense, much of what was planned for the castle was never carried out. The rears of the King's Gate (the entrance from the town) and the Queen's Gate (the entrance from the south-east) were left unfinished, and foundations in the castle's interior mark where buildings would have stood had work continued.

For around two centuries after the conquest of Wales, the arrangements established by Edward I for the governance of the country remained in place. During this time the castle was constantly garrisoned, and Caernarfon was effectively the capital of north Wales. There was a degree of discrimination, with the most important administrative jobs in Wales usually closed to Welsh people. Tension between the Welsh and their English conquerors spilled over at the start of the 15th century with the outbreak of the Glyndŵr Rising (1400–1415). During the revolt, Caernarfon was one of the targets of Owain Glyndŵr's army. The town and castle were besieged in 1401, and in November that year the Battle of Tuthill took place nearby between Caernarfon's defenders and the besieging force. In 1403 and 1404, Caernarfon was besieged by Welsh troops with support from French forces; the garrison at the time was around thirty. The ascension of the Tudor dynasty to the English throne in 1485 heralded a change in the way Wales was administered. The Tudors were Welsh in origin, and their rule eased hostilities between the Welsh and English. As a result, castles such as Caernarfon, which provided secure centres from which the country could be administered, became less important. They were neglected, and in 1538 it was reported that many castles in Wales were "moche ruynous and ferre in decaye for lakke of tymely reparations".
In Caernarfon's case the walls of the town and castle remained in good condition, while features which required maintenance — such as roofs — were in a state of decay and much timber was rotten. Conditions were so poor that of the castles seven towers and two gatehouses, only the Eagle Tower and the King's Gate had roofs by 1620. The domestic buildings inside the castle had been stripped of anything valuable, such as glass and iron. Despite the disrepair of the domestic buildings, the castle's defences were in a good enough state that during the English Civil War in the mid-17th century it was garrisoned by Royalists. Caernarfon Castle was besieged three times during the war. The constable was John Byron, 1st Baron Byron, who surrendered Caernarfon to Parliamentarian forces in 1646. It was the last time Caernarfon Castle saw fighting. Although it was ordered in 1660 that the castle and town walls should be dismantled, the work was aborted early on and may never have started.
Despite avoiding slighting, the castle was neglected until the late 19th century. From the 1870s onwards, the government funded repairs to Caernarfon Castle. The deputy-constable, Llewellyn Turner oversaw the work, in many cases controversially restoring and rebuilding the castle, rather than simply conserving the existing stonework. Steps, battlements, and roofs were repaired, and the moat to the north of the castle was cleared of post-medieval buildings that were considered to spoil the view, despite the protest of locals. Under the auspices of the Office of Works and its successors since 1908, the castle was preserved due to its historic significance. In 1911, Caernarfon was used for the investiture of the Prince of Wales for the first time when Prince Edward (later Edward VIII), eldest son of the newly crowned King George V; the ceremony was held there at the insistence of then-Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George, a Welshman raised in Caernarfonshire. In 1969, the precedent was repeated with the investiture of Charles, Prince of Wales. Although Caernarfon Castle has been the property of the Crown since it was built, it is currently cared for by "Cadw" (), the Welsh Government's historic environment division, responsible for the maintenance and care of Wales' historic buildings. In 1986, Caernarfon was added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites as part of the "Castles and Town Walls of King Edward in Gwynedd" in recognition of its global importance and to help conserve and protect the site. The castle houses the Royal Welch Fusiliers Museum. During 2015 a new "entrance pavilion" was built, designed by architects Donald Insall Associates.

Caernarfon castle is now a major tourist attraction, with over 195,000 people visiting the attraction in 2015.

Caernarfon Castle's design was partly influenced by a desire to make the structure impressive as a symbol of the new English rule in Wales. This was particularly acute as Caernarfon was made the centre of government in the northern part of the country. The Edwardian castle's layout was mostly dictated by the lay of the land, although the inclusion of the previous castle's motte played a part. It is a narrow enclosure, roughly in the shape of a figure eight. It was divided into two enclosures, upper and lower "wards" in the east and west respectively, with the eastern containing royal accommodation, although this was never completed. The divide was supposed to be established by a range of fortified buildings, however these too were never built.

Studded along the curtain wall are several polygonal towers from which flanking fire could be deployed. There were battlements on the tops of walls and towers, and along the southern face were firing galleries; it was intended to include galleries along the northern face but they were never built. In the opinion of military historian Allen Brown, this combined to make Caernarfon Castle "one of the most formidable concentrations of fire-power to be found in the Middle Ages".
Most of the northern towers stand had four-storeys including a basements. The Eagle Tower at the western corner of the castle was the grandest. It has three turrets which were once surmounted by statues of eagles. The tower contained grand lodgings, and was probably built for Sir Otton de Grandson, the first justiciar of Wales. A basement level contained a water gate, through which visitors travelling up the River Seiont could enter the castle. Water was drawn from a well in the eponymous Well Tower.

Caernarfon's appearance differs from that of other Edwardian castles through the use of banded coloured stone in the walls and in its polygonal, rather than round, towers. There has been extensive academic debate over the interpretation of these features. Historian Arnold Taylor argued that the design of the castle was a representation of the Walls of Constantinople. The conscious use of imagery from the Byzantine Roman Empire was therefore an assertion of authority by Edward I, and influenced by the legendary dream of Magnus Maximus, a Roman emperor. In his dream Maximus had seen a fort, "the fairest that man ever saw", within a city at the mouth of a river in a mountainous country and opposite an island. Edward interpreted this to mean Segontium was the city of Maximus' dream and drew on the imperial link when building Caernarfon Castle. Recent work by historian Abigail Wheatley suggests that the design of Caernarfon was indeed an assertion of Edward's authority, but that it drew on imagery from Roman sites in Britain with the intent of creating an allusion of Arthurian legitimacy for the king.

There were two main entrances, one leading from the town (the King's Gate) and one allowing direct access to the castle without having to proceed through the town (the Queen's Gate). Their form was typical of the time — a passage between two flanking towers. If the King's Gate had been completed, a visitor would have crossed two drawbridges, passed through five doors, under six portcullises, and negotiated a right-angle turn before emerging into the lower enclosure. The route was overlooked by numerous arrow loops and murder holes. A statue of Edward II was erected in a niche overlooking the town, above the entrance to the King's Gate. In the opinion of architectural historian Arnold Taylor, "No building in Britain demonstrates more strikingly the immense strength of medieval fortifications than the great twin-towered gateway to Caernarfon Castle." The Queen's Gate is unusual in that its entrance is above ground level; this was due to the integration of the earlier motte, raising the ground level of the interior. Externally, the gate would have been approached by a stone ramp which is no longer present.

While the curtain wall and its towers survive largely intact, all that remains of the buildings contained within the castle are the foundations. While royal lodgings were in the upper ward, the lower contained buildings such as the kitchens. The kitchens were located immediately west of the King's Gate. On the basis of their insubstantial foundations, Taylor suggests that the kitchens were not strongly built. The other key feature of the castle's domestic side, was the Great Hall. Caernarfon's abutted the south side of the lower ward and was . Though only the foundations survive, in its heyday the Great Hall would have been an impressive building, featuring fine architecture, and used to host royal entertainment. Had Caernarfon been completed as intended, it would have been able to contain a royal household of several hundred people.

Before 1835 the Constable of the castle served as mayor of Caernarfon. A list of the constables from 1284 to 1835 is thus available at the Caernarfon Royal Town Council site, below.





</doc>
<doc id="28673436" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28673436" title="Stephen Lekapenos">
Stephen Lekapenos

Stephen Lekapenos or Lecapenus (; died 18 April 963) was the second son of the Byzantine emperor Romanos I Lekapenos (r. 920–944), and co-emperor from 924 to 945. With his younger brother Constantine, he deposed Romanos I in December 944, but was overthrown and exiled by the legitimate emperor Constantine VII (r. 913–959) a few weeks later. Stephen lived out his life in exile on the island of Lesbos, where he died on Easter 963.

Stephen was the second son of Romanos I and his wife Theodora. His older siblings were Christopher (co-emperor from 921 until his death in 931) and his sisters Helena, who married Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos (r. 913–959), and Agatha, who married Romanos Argyros. His younger brothers were Constantine (co-emperor 924–945) and Theophylact (Patriarch of Constantinople in 933–956). He probably also had at least two unnamed younger sisters, known only because of their marriages to the "magistroi" Romanos Mosele and Romanos Saronites.

Romanos Lekapenos had risen to power in 919, when he had managed to appoint himself regent over the young Constantine VII and marry his daughter Helena to him. Within a year, he successively rose from "basileopator" to "Caesar", and was eventually crowned senior emperor on 17 December 920. To consolidate his hold on power, and with a view of supplanting the ruling Macedonian dynasty with his own family, he raised his eldest son Christopher to co-emperor in May 921, while Stephen and Constantine were proclaimed co-emperors on 25 December 924.

Following Christopher's early death in 931, and given Constantine VII's "de facto" sidelining, Stephen and Constantine assumed an increased prominence, although formally they still ranked after their brother-in-law in the college of emperors. In 933, Stephen was married to Anna, the daughter of a certain Gabalas, who was crowned "Augusta" on the same occasion. The couple had one known son, Romanos. According to the 11th-century chronicler George Kedrenos, he was castrated in 945, but later became a "sebastophoros".

Stephen and Constantine Lekapenos came to the fore in 943, when they opposed a dynastic marriage for their nephew, Romanos II. Their father wanted to have his eldest surviving grandson married to Euphrosyne, a daughter of his successful general John Kourkouas. Although such a union would effectively cement the loyalty of the army, it would also strengthen the position of the legitimate Macedonian line, represented by Romanos II and his father Constantine VII, over the imperial claims of Romanos's own sons. Predictably, Stephen and Constantine opposed this decision, and prevailed upon their father, who was by this time ill and old, to dismiss Kourkouas in the autumn of 944. Romanos II instead married Bertha, an illegitimate daughter of Hugh of Arles, King of Italy, who changed her name to Eudokia after her marriage.

With Romanos I approaching the end of his life, the matter of his succession became urgent. In 943, Romanos drafted a will which would leave Constantine VII as the senior emperor following his death. This greatly upset his two sons, who feared that their brother-in-law would have them deposed and force them to take monastic vows. Motivated, in the opinion of Steven Runciman, partially by self-preservation and partially from genuine ambition, they started planning to seize power through a coup d'état, with Stephen apparently the ringleader and Constantine a rather reluctant partner.

Their fellow conspirators included Marianos Argyros, the "protospatharios" Basil Peteinos, Manuel Kourtikes, the "strategos" Diogenes, Clado, and Philip. Kedrenos, however, considers Peteinos to have served as an agent of Constantine VII among the conspirators. On 20 December 944, the conspirators set their plans in motion. The two brothers smuggled their supporters in the Great Palace of Constantinople during the midday break in palace activities. They then led their men into the chamber of Romanos I, where they easily captured the "ill old man". They were able to transport him to the nearest harbour and from there to Prote, one of the Princes' Islands and a popular place of exile. There, Romanos agreed to take monastic vows and retire from the throne.

Having managed to quietly depose their father, the brothers now had to deal with Constantine VII. Unfortunately for them, rumours soon spread around Constantinople, to the effect that, following Romanos's deposition, Constantine VII's life was in danger. Before long, crowds gathered before the palace, demanding to see their emperor in person. The contemporary Lombard historian Liutprand of Cremona notes that the ambassadors and envoys from Amalfi, Gaeta, Rome, and Provence present in the capital also supported Constantine VII. Stephen and his brother had to succumb to the inevitable, recognizing their brother-in-law as the senior emperor.

The new triumvirate lasted for about 40 days. The three emperors soon appointed new leaders for the military services. Bardas Phokas the Elder was appointed as the new Domestic of the Schools, and Constantine Gongyles as head of the Byzantine navy. Stephen and his brother managed to reward their fellow conspirators. Peteinos became "patrikios" and Great Hetaeriarch, Argyros was appointed Count of the Stable, Kourtikes a "patrikios" and "droungarios" of the Watch. On 26 January 945, however, at the urging of their sister, the "Augusta" Helena, another coup removed the two Lekapenoi from power and restored the sole imperial authority to Constantine VII.

Initially, the two brothers were sent to Prote. The Byzantine chroniclers have their father welcoming them by quoting a passage from the Book of Isaiah, specifically Chapter 1.2: "Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth; for Jehovah hath spoken: I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me." Liutprand of Cremona, however, gives a slightly different account, having Romanos receive his sons with bitter sarcasm, thanking them for not neglecting him and begging them to excuse the monks for their ignorance on how to properly receive emperors. Soon, however, Stephen was moved on to a prison at Prokonnesos, and then to Rhodes, before finally settling in Methymna, Lesbos.

A plot by some members of the imperial government to restore him was discovered in December 947 and the conspirators mutilated and publicly humiliated. Stephen died at Methymna on Easter Sunday (18 April), 963. John Skylitzes claims that Stephen was poisoned by order of the Empress Theophano as part of her efforts to protect the rights to the throne of her sons Basil II and Constantine VIII, by eliminating other possible claimants to the throne. It should, however, be noted that several deaths of the extended imperial family at the time are attributed to Theophano by hostile sources, usually by poison.



</doc>
<doc id="28689382" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28689382" title="My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic">
My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic

My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic is a Canadian-American children's animated fantasy television series created by Lauren Faust for Hasbro. The series is based on Hasbro's My Little Pony line of toys and animated works and is often referred to by collectors as the fourth generation ("G4") of the franchise. The series premiered on October 10, 2010, on The Hub cable channel (which was renamed as Discovery Family in late 2014). Hasbro selected animator Lauren Faust as the creative director and executive producer for the show. Faust sought to challenge the established nature of the existing My Little Pony line, creating more in-depth characters and adventurous settings; she left the series during season 2, to be replaced by Meghan McCarthy as showrunner.

The show follows a studious anthropomorphic unicorn pony named Twilight Sparkle as her mentor Princess Celestia guides her to learn about friendship in the town of Ponyville. Twilight and her dragon assistant Spike become close friends with five other ponies: Applejack, Rarity, Fluttershy, Rainbow Dash, and Pinkie Pie. Each of the ponies represent a different facet of friendship, and Twilight discovers herself to be a key part of the magical artifacts known as the "Elements of Harmony". The ponies travel on adventures and help others around Equestria while working out problems that arise in their own friendships.

The series has become a major commercial success, becoming the most highly rated original production in the Hub Network's broadcast history and leading to new merchandising opportunities for Hasbro, including books, clothing, collectible trading cards, and comics. Despite the target demographic of young girls, "Friendship Is Magic" has also gained a large following of older viewers, mainly young and middle-aged men, who call themselves "". Portions of the show have become part of the remix culture, and have formed the basis for a variety of internet memes.

As of April 2019, the show is currently on its ninth and final season. A feature-length film adaptation directly based on the TV series, titled "", was theatrically released on October 6, 2017 in the United States. A spin-off franchise, "", was launched in 2013. The first two films, "" and "", has been shown in limited theatrical screenings prior to television broadcast and home media release.

Hasbro, Inc. has produced several incarnations and lines of toys and entertainment related to the My Little Pony franchise, often labeled by collectors as "generations". The animated series "My Little Pony Tales" which premiered in 1992 was the toy line's most recent television series before "Friendship Is Magic", featuring the pony designs of the first toy line. It was followed by various direct-to-video releases, which featured later designs up to the third incarnation of the franchise. Just as Michael Bay's film had helped to boost the new "Transformers" toy line, Hasbro wanted to retool the My Little Pony franchise and update it to better suit the current demographic and taste of young girls. According to Margaret Loesch, CEO of Hub Network, revisiting properties that had worked in the past was an important programming decision, influenced to an extent by the opinions of the network's programming executives, a number of whom were once fans of such shows. Senior Vice President Linda Steiner also stated that they "intended to have the show appeal to a larger demographic", with the concept of "co-viewing" of parents with their children being a central theme of the Hub Network's programming. Central themes that Hasbro sought for the show included friendships and working together, factors they determined from market research in how girls played with their toys.
Animator and writer Lauren Faust approached Hasbro, seeking to develop her girls' toys property "Galaxy Girls" into an animated series. Faust, who had previously worked on Cartoon Network's "The Powerpuff Girls" and "Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends", had been pitching original animation aimed at girls for years, but had always been rejected by studios and networks because cartoons for girls were considered unsuccessful. When she pitched to Lisa Licht of Hasbro Studios, Licht showed Faust one of their recent My Little Pony animated works, "", "completely on the fly". Licht considered that Faust's style was well suited to that line, and asked her to consider "some ideas where to take a new version of the franchise".

Faust was initially hired by Hasbro to create a pitch bible for the show, allowing her to get additional help with conceptualization. Faust said she was "extremely skeptical" about taking the job at first because she had always found shows based on girls' toys to be boring and unrelatable. My Little Pony was one of her favorite childhood toys, but she was disappointed that her imagination at the time was nothing like the animated shows, in which the characters, according to Faust, "just had endless tea parties, giggled over nothing and defeated villains by either sharing with them or crying". With the chance to work on "My Little Pony", she hoped to prove that "cartoons for girls don't have to be a puddle of smooshy, cutesy-wootsy, goody-two-shoeness". To do this, she incorporated into the design of the characters and the show many elements that contradicted idealized stereotypes of girls, such as diverse personalities, the message that friends can be different and can get into arguments but still be friends, and the idea that girls should not be limited by what others say they can or cannot do. Elements of the characters' personalities and the show's settings were based on her own childhood imagination of the ponies' adventures, in part inspired by the animated shows that her brothers would watch while growing up, such as "Transformers" and ""; she considered that she was making "Friendship Is Magic" "for me as an eight-year-old". Faust still aimed for the characters to be "relatable" characters, using stereotypical "icons of girliness" (such as the waif or the bookworm) in order to broaden the appeal of the characters for the young female audience.

Faust stated that as she provided Hasbro with more of her ideas for the show, she was inspired by their positive response to the non-traditional elements. Faust had initially pitched the show to include "adventure stories" in a similar proportion to "relationship stories", but recognizing the younger target audience, as well as the difficulty of basing complex plots on the adventure elements, she trimmed back this content, focusing more on exchanges between the characters. The show still incorporates episodic creatures intended to be frightening to children, such as dragons and hydras, but it places more emphasis on the friendships among the characters, displayed with a comedic tone. By the time the show was approved, Faust had developed three full scripts for the series.

Faust began to work out concept sketches, several of which appeared on her DeviantArt page, including ponies from the original series (Twilight, Applejack, Firefly, Surprise, Posey and Sparkler), which later provided the core for the main cast of the show. Hasbro approved the show with Faust as Executive Producer and asked her to complete the pitch bible. In order to do so, Faust brought in Martin Ansolabehere and Paul Rudish, who had worked on other animated shows with her. Faust credits Rudish for the inspiration of the pegasus ponies controlling the weather in Equestria, as well as the character of Nightmare Moon during this period. Faust also consulted Craig McCracken, her husband and also an animator and creator of "The Powerpuff Girls" and "Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends". After seeing the initial version of the pitch bible, Hasbro requested more character designs from Faust's team; subsequently, Faust brought aboard Dave Dunnet and Lynne Naylor to further refine the background and character styles.

On completion of the pitch bible, Hasbro and Faust began looking at studios for the animation. Studio B Productions (renamed to DHX Media on September 8, 2010, after its parent company, along with DHX's other subsidiaries) had previously worked on Macromedia Flash-based animations and on shows that featured a large number of animals, and Faust felt they would be a good selection. Studio B requested that Jayson Thiessen be the director, a choice Faust agreed with. She, Thiessen, and James Wootton led the completion of a two-minute short to pitch the final product to Hasbro, resulting in the company's sanctioning the full production. Faust estimates that from being initially asked to develop the show until this point took roughly one year.

The show is developed at Hasbro Studios in Los Angeles, where most of the writing staff is located, and at DHX Media Vancouver in Vancouver, British Columbia, for the animation work.
Faust's initial writing staff at Hasbro Studios included several writers who had worked with her on her previous shows and were approved by Hasbro. These included Amy Keating Rogers, Cindy Morrow, Meghan McCarthy, Chris Savino, Charlotte Fullerton, M.A. Larson, and Dave Polsky. The writing process began with Faust and Renzetti coming up with broad plots for each show. The two would then hold a brainstorming session with each episode's writer, allowing the writer to script out scenes and dialogue. Faust and Renzetti then worked with the writer to finalize the scripts and assign some basic storyboard instructions. Hasbro was involved throughout this process and laid down some of the concepts to be incorporated into the show. Examples of Hasbro's influence include having Celestia be a princess rather than a queen, making one of the ponies focused on fashion, and portraying toy sets in relevant places within the story, such as Rarity's boutique. In some cases, Hasbro requested that the show include a setting, but allowed Faust and her team to create its visual style, and Hasbro then based the toy set on it; an example is the Ponyville schoolhouse. Faust also had to write to the E/I ("educational and informational") standards that Hasbro required of the show, making the crafting of some of the situations she would have normally done on other animated shows more difficult; for example, Faust cited having one character call another an "egghead" as "treading a very delicate line", and having one character cheat in a competition as "worrisome to some". Each episode also generally includes a moral or life lesson, but these were chosen to "cross a broad spectrum of personal experiences", and not just to suit children. Because intellectual property issues had caused Hasbro to lose some of the rights on the original pony names, the show includes a mix of original characters from the toy line and new characters developed for the show.
Completed scripts were sent to Studio B for pre-production and animation using Macromedia Flash Professional 8. Thiessen's production team was also allowed to select key personnel subject to Hasbro's approval; one of those selected was art director Ridd Sorensen. The Studio B team would storyboard the provided scripts, incorporating any direction and sometimes managing to create scenes that the writers had believed impossible to show in animation. The animators would then prepare the key character poses, layout, background art, and other main elements, and send these versions back to the production team in Los Angeles for review by Hasbro and suggestions from the writers. Thiessen credited much of the technical expertise in the show to Wooton, who created Flash programs to optimize the placement and posing of the pony characters and other elements, simplifying and economizing on the amount of work needed from the other animators. For example, the ponies' manes and tails are generally fixed shapes, animated by bending and stretching them in curves in three dimensions and giving them a sense of movement without the high cost of individual animated hairs. The storyboard artists and animators also need to fill in background characters for otherwise scripted scenes as to populate the world. According to writer Meghan McCarthy, many of the small nods to the fandom, pop culture references, or other easter eggs would be added at this point by the studio. Once the pre-production work was approved and completed, the episode would then be animated. Though Studio B performed the initial animation work, the final steps were passed to Top Draw Animation in the Philippines, an animation studio that Studio B had worked with in the later part of season one and beyond.

The voice casting and production is handled by Voicebox Productions, with Terry Klassen as the series' voice director. Faust, Thiessen, and others participated in selecting voice actors, and Hasbro gave final approval. The voice work is performed prior to the animation, with the animators in the room to help provide direction; according to Libman, this allows herself and the other actors to play the character without certain limitations. Libman noted that for recording her lines as the hyperactive Pinkie Pie, "I learned that I can go as over the top as I want and they [the animators] rarely pull me back."
The series' background music is composed by William Kevin Anderson, and Daniel Ingram composes the songs, which are only included if they would make sense in the episode's script. The production team identifies specific parts of the episode where they want music cues, allowing Anderson to create appropriate music for each. Ingram works alongside Anderson's compositions to create vocal songs that mesh with the background music while filling out the show's fantasy setting. The composition of the music and songs far precedes the broadcast of the episode; for example, songs for the show's third season that began airing in November 2012 were composed in 2011. Ingram considered that songs from previous shows of My Little Pony were "a little bit dated" and decided to bring more interesting work to the "Friendship Is Magic" series. Such changes include making songs with more emotional depth than typical for children's animation, and tending to write songs that can be enjoyed musically outside of the context of the episode. Ingram's songs have "became bigger and more epic, more Broadway and more cinematic over time" with Hasbro blessing the effort to try "something groundbreaking for daytime television", according to Ingram. Lyrics and overall musical themes may be suggested by the writers; two examples include songs written by Amy Keating Rogers, who is a self-professed Stephen Sondheim fan. The song "The Art of the Dress" in the first-season episode "Suited for Success" is inspired by "Putting it Together" from the musical "Sunday in the Park with George", while the season one finale's song, "At The Gala", is based on Sondheim's "Into the Woods". A large musical number in the episode "The Super Speedy Cider Squeezy 6000" paid homage to the song "Ya Got Trouble" from Meredith Willson's musical, "The Music Man".

Before the show was approved, Hasbro and Faust had planned for episodes to be 11 minutes long, to which Faust conformed in her first full-length script, "The Ticket Master", which was part of the pitch bible. However, Faust preferred more traditional 22-minute episodes, and Hasbro eventually agreed to this. The initial production stages were very tight, requiring a schedule twice as fast as Faust had previously experienced, and frequent remote communication between the Los Angeles writing offices and the animation studio in Vancouver. At times, the two teams would hold "writer's summits" to propose new ideas for characters and situations, at which the animation team would provide suggestions on visuals, body language, and characterization. Faust estimates that the time to complete one episode was one year; at one point, the team was simultaneously working on various stages of all 26 episodes of the first season, and when the second season was approved, that number rose temporarily to 32. Episodes then aired about a month after completion. Thiessen explained that they had pushed to start work on the second season as soon as the first was completed, to prevent staff turnover.

After the airing of the first season's finale, Faust announced that she had left the show, and would be credited in the future as Consulting Producer. Her involvement in the second season consists mainly of story conception and scripts, and the involvement ceased after the second season. Despite leaving, she still has high hopes for the staff members, stating that "the gaps I have left are being filled by the same amazing artists, writers, and directors who brought you Season 1. I'm certain the show will be as entertaining as ever". In an interview with "New York Magazine", Faust stated her reasons for leaving were a combination of a hectic production schedules and a lack of creative control she had with the series. According to her husband McCracken, Faust's departure was due to the fact that as a toy company-driven show, "there were things she wanted to do with that series that she just wasn't able to do", and that there is "still some frustration with" not being able to bring some of her ideas to screen.

"Friendship Is Magic" takes place in the land of Equestria, populated by varieties of ponies including variants of Pegasus and unicorn, along with other sentient and non-sentient creatures. The central character is Twilight Sparkle, a unicorn mare sent by her mentor Princess Celestia, ruler of Equestria, to the town of Ponyville to study the magic of friendship. In the show's opening episode "Friendship Is Magic", Twilight resents this assignment, as she is more concerned about the foretold appearance of Nightmare Moon, the evil sister of Celestia. When Nightmare Moon does appear, vowing everlasting night and causing Celestia to disappear, Twilight sets off with five other ponies – Applejack, Fluttershy, Pinkie Pie, Rainbow Dash, and Rarity – to obtain the Elements of Harmony and defeat Nightmare Moon. Before Twilight can activate the Elements, Nightmare Moon appears and shatters them. In a flash of inspiration, Twilight realizes that each of her new friends represents one of the Elements of Harmony (Honesty, Loyalty, Laughter, Generosity, and Kindness), and that she herself is the final piece, Magic. The magical power of the ponies' friendship reverts Nightmare Moon to a repentant Princess Luna. Celestia reappears, reunites with her sister Princess Luna, and decrees that Twilight shall stay in Ponyville to continue studying the magic of friendship, much to the happiness of Twilight and her new friends.

Later episodes follow Twilight and her friends dealing with various problems around Ponyville, including interpersonal problems between friends and family, as well as more adventurous stories involving creatures like dragons and hydras, and having to save Equestria from villainous characters. At the end of each episode, Twilight sends a report back to Celestia explaining what she learned about friendship from these adventures. This part of the formula is abandoned in "Lesson Zero", the second-season episode in which Twilight is convinced to be less rigid in her perceived duties; after this, all the principals contribute reports, although the formality is disregarded when appropriate. In the fourth season, with the request for reports no longer applicable, the six resolve to keep a collective personal journal in which they record their thoughts about life for posterity.

Another focus of the show is the Cutie Mark Crusaders, a trio of much younger mares consisting of Apple Bloom, Sweetie Belle, and Scootaloo, who are obsessed with finding their "cutie marks", an iconic symbol that magically appear on a pony's flank once they have discovered their special talent in life. The show regularly features episodes centered on the Crusaders, who have yet to receive their cutie marks and are teased by other young ponies as "blank flanks". In response, they desperately hurry to try to discover their talents and receive their own cutie marks, often doing so in comical fashions.

Although the episodes are designed to stand alone, the series features continuity and overall story arcs, with several key elements of the series changing; one such change is the evolution of Twilight herself, who spends the first three seasons learning about friendship and is subsequently granted wings by Celestia to become an alicorn and a princess in the finale "Magical Mystery Cure". In the finale "Twilight's Kingdom", she discovers that she is the Princess of Friendship and starts living in a magic castle after the destruction of her library home from previous seasons. Other crucial events impacting the series are the Cutie Mark Crusaders finally obtaining their cutie marks in the episode "Crusaders of the Lost Mark"; the same season's introduction of Starlight Glimmer, a villainous character who redeems herself and becomes Twilight's pupil in the season finale "The Cutie Re-Mark"; and Rainbow Dash fulfilling her lifelong dream of joining the elite Wonderbolts flight team in the episode "Newbie Dash".

Each season typically has a theme and overall story arc: a theme throughout the , for example, is ponies' preparation for the Grand Galloping Gala that occurs in the final episode of that season. In season 4, the Mane Six must find six keys to a mysterious box revealed after they relinquish the Elements of Harmony to their original source, the Tree of Harmony, to save Equestria; in the season finale, it is revealed that they had already obtained the keys, in the form of gifts they received during the season from people they helped.

The show revolves around the adventures and daily life of the unicorn pony Twilight Sparkle (voiced by Tara Strong), her baby dragon assistant Spike (Cathy Weseluck), and her friends in Ponyville, colloquially referred to as the "Mane Six":

Other main characters are the Cutie Mark Crusaders, consisting of Applejack's younger sister Apple Bloom (Michelle Creber), Rarity's younger sister Sweetie Belle (Claire Corlett), and Scootaloo (Madeleine Peters). The two alicorns ruling over Equestria, Twilight's mentor Princess Celestia (Nicole Oliver), and the younger Princess Luna (St. Germain), also appear regularly; another alicorn, Princess Cadance (Britt McKillip), is introduced in the season two finale "A Canterlot Wedding" and oversees the northern Crystal Empire alongside her husband Shining Armor (Andrew Francis), a unicorn who is also Twilight's older brother. The season five premiere "The Cutie Map" introduces Starlight Glimmer (Kelly Sheridan), an antagonist who subsequently becomes Twilight's pupil in the season finale, "The Cutie Re-Mark".

Many friends, family members, and other residents of Ponyville appear frequently, including Applejack's older brother Big McIntosh (Peter New) and grandmother Granny Smith (St. Germain); the Crusaders' teacher Cheerilee (Oliver) and nemeses Diamond Tiara (Chantal Strand) and Silver Spoon (Shannon Chan-Kent); the town's mayor, Mayor Mare (Weseluck); and the muscular pegasus Bulk Biceps (Michael Dobson). Notable secondary characters outside of Ponyville include the self-proclaimed "great and powerful" traveling magician Trixie (Kathleen Barr); the eccentric zebra Zecora (Brenda Crichlow), who lives in the nearby Everfree Forest and dabbles in herbal medicine; the Wonderbolts Spitfire (Kelly Metzger) and Soarin (Matt Hill); and Pinkie Pie's older sister Maud (Ingrid Nilson), who rarely expresses emotion and is obsessed with rocks. The Mane Six also face several antagonists; one of them, the chimera-like trickster Discord (John de Lancie), is introduced in season 2 and subsequently becomes a recurring character of the show.

The show also features an extensive cast of over 200 minor background characters. Several of these background ponies became fan favorites, leading to them having their roles expanded; the show's one-hundredth episode "" focuses almost entirely on some the most popular of them.

In total, 197 episodes have been produced and broadcast.

"My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic" is one of several animated shows used to premiere The Hub, a retooling of the Discovery Kids channel of Discovery Communications in United States markets. The block of programming is a joint development of Hasbro and Discovery, designed to compete with similar family-friendly programming blocks on other networks such as the Disney Channel and Nickelodeon. The first episode of "Friendship Is Magic" premiered on the first Hub broadcast, on October 10, 2010. In March 2011, the show was renewed for a second season to air in 2011–12. The season two premiere on September 17, 2011, had 339,000 viewers, and Hasbro reported that the second-season finale, "A Canterlot Wedding", produced the best ratings of the history of the network in its core and other demographics, with an estimated 1,032,400 viewers.

The series is rated TV-Y and targeted at girls 4–7 years old. The first season was produced and broadcast to "E/I" ("educational and informational") standards, but Hasbro allowed the standard to be dropped in the second season.

"My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic" has been distributed to international markets, including Treehouse TV for the English-speaking audience in Canada, Boomerang in the United Kingdom until 2012 and on Tiny Pop and Pop (UK and Ireland), two British free-to-air children's television channels owned and operated by CSC Media Group, from September 2013, Okto in Singapore, Cartoon Network and later Boomerang with Eleven airing repeats in Australia and TV2 in New Zealand, ntv7 in Malaysia, e-Junior in the United Arab Emirates, Tooniverse in South Korea, and TV Tokyo (seasons 1–2) in Japan. Some of these international broadcasts, including language translations, were arranged with Turner Broadcasting System, which had broadcast "Friendship Is Magic" and other Hasbro shows on many of their European and Middle Eastern channels. The Japanese broadcast of the show has two audio tracks: the original English-language audio track (available via SAP) and a Japanese-language audio track. According to Hasbro Studio's CEO Stephen Davis, they have marketed the show to over 180 territories around the world.

In the United States, episodes of "Friendship Is Magic" are available for digital download through the iTunes Store. Along with several other Hasbro properties, the show's episodes were added to the Netflix video streaming service on April 1, 2012. A two-episode DVD, "Celebration at Canterlot", was offered to Target Corporation stores as an exclusive, packaged with certain toys from the franchise.

Shout! Factory has the DVD publishing rights for the series within Region 1. Fifteen five-episode DVDs and three six-episode DVDs have been released to date.

The first six seasons of the series have been released in complete DVD box sets. United Kingdom-based Clear Vision has the publishing rights for the first two seasons throughout Region 2, including most of Western Europe and the Middle East; however, the company abruptly entered administration in December 2013, and has managed to only release three "My Little Pony" DVD volume sets as of April 2014 by August 2014. Another Region 2 distributor known as Primal Screen had since taken over the license from Clear Vision. Madman Entertainment has the license for publishing the series via DVDs and digital downloads in Region 4 but since Season 4, Beyond Home Entertainment took over the license.

"Friendship Is Magic" is associated with the 2010 relaunch of My Little Pony toy line, having figurines and playsets based on it. A section of the Hasbro website gives information about "Friendship Is Magic" for children and their parents, including character backgrounds, videos, and interactive games and media. Due in part to the older fans, Hasbro has come to see My Little Pony as a "lifestyle" brand, with over 200 licenses in 15 categories of products, including clothing, houseware, and digital media. The brand grossed over 650 million USD in retail sales in 2013, and one billion USD annually in retail sales in 2014 and 2015.

In early 2019, Hasbro Studios released five tie-in animated shorts on their YouTube channel.

"", a theatrical animated film adaptation of the television series, was released on October 6, 2017 in the United States, distributed by Lionsgate. The film is directed by series supervising director Jayson Thiessen and written by showrunner Meghan McCarthy, and is financed by Hasbro Studios' film subdivision, Allspark Pictures.

The series has received positive reviews from critics. Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" favorably noted its "sheer and utter joyfulness" and lack of cynicism, unlike many other shows that garnered a cult following of parents and adults. He complimented the characters' stylized appearance, the stories' relative complexity for children's television, and the solid jokes which make the show enjoyable for parents as well as children. He gave the series a "B+". The show has been critically praised for its humor and moral outlook by Brian Truitt of "USA Today". Genevieve Koski of "The A.V. Club" later commented that "Friendship Is Magic" is an example of a show that, while considered "girly", has been able to tap into the nerd culture to allow it to gain wider acceptance than other comparable forms. Emily Ashby of Common Sense Media, an organization focusing on the parenting aspect of children's media, gave the show a rating of four out of five stars, emphasizing its messages of friendship, tolerance and respect, but advised parents to be wary of the "influence the characters might have on their kids' desires, since it's rooted in a well-known product line of books, toys, and just about everything in between." Liz Ohanesian, for "L.A. Weekly", said that the show is "absolutely genuine in its messages about friendship but never takes itself too seriously". Matt Morgan, writing for "Wired"s "GeekDad" column, praised the show for having "rebooted the long-time Hasbro property while managing to lace it with geeky undertones" and being one of the few "girl-focused shows that a geeky dad can appreciate with his daughter". "Los Angeles Times" critic Robert Lloyd called the show "smarter and sassier and more aesthetically sophisticated" than any of the previous My Little Pony cartoons, and praised its ability to appeal to both children and their parents, in that it is "smart and sprightly and well-staged, and never horribly cute". "TV Guide" listed "Friendship Is Magic" as one of the top sixty animated shows of all time in a September 2013 list. Other praise for the show included its style, stories, characterisation and discussion of feminism.

Kathleen Richter of "Ms." believed that "Friendship Is Magic" did little to change the nature of older animations for girls, which she considered "so sexist and racist and heteronormative." For example, she suggested that, through the character of Rainbow Dash, the show was promoting the stereotype that "all feminists are angry, tomboyish lesbians." She also considered that the only darker-colored ponies shown to date were in positions of servitude towards the "white pony overlord." Lauren Faust responded to these claims by stating that while Rainbow Dash was a tomboy, "nowhere in the show is her sexual orientation ever referenced" and "assuming [tomboys] are lesbians is extremely unfair to both straight and lesbian tomboys", and further stating that "Color has never, ever been depicted as a race indicator for the ponies." Amid Amidi, writing for the animation website "Cartoon Brew", was more critical of the concept of the show, calling it a sign of "the end of the creator-driven era in TV animation". Amidi's essay expressed concern that assigning a talent like Faust to a toy-centric show was part of a trend towards a focus on profitable genres of animation, such as toy tie-ins, to deal with a fragmented viewing audience, and overall "an admission of defeat for the entire movement, a white flag-waving moment for the TV animation industry."

"Friendship Is Magic" originally premiered with an average viewership of 1.4 million per month, but expanded to 4 million per month by the end of the first season, making it the highest-rated of any Hasbro offering at the time. "Advertising Age" reports that the viewership doubled between the first and the second season. The Hub Network reported that "Hearts and Hooves Day", an episode on the theme of Valentine's Day, which aired on February 11, 2012, in the middle of the second season, was the show's most-viewed episode ever, and the second highest of any program of the Hub network; its viewership exceeded 150% of that of the previous year. This was surpassed by the two-part season two finale, "A Canterlot Wedding", airing in April 2012, marking the broadcast as the highest viewership for the Hub Network to that date.

"Friendship Is Magic" was nominated for three British Columbia Leo Awards for Animation, "Best Program", "Best Direction", and "Best Overall Sound". Additionally, the songs "Becoming Popular (The Pony Everypony Should Know)" (from season 2 episode 9, "Sweet and Elite") and "Find A Pet Song" (from season 2 episode 7, "May the Best Pet Win!"), both written by Daniel Ingram, were nominated, but did not win, for "Outstanding Original Song—Children's and Animation" at the 39th Daytime Emmy Awards. The show was named the best animated show for the 2011–12 television season in a user poll on the website Television Without Pity. Marcel Duperreault, Todd Araki, Jason Fredrickson, and Adam McGhie received a 2014 Leo Award for their work on "Power Ponies" for "Best Overall Sound in an Animation Program or Series" on June 1, 2014.

Despite Hasbro's target demographic of young girls and their parents, "My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic" has become a cultural and Internet phenomenon, with many male fans between 13 and 35. The response from the Internet has been traced to cartoon and animation fans on the Internet board 4chan, responding to Amidi's negative essay regarding the show and current trends in animation. As a result of the discussion on 4chan, interest in the show spread throughout other parts of the Internet, creating a large fanbase and a multitude of creative works, fan sites, and conventions. The fanbase has adopted the name "brony" (a portmanteau of "bro" and "pony") to describe themselves. The older fanbase had come as a surprise to Hasbro and staff members involved with the show. They have appreciated and embraced the fandom, adding nods to the fans within the show and the toys, while, early on, allowing the creative elements of the fandom to flourish without legal interference.

Director Adam McKay was inspired by the visuals of "Friendship Is Magic", which his daughters had watched frequently, in creating a short for Morgan Spurlock's 2014 educational/documentary web series, "We the Economy", using cartoon alpacas in the same style as the show to explain about income inequality.

In early 2016, Hasbro was sued by Font Brothers over Hasbro's use of the font "Generation B" for much of its product packaging and marketing with the "Friendship Is Magic" show and toyline, including the "Friendship Is Magic" text in the show's logo. Font Brothers claim that Hasbro has been using this font in an unlicensed manner and is seeking up to $150,000 for each violation of its use.

Dialogue from a "My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic" episode was brought up during the 2016 Republican National Convention by then-RNC chief strategist (and future White House Press Secretary) Sean Spicer to defend Melania Trump against accusations of plagiarism.




</doc>
<doc id="28689578" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28689578" title="Peacock (song)">
Peacock (song)

"Peacock" is a song by American singer Katy Perry, taken from her third studio album, "Teenage Dream" (2010). Because the song was filled with suggestive lyrics pertaining to male genitalia, Capitol Records initially opposed the idea of including it on her record. Similar to what happened with another song of hers – "I Kissed a Girl" (2008) – she refused to withdraw it from the record. "Peacock" was panned by music critics and, musically, was compared to the 1980s hit "Mickey" by Toni Basil, and Gwen Stefani's "Hollaback Girl" (2005). On March 26, 2012, a remix version was released as promotional single on iTunes.
Despite not being released as a single, the song entered several music charts worldwide. Its least successful charting territory was the United Kingdom, while it performed best in the US, topping the "Billboard" Dance Club Songs chart for a week, and has been certified Platinum by the RIAA. Perry has performed "Peacock" on several occasions, including during her 2011 world tour California Dreams Tour. When performing the track, the singer usually wears colorful or glittery clothing.

Mikkel S. Eriksen, Tor Erik Hermansen, and Ester Dean assisted Perry in writing "Peacock" for her third studio album, "Teenage Dream", released in 2010. According to Perry, the whole point of writing "Peacock" was to play with words. Midway through recording the album, Perry recalled saying to the people she was working with: "Look I've got a lot of jewels, but I really don't have the crown. I really don't have that full-blown presentation". So she then decided to get back into the studio and work with Stargate, a production team co-producing "Teenage Dream", during a late-night session and made several more songs, including "Firework" and "Peacock".

Originally, the singer's recording label, Capitol Records, was against the inclusion of the song as a track on "Teenage Dream" as they deemed "Peacock" too controversial. "They were all a bit worried about the word 'cock' and it gave me déjà vu because they did the exact same thing with 'I Kissed a Girl,'" Perry stated. Unhappy with the idea of making her music more family friendly, she insisted on including the songs the label objected to. "They said, 'We don't see it as a single, we don't want it on the album.' And I was like, 'You guys are idiots'." When asked about "Peacock", Perry stated: "I'm hoping it will be a gay-pride anthem, peacocks represent a lot of individuality... It's not just like, 'I wanna see your bulge. And then she went on to clarify: "It does have the word cock in it, but art is also in fart! It's all in how you look at it." Prior to the release of "Teenage Dream", the singer debuted "Peacock" in early August 2010 when she performed it at the MTV World Stage in Malaysia.

"Peacock" is a dance-pop song, with an up-tempo house music beat, that lasts for three minutes and 51 seconds. The song is composed in the key of D minor and is set in time signature of common time, with a tempo of 138 beats per minute. Perry's vocal range spans over an octave, from B to D. Lyrically, the track contains a double entendre with suggestive wording. "New York" magazine writer Willa Paskin observed that Perry did the obvious with the song's hook ("she used a common word for penis and made it mean penis!").
Paskin also wrote that "Peacock" could perhaps be the most outrageous example of an entirely obvious double entendre. Perry herself has considered it to be the biggest innuendo in the world. During an interview with MTV News, the singer said that she is a fan of using puns and double entendres and often looks for ways to incorporate it into her material. In the song, Perry repeatedly asks to see their peacock, if they are "brave enough" to do so. Its composition was compared to Toni Basil's cheerleader anthem "Mickey" by many reviews as both songs are stomping jams, bursting with double meanings.
Leah Greenblatt of "Entertainment Weekly" dubbed it a shamelessly silly revival of Basil's 1980s hit. Rob Sheffield from "Rolling Stone" noticed the two songs shared a drum hook, and thought of "Peacock" as a sequel to Gwen Stefani's 2005 single, "Hollaback Girl".

The track garned generally negative reviews and criticism from critics, who mostly criticized the song's "cock, cock, cock" line. Greg Kot from the "Chicago Tribune" said that "Peacock" adapting the beat from Basil's "Mickey" into a suggestive metaphor "barely qualifies as an off-color joke let alone a song." Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic found the singer to have distinguished herself through "desperate vulgarity". Erlewine concluded: "All this stylized provocation is exhausting, and not just because there's so much of it (none of it actually arousing). It's tiring because, at her heart, Perry is old-fashioned and is invested in none of her aggressive teasing."

Elysa Gardner from "USA Today" advised people who buy the album to skip the song. In his negative review for the album, Matthew Cole of "Slant Magazine" found it difficult to think of a song more unrefined or more irritating than "Peacock". He believed all reviews of "Teenage Dream" will discuss the track, which will be because it is "potentially historic in its badness, to the point that, once you've heard it, you too will have to describe it to other people just to convince yourself that it really exists." "Spin" magazine writer Mikael Wood remarked that the song contains a double entendre that even a performer such as Kesha could find crude.

Writing in music website Sputnikmusic, Rudy Klapper said she would bet that "Peacock" would "never [be] seeing the light of day, primarily because it's a terrible song with a double entendre so blunt it would make Ke$ha blush". Klapper also said the lyrics do not compliment Perry's writing skills. "The Washington Post" staff writer Chris Richards' review of the track was also negative. Talking about how hooks on "Teenage Dream" are catchy, but quickly start to erode if listeners pay more attention to the words, he cited "Peacock" as an example of this. Describing its chorus as "an earworm of the highest order," he said some of the lyrics are enough to make people clench their teeth.

Despite not being released as a single, "Peacock" managed to chart in some territories. The song peaked at number fifty-six on the Canadian Hot 100 and performed similarly in the Czech Republic, where it charted at number fifty-two. The UK Singles Chart was where "Peacock" had its lowest charting entry. In the week ending on September 11, 2010, the track found its peak at number one-hundred-twenty-five. On "Billboard"s US Dance Club Songs, the song had its highest peak position. After eight weeks of appearing on the chart, "Peacock" reached the top spot, replacing La Roux's "In for the Kill", on December 4, 2010. However, by next week, it was superseded by the Richard Vission song "I Like That". The song also reached number five on the "Billboard" Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart. In June 2014, the song was certified Platinum by the RIAA for selling one million copies.

For most performances of "Peacock", the singer usually dons a glittery aquamarine bustier or a colorful piece of clothing attached to her back that is to resemble peacock feathers. Perry's first performance of the song took place during August 2010 at the MTV World Stage. The stage she performed on included props such as lifesize candy canes, background dancers dressed up like candy canes and a video of a blue eye surrounded by peacock feathers playing in the backdrop. While dancing across the stage, Perry wore a white glitter unitard and tutu.

In November, Perry also performed "Peacock" at New York's Roseland Ballroom, where she introduced herself by popping out of a giant cake, dressed in a purple skin-tight cupcake print dress. Additionally, Perry included "Peacock" in her setlist for her worldwide concert tour, California Dreams Tour (February 2011 – January 2012). When singing the song, the performance would include an elaborated feathered fan dance number. She wore a turquoise/green one-piece swimsuit with a peacock tail attached accompanied by female dancers dressed in a similar way, two male dancers and mimes. Concert reviewer Jim Abbott for the "Orlando Sentinel" felt that detailed performances such as the ones done for "Peacock" were a highlight for the singer's tour.

Monthly LGBT-interest magazine "The Advocate" called "Peacock" "very gay". Ryan James Yezak, who had already parodied another of Perry's songs, "California Gurls", did the same for "Peacock". While fewer than James Yezak's parody of the former, his "Peacock" video received more than 130,000 reviews on the internet just two days after its release.

The song was included on the 2016 film, "How to Be Single".



Credits adapted from the "Teenage Dream" liner notes.




</doc>
<doc id="28691956" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28691956" title="Patrick Star">
Patrick Star

Patrick Star is a fictional character in the American animated television series "SpongeBob SquarePants". He is voiced by actor Bill Fagerbakke and was created and designed by marine biologist and cartoonist Stephen Hillenburg. He first appeared on television in the series' pilot episode "Help Wanted" on May 1, 1999.

Seen as an overweight, dimwitted pink starfish, Patrick lives under a rock in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom next door to Squidward Tentacles' moai. His most significant character trait is his lack of common sense, which sometimes leads him and his best friend, SpongeBob SquarePants, into trouble. Patrick is unemployed and a self-proclaimed expert in the "art of doing nothing".

The character has received positive reactions from critics and fans alike. Patrick has been included in various "SpongeBob SquarePants"-related merchandise, including trading cards, video games, plush toys, and comic books. He is a leading character in the 2004 full-length feature film "The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie" and its 2015 sequel "".

Patrick is the ignorant but very humorous best friend of SpongeBob SquarePants. He is portrayed as being an overweight pink starfish, who serves as the village idiot of the underwater city of Bikini Bottom. Patrick gets dumber throughout the series and has been shown to make many ludicrous mistakes. Despite this, he has occasionally been portrayed as a savant, with articulate observance to certain subjects in specific detail. However, he always reverts quickly back to his usual, unintelligent self after displaying a moment of wisdom. He holds no form of occupation except for several very brief stints working at the Krusty Krab and at the Chum Bucket in a variety of positions, and mostly spends his time either clowning around with SpongeBob, catching jellyfish with him, or lounging beneath the rock under which he resides.

At home, Patrick is usually depicted either sleeping, watching TV, or engaged in the "art of doing nothing", at which he is an expert. All the furnishings in the space under his rock are made of sand, and Patrick can simply opt to quickly build up furniture as needed; even so, his living space is sparse and contains only the barest essentials. Aside from his best friend SpongeBob, who is often impressed by Patrick's capacity to come up with naïve yet genius plans or solutions, Patrick frequently irritates those around him and is confounded by the simplest of questions or subjects. The characters of Mr. Krabs and Squidward have no patience for Patrick's stupidity, and the former does not pay him much regard; Clancy Brown, who provides Mr. Krabs' voice, said, "The only person that he [Mr. Krabs] doesn't hire is Patrick because Patrick is just too stupid to work for nothing." Sandy often gets annoyed by Patrick, but still sees him as a friend.

Stephen Hillenburg first became fascinated with the ocean and began developing his artistic abilities as a child. During college, he majored in marine biology and minored in art. He planned to return to college eventually to pursue a master's degree in art. After graduating in 1984, he joined the Ocean Institute, an organization dedicated to educating the public about marine science and maritime history. While he was there, he initially had the idea that would lead to the creation of "SpongeBob SquarePants": a comic book titled "The Intertidal Zone". In 1987, Hillenburg left the institute to pursue a career in animation.

A few years after studying experimental animation at the California Institute of the Arts, Hillenburg met Joe Murray, creator of the Nickelodeon series "Rocko's Modern Life", at an animation festival, and was offered a job as a director of the show. Martin Olson, one of the writers for "Rocko's Modern Life", read "The Intertidal Zone" and encouraged Hillenburg to create a television series with a similar concept. At that point, Hillenburg had not even considered creating his own series. However, he realized that if he ever did, this would be the best approach. Production on "Rocko's Modern Life" ended in 1996. Shortly afterwards, Hillenburg began working on "SpongeBob SquarePants".
For the show's characters, Hillenburg started to draw and used character designs from his comic book—including starfish, crab, and sponge. He described Patrick as "probably the dumbest guy in town". The character was conceived as a starfish to embody the animal's nature; according to Hillenburg, starfish look "dumb and slow", but they are "very active and aggressive" in reality, like Patrick. Hillenburg incorporated character comedy rather than topical humor on the show to emphasize "things that are more about humorous situations and about characters and their flaws." He designed Patrick and SpongeBob as such because "they're whipping themselves up into situations—that's always where the humor comes from. The rule is: Follow the innocence and avoid topical [humor]."

In spite of being depicted as having a good temperament or state of mind, Patrick has been shown in some episodes to have a tantrum. Patrick's emotional outbreak was originally written only for the first season episode "Valentine's Day", where SpongeBob and Sandy try to give Patrick a Valentine's Day gift, and "was supposed to be a one-time thing". However, according to episode writer Jay Lender, "when that show came back it felt so right that his dark side started popping up everywhere. You can plan ahead all you want, but the characters eventually tell you who they are."

Every main character in the show has its own unique footstep sound. The sound of Patrick's footsteps is recorded by the show's Foley crew, with a Foley talent wearing a slip-on shoe. Jeff Hutchins, show's sound designer said, "[Going] barefoot makes it tough to have much presence, so we decided that Patrick would be performed with shoes on."

Patrick's voice is provided by actor Bill Fagerbakke, who also does the voices of numerous other characters on "SpongeBob SquarePants". While creating the show and writing its pilot episode in 1997, Hillenburg and Derek Drymon, the show's then-creative director, were also conducting auditions to find voices for the show's characters. Fagerbakke auditioned for the role of Patrick after Tom Kenny, SpongeBob's voice actor, had been cast. Fagerbakke said, "Steve is such a lovely guy, and I had absolutely no feeling for the material whatsoever." He described his experience in the audition, saying "I was just going in for another audition, and I had no idea what was in store there in terms of the remarkable visual wit and really the kind of endearing child-like humanity in the show. I couldn't pick that up from the audition material at all. I was just kind of perfunctorially trying to give the guy what he wanted."

Fagerbakke referred to Patrick as "AquaDauber" (a reference to his role as Michael "Dauber" Dybinski on the 1990s sitcom "Coach") in the first few years of working on the show. Patrick is "enormously entertaining to portray" because, according to Fagerbakke, "when I'm performing Patrick, there are many secrets that I could never divulge". Fagerbakke's approach in voicing Patrick is "much the same way I would do [to] any kind of character." "I'm always looking for opportunities to explore that freewheeling imagination and insanity of children. To be able to plug in to that and let that carry you in to a performance is such a gas, I have so much fun with that. I love kids; I raised two girls and I love being a parent," he said. The cast members record as a whole cast. Fagerbakke says that the situation improves his performance as a voice actor because "there is something remarkable that happens when people are working together that is unique to that." Fagerbakke modeled his performance whenever Patrick is angry after that of American actress Shelley Winters.

Fagerbakke has been compared to Patrick's character, which he concurs with. Kenny said that "Bill [Fagerbakke] is a big guy. The world is almost too small for him. He's a force of nature, like Patrick." Writer Jay Lender said, describing Fagerbakke in the recording studio, "Bill Fagerbakke is the most thoughtful performer I've ever seen in the booth—he was always asking questions and really trying to get into the mindset, such as it is, of Patrick." Writer Kent Osborne said of Fagerbakke, "He is this big guy, and he plays Patrick so well. He's just this big guy, and he lumbers around." Fagerbakke said, "I'm clumsy. I'm goofy. I make mistakes all the time" and agreed that "I guess I'm a lot of Patrick."

Critical reception for the character from both professionals and fans has been positive. In his DVD review for "DVD Verdict", Bill Treadway called Patrick "the village idiot, who sometimes gives SpongeBob some really bad advice, but he is a loyal friend and that's something we don't see much of these days." He said, "Patrick is the definition of stupid and his antics will have you laughing out loud." In a review published in 2007, Peter Keepnews of "The New York Times" said, "Patrick is a popular character, and the new episodes illustrate why: He is unfailingly enthusiastic, touchingly loyal and absolutely undeterred by his intellectual limitations. Hilariously voiced by Bill Fagerbakke, he is not just an endearing comic creation but a role model for idiots everywhere."

Nancy Basile of About.com called Patrick "one of the silliest characters on "SpongeBob SquarePants"". In her DVD review of "SpongeBob and Friends: Patrick SquarePants", a Patrick-themed "SpongeBob SquarePants" home video release, Basile said, "The episodes included [...] are hilarious. They're not only some of Patrick's best episodes, but also some of the show's classic episodes." She ranked "That's No Lady" as Patrick's best episode and said, "I was remiss not to include this episode in my top ten ["SpongeBob SquarePants" episodes] list." She cited her favorite scene from the episode, where "Patrick can't read the number on Mr. Krabs' table, saying, 'Ford knee.' Mr. Krabs replies, 'That's a seven, Patricia.'" The Kids' Choice Awards, an annual awards show presented by Nickelodeon, added several new categories, including "Favorite Animated Animal Sidekick", in its 2014 ceremony. Patrick received the Kids' Choice Award Blimp for the category, winning to Perry the Platypus ("Phineas and Ferb"), Sparky ("The Fairly OddParents") and Waddles ("Gravity Falls").

In 2002, the show's popularity among the gay community grew, and it was reported that they had embraced the show, according to BBC Online. "The Wall Street Journal" also raised questions about SpongeBob and Patrick in a recent article that pointed out the show's popularity in the gay community. Tom Kenny, in response to the article, said "[I] felt the insinuation was a stretch." "I had heard that gay viewers enjoy the show in the same way that lots of people—college students, parents and children—like the show [...] I thought it was rather silly to hang an entire article on that. I don't think it's a case of it being a gay-friendly show—It's a human-being-friendly show. They're all welcome," Kenny said.

In 2005, a promotional video that involves SpongeBob promoting diversity and tolerance was criticized by two U.S. Christian evangelical groups, most notably Focus on the Family, because they saw the character was being used as an advocate for homosexuality though the video contained "no reference to sex, sexual lifestyle or sexual identity." The incident led to questions as to whether or not SpongeBob, his best friend Patrick, and the rest of the series' characters are homosexual characters. After this speculation and comments, Hillenburg repeated his assertion that sexual preference was never considered during the creation of the show. He clarified the issue and said "We never intended them to be gay. I consider them to be almost asexual. We're just trying to be funny and this has got nothing to do with the show." Tom Kenny and other production members were shocked and surprised that such an issue had arisen. Derek Drymon, the show's creative director until 2004, said, "If SpongeBob holds hands with Patrick it's because he's his best friend and he loves him. I think the whole thing is a part of a larger agenda to stigmatize gay people." Focus on the Family founder James Dobson later stated that his comments were taken out of context and that his original complaints were not with SpongeBob or any of the characters in the video but with the organization that sponsored the video, the We Are Family Foundation. Dobson noted that the foundation had posted pro-homosexual material on its website, but later removed it.

Queer theorist Jeffrey P. Dennis, author of the journal article "The Same Thing We Do Every Night: Signifying Same-Sex Desire in Television Cartoons," argued that SpongeBob and Sandy are not romantically in love, while adding that he believed that SpongeBob and Patrick "are paired with arguably erotic intensity." Dennis noted the two are "not consistently coded as romantic partners," since they live in separate residences, and have distinct groups of friends, but claimed that in the series, "the possibility of same-sex desire is never excluded." Martin Goodman of "Animation World Magazine" described Dennis's comments regarding SpongeBob and Patrick as "interesting."

Patrick has appeared in other "SpongeBob SquarePants"-related media, including board games, comic books, keychains, plush toys, trading cards and video games. Patrick has a major role in "The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie", the first feature-length film adaptation of the show. The film was released on November 19, 2004 and has been a financial success, grossing over $140 million worldwide. He has also appeared in , which was released in theaters on February 6, 2015. In the second film, Patrick (along with SpongeBob, Squidward, Mr. Krabs, and Plankton) is rendered in 3D (using CGI) in the live action scenes. The group becomes an ""Avengers"-type team"; Patrick transforms to Mr. Superawesomeness.

In 2009, actor John Fricker portrayed Patrick in the musical adaptation of the third season episode "The Sponge Who Could Fly". Fricker and the musical itself were well received by most critics. Gordon Barr and Roger Domeneghetti of the "Evening Chronicle" described the musical as "a silly riot of colour [...] as you'd have to expect from an adaptation of a cartoon TV show", while Viv Hardwick of "The Northern Echo" said that Fricker and Martin Johnston (Mr. Krabs) "win the biggest costume contest." A critic from the "Chichester Observer" wrote, "John Fricker is in his element as the simple but lovable Patrick Star".

The character of Patrick has become viral in the Internet in the forms of memes or image macros. A still from "The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie", which displays Patrick in a drop-jawed look, inspired YouTube user to create a presentation of Patrick's expression using a number of different filters. Following this, a YouTube user uploaded another video featuring Patrick reacting to Canadian singer Justin Bieber's 2010 single, "Baby". The meme called "Surprised Patrick" started to disseminate, with one of the first images was posted to Reddit by SeannyOC, and then reblogged onto I Can Has Cheezburger?'s Memebase. Comedy websites—including BiteTV, CollegeHumor, Mashable and Smosh—have published their own "Best of" lists and compilations, covering the "Surprised Patrick" meme's popularity. Mashable's Nena Prakash said, "For years, Patrick Star helped hold down Bikini Bottom while SpongeBob was flippin' burgers at [t]he Krusty Krab. But now it's time for Patrick to come out from under that rock and take a seat upon his royal meme throne, because he's an Internet star(fish)." Another popular meme based on the character is the "Push It Somewhere Else Patrick" image macro, which was taken from the second season episode "Sandy, SpongeBob, and the Worm", based on a scene where Patrick suggests that the town should relocate itself in order to deal with an Alaskan Bull Worm.



</doc>
<doc id="28715891" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28715891" title="The Vinyl Conflict">
The Vinyl Conflict

The Vinyl Conflict is a box set by the thrash metal band Slayer, released October 12, 2010. It includes all ten of Slayer's studio albums since 1986 and their 1991 live album "Decade of Aggression". The idea of releasing a second box set was made public in August 2010. It was first released with a price of $199.99. The albums are all in vinyl and are remastered. It received generally positive reception from critics.

In August 2010, it was announced that band would be releasing a second box set after "Soundtrack to the Apocalypse" (2003), and would include every one of Slayer's studio albums from 1986's "Reign In Blood" to 2009's "World Painted Blood". It originally had a price tag of $199.99, but is now sold at retail price of $149.98. It was released through American Recordings and Sony. Blabbermouth.net noted that they are "treating the albums the way they would treat a great jazz, classical, Bob Dylan or Miles Davis record, something that isn't normally done for metal records." To increase quality, lacquers were cut several times, and the original albums were remastered. It was released as a high-quality 180 gram audiophile vinyl, pressed at RTI, an American pressing plant. The vinyl discs are packaged in a standard, clear inner sleeve to preserve the vinyl, and are also in high-quality litho-wrapped jackets, and boxed in a slipcase. Reproductions of the original albums inner sleeve artwork were converted to 12 inch square inserts to fit the standard vinyl disc covers.

Adam Farber of Sony Music Entertainment explained: "The vinyl box is a real treat for fans, especially with today's renewed and increased interest in vinyl." It is the first time that ten of Slayer's studio albums have been mass-produced on vinyl. Dino Paredes of American Recordings relates: "It's been years and years since the Slayer vinyl has been in print — only the two most recent albums are currently available on vinyl, the rest have been out of print for years and very hard to find. These albums sound spectacular — they sound like you've never heard them before. Everything about 'The Vinyl Conflict' — the look of it, the feel of it — is very strong, very powerful, very Slayer, from the music to the dripping, bloody pentagram on the front of the box. It's perfect."

John Kosik of the Associated Press criticized its price, stating: "For $200, casual fans may want to steer clear." Kosik also said that what it "offers the hard-core listener goes beyond the distinct romance of vinyl's warm, earthy sound." Bob Gendron of TONEAudio wrote that the box set was a "godsend" and also said that they were "amazingly produced LPs that bring to life several of the greatest metal records ever made…" "Guitar World" praised the box set for its mastering, saying the benefits of the treatment "are immediately clear when you drop the needle onto one of these babies. Basically all the songs Slayer fans lose their mind over are here, sounding heavier, livelier and more brutal than ever." He also said that the remastering made a listener want to thoroughly listen to the music.


</doc>
<doc id="28739415" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28739415" title="All Mixed Up (Cougar Town)">
All Mixed Up (Cougar Town)

"All Mixed Up" is the first episode of the second season of the American television sitcom "Cougar Town". It originally aired on September 22, 2010 in the United States on ABC. In this episode, Jules (Courteney Cox) sees a therapist named Glenn (Jennifer Aniston) in order to relieve the stresses of her issues. Meanwhile, Bobby (Brian Van Holt) is troubled with the reality of Grayson's (Josh Hopkins) relationship with Jules, and Travis (Dan Byrd) prepares for college.

"All Mixed Up" was directed by co-creator Bill Lawrence and written by Lawrence and fellow co-creator Kevin Biegel. Aniston made a guest appearance in "All Mixed Up", after a year of heavy speculation. Lawrence felt that her appearance marked a transition in viewership opinions on the show, and opined that the series had precluded from its original concept. 

The episode was well received by television commentators, who praised the storyline and Aniston's performance. Upon initial airing, it attained 8.35 million viewers and a 3.3/9 rating in the 18–49 demographic, according to Nielsen ratings. "All Mixed Up" became the third highest-rated episode of the series, and went on to become the highest-rated installment of the season.

To help with the stresses of her various issues – understanding her new relationship with Grayson, dealing with Travis leaving for college, and trying to fit Bobby into her life – Jules (Courteney Cox) has started to see a new therapist, Glenn (Jennifer Aniston). Jules is able to relate well to Glenn, particularly because Glenn seems to have a mother-son bond with her son, Gabriel, as close as Jules has with Travis. Ellie (Christa Miller) is skeptical about Glenn's qualifications, and jealous that Jules now prefers to talk about her problems with Glenn instead of her.

Grayson (Josh Hopkins) decides that he wants to spend a day away from Jules for some space, sending Jules spiralling. She starts tracking down Glenn outside of therapy sessions to talk. Eventually, Jules discovers that Gabriel is not Glenn's son, but rather a pet dog; after the resulting argument, Glenn tells Jules to find another therapist. Jules then reverts to relying on Ellie for advice.

Andy (Ian Gomez) discovers that a photograph of Jules on an advertising bench has been defaced, so he, Bobby (Brian Van Holt) and Grayson stake out the bench to catch the culprit. Grayson quickly realises that Bobby defaced the bench; Bobby confides in Grayson that he's not entirely comfortably yet with Grayson's and Jules' relationship, but insists that their friendship is still close.

Laurie (Busy Philipps) bets Travis (Dan Byrd) twenty dollars that she can stay awake longer than him. Laurie cheats, taking naps at every possible opportunity, accepting that she will lose the bet, but enjoying the opportunity to mess with Travis. When the bet is over, they acknowledge how much they will miss each other when Travis leaves for college.

Actress Jennifer Aniston made a guest appearance on "All Mixed Up". Speculations of her appearance initially surfaced a year prior to the confirmation, and upon hearing of it, "Cougar Town" co-creator Bill Lawrence initially supported such allegations. Lawrence stated that he announced that Aniston would appear on the television series, but had not contacted her or her representatives. Eventually, Lawrence averted away from his claims and stated that "nothing's happened yet". He continued in his interview with E! Online: "I'd kill to get Jennifer on the show, and if I had any inclination it was happening, I would be telling everybody 'cause I don't really give a sh-t. I would love it to happen and the second it did I would tell everybody in the world, but nothing's happened."

Lawrence confirmed her appearance in July 2010 and revealed that Aniston attained the role of Bonnie, the psychiatrist for Jules. "Kind of a get-too-involved-in-her-life-type of therapist," he retorted. "Those guys are so close in real life they kind of do that for each other anyway. Bonnie has the life Jules wishes she has." Aniston had previously worked with Courteney Cox in the American sitcom "Friends", and again on the serial drama "Dirt". Aniston became the second cast member from "Friends" to appear on the television series, succeeding Lisa Kudrow, who previously appeared in the season one episode "Rhino Skin", also playing the role of a medical professional (specifically, a dermatologist).
Cox wanted the show to establish itself before opting for an appearance by Aniston. Lawrence stated that it took a considerable length of time to lay on the foundation of "Cougar Town"; "And once we did and once it was clicking, I think that not only did Courteney feel comfortable talking to Jen about doing it, but comfortable in how funny she thinks the show is and that Jen would like it and fit into this world really well." He added: "It starts and ends with Courteney and Jennifer being really great friends and excited to work together again—especially doing comedy together. Every day that those two talk they have more ideas about [the role]. It's definitely something they’re both involved in creatively."

Bill Lawrence expressed that he hoped that Aniston's guest appearance would mark a turning point in viewership opinions, and felt that the show had distanced itself from its original concept. "I want as many people as I can get to see what the show kind of became last year," Lawrence articulated. "It went from a typical TV show trying to find itself to something that I’m really proud of and like and think is really funny."

"All Mixed Up" was originally broadcast on September 22, 2010 in the United States on ABC. Upon airing, the episode garnered 8.35 million viewers, despite airing simultaneously with episodes of "Hell's Kitchen" on Fox, "Criminal Minds" on CBS, "" on NBC, and "Hellcats" on The CW. It attained a 3.3/9 rating amongst people the 18–49 demographic, according to Nielsen ratings. "All Mixed Up" achieved the series' highest total viewership in a year, and earned the highest rating in the 18–34 demographic of the night in its respective timeslot, garnering a 3.0/9 rating. The episode became the third-highest rated episode of "Cougar Town", as well as the highest-rated episode of its second season.

"All Mixed Up" was well received by television critics. Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" issued the episode a B+ grade, and felt that the episode was superior to those of the show's first season. He asserted: ""Cougar Town" hasn't taken as big of a step up from season one to season two as it did from the first part of season one to the last part of season one. But the step from 'average' to 'good' was the easy part. Season two is the season where viewers are going to find out if the show has what it takes to make the small steps needed to get from 'good' to 'great'. There's every indication that it's on the way there in the premiere because it's finally started to wrestle with some of the knottier questions at its center." HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall opined that the show averted from its original premise; "It's become one of my favorite comedies, and whether you care about Aniston or not, tonight is a good time to sample it if you dismissed it last year because of the title, the original premise or some of those early episodes."

Commentators cited Jennifer Aniston's appearance as the highlight of the episode. "Entertainment Weekly" Annie Barrett lauded the interactions between Aniston and Cox; "Their interactions were along the lines of what I imagine it would have been like if Rachel's character had suddenly decided she had become a wizard." Kevin Fallon of "The Atlantic" echoed synonymous thoughts, and felt that Aniston's performance reminded the audience of her star power. Fallon wrote: "Aniston's performance was delightfully weird and offbeat—and comedically sharp, a welcome change from the generic and bland film roles she's played in the years since "Friends" ended. Last night's performance spotlighted her gifts as a character actress—and served as a frustrating reminder of what we've been missing since she has [all but] abandoned that niche of acting." Sepinwall expressed that Aniston "acquits herself just fine in the small role of Jules' eccentric new therapist. She's likable and daffy but never over-the-top." "Hollywood Life" journalist Laura Schreffler was not as enthusiastic as the general consensus, avouching that Aniston's guest appearance was overhyped and a "glorified cameo". Schreffler added that Cox overshadowed her, asserting that she "is still way more hilarious".



</doc>
<doc id="28756474" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28756474" title="Only Girl (In the World)">
Only Girl (In the World)

"Only Girl (In the World)" is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her fifth album, "Loud" (2010). The album's lead single, it was released on September 10, 2010. Crystal Johnson wrote the song in collaboration with producers Stargate and Sandy Vee. Rihanna contacted Stargate before "Loud"'s production and asked them to create lively, uptempo music. "Only Girl (In the World)" was the first song composed for the album, and the singer decided to include it on the track list before she recorded her vocals. Backed by strong bass and synthesizer, it is a dance-pop song that has an electronic composition. In its lyrics, Rihanna demands physical attention from her lover.

Critical response to "Only Girl (In the World)" was positive; a number of critics praised its composition and Rihanna's decision to move away from the dark themes of her previous album, "Rated R" (2009). The song reached number one on the United States' "Billboard" Hot 100 chart two weeks after "Loud"'s second single, "What's My Name?", peaked at number one. It was the first time in the chart's history that an album's lead single reached number one after its second single. In the United Kingdom the song spent two weeks at number one and is the nineteenth-bestselling single of all time by a female artist, with over a million copies sold. The song peaked at number one in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and Ireland, and reached the top five in France, Germany and Switzerland.

Rihanna performed "Only Girl (In the World)" on "Saturday Night Live" in the United States, "The X Factor" in the United Kingdom and a shortened version at the 31st Brit Awards. Anthony Mandler directed the song's music video, in which Rihanna is alone in an open natural landscape. The video suggests that she is the only female in the world, echoing the song's title and lyrics, and critics praised its bright, colorful theme. "Only Girl (In the World)" won the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards in 2011.

"Only Girl (In the World)" was written by Crystal Johnson with the song's producers, Stargate and Sandy Vee. Rihanna had previously worked with Stargate on the singles "Hate That I Love You", "Don't Stop the Music" and "Rude Boy". In February 2011, Stargate said that Rihanna approached the Norwegian production duo before she began recording the then-untitled project, saying that she wanted to have fun and produce happy, uptempo songs. According to Tor Erik Hermansen of Stargate, "Only Girl (In the World)" was the first song created for "Loud" and Rihanna decided to include it on the album before recording her vocals. In a webchat with fans, Rihanna said that she wanted to take the next step as an artist: "I didn’t want to go backward and remake "Good Girl Gone Bad". I wanted the next step in the evolution of Rihanna, and it’s perfect for us. You guys are always defending me, so now you’ve got some great songs to justify it." The singer described "Only Girl (In the World)" as having a "bigger sound" than "Rude Boy".

The song was recorded during Rihanna's Last Girl on Earth tour. Its instrumental was recorded by Mikkel Storleer Eriksen of Stargate and Miles Walker at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles, and by Vee at the Bunker in Paris. Kuk Harrell produced Rihanna's vocals, recording them with Josh Gudwin and Marcos Tovar. Inaam Haq, Dane Liska and Brad Shea recorded additional vocals. The song was mixed by Phil Tan at the Ninja Beat Club in Atlanta and by Vee at The Bunker, with engineering by Damien Lewis. Eriksen, Vee and Hermansen provided the instrumentation, and Johnson sang background vocals.

"Only Girl (In the World)" is a dance-pop song, with a length of three minutes and fifty-five seconds. It also incorporates elements of Eurodance. It is in the key of F minor (B minor in the chorus), and written in common time with a moderate tempo of 126 beats per minute. Its instrumentation includes synthesizers, a "heavy whipping bass" and a "strobing" electro beat. Brad Wete of "Entertainment Weekly" described the song as a "stronger, sexier" version of her 2007 single, "Don't Stop the Music".

Rihanna's voice spans one-and-a-half octaves in "Only Girl (In the World)", from F to C, and her vocal has a "silky", "seductive" tone. In the song's lyrics Rihanna yearns for her lover's attention, which makes her feel like the only girl in the world. The singer "pours her heart out" in the chorus: "Want you to make me feel like I'm the only girl in the world/ Like I'm the only one that you'll ever love/ Like I'm the only one who knows your heart/ Only girl in the world." According to Digital Spy writer Nick Levine, the chorus "thumps like a rabbit having an epileptic fit." Rihanna sings suggestively, "Baby, I'll tell you all my secrets that I'm keepin'/ You can come inside/ And when you enter, you ain't leavin'/ Be my prisoner for the night." Fraser McAlpine of the BBC compared the song's message to that of the German fairy tale "Rapunzel"; Rihanna is not willing to throw her hair out of the castle for just any man to come and satisfy her, "particularly not someone who isn't prepared to make the climb up to her scarily high window."

The song received a generally positive response from music critics. Gerrick D. Kennedy of the "Los Angeles Times" called the track a "surefire hit" and something of a "comeback". MTV News writer James Dinh praised the uptempo song, comparing it to the "stark" lead single "Russian Roulette" from Rihanna's previous "Rated R". Monica Herrera wrote for "Billboard" that "Only Girl (In the World)" "aims squarely for dance-floor domination." Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song four stars out of five, calling it a "crowd-pleaser" but not overly original.

According to Levine and Jim Farber of the "New York Daily News", "Only Girl (In the World)" was Rihanna's most pop-sounding song since "Don't Stop the Music". Analyzing the song, the BBC's Fraser McAlpine questioned why "Only Girl (In the World)" leaves a "positive impression" on the listener despite its arrogant, domineering tone. Critical at first ("Listen to the pneumatic hiss at the heart of this song. Try and endure the pumping thrust without getting winded. There is simply too much pressure being stuffed into our ears, with too much brutal force"), he concluded that Rihanna sings the song with great passion and gave it four stars out of five. James Dolan gave the song two-and-a-half stars out of five in "Rolling Stone", writing that "the trance beat won't keep you in the club unless someone else is paying for the drinks."

In the United States, "Only Girl (In the World)" debuted at number 75 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 on September 25, 2010, jumping to number three the following week, before peaking at number one (Rihanna's ninth) on November 25. "Loud" second single, "What's My Name?" (featuring Drake), topped the Hot 100 two weeks before; it was the first time in chart history that an album's first single reached number one after its second. "Only Girl (In the World)" was Rihanna's fourth number-one song of 2010, and she was the first female and the first artist since Usher (in 2004) with four number-one singles in a calendar year. The singer also had the most number-one singles (nine) since 2000. "Only Girl (In the World)" appeared on the "Billboard" Hot 100 year-end chart in 2010 and 2011 at numbers 47 and 40, respectively.

The song debuted on the Digital Songs chart at number one with sales of 249,000, Rihanna's eighth number-one single and her sixth to debut atop the chart (the most in both categories by any artist since the chart's 2005 introduction). The singer set a Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) radio-airplay chart record when "Only Girl (In the World)" rose from number two to number one on November 25, 2010, her seventh number-one. The song was number 46 and number 33, respectively, on the 2011 "Billboard" Digital Songs and Pop Songs year-end charts. "Only Girl (In the World)" was Rihanna's twelfth number-one on the Dance Club Songs songs chart and number 46 on the 2010 "Billboard" year-end chart. The song has been certified six times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and has sold 3.6 million copies in the US as of June 2015. In Canada, "Only Girl (In the World)" debuted at number 65 on September 25, 2010 and rose to number one for a week the following week. On November 6 the song returned to number one for three consecutive weeks, remaining on the chart for a total of 35 weeks.

In the United Kingdom "Only Girl (In the World)" debuted at number two on the UK Singles Chart on October 31, 2010, with 126,000 copies sold. Cheryl Cole debuted at number one with "Promise This", selling 157,000 copies, and Cole and Rihanna had the highest and second-highest debut sales figures of the year. The song, Rihanna's sixth number-two song on the UK Singles Chart, rose to number one the next week for two consecutive weeks. It was Rihanna's fourth UK number-one single, following "Umbrella" (2007), "Take a Bow" (2008) and "Run This Town" (2009). By December 2011 "Only Girl (In the World)" was the 108th song to sell more than a million copies in the United Kingdom, the fifteenth by a female artist, Rihanna's first as primary artist and second overall; the 107th million-seller was Eminem's "Love the Way You Lie" six weeks before, on which Rihanna was featured.

Rihanna was the second non-United Kingdom, non-North American million-selling artist; the first was Danish singer Whigfield with her 1994 song, "Saturday Night". Although at the time the only other female two-song million-seller was Canadian singer Celine Dion, two of Rihanna's subsequent singles—"We Found Love" (2011) and "Diamonds" (2012)—have also sold more than a million copies each. "Only Girl (In the World)" is the nineteenth-bestselling single by a female artist and the 99th overall of all time in the United Kingdom. The song was the fourth- and 68th-bestselling single, respectively, of 2010 and 2011. Certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for shipments exceeding 600,000 copies, it has sold 1,080,000 copies. "Only Girl (In the World)" peaked at number one on the UK Single Downloads Chart and the Scottish Singles Chart.

Director Anthony Mandler filmed the music video for "Only Girl (In the World)" at a location two hours from Los Angeles. Rihanna told JustJared.com that the video was filmed in a "big landscape" so she was the only person in the frame, echoing the song's title. The singer is also "frolicking in a red field and lying in a bed of flowers." The video features large balloons in different colours, a swing hanging from the sky and a tree with multi-colored lights. Rihanna's outfits include a mohair sweater, a floral miniskirt and a white-bra-and-boyshorts two-piece.

"Entertainment Weekly" writer Tanner Stransky praised the video's simplicity, noting that it seems "as if Rihanna is speaking directly to you, the viewer, and she is your one and only amid swallowing rolling, beautiful, swallowing landscapes. It's an effect that makes you focus squarely on [Rihanna], who's ensconced in flirty outfits." According to Joyce Lee of CBS, Rihanna appeared to have progressed from the "edgy" music videos of the "Rated R" singles to a more feminine, colourful tone. A Mail Online reviewer and Seth Sommerfield of "Spin" echoed Lee's comments, with the former calling it "beautifully shot" and the latter "whimsical [and] beautiful". The Mail Online reviewer called the video a departure from the "hard-edged, heavier image" music videos of "Rated R". "Billboard" reviewer Jason Lipshutz described the tree with flashing lights as "surreal imagery."

Rihanna performed "Only Girl (In the World)" and a solo version of "What's My Name?" on "Saturday Night Live" in New York City on October 30, 2010. The next day, she flew to London to perform the song on "The X Factor". Rihanna's dancers had a food fight with cakes and cream while she sang, and the show's producers had only one minute to clear the stage before the weekly elimination results were announced. On November 7 she performed the song at the MTV Europe Music Awards in Madrid, wearing a "fairy tale"-inspired ensemble and walking through a set of flowers against a sunset. Two days later, Rihanna sang "Only Girl (In the World)" on the Italian version of "The X Factor" in a floral-print bikini, boots and a red pigtail. The next day she flew to France to sing the song on "Le Grand Journal", on a set covered with white balloons.

The singer returned to London on November 11 to record an interview for "The Graham Norton Show", which included a live performance of "Only Girl (In the World)". Rihanna opened the American Music Awards with a medley of songs from "Loud". She began with an a cappella version of "Love the Way You Lie (Part II)", sitting on a stylized tree of lights above "a field of sable-colored blades of grass." Rihanna then sang a solo version of "What's My Name?" and a short version of "Only Girl (In the World)". According to Mawuse Ziegbe of MTV News, the singer "kicked up the island theme" as drummers in tribal dress circled her.

Rihanna performed a short version of "Only Girl (In the World)" at the 31st Brit Awards on February 15, 2011, as part of a medley with two other singles from "Loud": "S&M" and "What's My Name?". She had planned to perform "S&M" only (to coincide with its United Kingdom release), but was asked by the British Phonographic Industry to "tone down the sexual references in the song's lyrics". Rihanna was reportedly angered at the request and a related one to perform a different song. She made the changes because the BPI wanted to avoid complaints like those received after the seventh-series finale of "The X Factor" on December 11, 2010, when Rihanna was criticized for wearing a provocative outfit and performing a suggestive, "disgusting" dance routine before the 9 pm UK watershed. Rihanna performed "Only Girl (In the World)", "California King Bed", "What's My Name?" and "S&M" on NBC's May 27, 2011 "Today" as part of its summer concert series. The song, which was included on the Loud, 777 and the Diamonds World Tours, was the opener for her performance at Radio 1's Hackney Weekend on May 24, 2012. She also performed the song at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards.

Katy Perry covered "Only Girl (In the World)" as part of an acoustic mash-up with Willow Smith's "Whip My Hair" on her California Dreams Tour (2011). Ellie Goulding covered the song during her appearance on "Radio 1's Live Lounge", and the cover was the B-side of her single "Lights".




! scope="row"| Denmark (IFPI Denmark)




</doc>
<doc id="28773282" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28773282" title="Forza Motorsport 4">
Forza Motorsport 4

Forza Motorsport 4 is a racing video game developed by Turn 10 Studios and published by Microsoft Studios for the Xbox 360. It is the fourth installment in the "Forza" series. It is the first title in the series to support the Kinect sensor alongside the traditional controller-based gameplay. It is the last "Forza Motorsport" released for Xbox 360; 2012's "Forza Horizon" and its 2014 sequel were the last two "Forza" games for the platform, while 2013's "Forza Motorsport 5" was released as an Xbox One exclusive.

A new feature in the series is Autovista, a game mode in which players can view precise details such as engine parts and interior gauges on a select number of cars. It features a partnership with BBC's "Top Gear" as well as its American counterpart. Jeremy Clarkson and James May, former co-presenters for "Top Gear", provide commentary in the game's Autovista mode. Other partnerships include a two-year agreement with the American Le Mans Series (ALMS). Over 500 cars and 26 tracks are included.

The game received universal acclaim from critics, who praised the enhanced vehicle physics, updated visuals, and strong sound design. Several reviewers also gave high marks for the game's Autovista mode. Some critics expressed frustration with Kinect features, and others also felt that the game was not enough of an innovation from its predecessor, "Forza Motorsport 3". These critics did, however, concede that the game was a vast improvement over "Forza Motorsport 3".

"Forza Motorsport 4" is a racing video game, and the fourth in the "Forza Motorsport" series. Like Sony's "Gran Turismo" franchise, "Forza" games are racing simulations; heavy emphasis is placed on making the cars drive and look as realistic as possible. Races are conducted on closed circuit tracks. 500 cars are featured in the core game experience, ranging from city cars to race cars.

Players can utilize Kinect to look into a corner using a new head tracking feature. This allows them to look toward the apex of a corner or at nearby cars. The controller or steering wheel is used to control the car while Kinect is used independently for viewing around the driver. Players can also use Kinect as a game controller. In this setting the game automatically accelerates and decelerates the player's vehicle utilizing a modified version of the feature known as Auto Brake in "Forza Motorsport 3". The steering is controlled by placing the players arms out as if controlling an invisible steering wheel. Kinect will allow the player to use voice commands to start races and navigate menus.
New to the "Forza" series is a feature known as Autovista. It is designed to allow players to walk around and explore inside cars. This feature allows players to view minute details such as brake pads, transmission, tyres, engine components, and interior details. The player can point at certain features, such as headlights, wheels and the engine for further information about them via audio recording. It can be controlled via Kinect or a game controller. Only 24 cars in the game support the Autovista feature, as it is primarily for sports cars, classic cars, and dream cars. The graphics used to create these cars are formed using image-based lighting which allowed the developers to create perfect reflections, and would better immerse the car in the environment both when racing on a track or in the garage or "Top Gear" studio when viewing a car.

As in "Forza Motorsport 3", there is a career mode for players to complete, which sees players racing at multiple locations around the world. This is known as World Tour Mode in "Forza Motorsport 4", previously known as Season Play in "Forza Motorsport 3". However, one new feature that appears in "Forza Motorsport 4" is the game's ability to adapt the difficulty as the player progresses through the career, and collect a trend of data to see how well they perform. This allows AI drivers to change and upgrade their cars automatically to suit the player's driving abilities. There are several types of races besides the standard format. "Forza Motorsport 4" includes the original bumper-to-bumper races, but also has drift, autocross, and multiple-heat races. Unlike in "Forza Motorsport 3" where players had no choice over which car they received after leveling up, in "Forza Motorsport 4" players are now able to choose one out of several cars as a prize, which are automatically upgraded to the high end of their class. Players are able to import their "Forza Motorsport 3" profiles into "Forza Motorsport 4". This gives them the ability to transfer a certain number of in-game credits and gifted cars into their new garage. The allowed number transferred is based on how long they have played the game and how many cars and credits they have. Players have the option to create car clubs and share cars in their garages within that club. Previous games in the series were limited to eight cars on the track, however "Forza Motorsport 4" supports 16 player racing online, and two players offline.

"Forza Motorsport 4" features 26 courses to compete on. These race courses are mix between circuits courses and point-to-point courses. 17 real-world tracks and nine fictional locations are included. Each course features as reverse configuration, and many have multiple other configurations. Three additional real world race tracks and one fictional track have been added to the "Forza" franchise, Hockenheimring, Indianapolis Motor Speedway, Infineon Raceway and the fictional Bernese Alps.

A technology demo for "Forza Motorsport 4" was first revealed at Microsoft's E3 2010 press conference. The live demonstration showcased a passing challenge while driving the 2010 Ferrari 458 Italia. Using the Microsoft Kinect sensor the player steered the car to pass opponents. "Forza Motorsport 4" was formally unveiled at the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards. Turn 10 announced that the game would feature over 500 cars from 80 manufacturers, and confirmed that it will support Kinect as well as standard Xbox 360 controllers and racing wheels. Turn 10 officially partnered with the American Le Mans Series (ALMS) for two years from August 8, 2011. The partnership provides several in-game ALMS themed events to complement the cars and tracks raced in the ALMS present in previous entries in the "Forza Motorsport" series. Unlike past games in the series, vehicles from the SCCA Pro Racing World Challenge were not present initially in "Forza Motorsport 4" aside from a Mopar sponsored Dodge Viper. The Porsche download content pack added one World Challenge Porsche GT3. More known content was leaked during IGN's visit to E3 2011, which revealed that there will be the option to create car clubs and share garages within that club, and that the game will support 16 player online racing. Hockenheimring, Indianapolis Motor Speedway and Infineon Raceway were added as three more real world tracks to the "Forza" series.
A Tesla Roadster was used to record the game's tire sounds. The developers chose the Tesla due to its near-silent electric motor which allowed them to record the sounds cleanly without engine or exhaust noise. Two microphones were mounted to the car and pointed at the tire for recording. Lance Hayes, the award-winning composer for "Forza Motorsport 3", returned to score "Forza Motorsport 4", which features a combination of his music and other licensed artists. 15 songs were provided by Hayes for the user interface and some in-race music. In speaking of the tone of the soundtrack, Hayes stated "The score has an increased cinematic feel as well as incorporating many of the styles (downtempo, electronic, ambient) that made the "Forza Motorsport 3" OST a fan favorite."

On August 26, 2011, at PAX Prime it was announced that Turn 10 would include the UNSC Warthog from Microsoft Studios' "Halo" series in "Forza Motorsport 4"s Autovista mode. The model of Warthog used in "Forza Motorsport 4" is identical to the version in the then-upcoming "Halo 4", although the vehicle is not drivable. Turn 10 has cited the vehicle's exaggerated four wheel steering system, fictional futuristic technology and excessive height as reasons for its exclusion, stating "One, it's got some technology that's built into "Halo" that would have been a big investment for us to then build into the game only to support one vehicle. [...] Technically we don't support that because no real world cars in our game do."

Turn 10 has entered a multiple year partnership with the BBC's "Top Gear". The content provided by the BBC's BAFTA award-winning television show "Top Gear", also includes narration from presenters Jeremy Clarkson and James May during the virtual showroom (Autovista) navigation. The game features the "Top Gear" test track at Dunsfold Aerodrome, near the village of Cranleigh, UK. The first in-game demo in Autovista was revealed at E3 2011. An extra piece of content for "Top Gear" fans is the addition of two of the show's three reasonably priced cars, the Kia Cee'd, and the Suzuki Liana, while the TV show's third such car, the Chevrolet Lacetti is not present. At E3, players were able to complete laps of the "Top Gear" Test Track and record their own times. The "Top Gear" test track in "Forza Motorsport 4" also features authentic camera angles during replays. The game features "Top Gear" "Car Football" (only available online with Xbox Live) and a "Top Gear" bowling mini game, both set on the official "Top Gear" test track.

The BBC "Top Gear" studio is part of the Home Space when viewing a car. The studio has the original TV series cars on plinths, such as the destroyed Toyota Hilux and Clarkson's Fiat Coupé police car as seen in Series 11, Episode 1, and all of the original "Top Gear" logos, Stig posters, and lighting arrangements, that reflect off the paintwork of the car the player is viewing, similar to how they would on the real "Top Gear" show. A live action commercial was produced and contained a voice over track by Jeremy Clarkson. The commercial is set in a busy city in which a man merely wants to drive fast. As the man speeds through the city streets with police in pursuit Clarkson speaks of lovers of speed as an endangered species. He notes that places for these people to truly enjoy their cars are being taken away, then pitches the video game. The commercial was well received by the media. Jalopnik's Ray Wert called the advert "epic". The driving was performed by professional stunt driver Martin Ivanov.

"Forza Motorsport 4" was featured in the U.S. version of "Top Gear". At the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards professional stunt driver and show co-host Tanner Foust and Rutledge Wood, car expert and co-host were featured in the unveiling of the game. Foust drove a 2010 Dodge Challenger while Wood rode as a passenger. The advertisement showed Foust drifting around the environment and ended with a top-down shot of the pad. On the pavement the word "Forza" was spelled out in tire marks. Additionally in the final episode of the show's second season Wood and co-host Adam Ferrara challenged Foust to a timed race at Infineon Raceway, otherwise known as Sears Point; Foust drove the Lexus LF-A around the real course while Wood and Ferrara drove the course in "Forza Motorsport 4".

Players who buy the Limited Collector's Edition get a polished Steelbook case, with the 2012 BMW M5 as the cover car. They receive a V.I.P. car pack, including the Bugatti Veyron Super Sport and Noble M600; a 10-car "American Muscle Car Pack", including the Plymouth GTX 426 HEMI and Chevrolet Nova SS, (also available on Xbox Live on launch day); a pre-order exclusive "Ship Bonus Car Pack", including the Koenigsegg Agera and Tesla Roadster Sport; a five-car "BMW Designer Car Pack" featuring five BMWs with unique exterior designs, including a BMW M6 designed by an entrant into an M6 design competition. This pack was available on launch day, along with a free download of the 2012 BMW M5 and a BMW theme for the Xbox 360 dashboard. In addition to this, Collector's Edition owners are given a 96-page volume entitled 'Cars of "Forza Motorsport 4" Presented By "Top Gear"', written by the editors from "Top Gear" magazine. This volume gives detailed information about many of the exotic cars found within the game, as well as photos (both in game and real life) of them. The description of the cars is exactly the same that Jeremy Clarkson narrates while using the "Top Gear" section found within the Autovista feature.

"Forza Motorsport 4" had received monthly downloadable content (DLC) packs since its release. Each month a number of new cars would be bundled into a pack available for purchase. Players could also opt to purchase individual cars from a given pack should they not want all the vehicles presented that month. Players can purchase a Season Pass which entitles them to free downloads of the first six packs. The "Top Gear" Car Pack DLC was the first of the monthly packs to not be covered by the Season Pass. Unlike previous "Forza" titles which included Porsche cars through a sublicense from Electronic Arts, "Forza Motorsport 4" did not initially include the Porsche marque. Instead, cars from Ruf Automobile, a German car manufacturer which builds their own models from bodies in white received from Porsche, were included. EA's release of "" earlier in 2011 was regarded as an expansion into the simulation-racing genre, and brought the "Forza" series into more direct competition with EA Games. On March 5, 2012 it was announced there would be a downloadable car pack on May 22 that will feature 30 Porsche cars. The new 2013 SRT Viper GTS was included in "Forza Motorsport 4" as free downloadable content on June 22, 2012. As a part of the June DLC pack, a 1940 Ford was added. This pack also includes an MG MGA, a Volkswagen Beetle, a BMW 507, and a Maserati Ghibli. In September 2015, all downloadable content was removed.

The download content featured a few unique themes not previously seen in the series. Some cars were carried over into subsequent games.

Novelty Cars
Classic British

"Forza Motorsport 4" features an original score by Lance Hayes, also known as DJ Drunken Master. Like "Forza Motorsport 3", the score consists mainly of ambient electronica music, although orchestral elements are incorporated into the music. Alongside the score, "Forza Motorsport 4" contains a wide selection of licensed music from various artists. Although the game was released in 2011, the score was not officially released until October 30, 2013 on iTunes.

"Forza Motorsport 4" received "universal acclaim" like the first three games before it according to the review aggregation website Metacritic. It also won the award for Most Anticipated E3 2011 game from "Computer and Video Games". It ranked first in sales in the United Kingdom during the week of its release. As of April 30, 2012 it ranked 23rd in sales in the UK.

Luke Reilly of IGN called the game "this generation's premier racing simulator". He praised the game's Autovista mode, specifically mentioning the attention to detail given to even the smaller parts of the vehicles. He gave high marks for the commentary given by Jeremy Clarkson of the BBC's "Top Gear". He called Clarkson's remarks "refreshingly candid". Reilly did state, however that he wished the game offered evening races. Editor Martin Robinson of "Eurogamer" felt that the game was "easy to fall in love with." Robinson noted that several cars benefit from the improved handling system, including the Ferrari 250 Testa Rossa. He contrasted the game to "Gran Turismo 5" ("GT5"). He explained that "GT5" emitted a "crazy love" from its developers and noted that "Forza Motorsport 4" "often failed to embrace the emotion its subjects can inspire." "Official Xbox Magazine"s Ryan McCaffrey lauded the game's 60 fps framerate and breathtaking views. He stated that this, along with excellent sound design, kept him "playing from the cockpit view the entire time." He did note, however, that the game's soundtrack felt out of place, and that he muted it during gameplay.

Jeff Gerstmann, co-founder of Giant Bomb, felt that while "Forza Motorsport 4" was a "fantastic driving game" it merely felt like an incremental improvement on its predecessor. "I found myself getting a very 'annual sports game update' vibe off of it," stated Gerstmann. Justin Calvert of GameSpot agreed; he said that "Forza Motorsport 4" refines upon its predecessor, "but also feels just a little too familiar". "X-Play"'s Jason D'Aprile also felt that "Forza Motorsport 4" an improvement over "Forza Motorsport 3", "making it the absolute king of the road." He cited the game's audio and visuals, the number of cars and tracks, the online play and variable skill level all as high points. However, D'Aprile felt that the Kinect implementation was "a gimmick" and expressed disappointment that there was not more content involving "Top Gear". Matthew Kato, reviewer for "Game Informer", was unimpressed by "Forza"s Kinect integration as well. He felt that Kinect-based racing "isn’t satisfying since your arms get tired and the game controls the gas and brake for you."

"1UP.com" Associate Editor Jose Otero called "Forza Motorsport 4" "the most accessible racer around." He cited the new World Tour mode as a major improvement over "Forza 3" Season Play. He noted that should a car in the player's garage not be tuned correctly for an event the game can suggest the proper upgrades. For seasoned players this feature can be turned off. He felt that features like this, along with the returning Rewind feature which allows players to replay a poor section of their race, cater to all skill levels. The reviewer from "Edge" magazine compared "Forza Motorsport 4" to its closest competitor, "Gran Turismo 5" ("GT5"). He stated that though the "Forza" series "might be getting familiar, but it's still a more exciting drive than ["GT5"]." The review stated that the improved handling dynamics, focus on the player and the game's community, and strong accessibility made the game a "supercharged package." In Japan, "Famitsu" gave it a score of two nines and two tens for a total of 38 out of 40.

"The Digital Fix" gave the game a perfect ten and called it "the best racing simulator on any platform." "Digital Spy" similarly gave it all five stars and said it was "authentic yet accessible, educating, entertaining, occasionally silly, always spectacular, but most importantly, faster and more thrilling than riding a V12-powered rollercoaster with no restraints." "The Daily Telegraph" gave it four-and-a-half stars out of five, saying it was "welcoming, slick and meticulously built in order to give its audience what it most desires. Because whether it's the feel of the road, the fury of competition or good old fashioned wish fulfilment, "Forza 4" really does have you covered."


</doc>
<doc id="28793104" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28793104" title="Cyclops-class monitor">
Cyclops-class monitor

The "Cyclops"-class monitor was a group of four ironclad breastwork monitors built for the Royal Navy during the 1870s. They were slightly modified versions of the s. The ships were ordered to satisfy demands for local defence during the war scare of 1870, but the pace of construction slowed down tremendously as the perceived threat of war declined. The "Cyclops"-class monitors spent most of their careers in and were finally sold off in 1903.

The immediate reason why these ships were ordered was for local coast defence during the war scare during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, but they were chosen for several other reasons. They were small and cheap, and their shallow draft was thought to limit them to defensive operations, which appealed to economy and defence-minded Members of Parliament. The Admiralty, however, envisioned them attacking shallow-water ports that larger ironclads could not enter and operating in the shallow waters of the Baltic Sea.

The ships used the basic design of the "Cerberus"-class breastwork monitors to reduce design and construction time. Their hulls were completed very quickly, but the pace of building reduced as the likelihood of their immediate use diminished. They were delivered to the Royal dockyards in 1872 and commissioned for fitting out, but a number of years elapsed before that process was completed as little sense of urgency remained.

The ships had a length between perpendiculars of , a beam of , and a draught of at deep load. They displaced . Their crew consisted of 156 officers and men.

The "Cyclops"-class ships and other ships of her type were described by Admiral George Alexander Ballard as being like "full-armoured knights riding on donkeys, easy to avoid but bad to close with." While not unfit to face heavy weather their decks were frequently awash in even a moderate sea. Their accommodations were rated the worst in the fleet, referred to by ordinary seamen as "ratholes with tinned air".

The "Cyclops"-class ships had two steam engines, each driving a single propeller. "Cyclops" and "Hydra" had 4-cylinder inverted compound steam engines made by John Elder that had a working pressure of . The engines produced a total of on sea trials which gave the ships a maximum speed around . The engines used by "Hecate" and "Gorgon" were built by Ravenhill and were simple horizontal 4-cylinder direct acting steam engines. Their working pressure was and they produced a total of for about the same speed. The first pair of ships carried of coal while the second pair carried . This was enough to steam at .

The ships mounted a pair of 10-inch rifled muzzle-loading guns in each turret. The shell of the gun weighed while the gun itself weighed . The gun had a muzzle velocity of and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal of wrought iron armour at the muzzle. The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells. They were mounted on compound pivoting carriages that used hydraulic jacks to elevate and depress the guns.

The "Cyclops"-class ships had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that was thick amidships and thinned to at the ends. The superstructure and conning tower was fully armoured, the reason it was called a breastwork, with of wrought iron. The gun turrets had 10 inches on their faces and nine inches on the sides and rear. All of the vertical armour was backed by of teak. The decks were thick.

Each of the ships was towed to Devonport from the builders in 1872. They were commissioned and placed into reserve until finally completed.

Although a recommendation had been made while the ships were still under construction to extend the superstructure out to the sides of the ship to improve their stability and habitability, this was not acted upon until they were refitted during the 1880s. This refit also strengthened the breastwork and upper decks, added another watertight bulkhead as well as a false keel. Four quick-firing 3-pounder Hotchkiss guns were added on the breastwork for torpedo boat defence as well as five machine guns and several searchlights. This increased their crew to approximately 191 men and added to their displacement.

HMS "Gorgon" was the first ship completed and she served as tender to HMS "Cambridge", the gunnery school ship at Devonport, from 1874 to 1877. All four ships were commissioned between April and August 1878 during the war scare during the Russo-Turkish War for service with Admiral Sir Cooper Key's Particular Service Squadron in Portland Harbour. She resumed her duties as tender to HMS "Cambridge" until she was refitted in 1888–89. All four of the ships of the class participated in the annual fleet manoeuvers in 1887, 1889–90 and 1892; in between times they were in Fleet Reserve. HMS "Gorgon", like all of her sisters, was placed on the non-effective list in 1901 and sold in 1903 for £8,400.

HMS "Hydra" was the next ship to be completed. After her service with the Particular Service Squadron she was paid off at Sheerness and served as tender to . The ship was refitted in 1888–89 and was in Fleet Reserve at Chatham until 1901.

HMS "Cyclops", the lead ship of the class, was the third ship to be completed. She was placed in 1st Reserve after her completion. The ship was paid off at Chatham in August 1878 and refitted in 1887–89.

HMS "Hecate" was the fourth and final ship of the class to be completed. She paid off at Devonport after her service with the Particular Service Squadron. The ship was refitted in 1885–86 and was placed into reserve at Devonport afterwards.



</doc>
<doc id="28876644" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28876644" title="Typhoon Fanapi">
Typhoon Fanapi

Typhoon Fanapi, known in the Philippines as Typhoon Inday, was a damaging and deadly typhoon that struck Taiwan and southeastern China in September 2010. It was the eleventh tropical storm and fourth typhoon of the annual season. The storm formed on September 14 east of the Philippines and moved slowly for several days, initially to the northwest, then curving to the northeast before turning westward due to a ridge to the north. During this time, Fanapi intensified to reach 10 minute maximum sustained winds of 175 km/h (110 mph). Fanapi made its first landfall on September 19 over Hualien, Taiwan, becoming the first typhoon to hit the island since Typhoon Morakot in August 2009. Later that day made a final landfall in Fujian, China. The storm dissipated on September 21 over southern China.

The typhoon first affected southern Japan, bringing rainfall to the outer Miyako Islands. However, impacts were worst in Taiwan and mainland China. In southern Taiwan, Fanapi dropped heavy rainfall, peaking at 1,126 mm (44 in) in Majia, Pingtung. About 150,000 people evacuated their homes, and there were heightened preparations after the damaging effects of Typhoon Morakot the previous year. The heavy rainfall from Fanapi caused landslides, heavy crop damage, and flooding, notably in the major city of Kaohsiung, where rains totaled . In some areas of the city, the floods reached over one-story deep, inundating cars and causing about NT$3 billion (New Taiwan dollar, US$93.75 million) in industrial damage. There were five deaths in Taiwan during the storm's passage, and damage was estimated at NT$5 billion (US$158 million).

Later, the threat from Fanapi caused 264,000 people to evacuate their homes in southeastern China. The storm dropped heavy rainfall in the region, reaching in Guangdong. Fanapi also caused landslides there, killing 100 people, including 28 in Xinyi due to a collapse at a mine. Also in Guangdong, the storm wrecked 16,000 homes and flooded of crop fields. Provincial damage was estimated at ¥5.15 billion (CNY, $757.05 million). The name Fanapi was later retired due to the heavy damage.

An area of convection, or thunderstorms, persisted west of Guam on September 13, in association with the monsoon trough. The system gradually developed a low-level circulation and rainbands, aided by low wind shear from an anticyclone aloft. Late on September 14, the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) designated the system as a tropical depression to the east of the Philippine island of Luzon. Around the same time, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) classified the system as Tropical Depression 12W. A nearby tropical upper tropospheric trough limited the depression's outflow to the north, although convection continued to increase. The depression moved northwestward along the southwestern periphery of a ridge. At 03:00 UTC on September 15, the Philippine-based PAGASA began warning on the system, giving it the local name "Inday". Nine hours later, the JMA named the system Tropical Storm Fanapi.

As a strengthening tropical storm, Fanapi developed deeper convection near the center. A passing trough to the north weakened the ridge and caused the storm to slow, turning northeastward by September 16. That day, Fanapi developed an eye feature, becoming a typhoon at 18:00 UTC. As the ridge built into the East China Sea, the storm responded by turning to the northwest, and at the same time, outflow improved to the north. The eye organized further as it contracted to a diameter of 19 km (12 mi). By that time, the typhoon was moving due westward toward Taiwan, steered by a ridge over northeastern China. At 06:00 UTC on September 18, the JTWC estimated that Fanapi attained peak 1 minute winds of 195 km/h (120 mph). Around the same time, the JMA estimated peak 10 minute winds of 175 km/h (110 mph).
Early on September 19, Typhoon Fanapi made landfall over eastern Taiwan near Hualien City with winds of , according to Taiwan's Central Weather Bureau. The storm subsequently weakened over land, dipping southwestward as convection diminished over the northern portion of the storm. However, the storm resumed its westward trajectory and soon moved over the Taiwan Strait as a severe tropical storm. The thunderstorms reorganized slightly as Fanapi reached open waters, and a nearby ship reported winds of 120 km/h (75 mph). Early on September 20, the storm made a second landfall on southeastern China near Fujian and weakened further over land, although thunderstorms persisted southeast of the circulation along the coast. Fanapi weakened into a tropical depression later that day and dissipated late on September 21.

In Taiwan, the threat of Fanapi forced the closure of rail lines and cancellation of flights from Kaohsiung International Airport, and at least 156 flights were canceled. The storm caused the Kaohsiung seaport in southern Taiwan to close, thus delaying shipments from nearby chemical plants. Many boats rode out the storm at port. Portions of the Kaohsiung Mass Rapid Transit system suspended their service, and the Maokong Gondola was shut down during the storm.

Ahead of the storm, officials issued landslide warnings along 61 rivers, and residents in landslide-prone areas were ordered to evacuate. About 10,000 people left their homes in mountainous areas. Hotels were also evacuated, and residents boarded up windows, with schools and businesses closed. Overall, about 150,000 were evacuated due to the storm, with over 7,500 people staying in their houses and requiring assistance to leave after the floods. After the damaging impacts of Typhoon Morakot from the year prior, officials enacted enhanced preparations for Fanapi, including activating over 19,000 emergency workers. Anticipating heavy rainfall, workers at the Tsengwen Reservoir drained waters ahead of the storm. Farmers also rushed to complete harvests, causing a temporary drop in price due to excess supply. The inaugural Yeangder Tournament Players Championship was reduced to a 54-stroke play due to the Typhoon.

The shipping route linking Xiamen, in east China's Fujian Province, and Jinmen, in Taiwan was closed as the typhoon closed in. Chinese officials ordered over 55,000 fishing boats to return to port in Fujian. In Xiamen province north of where Fanapi moved ashore, all kindergarten through middle schools were closed. Across Fujian province, 186,000 people evacuated due to the storm. The Fuzhou Changle International Airport in the province's capital city canceled 37 flights due to the storm. About 78,000 people in low-lying areas of Guangdong left their houses. Oil futures rose in Asia due to the potential for the storm affecting China's offshore oil platforms. While Fanapi was still over Taiwan, the Hong Kong Observatory issued the Number 1 Standby Warning and later upgraded it to a warning Number 3 for Hong Kong. The storm ultimately passed about 150 km (95 mi) north of the territory.

While moving toward Taiwan, Fanapi affected the southernmost islands of Japan, bringing heavy rainfall to Okinawa Prefecture. Ohara recorded of precipitation during the storm's passage. High winds were recorded as well, peaking at 158 km/h (98 mph) at Taketomi, Okinawa. The storm caused flights to be canceled in the Miyako Islands.

By the time Fanapi made landfall, portions of Taiwan reported of rainfall. Overall rainfall peaked at 1,126 mm (44 in) on the island in Majia, Pingtung. These were the heaviest rainfall totals in 10 years in some locations. This led to flooding in the southern portion of the island, with flash flooding occurring in Kaohsiung, the island's second largest city. Rainfall rates there reached 100 mm (4 in) per hour at one point, totaling ; this was the heaviest in 50 years. Several reservoirs were filled to capacity across Taiwan. Wind gusts also reached 220 km/h (138 mph). During the storm, a M5.2 earthquake struck eastern Taiwan, although it did not cause any additional injuries.

In Kaohsiung, nine of the eleven administrative districts were filled with water. Thousands of homes and vehicles were flooded, reaching over one-story in height. Flooding shut down 10 petrochemical plants in Kaohsiung, causing NT$3 billion (New Taiwan dollar, US$93.75 million) in industrial damage. Also in the city, a nursing home was flooded while residents were inside, forcing firemen and rescuers to evacuate the senior citizens; due to inadequate staffing during the storm, the facility was later shut down. The severe flooding in Kaohsuing resulted from inadequate handling by the sewage system, which was designed to handle of daily precipitation. Flood systems were designed to withstand a 1 in 50 year flood, and the deluge from Fanapi was previously estimated to occur only once every 200 years; after the storm, the government began the process of reviewing the standards.

High winds broke windows across Taiwan, while also knocking down trees and traffic lights. The storm damaged 438 schools, mostly affecting colleges and universities. The passage of Fanapi left about 890,000 homes without power, and another 17,000 without water. Floods also affected of crop fields, mostly to banana plantations. The storm killed 8,791 pigs and 533,000 chickens, and many fish breeding ponds were marred. Agriculture damage was preliminarily estimated at $NT2.12 billion (US$65.27 million). The storm forced 25 roads to be closed, mostly due to debris. The South-Link Line was shut down after a railroad bridge along the Taimali River was washed out. Across Taiwan, 111 people were injured, mainly due to broken glass, and some were blown off motorcycles by high winds. A girl drowned after slipping into the flooded Taoyuan Canal, and a companion attempting to rescue her died as well. One woman drowned after falling into a swollen river while harvesting her crops. These three deaths were not directly related to the storm. The storm directly killed two people – one was due to electrocution in Pingtung County, and the other due to drowning in Tainan County. Overall damage in Taiwan were counted at NT$5 billion (US$158 million).

The storm brought heavy rainfall to southern China, with six counties in Fujian Province reporting over of precipitation in 23 hours. Rainfall was the heaviest in a century in some portions of Guangdong. Yangchun recorded in just seven hours, which broke the daily precipitation record set in 1958. Elsewhere in Guangdong, 24‑hour rainfall reached over .

Moving ashore in Fujian, the high winds from Fanapi knocked over trees and billboards. However, damage was heaviest in neighboring Guangdong, where the storm's heavy rainfall caused widespread mudslides in the western mountainous regions. The landslides cut off traffic between cities, in conjunction with floodwaters. In Xinyi, a storm-related landslide collapsed a dam at a mine, killing 28 people, including four people downstream. The collapse also damaged homes and farms while killing over 100 tons of fish. Damage in the city alone was estimated at ¥460 million (Chinese yuan, US$68.5 million), with 350 houses destroyed. The floods forced about 128,000 people to evacuate in Guangdong, including 18,930 people in Yangchun. Fanapi wrecked 16,000 homes and flooded of crop fields. Throughout Guangdong, Fanapi killed 100 people and provincial damage was counted to be CNY 5.15 billion (USD 757.05 million). Total economic losses in Fujian province were counted to be CNY 610 million (USD 89.71 million). 
While passing north of Hong Kong, Fanapi produced thunderstorms and gale-force winds in Hong Kong, with a peak precipitation of . The rains caused isolated flooding that caused residents in Pok Fu Lam to require rescue. The winds knocked over 47 trees, some of which damaged vehicles, but otherwise damage was minor in the territory.

In response to the Taiwan flooding in Kaohsiung, officials deployed 7,888 troops to the southern portion of the island to assist in rescue and recovery work. Soldiers also set up five medical centers, and utilized amphibious vehicles to rescue people in flooded areas. Taiwan's president Ma Ying-jeou toured the flooded regions on September 23, emphasizing that efforts to drain the flooding should be the main priority. More than 100 buildings in Kaohsiung required water pumps and thousands of volunteers to remove standing water from basements and streets. The mayor Kiku Chen temporarily suspended her reelection campaign due to the floods. About 80% of the factories in Kaohsiung were reopened by September 21. The high crop damage allowed farmers to qualify for low interest loans. Rail lines took two weeks to reopen due to damage. Power and water service was restored within days of the storm, although residents in flooded areas were advised to boil water before usage. There was also an increase in dengue fever after the floods. The Red Cross Society of China donated about US$100,000 in the days after the storm. The government announced on September 20 that families affected by the floods would receive NT$30,000 (US$945.92) per house. Throughout Taiwan, exports during September 2010 decreased 6.9% from August's levels due to the storm and an industrial fire.

In mainland China, officials used helicopters to airdrop relief goods to Guangdong. By three days after the storm, workers distributed 2,000 tents and 1,000 beds. Once the floodwaters dropped, residents returned their homes to clean up the mud and damage. Farm officials in Guangdong used 50 tons of disinfectant to prevent the spread of disease, while the provincial government allocated ¥240 million (CNY, US$35 million) for rebuilding. About 1,000 soldiers worked to clean debris and animal carcasses from the reservoir providing drinking water to Maoming. The collapsed dam in Guangdong was later torn down due to being structurally deficient. Zijin Mining, the owner of the dam, had to sell a mine to pay for compensation and fines related to the incident, which ultimately totaled ¥245 million (CNY, US$38.7 million). After the storm, the Red Cross Society of China provided ¥1 million (CNY, US$148,000) to localities affected hardest by the storm, as well as distributing mosquito nets, water purifiers, food, and clothing.

The name "Fanapi" was retired at the 43rd annual meeting of ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee in Jeju, South Korea, in January 2011. In February 2012, the committee selected the name "Rai" to replace "Fanapi" on the naming lists. It was first used during the 2016 season.




</doc>
<doc id="28936566" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28936566" title="The Fabian Strategy">
The Fabian Strategy

"The Fabian Strategy" is the of the fifth season of the American television comedy series "30 Rock", and the 81st overall episode of the series. It was directed by Beth McCarthy-Miller, and written by series creator, executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey. The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) network in the United States on September 23, 2010. Guest stars in this episode include Mario Brassard, Matt Damon, Jan Owen, Paula Pell, and Jeffrey Schara.

In the episode, Jack Donaghy (Alec Baldwin) interferes in Liz Lemon's (Fey) relationship with Carol (Damon) as he is determined to help Liz have a relationship that lasts for once. At the same time, Jack struggles to compromise with his girlfriend Avery Jessup (Elizabeth Banks) as she redecorates his apartment. Meanwhile, Tracy Jordan (Tracy Morgan) has trouble coming to terms with Kenneth Parcell (Jack McBrayer) getting fired as an NBC page and Jenna Maroney (Jane Krakowski) becomes a producer of the fictional sketch comedy show "The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan" ("TGS"). This episode also continued a story arc involving Carol as a love interest for Liz, which began in the previous episode, the season finale of the show's fourth season "I Do Do".

Before the airing, NBC moved the program to a new timeslot at 8:30 p.m., moving it from its 9:30 p.m. slot. This episode of "30 Rock" received generally positive reviews from television critics. According to Nielsen Media Research, it was watched by 5.85 million households during its original broadcast, and received a 2.6 rating/8 share among viewers in the 18–49 demographic.

Liz Lemon (Tina Fey), the head writer of the sketch show "TGS with Tracy Jordan", goes back to work following the summer break and prepares for the show's fifth season. At the 30 Rock building, where she works, Liz and "TGS" producer Pete Hornberger (Scott Adsit) meet their boss, Jack Donaghy (Alec Baldwin) to discuss cutting the show's expenses. During the meeting, Pete reveals that star Jenna Maroney (Jane Krakowski) now has a producer credit because of changes in her contract that were not set to start until the fifth season of "TGS" (nobody thought that the show would last that long). Jenna takes this role seriously and takes on the job of firing people. Eventually, on reviewing the budget, she realizes that her producer credit is costly—and unnecessary—and asks Pete to fire her.

Later, Jack asks Liz about her relationship with her boyfriend Carol (Matt Damon), an airline pilot. She tells him that during the summer break the two met twice a month in a hotel. Jack does not believe that the relationship is serious since Carol never stays at Liz's apartment. He decides to force Carol to stay with Liz and reserves all the rooms of the hotel that Liz and Carol stay in when he is in New York. During his stay with Liz, Carol bursts into tears and asks her where their relationship is heading as he believes that she is resisting him, which she denies. The next day, Carol decides to leave New York early, but tells Liz that they need to work on their relationship. The two go their separate ways and agree to meet again on October 14.

During the summer break, Jack's girlfriend CNBC host Avery Jessup (Elizabeth Banks) moved in with him. Avery decides to redecorate Jack's apartment. He is not keen on the idea, but not wanting to say no or give into Avery's demands, decides to employ the Fabian strategy—named after Fabius Maximus, a Roman general who employed a strategy of avoiding battles, instead wearing the enemy down by attrition. Jack is successful in avoiding redecorating the apartment; he agrees to knock down a wall instead. At the end of the episode, however, he realizes that Avery has emulated the military genius of Hannibal, outmaneuvering his Fabian strategy, and he ecstatically realizes they are a perfect match, far beyond the level of mere soul-mates.

Elsewhere, Tracy Jordan (Tracy Morgan) is missing Kenneth Parcell (Jack McBrayer), a former NBC page who was fired in the previous episode, "I Do Do". When Tracy returns to work for the new season of "TGS", he begins to hallucinate Kenneth everywhere he goes, mistaking the new page (Jeffrey Schara) and Liz for him. Later, Tracy roams the city and sees Kenneth, who is now working as a page at CBS. Tracy believes Kenneth is a hallucination. Later, the two run into each other again and Kenneth tries to talk to Tracy, but Tracy refuses to acknowledge him as he believes his mind is playing tricks on him. To prove he is real, Kenneth throws himself in front of a car, thus making Tracy believe him. He pleads with Kenneth to come back to NBC, but Kenneth says he is happy working at CBS. At the end of the credits, Kenneth admits to himself that he lied to Tracy and that he misses everyone at "TGS". Kenneth then starts hallucinating Tracy.

"The Fabian Strategy" was written by series creator, executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey, and directed by Beth McCarthy-Miller, a long-time television director who worked with Fey on the sketch comedy show "Saturday Night Live". This was Fey's twenty-second writing credit, and McCarthy-Miller's thirteenth helmed episode. "The Fabian Strategy" originally aired on NBC in the United States on September 23, 2010, as the season premiere episode of the show's fifth season and the 81st overall episode of the series. This episode of "30 Rock" was filmed on August 30, 2010.
In March 2010, it was announced that actor Matt Damon would guest star on "30 Rock". He made his debut in the fourth season finale episode "I Do Do" as Carol, an airline pilot and love interest for Fey's character, Liz Lemon, and reprised the role in "The Fabian Strategy". In December 2009, prior to the confirmation of his first guest appearance, "Entertainment Weekly" informed Damon that he was at the top of Fey's guest star wish list for the show. A fan of the series, Damon replied "I would do ["30 Rock"] in a heartbeat if they asked me to come on. She should call my people—or even better "me". Or I could call her. Let's make this happen." A day after the airing of "I Do Do" he was asked if he would reprise his role as Carol in the upcoming season and responded "If they'll have me, I would love to pop in and see the gang again. I had a great time doing it." In August 2010, Fey confirmed Damon's return saying that he would play her boyfriend once the new season began.

Jane Krakowski, who plays Jenna Maroney, revealed to "Entertainment Weekly"s Michael Ausiello her character's plot in which Jenna becomes a television producer as part of her contract as "TGS" begins its fifth season. "[Jenna] has all these wacky things built into her contract [that kick in at this point], because nobody thought we'd still be on the air. So I get to be a producer." Series producer Paula Pell reprised her role as Paula Hornberger, the wife of Scott Adsit's character Pete Hornberger. The episode references the ongoing storyline of Liz's desire to become a mother when she tells Carol that she is on a waiting list to adopt a child. This story first began in the show's first season, and continued in the third season.

Two months after the airing of the fourth season finale episode, co-showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock was asked if Jack McBrayer's character Kenneth Parcell would return in the upcoming season after he was fired as an NBC page in "I Do Do". Carlock said "We haven't cracked [how] he is getting [his job] back, but of course he will get back somehow. We wanted a fun thing to shuffle the deck a little bit and send him off into the world. Of course, he will miss it and he will be missed. Events will bring him back." In "The Fabian Strategy", Kenneth is now working at CBS as a page for the "Late Show with David Letterman". The scene in which Kenneth throws himself in front of a car to prove to Tracy Jordan that he is real and not Tracy's imagination was filmed on August 27, 2010, in front of the Ed Sullivan Theater.

At the start of the episode, Liz says while sleeping, "No, Tom Jones, no!" before waking up. This is a reference to a future plot in the episode "Reaganing" in which Liz is having intimacy issues because of a traumatic incident from her childhood that involved a poster of singer Tom Jones. Throughout the episode, Jack refers to the Fabian strategy, a strategy named after Roman general Fabius Maximus, which avoids direct battle in favor of attrition warfare. Jack uses the strategy as he does not want to say no to Avery or give in to her demands. In addition, Jack hails Fabius Maximus as his role model. When Carol surprises Liz at the "TGS" writers' room, staff writer J.D. Lutz (John Lutz) asks Carol if he is on Facebook, the latter being a social networking website. Later, Liz tells Jack not to interfere in her relationship with Carol, as she believes she has the perfect relationship with him. She reveals that she is modeling her life on that of chef Ina Garten of the Food Network show "Barefoot Contessa". Jack responds by saying that Liz will never be like Garten, including the "barefoot" part, referring to the fact that Liz has never let anyone see her feet, which is a real life trait of Fey's.

Liz and Carol discover that one of the things they have in common is that they both love to watch The Muppets presenting award shows. Later, Liz reveals that she has a Life Alert Emergency Response necklace; this necklace helps the elderly contact emergency services in case of an accident. Carol wonders why Geico—an auto insurance company—has multiple mascots, a reference to Geico's advertising campaigns. Jack plans to seduce the gay interior designer that Avery hired and hopes to get the designer to agree with him to leave the apartment the way it is, explaining to Liz "Do you know what a prize I am in the gay community? There's a term for it. I'm a bear. And I'm a daddy. I'm a daddy bear." Before parting ways, Liz says to Carol "See you October 14", a reference to the live episode of "30 Rock" entitled "Live Show" that aired on October 14, 2010.

"30 Rock" and "Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip"—both of which debuted on 2006–07 NBC lineup—revolved around the off-camera happenings on a sketch comedy series. Evidence of the overlapping subject matter between the shows, as well as the conflict between them, arose when Aaron Sorkin, the creator of "Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip", asked Lorne Michaels to allow him to observe "Saturday Night Live" for a week, a request Michaels, the creator of "Saturday Night Live" and executive producer of "30 Rock", denied. Despite this, Sorkin sent Fey flowers after NBC announced it would pick up both programs, and wished her luck with "30 Rock". Fey succeeded where Sorkin did not when "Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip" was canceled after one season and "30 Rock" was renewed for a second. Though "30 Rock"s first season ratings proved lackluster and were lower than those of "Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip", the latter was more expensive to produce. In the ending sequence of "The Fabian Strategy", Kenneth watches the credits for "TGS", which include Ricky Tahoe and Ronnie Oswald as writers, the two former head writers on "Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip".

Before the airing of this episode, NBC unveiled its 2010–11 primetime schedule in May 2010 with the network moving the program from the 9:30 p.m. time to the 8:30 p.m. timeslot. According to the Nielsen Media Research, this episode of "30 Rock" was watched by 5.85 million households in its original American broadcast. It earned a 2.6 rating/8 share in the 18–49 demographic. This means that it was seen by 2.6 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds, and 8 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds watching television at the time of the broadcast. A contributor from "Variety" reported that "Community", an NBC show that airs at 8:00 p.m., and "30 Rock" "held up nicely" in their respective timeslots and that the two programs "were up over last year's opening Thursday hour for NBC in premiere week."

"The A.V. Club"s Nathan Rabin reported that past season premieres of "30 Rock" had a solid track record as being the worst episodes of the season, nonetheless Rabin found "The Fabian Strategy" hilarious and breaking that barrier. He wrote that Matt Damon has been great on the show as Carol; however, his only complaint was Carol's character flaw as being too sensitive. Rabin, who has complained "extensively" about Jenna's character in the past, said the character was in "fine form" in her role as a "TGS" producer. Rabin gave the episode an A- grade rating. Bob Sassone of TV Squad deemed this episode a "solid season-opener" that featured "lots of great lines and plot development". Meredith Blake, a contributor from the "Los Angeles Times", was thrilled that the Jack and Avery relationship "not only lasted the summer, but is thriving", and wrote that she was looking forward to the pregnancy storyline involving Avery. Blake noted that Damon's character was "darn-near perfect, by which I mean 'a male version of Liz.'" Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for HitFix said that "The Fabian Strategy" did not "live up to the good old days" of past episodes, nonetheless reported that he "laughed enough" and was pleased with the direction the show took Liz and Carol's relationship. Sepinwall did not like Tracy and Kenneth's story, calling it a complete miss, but was appreciative of the other storylines, choosing Pete and Jenna's as his favorite. Alessandra Stanley from "The New York Times" was positive about Damon's role on the show, noting that he has been a "hoot". Scott Eidler of "The Cornell Daily Sun" commented that the episode was a "nice start to the [fifth] season" of "30 Rock" as it was "perhaps more plot-driven than packed with the emotional and uproariously funny episodes that concluded last season." Eidler commented that "The Fabian Strategy" never did "[reach] the utter hilariousness of last season, but I hope that wasn't the climax ... and it can eventually return to its previous heights of hilarity". "TV Guide"s Bruce Fretts was complimentary towards Damon's role as Tina Fey's love interest, writing that Damon "showed a refreshingly silly side in keeping with "30 Rock"s anything-goes spirit." Matt Wilstein of "The Huffington Post" called the premiere "a very solid first episode", enjoying Damon's part on the show and the Kenneth story of him still being fired by NBC.

"Time" contributor James Poniewozik reported that the Pete/Jenna and Tracy/Kenneth plots were a "hit-and-miss", however noted it was good to see the show giving the Jack and Liz characters "ongoing direction, not just in their personal lives". "The Atlantic"s Caitlan Smith was skeptical about Liz and Carol's relationship lasting, saying that Damon "who commands more than $20 million per movie, won't stick around for long, leaving Liz Lemon Carol-less and in for another round of the entertaining self-loathing that we've all been coming back for four seasons."



</doc>
<doc id="28954729" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28954729" title="Stupid in Love">
Stupid in Love

"Stupid in Love" is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her fourth studio album, "Rated R" (2009). The song was written by Shaffer Smith, Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen, with production helmed by StarGate. Ne-Yo served as the assistant producer. It was written two days before Rihanna and then boyfriend Chris Brown's altercation on the night of the 2009 Grammy Awards, which occurred on February 8, 2009. The lyrical content, which describes an abusive relationship, led Ne-Yo to describe the song as a "premonition".

"Stupid in Love" is a R&B power ballad. Instrumentation is provided by finger snapping, minor piano keys and piano riffs. The lyrics of the song revolve around a female protagonist who realizes that she needs to escape an abusive and adulterous boyfriend. "Stupid in Love" received a mixed to positive response from music critics. Some critics praised Rihanna's emotional delivery of the song whereas others criticized it as being overly dark. Upon the release of "Rated R", the song peaked at number seven on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on December 27, 2009.

"Stupid in Love" was written by Shaffer Smith, under his stage name Ne-Yo, and Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen, under their production name StarGate. Ne-Yo served as the assistant producer. The song was recorded in 2009 at Metropolis Studios, London. There also is a version of the song recorded by American singer Brandy. On February 8, 2009, Rihanna's scheduled performance at the 2009 Grammy Awards was cancelled. Reports later surfaced regarding an alleged altercation with then boyfriend, singer Chris Brown, who was arrested on suspicion of making criminal threats. On March 5, 2009, Brown was charged with assault and making criminal threats. In the months that proceeded the altercation, both Rihanna and Brown kept low profiles and avoided media attention.

In an interview for MTV News, co-writer of "Stupid in Love" Ne-Yo, who had collaborated with Rihanna on her previous albums "A Girl like Me" (2006) and "Good Girl Gone Bad" (2007), clarified that he would not write a song for Rihanna with regard to Brown as he found it unnecessary and because of his friendship with Brown. Producer Chuck Harmony concurred with Ne-Yo's statement, saying that no matter what song Rihanna released as the lead single people would immediately think that the song is about Brown. In an interview with "USA Today", Ne-Yo later revealed that the song was written two days before Rihanna and Brown's altercation, citing it as "a premonition." In an interview with Sway Calloway for MTV News at "Rated R"s preview in New York City, Rihanna stated that the album represented her honesty and vulnerbility. During the preview, Calloway noted that "Stupid in Love" was the song most likely to receive comparisons to Brown, with emphasis on the lyric "I still love you, but I can't do this/ I may be dumb but I'm not stupid."

"Stupid in Love" is a R&B power ballad which lasts for 4:01 (four minutes, one second). Instrumentation is provided by finger snapping, minor piano keys and piano riffs, a style of repeated chord progression. The lyrics of "Stupid in Love" revolve around a woman in an abusive and adulterous relationship, progressing to the female protagonist leaving her boyfriend. The song begins with the line "Let me tell you somethin' / Never / Have I ever / Been a size 10 in my whole life." Rihanna sings the line "This is stupid / I'm not stupid / Don't talk to me / Like I'm stupid" during the chorus. The bridge consists of Rihanna singing "Trying to make this work / but you act like a jerk." As noted by Rob Harvilla of "The Village Voice", the bridge represents the moment when Rihanna realizes that it is not worth her while to stay in the relationship, writing "the dunce cap is off". "Stupid in Love" contains a lyrical metaphor, "Blood on your hands."

"Stupid in Love" garnered mixed to positive reviews from music critics. Leah Greenblatt for "Entertainment Weekly" praised Rihanna's high level of emotional conviction on "Stupid in Love", writing that it is a piece of "self-lacerating balladry." Neil McCormick for "The Daily Telegraph" thought that the song was a direct reference to Rihanna and Brown, writing "Rihanna notoriously received a black eye prior to the 2009 Grammy awards when she was attacked by her then boyfriend, R&B singer Chris Brown. Clearly, this is a potentially life-changing incident, and we get some sense of the emotional aftermath on the ballad Stupid In Love." Norman Mayers for Nu-Soul Magazine concurred with McCormick, writing that Rihanna does not shy away from what happened between herself and Brown, rather, she confronts it directly on "Stupid in Love". Alex Thornton for HipHopDX wrote that it is difficult to listen to the song without thinking of "you know who," referring to Brown.

Michaelangelo Matos for "The A.V. Club" wrote that "Stupid in Love" sounded more like a therapy sessions than a song. Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media was critical of the song, labeling it as "quite-dim." Emily Tartanella for Popmatters was not impressed by the song, writing Stupid in Love' might be aiming for something more, but they arrive at something less." Chris Richards for "The Washington Post" wrote that "Stupid in Love", along with the lead single released from the album "Russian Roulette", consisted of "plodding beats" and "forgettable hooks". Richards continued in his review to write that the song is about "heavyhearted confessions to the treacliest of melodies." Eric Henderson for Slant Magazine was critical of the first six songs on "Rated R" ("Mad House", "Wait Your Turn", "Hard", "Stupid in Love", "Rockstar 101" and "Russian Roulette") were "grim and relentless."





Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Rated R", Def Jam Recordings.

Upon the release of "Rated R", "Stupid in Love" debuted at number eight on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on December 27, 2009. The following week, it peaked at number seven for two consecutive weeks.


</doc>
<doc id="28988003" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28988003" title="Brittany Pierce">
Brittany Pierce

Brittany Susan Pierce is a fictional character from the Fox musical comedy-drama series "Glee". The character is portrayed by actress Heather Morris, and first appeared in the show's second episode, "Showmance". Brittany was developed by "Glee" creators Ryan Murphy, Brad Falchuk, and Ian Brennan. In "Glee", Brittany is a cheerleader, or "Cheerio" for the fictional William McKinley High School, and a member of the school's glee club led by Will Schuester. Morris was originally hired to teach Beyoncé's "Single Ladies" dance to the "Glee" cast. The show at the time was looking for a third cheerleader, and Morris landed the role. Morris was upgraded to a series regular in the series' second season, in which Brittany is given a larger storyline, solos and dance routines to perform.

Morris plays Brittany as "literally insane", but also entirely well-meaning and goodhearted. She has said that Brittany "love[s] everybody, no matter who they are"; she is frequently smiling and being nice to people. Brittany's character traits include her finding recipes confusing, cheating off intellectually disabled classmates, thinking her cat, Lord Tubbington, is reading her diary, and not knowing her right hand from her left. These facts are often presented in one-liners delivered by Morris, many of which she has ad-libbed. Brittany's one-liners are regularly celebrated in reviews of "Glee". The character's lack of intelligence and forthright manner of speaking means, as Morris puts it, that "Brittany is used by the series' writers to say things no other character would". The character has also received positive reviews related to her romantic storyline with her closeted best friend Santana (Naya Rivera). While Brittany is bisexual, and is unashamed of that, Santana has trouble accepting her lesbianism. Brittany has continued to support Santana and urged her to be true to herself.

The character has been received favorably with television critics. Jarrett Wieselman of the "New York Post" has compared Morris as Brittany to Lynch as Sue, and has opined that she has "emerged as one of the funniest second bananas on TV right now". Wieselman wrote that since her introduction, Brittany has been given "more and more to do [and] less and less to think", and that the result has been "one of the most clueless characters that's ever figured out how to dress herself in the morning." Snarker called Brittany and Santana her "new favourite "Glee" pairing", and commented: "While Heather Morris (Brittany) and Naya Rivera (Santana) have had minimal screen time, they’ve made it count. Heather in particular has brought the laughs as the Cheerio least likely to get a Mensa invitation." Brittany has attracted comparison to Amanda Seyfried's character from the 2004 hit teen comedy "Mean Girls". Morris also received acclaim for her dancing and her portrayal as Brittany.

Brittany first appears in "Glee" during the show's second episode, as a member of William McKinley High's cheerleading team, the Cheerios. She joins the glee club, New Directions, with her friends and fellow cheerleaders Quinn Fabray (Dianna Agron) and Santana Lopez (Naya Rivera). Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) then enlists the three of them to help her destroy the club from the inside. When the club is due to compete at the sectionals round of show choir competition, Brittany unknowingly leaks their set list to Sue, who leaks the routines to competing glee clubs. New Directions put a new set list together at the last minute, and go on to win the competition regardless. Brittany also reveals that she and Santana have had sex, but are not dating. Following the club's victory at sectionals, Sue renews her effort to bring them down, and enlists Brittany and Santana to break up co-captains Rachel Berry (Lea Michele) and Finn Hudson (Cory Monteith). They invite Finn on a date with the both of them, but ignore him throughout the evening and ultimately request that he sit in the car and leave them to finish their meal alone. She mentions in the episode "Bad Reputation" that she has made out with almost everyone in the school – guys and girls alike, and the school janitor. She also briefly dates Kurt Hummel (Chris Colfer) in the episode "Laryngitis" as he wants to appear more masculine to impress his father and he is the only guy she has not made out with in the school.

In the second season episode "Duets", she asks Santana to be her partner for the duet competition while they are making out. Santana rejects her, so Brittany attempts to make her jealous by dating fellow glee club member Artie Abrams (Kevin McHale). She sleeps with Artie, but Santana tells him that Brittany was just using him for his voice, so he breaks up with her, to Brittany's dismay. Brittany's relationship with Artie continues to develop; in "Never Been Kissed", he gets her to go out with him again. As of "Furt", they are officially dating. In "Sexy", following her performance of "Landslide" with Santana and Holly Holliday (Gwyneth Paltrow), Santana admits her true feelings for Brittany. Although Santana fears being ostracized by the McKinley High student body for being in a same-sex relationship, she confesses her romantic love to Brittany, feelings which are reciprocated. However, Brittany states that she loves Artie too, and would never do anything to hurt him, even if it means not being able to be with Santana. She says that if she and Artie ever break up, she would be Santana's, proudly so.

Brittany runs for senior class president in the third season, starting in "I Am Unicorn", and wins the election in "I Kissed A Girl", defeating Kurt in the balloting. She and Santana join the Troubletones, a rival all-girls show choir at McKinley, and formally begin dating; after Santana is outed by Finn, they are open about their relationship. The two rejoin New Directions after the Troubletones lose to them at Sectionals. Santana sends Brittany a singing valentine in "Heart", and the two publicly kiss afterward. In "Saturday Night Glee-ver", concerned about Santana's future plans, Brittany gets the idea to ask Sue to arrange for Santana to get a full scholarship to the top college cheerleading program in the country. After a year of being a do-nothing class president, Brittany puts on a dinosaur-themed senior prom. In the season finale, Brittany reveals that her grades are so bad she is not graduating, but will have to repeat her senior year.

In the first episode of the fourth season, Brittany competes to become the lead singer of New Directions, but loses to Blaine (Darren Criss). She then loses to him again when she runs to be a second-term senior class president. Santana formally breaks up with Brittany because she feels that their long-distance relationship is not working, though the two remain friends.
She then becomes 'blonde buddies' with Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet), and then starts to date him. Santana comes back to try and break them up, however fails. Brittany visits MIT, where she is dubbed a mathematical genius. Returning to Lima, she becomes arrogant, refuses to perform at Regionals, leaves the Cheerios, and breaks up with Sam. After Will and Sue fail to get Brittany to change her attitude, Sam gets Santana to return to Lima to intervene. After talking with Santana, Brittany decides to perform at Regionals. Brittany reveals to the glee club she has been offered early admission to MIT and delivers an emotional goodbye, as she will be leaving after Regionals.

Brittany returns to McKinley in "100" along with other New Directions alumni following the closure of the Glee club. Brittany states her unhappiness at being a math genius and kisses her ex-girlfriend Santana. In "New Directions", Brittany agrees to dropping out of MIT before going on a trip to Lesbos with Santana. Santana asks Brittany to go with her to New York after their trip, and Brittany accepts. Brittany finally graduates in the episode, one year late. Brittany returns to New York in the last episode of the season "The Untitled Rachel Berry Project" but she finds out that Santana is out of town shooting another Yeast-I-Stat commercial.

At the beginning of season six, Brittany returns with Santana and the rest of Glee club alumni to McKinley High School in "Homecoming" to help Rachel and Kurt recruit for New Directions. In "Jagged Little Tapestry", while the alumni stick around for another week, Brittany is surprised by Santana's marriage proposal and gladly accepts. Brittany and Santana then return in "What The World Needs Now" to deal with Santana's disapproving grandmother Alma – with whom she hasn’t spoken since coming out as a lesbian. Brittany takes matters into her own hands and tries to invite Alma to the wedding, but Alma's prejudice is too strong and she rejects their engagement, and Brittany tells her off for doing so. Later the New Directions serenade them in an attempt to be invited to their upcoming wedding. Brittany and Santana are wed in a double ceremony with Kurt and Blaine in the eighth episode "A Wedding". Before the ceremony, Sue arrives with Alma, who she has helped to realize that although she may not believe females should marry each other, family is the most important thing, leading her and Santana to reconcile. Brittany and Santana return briefly in the last minutes of the series finale "Dreams Come True" for a last performance with the rest of the Glee Cast to take a bow.

Brittany first appears as a guest character in the second episode of the first season of "Glee". She was brought in as a member of William McKinley High's cheerleading team, the Cheerios. Brittany is regularly played by actress Heather Morris. Morris grew up with a strong background in choreography. She was taking acting classes and actively pursuing an acting career when she was offered a spot on recording artist Beyoncé Knowles world tour as a dancer. Morris, however, turned down the job. Shortly thereafter, she was asked by "Glee" choreographer Zach Woodlee to teach the choreography for Beyoncé's "Single Ladies" dance to the "Glee" actors. At the same time, the show was looking for a third cheerleader, they originally wanted to have the third be African American, but Morris ended up landing the role of Brittany Pierce. Initially a background character who hardly ever spoke, the role grew as writers discovered Morris had a gift for delivering one-liners. In an interview with Brandon Voss of "The Advocate.com", Morris said of her casting:

Brittany's role in the show was initially intended to be minor, but grew towards the end of the first season. She does not have any solo musical performances during season one, but Morris hoped she would have one in the second season. On April 27, 2010, Michael Ausiello of "Entertainment Weekly" reported that Morris would be upgraded to a series regular for season two. Speaking to E! Online, Morris commented: "It's so fun. I literally just stand there and doze off and then I'm like, 'Oh yeah, I have to speak now! At the 2010 Television Critics Association Summer Press Tour, Murphy stated that Brittany would have "big storylines" in the new season, as viewers want to know more about her.

Some of Brittany's most memorable lines are unscripted, and are instead devised by Murphy during filming, or improvised by Morris. Morris portrays Brittany as being "literally insane." She is used by the series' writers to say things no other character would, to the point that Morris considers some of her lines nonsensical. Brittany's character traits include her finding recipes confusing, cheating off intellectually disabled classmates, thinking her cat is reading her diary, and not knowing her right hand from her left. She is friendly towards all the other characters, and Morris has explained that Brittany "love[s] everybody, no matter who they are", so she is frequently smiling and being nice to people. Morris bases her portrayal of Brittany on the character Karen Smith from the film "Mean Girls". She plays Brittany as being very innocent, rather than stupid. In the episode "A Night of Neglect", Brittany participates in an academic decathlon as a seat warmer, but surprisingly ends up contributing to the win due to the fact that she is somewhat of an idiot savant on the topic of cat diseases. It is also revealed in "Britney/Brittany" that Brittany is also "Britney Spears" as her middle initial is "S" making her "Brittany S. Pierce."

At the Paley Festival "Glee" panel in March 2010, Murphy stated that Brittany and Santana would be seen to make out during the show's first season. Morris and Rivera only became aware of this after reading a Paley Festival report online. When they asked Murphy about the development, he claimed to have made the statement "to get a kick" out of the "dirty guy" asking about them. Murphy told Morris and Rivera that "Glee" would not push relationships to appease the show's fans, but would only pursue those which were "organic and natural." While there are moments on the show which depict Brittany and Santana as being very close to one another, Morris attributes these to her close relationship with Rivera: "that is just Naya and I joking around with each other and being really close. It's always her and I just messing around and they end up using it."

Later in 2010, when interviewed by After Ellen and discussing the large lesbian audience of Glee, Ryan Murphy confirmed that season two would contain at least one kiss between Brittany and Santana. In January 2011, several months after Brittany and Santana are seen in bed together, Glee co-creator Brad Falchuk further confirmed that "Brittana is on. Brittana was always on."

Brittany performs in many of the series' musical numbers, though she does not have a solo line until the second season. In that season's second episode "Britney/Brittany", Brittany performs "I'm a Slave 4 U" as a solo and "Me Against the Music" as a duet with Santana. Songs by Morris as Brittany have been released as singles, available for digital download, and have also featured on the show's soundtrack albums. Brittany sings lead for Kesha's "Tik-Tok" in the episode "Blame It on the Alcohol". Candace Bulter of "ScreenCrave" praised the New Directions performance of the song and wrote, "Ke$ha might be able to out-drink the "Glee" members, but their cover of her song was phenomenal." She went on to praise Brittany's choreography and voice, calling it "mad" and "awesome". Sandra Gonzalez of "Entertainment Weekly" praised all of the musical performances and covers of that episode. In the season finale, she sings solo lines in the glee club's Nationals performance of the original song "Light Up the World". In the third season, Brittany's first major performance was in the third episode "Asian F", where she sings lead on Beyoncé's "Run the World (Girls)", which garnered superlatives from many reviewers including Kevin Fallon of "The Atlantic", who wrote, "Brittany's performance of 'Run the World (Girls)' was thrilling. It was the most adrenaline-pumping musical number the series has produced: intricately choreographed, expertly shot and edited, perfectly woven into the story, and performed exquisitely by Heather Morris." She also performs a duet with Santana on "I Wanna Dance With Somebody (Who Loves Me)" in the Whitney Houston tribute episode "Dance With Somebody".

Jarrett Wieselman of the "New York Post" has compared Morris as Brittany to Lynch as Sue, and noted that she has "emerged as one of the funniest second bananas on TV right now". Wieselman wrote that since her introduction, Brittany has been given "more and more to do [and] less and less to think", and that the result has been "one of the most clueless characters that's ever figured out how to dress herself in the morning." E! Online's Megan Masters has also compared Brittany to Sue, and stated that Brittany's one-liners "easily rival" Sue's. She deemed Brittany "brainlessly brilliant", and thanked the "Glee" producers for creating her: "Never before have we had the pleasure of enjoying such a ridiculously dumb—yet always loveable—character on television." When a promotional clip for the episode "Sectionals" indicated that Brittany and Santana had slept together, Dorothy Snarker, when writing for lesbian entertainment website AfterEllen.com, praised the pairing and referred to it by the portmanteau "Brittana". Snarker called the two her "new favourite "Glee" pairing", and commented: "While Heather Morris (Brittany) and Naya Rivera (Santana) have had minimal screen time, they’ve made it count. Heather in particular has brought the laughs as the Cheerio least likely to get a Mensa invitation. Never mind Finn and Rachel – I’m on Team Brittana now."

Morris' performance in Britney/Brittany attracted critical praise; Lisa de Moraes called "Britney/Brittany" a "great showcase" for the actress, and praised her "spectacular dance moves" and "deadpan flare". In his otherwise negative review, Todd VanDerWerff deemed Morris "hysterical throughout" and the cast's best dancer. He stated, "Murphy seems intent on running this character into the ground, but Morris isn't going to have her stop being funny without a fight." Jenna Mullins of E! Online observed, "When Ryan Murphy said this episode was a celebration of Heather, he wasn't kidding", and commended her musical performances. Robert Canning of IGN was initially concerned that the episode would diminish Morris' appeal by elevating her from a background role, but was ultimately pleased that it managed to retain her "fan favorite" secondary character status. While Poniewozik asked "have we gotten to the point as a society where it's unremarkable that the most popular scripted TV show in the 18 to 49 demographic is also—almost without comment or controversy—the gayest show on broadcast TV?", Ann Oldenburg of "USA Today" questioned whether "Glee" had gone too far by its depiction of Brittany and Santana kissing and their reference to the sexual act called "scissoring". Christie Keith, in writing for the lesbian and bisexual media website AfterEllen.com, suggested that "Duets" was the "queerest episode of any series that's ever been on television", and stated that she was moved to tears by the final scene of Brittany forlorn without Santana. AfterEllen.com also listed her in their Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters.

Robert Canning praised Morris for her performance in "A Very Glee Christmas", and wrote: "The heart of "A Very Glee Christmas" was found in Artie Abrams attempt to keep Brittany's belief in Santa Claus alive. Heather Morris perfectly played up Brittany's innocence and joy surrounding everything Santa. Her interaction with the black mall Santa was a highlight. Watching Artie, and eventually the rest of the club, work to keep Brittany's belief intact was truly in the spirit of Christmas and should have been made into a fuller part of the episode. Also shining in this storyline was Dot Jones as Coach Bieste. Her scene as Santa, and then her knowing expression as she watched Artie walk, were the best moments of the episode." In January 2010, Morris and her co-stars won the "Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series. Later that year, Brittany and Santana were nominated for the "Favorite Fictional Lesbian Couple" award at the AfterEllen.com Visibility Awards.



</doc>
<doc id="28993408" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28993408" title="Inocybe cookei">
Inocybe cookei

Inocybe cookei, commonly known as the straw fibrecap, is a species of mushroom in the Inocybaceae family. It was first described in 1892 by Giacomo Bresadola, and is named in honour of Mordecai Cubitt Cooke. The species can be found in Europe, Asia and North America. It produces small mushrooms of an ochre colour, with a prominent umbo, fibres on the cap and a distinctive bulb at the base of the stem. It grows from soil in mixed woodland, and is encountered in summer and autumn, though is not common. Ecologically, it feeds through use of ectomycorrhiza. "Inocybe cookei" has been described as both toxic and non-toxic, but either way, is not advised for consumption.

"Inocybe cookei" was first described by Giacomo Bresadola in 1892; the specific epithet "cookei" honours the British mycologist Mordecai Cubitt Cooke. Mycologists J. Stangl and J. Veselský described "Inocybe kuthanii" in 1979, which was later described as a variety of "Inocybe cookei" ("Inocybe cookei" var. "kuthanii") by Thom Kuyper in 1986, but MycoBank now lists both names as synonyms of "I. cookei". The mushroom is commonly known as the straw fibrecap.

Within "Inocybe", it is placed within the subgenus "Inosperma", and was previously categorised within the section "Rimosae". However, phylogenetic analysis has shown that section "Rimosae" as formerly defined does not form a monophyletic group (that is, descended from a single exclusive ancestor), and former "Rimosae" species are better grouped into two clades, "Maculata" and "Rimosae". Phylogenetic analysis has placed the species in the clade "Maculata". Other species joining "I. cookei" in the "Maculata" clade include "I. maculata", "I. quietiodor", "I. rhodiola", "I. adaequata", and "I. erubescens".

"Inocybe cookei" has a conical or bell-shaped cap of between in diameter. As the mushrooms age, the cap becomes flatter, and an umbo becomes prominent. The margin of the cap frequently cracks towards the centre. The cap is an ochre colour, and the upper surface is covered in long fibres. The silky fibres thickly cover the cap, starting and the centre and extending to the cap's margin. The species has a whitish or ochre stem of in height by in thickness. There is a distinctive marginate bulb at the base of the stem, and no ring. The flesh is white, becoming yellow with age. "Inocybe cookei" mushrooms have closely packed adnexed gills (gills that are attached to the stem only on part of their depth). Gills on young mushrooms are whitish, then become a grey-tinged pale ochre before becoming cinnamon yellow.

"Inocybe cookei" leaves a snuff-brown spore print. The spores themselves are bean-shaped, measuring from by . The walls of the spores (which are around thick) can be smooth or slightly wrinkled, and there is a distinct depression just above the hilum (the scar where the spore was once attached to the basidium). The basidia are four-spored, and the thin-walled, gill-edge cheilocystidia are pear-shaped.

The species can be differentiated from the similar "I. praetervisa" by its spores; the latter "has irregular, lumpy spores". "Inocybe rimosa", the split fibrecap, is also similar in appearance; the rarer "I. cookei" can be differentiated by the smell of honey and the marginate bulb. The colouration, as well as the thick stem with a bulb, are features shared by two other species of "Inocybe"; "I. mixtilis" and "I. cryptocystis". Another fragrant "Inocybe" is "I. pyriodora", which has an odor resembling cinnamon, or ripe pears in mature specimens; unlike "I. cookei", it lacks a bulb at the base of its stem, and bruises a reddish colour when handled or with age.

"Inocybe cookei" is an occasional to frequent mushroom, found growing in mixed woodland on the ground. It is ectomycorrhizal, and grows from summer to late autumn, solitarily or in "trooping groups". It has been recorded in Europe, Russia, China, Mexico, and the United States.

"Inocybe cookei" has been described as both poisonous (due to the presence of muscarine compounds) and non-toxic. Consumption of mushrooms containing muscarine compounds could lead to a number of physiological effects, including: excess salivation, lacrimation, uncontrolled urination or defecation, gastrointestinal problems and emesis (vomiting); this array of symptoms may also be known by the acronym SLUDGE. Other potential effects include a drop in blood pressure, sweating and death due to respiratory failure. The flesh of the mushroom has a mild taste and a slight smell of honey. Regardless of its actual toxicity or edibility, it is considered "best avoided".



</doc>
<doc id="29007740" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29007740" title="Church of St Nicholas, Sapareva Banya">
Church of St Nicholas, Sapareva Banya

The Church of St Nicholas (, "tsarkva „Sveti Nikola“") is a small medieval Eastern Orthodox church in the southwestern Bulgarian town of Sapareva Banya, which is part of Kyustendil Province. Originally either the property of a local notable or attached to a larger church, it was constructed anytime from the 11th to the 14th century.

The church was built using red bricks and white mortar. Architecturally, it is of a simple Byzantine cross-in-square design, with a single nave and apse. The frescoes in the interior are only scarcely preserved. It was reconstructed in 1937 after falling into ruin, and it was listed as a monument of culture of national importance in 1968.

Scholars disagree on the possible period of the church's construction; assessments range from the 11th–12th, through the 12th–13th, to the 13th–14th century. In an article in the "Bulgarian Church Review" magazine from 1898, the local priest Mihal Popov was cited as saying that a stone from the church altar was unearthed during excavations. The priest believed that the stone, which reportedly had the date 1160 inscribed on it, was sent to the National Archaeological Museum in the capital Sofia.

Due to its diminutive size, the Church of St Nicholas was probably not constructed as an independent church. A legend links the church to the name of an unidentified local feudal lord named Nikola (Nicholas) as his final resting place, though archaeologist Nikola Mavrodinov considers it more likely that it was possibly a chapel or a cemetery church attached to a larger place of worship. The larger church was perhaps pulled down during the early Ottoman rule of Bulgaria (post-14th century). While the Church of St Nicholas was not destroyed, its renovation was prohibited by the Ottomans, thus it gradually fell into ruin.

In his 1931 study, Mavrodinov also writes that at the time, the church lacked a roof. He references a story about a group of Circassians that were settled in Sapareva Banya on the order of the Ottoman authorities after the Crimean War (1853–1856). According to that story, the Circassians sought to pull down the church's roof. However, one of them fell to his death inside the church, so they fled in horror. The church was thoroughly reconstructed in 1937 by a team under architect Rashenov.

The Church of St Nicholas lies in the centre of Sapareva Banya. Its architecture is rather simple, with a single nave, a single apse and no narthex present. The church follows the Byzantine cross-in-square design, with unusually short arms of equal size. The dome has twelve sides and is of no particular height, though it is rather large for the church's size. The apse is situated on the church's eastern side; its shape is semicircular and it features a window. The entrance is located on the west wall.

The church was constructed out of rows of red bricks stuck together with white mortar. According to scholar Bistra Nikolova, its size is , while another source measures it as . Either way, it is square in appearance. In height, it probably reached at the dome and at the cornice.

In terms of design and decoration, Mavrodinov likens the church to the Church of St Pantaleon in Gorno Nerezi near Skopje, today in the Republic of Macedonia. It is also compared to the Church of St Theodore in nearby Boboshevo. The Church of St Nicholas features a multitude of two-stepped vaults on its outside walls. The interior was originally entirely covered with frescoes, though only fragments survive. It was enlisted as a monument of culture of national importance in 1968, with a publication in Bulgaria's newspaper of record, the "State Gazette", issue 77.


</doc>
<doc id="29075630" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29075630" title="The Dark Knight Rises">
The Dark Knight Rises

The Dark Knight Rises is a 2012 American-British superhero film directed by Christopher Nolan, who co-wrote the screenplay with his brother Jonathan Nolan, and the story with David S. Goyer. Featuring the DC Comics character Batman, the film is the final installment in Nolan's "The Dark Knight Trilogy", and the sequel to "The Dark Knight" (2008). Christian Bale stars as Bruce Wayne / Batman, alongside Michael Caine, Gary Oldman, Anne Hathaway, Tom Hardy, Marion Cotillard, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, and Morgan Freeman. Eight years after the events of "The Dark Knight", merciless revolutionary Bane forces an older Bruce Wayne to resume his role as Batman and save Gotham City from nuclear destruction.

Christopher Nolan was hesitant about returning to the series for a second time, but agreed after developing a story with his brother and Goyer that he felt would conclude the series on a satisfactory note. Nolan drew inspiration from Bane's comic book debut in the 1993 "" storyline, the 1986 series "The Dark Knight Returns", and the 1999 storyline "". Filming took place from May to November 2011 in locations including Jodhpur, London, Nottingham, Glasgow, Los Angeles, New York City, Newark, and Pittsburgh. Nolan used IMAX 70 mm film cameras for much of the filming, including the first six minutes of the film, to optimize the quality of the picture. A vehicle variation of the Batplane and Batcopter termed the "Bat", an underground prison set, and a new Batcave set were created specifically for the film. As with "The Dark Knight", viral marketing campaigns began early during production. When filming concluded, Warner Bros. refocused its campaign: developing promotional websites, releasing the first six minutes of the film, screening theatrical trailers, and sending out information regarding the film's plot.

"The Dark Knight Rises" premiered in New York City on July 16, 2012. The film was released in the United States and the United Kingdom on July 20, 2012. It received positive reviews; the consensus at Rotten Tomatoes calls it "ambitious, thoughtful, and potent". The film has grossed over $1 billion worldwide, making it the second film in the "Batman" film series to earn $1 billion. In addition to being Nolan's highest-grossing film, it is the 25th highest-grossing film of all time (7th at the time of release), the highest grossing live action superhero film that is not in a shared universe, the third highest-grossing film of 2012, the highest-grossing Batman film of all time, the ninth highest-grossing superhero film, as well as the second highest-grossing DC Comics film of all time.

In Uzbekistan, Bane, a mysterious terrorist figure and former member of the League of Shadows, abducts nuclear physicist Dr. Leonid Pavel from a CIA aircraft.

Eight years after the death of District Attorney Harvey Dent, Batman has disappeared and organized crime has been eradicated in Gotham City thanks to the Dent Act giving expanded powers to the police. Commissioner James Gordon has kept Dent's murderous rampage a secret and allowed blame for his crimes to fall on Batman. He writes a resignation speech revealing the truth, but decides that the city is not yet ready to hear it. Bruce Wayne has become a recluse, and Wayne Enterprises is losing money after Wayne discontinued his fusion reactor project when he learned that it could be weaponized. 

Six months following Pavel's kidnapping, Bane sets up his base in the city sewers, and prompts Wayne's corporate rival John Daggett to buy Wayne's fingerprints. Cat burglar Selina Kyle obtains Wayne's prints from Wayne Manor for Daggett, but she is double-crossed at the exchange, and alerts the police. Gordon and the police arrive and pursue Bane and Daggett's henchmen into the sewers while Selina flees. The men capture Gordon and take him to Bane. Gordon escapes and is found by rookie officer John Blake. Blake, a fellow orphan, confronts Bruce and convinces him to return as Batman. Bane later attacks the Gotham Stock Exchange by using Wayne's fingerprints in a series of transactions that leaves Wayne bankrupt; Batman resurfaces for the first time in eight years while intercepting Bane and his subordinates. Wayne's butler, Alfred Pennyworth resigns in an attempt to save Bruce from death at the hands of Bane. Wayne finds comfort in new Wayne Enterprises CEO Miranda Tate. Using the stolen transactions, Bane expands his operations and kills Daggett.
Kyle agrees to take Batman to Bane but instead leads him into Bane's trap. Bane reveals that he intends to fulfill Ra's al Ghul's mission to destroy Gotham. Bane fights Batman and defeats him; dealing a crippling blow to his back before taking him abroad to an underground prison. There, the inmates tell Wayne the story of Ra's al Ghul's child, who was born and raised in the prison before finally escaping — the only prisoner to have done so. Bane lures Gotham's police into the underground sewer network and uses explosives to trap them, and destroy the bridges surrounding the city. He kills Mayor Anthony Garcia and forces Dr. Pavel to convert the reactor core into a decaying neutron bomb at a football stadium before killing him as well. Bane reads Gordon's speech to the public, and releases the prisoners of Blackgate Penitentiary, initiating chaos while holding the city hostage and isolated with the bomb.

Months later, a recovered Wayne escapes from the prison and returns to Gotham. Batman frees the trapped police and they clash with Bane's army in the streets; during the battle, Batman overpowers Bane. Tate intervenes and stabs Batman, revealing herself to be Talia al Ghul, Ra's al Ghul's daughter. She activates the bomb's detonator, but Gordon blocks her signal. Talia leaves to find the bomb while Bane prepares to kill Batman, but Kyle arrives and kills Bane. Batman and Kyle pursue Talia, hoping to bring the bomb back to the reactor chamber where it can be stabilized. Talia's truck crashes, but she remotely floods and destroys the reactor chamber before dying. With no way to stop the detonation, Batman uses the Batplane to haul the bomb far over the bay, where it safely explodes. Before takeoff, Batman reveals his identity to Gordon.

In the aftermath, Batman is presumed dead and is honored as a hero. With Wayne presumed dead as well, Wayne Manor becomes an orphanage and his remaining estate is left to Alfred. Gordon finds the previously destroyed Bat Signal repaired, while Lucius Fox discovers that Wayne had fixed the previously malfunctioning auto-pilot on the Batplane. Blake resigns from the police force and a parcel left to him in Wayne's will leads him to find the Batcave. While visiting Florence, Alfred discovers that Wayne is alive, and in a relationship with Kyle.


Matthew Modine appears as Peter Foley, Gordon's second-in-command that disdains Batman. Ben Mendelsohn portrays John Daggett, a rival billionaire socialite who employs Bane in his plan to take control of Wayne Enterprises, and Burn Gorman appears as Daggett's assistant and Senior Executive Vice President Philip Stryver. Alon Abutbul portrays Leonid Pavel, a Russian nuclear physicist who is kidnapped from Uzbekistan by Bane and forced to convert the new Wayne Enterprises reactor core into a bomb. Juno Temple plays Jen, Kyle's friend and accomplice, and Daniel Sunjata portrays Mark Jones, a U.S. Special Ops officer who leads a task force into Gotham to assist Gordon and the GCPD in freeing the city from Bane's rule. Chris Ellis appears as Father Reilly, a priest at the orphanage that Blake grew up in. Brett Cullen portrays Byron Gilley, a U.S. congressman who is kidnapped on Harvey Dent Day by Kyle.

Cillian Murphy reprises his role as Dr. Jonathan Crane / Scarecrow from previous films, as does Liam Neeson as Henri Ducard / Ra's al Ghul, who appears to Bruce in a hallucination. Josh Pence portrays Ra's al Ghul in scenes set thirty years before the events of "Batman Begins". Nestor Carbonell also returns as Anthony Garcia, Gotham's mayor. Other cast members include Aidan Gillen as CIA agent Bill Wilson (referred to solely as "CIA" in the film's dialogue; the character's name is revealed in the film's novelization); Rob Brown and Desmond Harrington as police officers; Josh Stewart as Bane's right-hand man Barsad, Christopher Judge as one of Bane's henchmen, Noel Gugliemi as Bane's exile compeller, and Tom Conti as a prisoner. William Devane portrays the President of the United States. Aaron Eckhart expressed enthusiasm in returning for a sequel if asked, although he later stated Nolan verified that his character, Harvey Dent / Two-Face, is dead, and only archive footage of Eckhart from "The Dark Knight" appears in the film.

Several members of the Pittsburgh Steelers have cameo appearances as members of the fictional Gotham Rogues football team in the film, including Ben Roethlisberger, Hines Ward, Troy Polamalu, Willie Colon, Maurkice Pouncey, Mike Wallace, Heath Miller, Aaron Smith, Ryan Clark, James Farrior, LaMarr Woodley, and Casey Hampton, and former Steelers head coach Bill Cowher as the head coach of the Rogues. Pittsburgh mayor Luke Ravenstahl, a kicker in college, appears as the kicker for the Rogues' opponents, the Rapid City Monuments. In 2008, the Rooney family sold a minority stake in the team to Thomas Tull, the CEO and president of Legendary Pictures, which produced "The Dark Knight Rises". United States Senator Patrick Leahy, who had made a cameo appearance in "The Dark Knight", returned in "The Dark Knight Rises," as a Wayne Enterprises board member. Thomas Lennon, who had appeared as a doctor in "Memento", once again plays a doctor. India Wadsworth plays the wife of Ra's al Ghul and the mother of Talia.

Warner Bros. president of production Jeff Robinov had hoped a third film would be released in 2011 or 2012. Nolan wanted the story for the third installment to keep him emotionally invested. "On a more superficial level, I have to ask the question," he reasoned, "how many good third movies in a franchise can people name?" Nolan said that he never even thought a third film was possible in the foreword for his book "The Art and Making of the Dark Knight Trilogy". Nolan only agreed to a third film on the basis of finding a worthwhile story, fearing that he would become bored halfway through production if he discovered the film to be unnecessary. By December 2008, Nolan completed a rough story outline, before he committed himself to "Inception". Later in December, Alan F. Horn confirmed that while discussions with Nolan about a third film were ongoing, no casting had been done, and Horn denied all such rumors. Before Nolan confirmed his involvement, Gary Oldman had said he was confident Nolan would return.

Following the success of the Joker in "The Dark Knight", studio executives wished for the Riddler to be included as the primary villain as he was considered a similar character and encouraged the casting of Leonardo DiCaprio. However, Nolan wanted the antagonist to be vastly different from the previous incarnations and committed to using Bane instead, citing the need for a character with a physical presence within the film. He was initially unfamiliar with the character's back-story, but pointed out the appeal of an archetype, labelling it as "the extreme of some type of villainy". When comparing the choice of Bane with the Joker, Nolan highlighted the Joker as an example of "diabolical, chaotic anarchy and has a devilish sense of humor", juxtaposing him against Bane, whom he likened to "a classic movie monster [...] with a terrific brain." Nolan has said that his draft of the script was inspired by Charles Dickens' 1859 novel "A Tale of Two Cities", which centers around the French Revolution. This homage to Dickens was briefly illustrated by having Bane inconspicuously finger knit paracord in the film, symbolizing his literary character Madame Defarge, and more overtly by Commissioner Gordon's eulogy for Bruce Wayne at the end of the film, which is taken directly from the classic book.

It was not until February 9, 2010, that it was announced that Nolan had "cracked" the story of a sequel to "The Dark Knight" and was committed to return to the project. Shortly afterward, it was announced David S. Goyer and Jonathan Nolan were working on a screenplay. Goyer would leave the project during pre-production to begin work on "Man of Steel"; Jonathan continued writing the script based on the story by his brother Chris and Goyer. Chris Nolan said that his brother's original draft was about 400 pages. The film's storyline has been compared with the "Batman" comic book series' story arc "" (1993), which showcased Bane; the mini-series "The Dark Knight Returns" (1986), in which Batman returns to Gotham City after a ten-year absence; and the story arc "No Man's Land" (1999), which depicts a Gotham cut off from the rest of the world and overrun by gangs. The nickname "the Dark Knight" was first applied to Batman in "Batman" #1 (1940), in a story written by Bill Finger. Nolan confirmed the Joker would not return in the third film, and dismissed rumors that he considered using unused footage of Heath Ledger from "The Dark Knight". "The Dark Knight Rises" reunited Nolan with many of his past collaborators, including cinematographer Wally Pfister, production designer Nathan Crowley, editor Lee Smith, costume designer Lindy Hemming, special effects supervisors Paul Franklin and Chris Corbould, and composer Hans Zimmer.

During location scouting in December 2010, Nolan began searching for locations such as India, Romania, and Michigan. According to the "Romania Insider", Nolan was interested in Bucharest's historical centers, Edgar Quinet Street, the Palace of the Parliament, and the Turda salt mine. The film had an estimated budget of $250–300 million, coming down to about $230 million after tax credits. Nolan elected not to film in 3-D, but instead stated that he intended to focus on improving image quality and scale using the IMAX format. "The Dark Knight Rises" featured over an hour of footage shot in IMAX (by comparison, "The Dark Knight" contained 28 minutes). Nolan had several meetings with IMAX Vice-President David Keighley to work on the logistics of projecting films in digital IMAX venues. Wally Pfister had expressed interest in shooting the film entirely in IMAX, but because of the considerable noise made by IMAX cameras, 35mm and 70mm cameras had to be used for shooting the film's dialogue scenes, as dialogue had to be dubbed when shot with IMAX cameras. Chairman and president of the IMAX Corporation Greg Foster stated that IMAX planned to run the film in its theatres for two months, despite only being contractually committed to run the film for two weeks. Nolan also bypassed the use of a digital intermediate for the film, resulting in less manipulation of the filmed image and higher film resolution.

Filming was scheduled to start in May and conclude in November 2011. Principal photography commenced on May 6, 2011, in Jodhpur, India at the Mehrangarh Fort before moving to Pittsburgh, where it operated under the working title "Magnus Rex" to reduce the visibility of the production. Shooting locations within the city included Heinz Field, the site of an American football game, with members of the Pittsburgh Steelers playing the Gotham Rogues football team. More than 11,000 extras were used to depict the shot sequence. Filming in Pittsburgh also took place at the Mellon Institute and Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University. A letter sent out to residents and business owners detailing road closures revealed that the streets of the city would be featured "as the start of [the] film". 9-1-1 operators were told to expect an increase in calls related to gunshots and explosions in the film's production. The Pittsburgh leg of production wrapped after three weeks on August 21, 2011. The next portion of the filming began in Los Angeles in late August and finished up on October 23 after nine weeks of filming. New York and New Jersey were the next places of filming. The Trump Tower replaced the Richard J. Daley Center as the location for the headquarters of Wayne Enterprises. In November 2011, shooting shifted to Newark, New Jersey. Newark City Hall and Military Park were among the locations used for filming. Other shooting locations include London and Glasgow, the latter of which was used for "additional exterior filming". Principal photography concluded on November 14, 2011. The external waterfall scene at the end of the film was shot at Sgwd Henrhyd falls, on the edge of the Brecon Beacons National Park in Wales.

Production photos from filming in Pittsburgh showed a second Tumbler chassis after the first was destroyed, indicating that a new Batmobile would be in the film, following the destruction of the first in "The Dark Knight". Further set photos revealed a "new vehicle" being transported to Wabash Tunnel, prompting speculation as to its nature. In June 2011, Autoblog confirmed the presence of the new Lamborghini Aventador on the film set.
Several accidents occurred during the production of the film. While filming at Wollaton Hall, Nottingham, a tractor-trailer crashed into the main entrance, though no one was injured. A stuntman parachutist later crashed through the roof of a home in Cairngorm Gliding Club, Feshiebridge in Scotland, and became wedged there after a failed landing during a skydiving stunt; he was not seriously injured. While filming scenes in Pittsburgh, Hathaway's stunt double crashed into an IMAX camera while filming a sequence that required her to ride a Batpod down a flight of stairs during a riot. There were no injuries, but the camera was destroyed. A second accident took place in Pittsburgh when the truck carrying the then-unidentified vehicle later termed "the Bat" went off-course and crashed into a lighting array, damaging the model of the aircraft. Production was delayed while the model was repaired.

Shortly before Christmas of 2011, Christopher Nolan invited several prominent directors, including Edgar Wright, Michael Bay, Bryan Singer, Jon Favreau, Eli Roth, Duncan Jones and Stephen Daldry, to Universal CityWalk's IMAX theatre for a private screening of the first six minutes of "The Dark Knight Rises", which had been shot on IMAX film and edited from the original camera negative. Nolan, feeling that the use of film stock in cinema is currently being phased out due to the introduction of digital cinematography and projection, used this screening to make a case for the continued use of film, which he asserts still offers superior image quality to any digital format, and warned the filmmakers that unless they continued to assert their choice to use film in their productions, they may eventually lose it as an option. Nolan explained; "I wanted to give them a chance to see the potential, because I think IMAX is the best film format that was ever invented. It's the gold standard and what any other technology has to match up to, but none have, in my opinion. The message I wanted to put out there was that no one is taking anyone's digital cameras away. But if we want film to continue as an option, and someone is working on a big studio movie with the resources and the power to insist [on] film, they should say so. I felt as if I didn't say anything, and then we started to lose that option, it would be a shame. When I look at a digitally acquired and projected image, it looks inferior against an original negative anamorphic print or an IMAX one."

Costume designer Lindy Hemming explained that Bane uses a mask to inhale an analgesic gas, which, in director Christopher Nolan's words, "keeps his pain just below the threshold so he can function." In designing Bane's costume, Hemming needed it to look "like an amalgam of all sorts of bits and pieces he cobbled together, as he passed through some very remote places. We made parts of his vest, for example, from fragments of an old military tent. His clothes are militaristic, but are not in any way a uniform." Hemming also designed Bane's mask to look "animalistic". Costume effects supervisor Graham Churchyard created a three-dimensional model of actor Tom Hardy's face and skull to design the mask, allowing the mask to perfectly conform to the contours of Hardy's face. Hemming personally designed Bane's coat, which she admitted took two years to complete. Taking inspiration from a Swedish army jacket and a frock coat from the French Revolution, it was designed to make Bane look equal parts dictatorial and revolutionary. The design was difficult as Hemming struggled to find a tailor in Los Angeles who could work with shearling.

The Batsuit consisted of 110 separate pieces, each of which had to be replicated dozens of times over the course of the production. The base layer was made of a polyester mesh that is utilized by the military and high-tech sports manufacturers because of its breathability and moisture-wicking properties. Molded pieces of flexible urethane were then attached to the mesh, to form the overall body armor plating. Carbon fiber panels were placed inside the sections on the legs, chest and abdomen. The cowl was sculpted from a cast of Bale's face and head to become a perfect fit for Christian Bale. The suit remained unchanged for the film since "The Dark Knight".

In creating Selina Kyle's catsuit, two layers of material were used, with the outer layer being polyurethane coated spandex, embossed with a hexagonal pattern. The catsuit also consisted of elbow-length gloves, a utility belt, and thigh-high boots with spike heels.

Concept artist Tully Summers commented on Nolan's style of cinematography when asked about the difference between his designs for this film and fantasy-based designs for "Men in Black 3": "The difference for me was Christopher Nolan's visual style. One of the things that makes his Batman movies so compelling is their tone of plausibility. He will often prefer a raw, grittier design over one that is very sleek and product design pretty. It's sort of a practical military aesthetic. This stuff is made to work, not impress shoppers. "The Dark Knight Rises" is a war film." Producer Emma Thomas stated this Batman film has a different visual aesthetic from the first two Nolan-directed features, explaining that "it's meant to be winter in Gotham, so that right there is going to lend a whole different look to the film."

The film introduces a vehicle that has been compared with the Batplane and the Batcopter, dubbed "the Bat". In designing the Bat, Nathan Crowley approached it as if it were an actual military project, emphasising the need for it to "fit into the same family" as the Tumbler and the Batpod. The final version of the Bat takes its design cues from the Harrier Jump Jet, Bell Boeing V-22 Osprey and the Boeing AH-64 Apache. Chris Corbould described the Bat's size and shape as presenting a major challenge for filming given Christopher Nolan's emphasis on practical effects over computer-generated imagery. In order to make the Bat "fly", it was variously supported by wires, suspended from cranes and helicopters, and mounted on a purpose-built vehicle with hydraulic controls to simulate movement.

When designing the Batcave set, Crowley and fellow production designer Kevin Kavanaugh hit upon the idea of flooding the Batcave and having Batman's equipment, the Batsuit and a supercomputer rise from the water. Another set was designed at Cardington as an "underground prison", a rough-hewn labyrinth of stone cells in a vast abyss with a vertical shaft leading to the surface. Exteriors above the prison were filmed in Jodhpur, India, chosen because the "forbidding landscape added to the desolation".

In an interview in October 2010, composer Hans Zimmer confirmed that he would be returning to score "The Dark Knight Rises." James Newton Howard was offered to return and write the score with Zimmer as he did for "Batman Begins" and "The Dark Knight", but he chose not to because he noted that the chemistry established between Zimmer and Nolan during the making of "Inception" would make him seem like a "third wheel". Zimmer included several cues from the earlier scores, but explains that he wanted to go in a "completely different direction" for Bane's theme. While the theme accompanying Selina Kyle is deliberately ambiguous, the musical thread spanning throughout the trilogy was composed exclusively for Bruce Wayne.

The film features a prevalent Moroccan chant of the phrase "deshi basara" (proper transliteration: "Tījī basara’ah") (Arabic: تيجي بسرعة), which translates to "rise up" (literally: "come quickly"). In November 2011, Zimmer crowdsourced online audio recordings of the chant to be used in the film's score. When asked about the chant for clarification, Zimmer said, "The chant became a very complicated thing because I wanted hundreds of thousands of voices, and it's not so easy to get hundreds of thousands of voices. So, we tweeted and we posted on the internet, for people who wanted to be part of it. It seemed like an interesting thing. We've created this world, over these last two movies, and somehow I think the audience and the fans have been part of this world. We do keep them in mind."

The official website launched in May 2011, introducing a viral marketing campaign similar to the one used to promote "The Dark Knight". The website streamed an encrypted audio file described by users as chanting. Users decrypted the audio to the Twitter hashtag, "#TheFireRises". Warner Bros. removed a pixel from the webpage for every tweet using the hashtag. The website revealed the first official image of Bane.
In July 2011, a teaser trailer leaked online before its official release with "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2". The studio released the teaser three days after the leak. The trailer received mixed responses; Stephen Spencer Davis of "Slate" wrote it successfully built hype, while Kofi Outlaw of ScreenRant showed disappointment, claiming it was more of an "announcement trailer" than an actual teaser trailer. Outlaw criticized the quality, writing that a scene depicting Commissioner Gordon in a hospital bed was overly dramatic, had "hammy" dialogue, and was difficult to understand due to Gordon's labored breathing. Outlaw wrote that the sweeping shot of Gotham City had poor CGI and was too reminiscent of the "Inception" trailer. The theatrical trailer leaked online, like the teaser trailer, before being released the following week attached to theatrical prints of "". Critics noted political undertones with dialogue foreshadowing the theme of income inequality and an "Occupy Gotham" campaign within the world of the story. Receiving more than 12.5 million views in the first 24 hours after its release, the trailer set the record for most combined downloads from iTunes, beating the previous record held by "The Avengers". However, the second trailer for "The Avengers" again set the record with 13.7 million downloads. Warner Bros. attached a second theatrical trailer for "The Dark Knight Rises" to theatrical prints of "The Avengers". An "unnamed" Warner Brothers executive clarified that "We see this placement as a good strategic decision. We always want our trailers to be seen with films that people want to see—and a lot of people will be going to The Avengers!" The executive also commented that the trailer will "provide the best potential exposure for TDKR." Warner Bros. released the trailer online on April 30, 2012, approximately four days before they attached it to theatrical prints of "The Avengers".

Continuing a method used with "The Dark Knight" whereby the opening sequence of the film was attached to IMAX prints of "I Am Legend" seven months before release, a six-minute prologue of "The Dark Knight Rises" was attached to 70mm IMAX prints of "", again approximately seven months before release. Critical reaction to the prologue was positive, with one critic commenting that "no one gets to make a film on this kind of scale anymore. Except for Christopher Nolan," though a round-up of reviews highlighted the way many critics found Tom Hardy's dialogue very difficult to hear. Addressing the issue in an interview with "Entertainment Weekly", Nolan said "I think when people see the film, things will come into focus. Bane is very complex and very interesting and when people see the finished film people will be very entertained by him."
Viral marketing campaigns for the film continued as magazine companies "Empire" and "Wired" received "CIA documents" concerning a "Dr. Leonid Pavel", with its mugshot connected to actor Alon Abutbul. According to the first document, Pavel is a missing Russian nuclear physicist, while the second document appears to be an edited transcript of a conversation discussing the handover of Dr. Pavel to the CIA by Georgian separatists, but with most of the conversation redacted. These were later shown to be plot elements of the six-minute prologue. The official Twitter account later linked to another censored document, this time, referencing "Operation Early Bird". A website of the same name was discovered, revealing a countdown timer. When the countdown finished, the site presented a map showing all available theaters that would be screening the film's prologue earlier than its release. Various websites received a package that included a cylinder map of "strike zones", and a "fire rises" T-shirt. In April 2012, the film's official website was updated with a "dossier" on a suspect named "John Doe" also known as "the Batman" for an arrest, with a list of several accusations. The premise of the campaign starts when the mayor of Gotham City "redoubles" the effort to capture Batman and anyone supporting his return in preparation for the upcoming "Harvey Dent Day". The site also includes an extensive list of real-world locations where "graffiti related to movement in support of the vigilante's return" is located. For each tweet of a specific location marked on the list, a frame of the second theatrical trailer for the film was released on a separate website.

In January 2012, six months prior to the film's release, tickets for midnight IMAX showings in New York, San Francisco, and Los Angeles went on sale and sold out immediately. Purchased tickets surfaced for sale online for over $100, compared with their original price of $17.50.
At the American International Toy Fair, Mattel unveiled figures for Batman, Bane, and Catwoman, and Batman's flying vehicle, the Bat. The Mattel figures were also released in the "Movie Masters" line, featuring more highly detailed and articulated presentation, and Quiktek versions that feature interchangeable accessories. Lego released building sets and mini-figures based on the film and incorporating other DC Comic characters. Additionally, Funko released a series of plush toys, Mezco Toyz released vinyl figures, and Hornby released the Batman Tumbler car. Other partners include Jakks Pacific, who created novelty and large-scale figures and plush toys, and PPW Toys, who created a Batman themed Mr. Potato Head. Various clothing items including shoes, T-shirts, hats and wallets were also produced.

A video game of the same name was released on the same day as the release of the film for the iOS and Android devices for promoting the movie. The game features an open world with primary focus on stealth and combat. The combat system of the game is inspired from and . It takes place in Gotham City, with a somewhat similar but still significantly different plot from that of the movie. IGN gave it a mediocre score of 5.5/10.

The film novelization, written by author Greg Cox and published by Titan Books, was released alongside the film on July 24, 2012.

Warner Bros. partnered with Mountain Dew to do a cross-promotion that included a special paint scheme on the number 88 Chevrolet Impala owned by Hendrick Motorsports and driven by Dale Earnhardt, Jr. in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series. On June 17, 2012, the car won the 2012 Quicken Loans 400 at Michigan International Speedway. On July 4, 2012, the studio signed a deal with Formula One team Lotus F1 to have the film's logos appear on the Lotus E20s driven by Kimi Räikkönen and Romain Grosjean at the 2012 British Grand Prix. Räikkönen and Grosjean went on to finish the race in fifth and sixth place respectively. Warner Bros. had previously followed a similar promotion at the 2008 British Grand Prix, when the now-defunct Toyota F1 carried a livery to promote "The Dark Knight".

Two digital comic books entitled "Batman Origins" and "The Dark Knight: Prologue" were released exclusively for Nokia Lumia devices. A special movie application has also been released, featuring trailers, wallpapers, movie schedules and Batman trivias. Limited editions of the Lumia 710, Lumia 800 and Lumia 900 were also released featuring a laser-etched Batman logo.

On July 20, 2012, during a midnight showing of "The Dark Knight Rises" at the Century 16 cinema in Aurora, Colorado, a gunman wearing a gas mask opened fire inside the theater, killing 12 people and injuring 58 others. Police responding to the shooting apprehended a suspect later identified as 24-year-old James Eagan Holmes shortly after arriving on the scene. Initial reports stated that Holmes identified himself as "the Joker" at the time of his arrest.

Warner Bros. cancelled the Paris, Mexico, and Japan premieres of "The Dark Knight Rises", and suspended the film's marketing campaign in Finland. Several broadcast networks also suspended television ads for the film in the United States. The trailer for "Gangster Squad", another Warner Bros. movie included in the screening of "The Dark Knight Rises", was removed as it contains a scene which shows gangsters shooting submachine guns at moviegoers through the screen, similar to the shooting in Aurora.

Director Christopher Nolan released a public statement calling the shooting "unbearably savage". Other stars of the film released statements expressing their condolences, with star Christian Bale paying a personal visit to the survivors and the memorial in Aurora.

On July 6, 2012, Warner Bros. held a special IMAX screening of "The Dark Knight Rises" for more than one hundred reporters and critics. However, technical issues with the computer device synchronizing the sound and picture forced the studio to postpone the screening by a day. The film later premiered on July 16 at the AMC Lincoln Square Theater in New York City, New York, followed by a European premiere on July 18 at Leicester Square in London, England. The film was released in Australia and New Zealand on July 19, and was later released in North America and the United Kingdom on July 20.

"The Dark Knight Rises" received highly favorable reviews from critics. Many have named it one of the best films of 2012. Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave "The Dark Knight Rises" an approval rating of 87% based on 355 reviews, and a rating average of 7.98/10. The web site's critical consensus reads, ""The Dark Knight Rises" is an ambitious, thoughtful, and potent action film that concludes Christopher Nolan's franchise in spectacular fashion." Metacritic, another review aggregator, assigned the film a weighted average score of 78 out of 100, based on 45 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.

"The Telegraph" granted the film a maximum score of five stars, stating that it is "a superhero film without a superhero," comparing it with "The Godfather Part II" and praising Hardy's performance as well as the film's intricate plot and narrative. Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" thought the film was "potent, persuasive and hypnotic" and that it was "more than an exceptional superhero movie, it is masterful filmmaking by any standard." "The Playlists" Todd Gilchrist wrote "A cinematic, cultural and personal triumph, "The Dark Knight Rises" is emotionally inspiring, aesthetically significant and critically important for America itself – as a mirror of both sober reflection and resilient hope." IGN gave it a 9 out of 10, noting similarities in tone and theme to "Batman Begins" over the trilogy's second installment "The Dark Knight", but also describing Bane as "that bit less interesting to watch" than Ledger's Joker, despite praising his "menacing voice" and "body language-driven performance". "The Guardian" scored the film four out of five stars, calling it a film of "granite, monolithic intensity", yet also calling it a "hammy, portentous affair". Andrew O'Hehir of "Salon" writes "if "The Dark Knight Rises" is a fascist film, it's a great fascist film, and arguably the biggest, darkest, most thrilling and disturbing and utterly balls-out spectacle ever created for the screen". Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film three out of four stars, stating "the film begins slowly with a murky plot and too many new characters, but builds to a sensational climax." Film critic Richard Roeper gave the film an "A", calling it "a majestic, gorgeous, brutal and richly satisfying epic", and citing the final scenes of the picture as "the best five minutes of any film this year." The London Film Review gave the film a B and said "Nolan's film is a reminder that superheroes aren't merely a frivolous distraction, but an embodiment of our best selves." The film was crowned by "Forbes" as the best modern comic book superhero adaptation on screen, outranking both its main summer blockbuster competitor, "Marvel's The Avengers", and the trilogy's previous installment "The Dark Knight". In 2014, "Empire" ranked "The Dark Knight Rises" the 72nd greatest film ever made on their list of "The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time" as voted by the magazine's readers.

"The Daily Mail" Chris Tookey said that the film was bloated and overly long, and criticized the sombre tone and lack of humor, despite praising the film's visually impressive set pieces. CNN's Tom Charity said the film was a "disappointingly clunky and bombastic conclusion to a superior series" and called it Nolan's worst film. Anthony Lane of "The New Yorker" says that the "story is dense, overlong, and studded with references that will make sense only to those intimate with Nolan's previous excursions into Batmanhood".

In reaction to fan backlash to some of the negative reviews, Rotten Tomatoes chose to disable user commentary for the film leading up to its release. Some fans had threatened violence against critics while others threatened to take down the websites of movie critics who had given the film a negative review.

In 2014, Aidan Gillen's character in the film, CIA agent Bill Wilson, became the subject of an Internet meme popular among 4chan users known as "Baneposting", which references the dialogue between Wilson and Bane in the film's opening plane scene.

Writing in "Salon", David Sirota, a progressive political commentator compared "The Dark Knight Rises" and the game "Call of Duty" to 1980s popular culture reflecting the political period of the time, accusing them of perpetuating a conservative agenda: "Just as so many 1980s pop culture products reflected the spirit of the Reagan Revolution's conservative backlash, we are now seeing two blockbuster, genre-shaping products not-so-subtly reflect the Tea Party's rhetorical backlash to the powerful Occupy Wall Street zeitgeist." An article in "Variety" reported Chuck Dixon, the co-creator of the Bane character, as saying that Bane is "far more akin to an Occupy Wall Street type if you're looking to cast him politically." Catherine Shoard of the center-left British publication "The Guardian" claimed the film "is a quite audaciously capitalist vision, radically conservative, radically vigilante, that advances a serious, stirring proposal that the wish-fulfilment of the wealthy is to be championed if they say they want to do good." In contrast, liberal commentator Jonathan Chait opined in "New York" that "What passes for a right-wing movie these days is "The Dark Knight Rises", which submits the rather modest premise that, irritating though the rich may be, actually killing them and taking all their stuff might be excessive." Writing in "USA Today", Bryan Alexander called Bane "the ultimate occupier" and reported that Christian Bale was amazed that the script had "foreseen" the Occupy movement.

Nolan has denied the film criticizes the Occupy movement and insists that none of his Batman films are intended to be political: "I've had as many conversations with people who have seen the film the other way round. We throw a lot of things against the wall to see if it sticks. We put a lot of interesting questions in the air, but that's simply a backdrop for the story. What we're really trying to do is show the cracks of society, show the conflicts that somebody would try to wedge open. We're going to get wildly different interpretations of what the film is supporting and not supporting, but it's not doing any of those things. It's just telling a story. If you're saying, 'Have you made a film that's supposed to be criticizing the Occupy Wall Street movement?' – well, obviously, that's not true."

Alternatively, politically-conservative commentator Rush Limbaugh alleged that the film was biased against 2012 Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney due to Bane's name being a homophone for Bain Capital, the financial service company Romney used to head, despite the fact that the character has existed as a major Batman foe since 1993. In response, Nolan said that the comments were "bizarre", while Dixon and Freeman said that the comments were "ridiculous". Democratic adviser Christopher Lehane has noted the similarities between the narratives of the film and the presidential campaign.

On January 20, 2017, multiple media outlets noted that a small but key part of U.S. president Donald Trump's "had an uncanny echo" of Bane's speech after he takes control of Gotham in "The Dark Knight Rises". Trump had given the film a positive review in 2012.

Hours before the midnight release, several box office analysts suggested as much as a $198 million domestic opening weekend. However, in the wake of the mass shooting during a midnight screening of the film, Warner Bros. decided to not report further box office figures for the movie until Monday, July 23, 2012. As a result, other distributors also delayed the release of their official estimates as well. The shooting is also speculated to have hurt the ticket sales as E! Online reported that a North Carolina audience member had stated that "this theater was kinda empty". Some reports released on July 21, 2012 said that rival studios estimated that the film grossed $75 million to $77 million on its opening day. Warner Brothers shortly after released a statement to ABC News stating that they delayed the release of their estimates for the opening day total of the film "out of respect for the victims and their families," and added "Warner Bros. Pictures will not be reporting box office numbers for "The Dark Knight Rises" throughout the weekend. Box office numbers will be released on Monday."

"The Dark Knight Rises" earned $448 million in North America, and $636 million in other countries, summing up to a worldwide total of $1 billion($1084 million). Worldwide, it is the sixteenth-highest-grossing film of all time and the third-highest-grossing film of 2012. It had a worldwide opening weekend of $248.9 million. The film set a worldwide IMAX opening-weekend record with $23.8 million (overtaken by "") and also broke the record for the fastest movie to make over $50 million in IMAX theatres. IMAX CEO Richard L. Gelfond explained this by claiming, "Audiences are clearly seeking out and embracing the film the way it was meant to be seen – in IMAX." On the 2012 Labor Day weekend, it became the third film distributed by Warner Bros. and the thirteenth film in cinematic history to cross the $1 billion mark. The film also became the second movie (after "Avatar") to reach $100 million in worldwide IMAX grosses.

"The Dark Knight Rises" opened on Friday, July 20, 2012. It earned an estimated $30.6 million in midnight showings, which was the second-highest midnight gross behind "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2" ($43.5 million). It did, however, set an IMAX midnight-gross record with $2.3 million (overtaken by ""). The film made $75.8 million during its opening day, achieving, at the time, the third-highest single and opening day tally of all time. On July 23, 2012, it was announced that the film grossed $160.9 million for its debut weekend, which was the third-highest opening weekend ever, at the time, behind "Marvel's The Avengers" ($207.4 million) and "Deathly Hallows – Part 2" ($169.2 million). However, it did set an opening-weekend record for a 2D film (previously held by "The Dark Knight") and an IMAX opening-weekend record with $19.0 million (previously held by "Marvel's The Avengers"). The film also held the top spot at the box office for its second and third weekends. In North America, it is the thirteenth-highest-grossing film, the second-highest-grossing 2012 film, as well as the sixth highest-grossing superhero film and film based on comics. Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold more than 55 million tickets in the US.

Outside North America, the film opened with $88.0 million from 7,173 theaters in just 17 markets. It was in first place at the box office outside North America for four consecutive weekends. Its three largest markets are the UK, Ireland and Malta ($90.3 million), where it is the highest-grossing superhero film, China ($52.8 million) and Australia ($44.2 million).

"The Dark Knight Rises" was released on November 28, 2012 in Hong Kong and New Zealand. On December 3, it was released in the United Kingdom, and on December 4, it was released in the United States. It is available on Blu-ray, DVD, and as a digital download. Coinciding with the release of this film, a box set of "The Dark Knight Trilogy" was released. "The Dark Knight Rises" was released on 4K UHD Blu-ray on December 19, 2017.



</doc>
<doc id="29103383" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29103383" title="Mycena fonticola">
Mycena fonticola

Mycena fonticola is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family. First reported in 2007, it is known only from central Honshu, in Japan, where it grows on dead leaves and twigs in low-elevation forests dominated by oak trees. The fruit body of the fungus has a smooth, violet-brown cap up to in diameter, and a slender stem up to long. Distinguishing microscopic characteristics of the mushroom include the relatively large, distinctly amyloid spores (turning blue to black when stained with Melzer's reagent), the smooth, spindle-shaped cheilocystidia (cystidia on the gill edge), the absence of pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face), the diverticulate hyphae of the cap cuticle, and the absence of clamp connections.

The fungus was first collected by Japanese mycologist Haruki Takahashi in 1999, and described as a new species along with seven other Japanese Mycenas in a 2007 publication. The mushroom's Japanese name is "Izumino-ashinagatake" (イズミノアシナガタケ). The specific epithet "fonticola" is derived from Latin, and means "dweller in fountain".

According to Takahashi, various macro- and microscopic features suggest that this species is best classified in the section "Fragilipedes" (Fr.) Quél., as defined by the Dutch "Mycena" specialist Maas Geesteranus.

The cap is in diameter, and ranges in shape from conical to convex to bell-shaped. The surface has radially arranged shallow grooves extending almost to the center of the cap. The cap surface is somewhat hygrophanous (changing color as it loses or absorbs water), dry, and smooth. It is colored violet-brown when young, then becomes somewhat paler from the margin. The white flesh is up to 1 mm thick, and lacks any distinctive odor or taste. The stem is long and slender compared to the size of the cap, typically tall by thick, cylindrical, slightly enlarged at the base, and hollow. It is grayish-brown to violet-brown at the top, gradually becoming violet-brown on the lower portion. The stem surface is initially pruinose (appearing to be covered with a fine whitish powder), but becomes smooth in age. The stem base bears large, bristle-like coarse white hairs. The gills are adnexed (narrowly attached to the stem), with between 23–27 reaching the stem. The gills are up to broad, thin, and have a whitish or with a grayish hue; the gills edges are the same color as the gill faces.

The spores are ellipsoid, smooth, colorless, distinctly amyloid (absorbing iodine stain from Melzer's reagent), thin-walled, and measure 11.5–14 by 6–8 µm. The spore-bearing cells, the basidia, are 17–28 by 6–8 µm, club-shaped, and four-spored. The basidioles (immature or aborted basidia) are club-shaped. The cheilocystidia (cystidia found on the gills edges) are 32–39 by 5–12 µm, abundant, spindle-shaped to roughly club-shaped, often apically broadly rounded, smooth, colorless, and thin-walled. They form a sterile gill edge. Pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill faces) are absent in this species. The hymenophoral tissue (tissue of the hymenium-bearing structure) is made of thin-walled hyphae that are 7–15 µm wide, cylindrical, smooth, colorless, and dextrinoid (staining reddish to reddish-brown in Melzer's reagent). The cap cuticle is made of parallel, bent-over hyphae that are 2–5 µm wide, cylindrical, and densely covered with warty or finger-like thin-walled diverticulae that are colorless or contain cytoplasmic brownish pigment. The layer of hyphae underlying the cap cuticle are parallel, colorless or with cytoplasmic brownish pigment, dextrinoid, and have short and inflated cells measuring up to 30 µm wide. The stem cuticle is made of parallel, bent-over hyphae that are 3–5 µm wide, and cylindrical. These hyphae are covered with scattered, thin-walled warty or finger-like diverticulae that can be either colorless, or contain brownish pigment in the cytoplasm. The flesh of the stem is made of longitudinally running, cylindrical hyphae that are 5–17 µm wide, smooth, colorless, and dextrinoid. Clamp connections are absent in all tissues of this species.

"Mycena mustea" is another similar "Mycena" that was discovered and reported concurrently with "M. fonticola"; it differs in forming a pale grayish purple cap with a low and broad umbo. Microscopically, it has club-shaped cheilocystidia with several apical short finger-like outgrowths, and nondiverticulate hyphae in the stem cuticle.

"Mycena fonticola" is known only from Kanagawa, Japan. Fruit bodies are found solitary or scattered, on dead leaves and twigs in low-elevation forests dominated by the oak species "Quercus myrsinaefolia" and "Q. serrata".



</doc>
<doc id="29103387" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29103387" title="Mycena intersecta">
Mycena intersecta

Mycena intersecta is a species of mushroom in the Mycenaceae family. First reported as a new species in 2007, it is known only from central Honshu, in Japan, where it is found growing solitarily or scattered, on dead leaves in lowland forests dominated by oak. The mushrooms have olive-brown caps up to in diameter atop slender stems that are long by thick. On the underside of the cap are the distantly spaced, whitish gills that have cross-veins running between them. Microscopic characteristics of the mushroom include the smooth, irregularly cylindrical cheilocystidia (cystidia on the gill edge), the absence of pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face), the diverticulate elements of the cap cuticle, the broadly club-shaped to irregularly shaped caulocystidia (cystidia on the stem), the weakly dextrinoid flesh (staining reddish to reddish-brown in Melzer's reagent), and the absence of clamp connections. The edibility of the mushroom is unknown.

The mushroom was first collected by Japanese mycologist Haruki Takahashi in 1999, and published as a new species (along with seven other Japanese Mycenas) in a 2007 publication. The specific epithet is from the Latin word "intersecta" or "intersected", and refers to the intervenose gills. Its Japanese name is "Oriibu-ashinagatake" (オリーブアシナガタケ).

According to Takahashi, the fungus is best classified in the section "Fragilipedes" (Fr.) Quél., as defined by the Dutch "Mycena" specialist Maas Geesteranus.

The cap of "M. intersecta" is initially conical to convex to bell-shaped, eventually reaching in diameter. When it is moist, it is partly translucent, so that the outlines of the gills underneath the cap can be seen. The cap is somewhat hygrophanous, and dry. Its surface is initially minutely pruinose (as if covered with a fine white powder), but this effect soon sloughs off, leaving the surface smooth. The cap color is initially olive-brown to yellowish-brown, then somewhat paler from the margin. The white flesh is up to 0.7 mm thick, and lacks any distinctive taste and odor. The slender stem is long by thick, cylindrical, and hollow. Its surface is dry, and colored pale olive-brown near the top, becoming olive-brown downward. Like the cap, it is at first pruinose, but smooths out in age. The base of the stem is covered with coarse white hairs. The gills are adnate to subdecurrent (running slightly down the length of the stem), and distantly spaced, with 16–19 gills reaching the stem. The gills are up to 1.5 mm broad, thin, somewhat intervenose, and whitish, with edges that are the same color as the gill faces. Takahashi's description does not include any discussion of the mushroom's edibility.

The basidiospores are roughly ellipsoid and measure 7.5–8.5 by 5–6 µm. They are thin-walled, smooth, colorless, and inamyloid to weakly amyloid—indicating a weak ability to absorb the iodine in Melzer's reagent. The spore-bearing cells, the basidia are 22–31 by 5.5–7 µm, club-shaped, and mostly two-spored. The cheilocystidia (cystidia on the gill edge) are 27–40 by 3–6 µm, abundant, and form a sterile gill edge. They are irregularly cylindrical to constricted, smooth, colorless, and thin-walled. Pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face) are absent. The hymenophoral tissue is made of thin-walled hyphae that are 5–18 µm wide, cylindrical, smooth, colorless, and weakly dextrinoid. The cap cuticle is made of parallel, bent-over hyphae that are 2–6 µm wide, cylindrical, and densely covered with warty or finger-like thin-walled diverticulae that are colorless and inamyloid. The layer of hyphae underneath the cap cuticle are parallel, olive-brown, and weakly dextrinoid, with short and inflated cells up to 22 µm wide. The stem cuticle is made of parallel, bent-over hyphae that are 2–4 µm wide, cylindrical, smooth to sparsely diverticulate. These hyphae curve outward to form club-shaped or irregularly shaped caulocystidia (cystidia on the stem) that are olive-brown, inamyloid, and thin-walled. They measure 13–29 by 3–7 µm, and are broadly club-shaped to irregularly shaped, and often have one to three knob-like excrescences. The stem tissue is made of longitudinally running, cylindrical hyphae that are 5–12 µm wide, smooth, colorless, and have a weakly dextrinoid in Melzer's reagent. Clamp connections are absent in all tissues of "M. intersecta".

The European species "Mycena viridimarginata" is somewhat similar to "M. intersecta" in appearance, but may be distinguished by its greenish-edged gills, cheilocystidia with abruptly tapering points, and clamp connections.

"Mycena intersecta" is known only from Kanagawa, Japan. The fruit bodies are found solitary or scattered, on dead leaves in lowland forests dominated by the oak trees "Quercus myrsinaefolia" and "Q. serrata".



</doc>
<doc id="29103391" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29103391" title="Mycena multiplicata">
Mycena multiplicata

Mycena multiplicata is a species of mushroom in the Mycenaceae family. First described as a new species in 2007, the mushroom is known only from Kanagawa, Japan, where it grows on dead fallen twigs in lowland forests dominated by oak. The mushroom has a whitish cap that reaches up to in diameter atop a slender stem long by thick. On the underside of the cap are whitish, distantly spaced gills that are narrowly attached to the stem. Microscopic characteristics of the mushroom include the amyloid spores (turning bluish-black to black in the presence of Melzer's reagent), the pear-shaped to broadly club-shaped cheilocystidia (cystidia found on the gill edge) covered with a few to numerous, unevenly spaced, cylindrical protuberances, the lack of pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face), and the diverticulate hyphae in the outer layer of the cap and stem. The edibility of the mushroom is unknown.

The mushroom was first collected by Japanese mycologist Haruki Takahashi in 1999, and reported as a new species in a 2007, along with seven other Japanese Mycenas. The specific epithet is derived from the Latin word "multiplicata", meaning "multiplicative". Its Japanese name is "Keashi-ochiedatake" (ケアシオチエダタケ).

Takahashi suggests that the mushroom is best classified in the section "Mycena" of the genus "Mycena", as defined by Dutch "Mycena" specialist Maas Geesteranus.

The cap of "M. multiplicata" is conical to convex to bell-shaped, reaching in diameter. It is often shallowly grooved toward the margin, dry, and somewhat hygrophanous (changing color when it loses or absorbs water). The cap surface is initially pruinose (appearing as if covered with a fine white powder), but soon becomes smooth. The cap color is whitish, sometimes pale brownish at the center. The white flesh is up to 0.3 mm thick, and does not have any distinctive taste or odor. The slender stem is long by thick, cylindrical, centrally attached to the cap, and hollow. Its surface is dry, pruinose near the top, and covered with fine, soft hairs toward the base. It is whitish to grayish-violet near the top, gradually becoming dark violet below. The stem base is covered with long, fairly coarse, whitish fibrils. The gills are narrowly attached to the stem, distantly spaced (between 13 and 16 gills reach the stem), up to 1.7 mm broad, thin, and whitish, with the gill edges the same color as the gill faces. The edibility of the mushroom has not been determined.

The spores are ellipsoid, thin-walled, smooth, colorless, amyloid, and measure 8–9.5 by 4 µm. The basidia (spore-bearing cells) are 24–31 by 6.5–7.5 µm, club-shaped, four-spored, and have clamps at the basal septa. The cheilocystidia (cystidia on the gill edge) are abundant, pear-shaped to broadly club-shaped, and measure 17–28 by 11–20 µm. They are covered with a few to numerous excrescences (outgrowths) that are 2–18 by 1–3 µm, colorless, and thin-walled. The excrescences are unevenly spaced, simple to somewhat branched, cylindrical, and straight or curved. There are no pleurocystidia (cystidia on the gill face) in this species. The hymenophoral (gill-producing) tissue is made of thin-walled hyphae that are 7–20 µm wide, cylindrical (but often inflated), smooth, hyaline (translucent), and dextrinoid (staining reddish to reddish-brown in Melzer's reagent). The cap cuticle is made of parallel, bent-over hyphae that are 3–5 µm wide, cylindrical, and covered with simple to highly branched colorless diverticulae that have thin walls. The layer of hyphae underneath the cap cuticle have a parallel arrangement, and are hyaline and dextrinoid, and made of short and inflated cells that are up to 52 µm wide. The stem cuticle is made of parallel, bent-over hyphae that are 2–10 µm wide, cylindrical, diverticulate, colorless or pale violet, dextrinoid, and thin-walled. The caulocystidia (cystidia on the stem) are 2–6 µm wide, and otherwise similar in appearance to the cheilocystidia. The stem tissue is made of longitudinally arranged, cylindrical hyphae measuring 5–13 µm wide that are smooth, hyaline, and dextrinoid. Clamp connections are present in the cap cuticle and flesh, and at the septa at the base of the basidia.

Within the section "Mycena", "M. multiplicata" is similar to the Malaysian species "M. obcalyx" in having a grayish-white cap, lobed cheilocystidia with finger-like outgrowths, and a lignicolous habitat. "M. obcalyx" may be distinguished by forming much smaller fruit bodies (with caps 2–4 mm wide) with subdecurrent gills, a pruinose, hyaline white stem, and broadly ellipsoid spores.

"Mycena multiplicata" is known only from Kanagawa, Japan. It is found growing solitary or scattered, on dead fallen twigs in lowland forests dominated by the oak species "Quercus myrsinaefolia" and "Q. serrata".



</doc>
<doc id="29178647" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29178647" title="Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy">
Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy

Seneca Nation of Indians v. Christy, 162 U.S. 283 (1896), was the first litigation of aboriginal title in the United States by a tribal plaintiff in the Supreme Court of the United States since "Cherokee Nation v. Georgia" (1831). It was the first such litigation by an indigenous plaintiff since "Fellows v. Blacksmith" (1857) and its companion case of "New York ex rel. Cutler v. Dibble" (1858). The New York courts held that the 1788 Phelps and Gorham Purchase did not violate the Nonintercourse Act, one of the provisions of which prohibits purchases of Indian lands without the approval of the federal government, and that (even if it did) the Seneca Nation of New York was barred by the state statute of limitations from challenging the transfer of title. The U.S. Supreme Court declined to review the merits of lower court ruling because of the adequate and independent state grounds doctrine.

According to O'Toole and Tureen, ""Christy" is an important case in that it revived the concept that states had special powers to deal with Indian tribes within their borders."
Although the case has not been formally overruled, two Supreme Court decisions in the 1970s and 1980s have undone its effect by ruling that there is federal subject-matter jurisdiction for a federal common law cause of action for recovering possession based on the common-law doctrine of aboriginal title. Moreover, the New York courts' interpretation of the Nonintercourse Act is no longer good law. Modern federal courts hold that only Congress can ratify a conveyance of aboriginal title, and only with a clear statement, rather than implicitly.

The land in question, which had been part of the Seneca Nation's traditional territory for centuries before the American Revolution, comprised part of the Phelps and Gorham Purchase, a tract of land disputed after the war between claims of New York and Massachusetts. By a December 16, 1786 interstate compact, the states agreed that Massachusetts would retain the proprietary rights and the pre-emption rights, but New York would retain governmental rights. After the adoption of the United States Constitution in 1787, the federal government ratified their compact.

Three private individuals—Robert Troup, Thomas L. Ogden, and Benjamin W. Rogers—obtained the proprietary and preemptive rights from Massachusetts. They executed a treaty of conveyance with the Seneca on August 31, 1826, purchasing 87,000 acres for $48,216. Massachusetts approved the conveyance, but the United States Senate was never consulted and never ratified the treaty, as required for treaties with Native American nations. In 1827, the money was deposited in Ontario Bank in Canandaigua, New York, and in 1855 it was paid to the United States treasury, which began remitting the interest to the Seneca Nation.

The Seneca Nation could not have brought the lawsuit until 1845, when the New York legislature granted the nation the right to bring suits in courts of law and equity. The Seneca filed a petition with the Bureau of Indian Affairs on January 5, 1881, requesting restoration and possession of certain lands related to the Phelps and Gorham Purchase. This petition was ignored by the BIA.

The Seneca hired the lawyer James Clark Strong to represent them, a "prominent lawyer and civic-minded resident of Buffalo." Strong was a former lieutenant colonel in the Union army (brevetted to general after the war). He had a permanent limp from his wounds in the American Civil War. At the law practice of his brother, John C. Strong, he had also represented the Cayuga in a claim against New York state.

The Seneca brought suit in the Circuit Court of Erie County, New York on October 13, 1885. The Seneca requested the ejectment of Harrison B. Christy from 100 acres of land in the town of Brant, New York (purchased from the Ogden Land Company), known as the "mile strip." These lands were formerly part of the Cattaraugus Indian Reservation, as established by the New York Treaty of Big Tree (1797).

The Seneca contended that the purchase was invalid because the treaty was not approved by the Senate, as required by the Constitution; therefore it violated the Nonintercourse Act. Christy's "answer consisted of a general denial, the plea of the statute of limitations of 20 years, and that the plaintiff had not the legal right, title, capacity, or authority to maintain the action."

The General Term of the Fifth Department of the New York Supreme Court heard the intermediate appeal. Bradley J., writing for himself and Dwight J.J., affirmed. The court considered whether the Indians had properly surrendered the land and whether the consideration had been paid. As to the first question, the court noted that, while "in view of the known habits of Indians they may not be supposed to represent their occupation or possession by improvements or inclosures of all or great portions of their lands":
[I]n this case the abandonment and surrender were not only practically made, but have been characterized by such circumstances and by such recognition, not only by the Indians, but by the government, in such manner as to determine the situation, and in legal effect to sever the prior relation of the Indians to the lands from them. The quantity of land covered by the treaty of conveyance was large.
The court cited "Johnson v. M'Intosh" (1823) for the proposition that: "[t]he title of the Indians was possessory, and embraced the right of occupancy only. And when abandoned by them the possession attached itself to the fee of the lands."

As to the second question, the court noted:
The suggestion that the entire amount of the purchase money was not paid, and that such fact is in the way of supporting the claim to the Indian title, is not sustained. We are not called upon to consider the effect of default in payment of any portion of the purchase money. The treaty recites the payment of it, and as no such question seems ever before to have been raised, or full payment questioned, either by government or the Indians, it must at this late day be assumed, until the contrary is quite clearly made to appear, that the contract in that respect was performed.

Finally, the court noted: 
The plaintiff not being a corporation, and having no such corporate name, could not at common law maintain an action. This right, however, was more than 40 years ago conferred by statute, which, among other things, provides that the Seneca Nation of Indians may maintain any action of ejectment to recover the possession of any part of the Allegany and Cattaraugus reservations unlawfully withheld from them.

As a result, the intermediate appellate court did not reach the question of whether the statute of limitation applies.

Chief Justice Charles Andrews, writing for a unanimous New York Court of Appeals, affirmed. 
After reviewing the facts, Andrews began by arguing that there were many ways to extinguish aboriginal title. He said: "It is material to observe that there was no uniform procedure on the part of the purchasers from Massachusetts in acquiring the Indian title," and gave examples of conveyances he believed to have been implicitly ratified by the federal government. As to the Seneca argument that, after the ratification of the Constitution, only the federal government could extinguish aboriginal title, Andrews noted that:
These claims challenge the title not only of every purchaser and holder of lands within the boundaries of the grant of August 31, 1826, but also the title to many millions of acres of lands in this state, held under Indian treaties made by the state of New York with the Indian tribes within its borders, or under grants made by Indians to individuals under the authority of the state, where no treaty had been made between the United States and the Indian occupants.
Andrews expressed the view that the U.S. states, not the federal government, inherited from Great Britain the sole power to extinguish aboriginal title:
On the Declaration of Independence the colonies became sovereign states. They were so acknowledged by the treaty of peace of 1783, and Great Britain by that treaty ‘relinquished all claims to the government, property, and territorial rights' within the several colonies. It is the received opinion that the colonies succeeded to the title of the crown to all the ungranted lands within their respective boundaries, with the exclusive right to extinguish by purchase the Indian title, and to regulate dealings with the Indian tribes. ‘There was no territory in the United States,’ said JOHNSON, J., in "Harcourt v. Gaillard", 12 Wheat. 523, ‘that was claimed in any other right than that of one of the confederated states; therefore there could be no acquisition of territory made by the United States distinct from or independent of some one of the United States.’

Andrews rejected the argument that the federal government had acquired Indian lands by treaty out of a legal requirement to do so:
But the dealing by the general government with the Indian tribes through treaties was resorted to as a convenient mode of regulating Indian affairs, and not because, as with other nations, it was the only mode, independently of the arbitrament of war, of dealing with them.

Andrews relied upon the argument of federal acquiescence:
The practical construction given by the state of New York to the federal constitution, as shown by the numerous treaties made by it with the Indian tribes, and the recognition by the federal authority of their validity, is very strong evidence that the clause in the federal constitution prohibiting the states from entering into treaties does not preclude a state, having the preemption right to Indian lands, from dealing with the Indian tribes directly, for the extinguishment of the Indian title.
As to the Nonintercourse Act, Andrews questioned both whether it applied to purchases by a state and whether it applied to purchases within a state. However, Andrews proceed to assume that the Act applied and held that it had not been violated. Andrews proceeded to argue that the treaty requirement of the Act was satisfied by state treaties:
The purchase must be made at a treaty, as in other cases. This insures publicity, and affords a protection against fraud. But the proviso does not require that the treaty should be one between the United States and the tribe from whom the purchase is made, as in the cases coming under the first clause of the section. It is sufficient if the purchase is made at a treaty held ‘under the authority of the United States,’ and in the ‘presence and with the approbation of the commissioner or commissioners of the United States,’ etc.
Andrews also placed reliance on the fact that later versions of the Act excluded the clause "or to any state, whether having the right of pre-emption or not" and instead simply prohibited acquisitions by persons.
Independently, Andrews indicated he would have dismissed the action under the statute of limitations:
Andrews emphasized this latter ground because of his desire to prevent any similar lands claims by Indian tribes:
In view of the numerous Indian titles in this state originating in treaties by the state, or in purchases made with its sanction by individuals, we prefer to place our judgment on the broader ground, which will remove any cloud upon the validity of those titles.

Chief Justice Melville Fuller, for a unanimous Court, dismissed the writ of error, relying on the adequate and independent state grounds for the New York Court of Appeals' decision. After reviewing the facts and the judgment below, he wrote that:
The proper construction of this enabling act, and the time within which an action might be brought and maintained thereunder, it was the province of the state courts to determine.<br>
The Seneca Nation availed itself of the act in bringing this action, which was subject to the provision, as held by the court of appeals, that it could only be brought and maintained ‘in the same manner and within the same time as if brought by citizens of this state in relation to their private individual property and rights.’ Under the circumstances, the fact that the plaintiff was an Indian tribe cannot make federal questions of the correct construction of the act and the bar of the statute of limitations.<br>
As it appears that the decision of the court of appeals was rested, in addition to other grounds, upon a distinct and independent ground, not involving any federal question, and sufficient in itself to maintain the judgment, the writ of error falls within the wellsettled rule on that subject, and cannot be maintained.

A 19th-century "New York Times" article claimed that "[t]he decision is one of local, state, and national importance alike . . . ." In 1998 Prof. Hauptman summed up the case by the following:
The Treaties of 1823 and 1826, although fraudulent at their roots, were allowed to stand. The legal obstacles to Indian land suits at the time made it almost impossible to obtain redress until monetary compensation was awarded the Senecas under the Indian Claims Commission in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

"Seneca Nation" has never been overruled. But, the effect of the decision was undone by rulings in "Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. State v. Oneida County" (1974), known as "Oneida I", and "Oneida County v. Oneida Indian Nation of N.Y. State" (1985), known as "Oneida II", which held that there is a federal common law cause of action for ejectment based upon aboriginal title for which there is federal subject-matter jurisdiction. Therefore, Indian tribes no longer have to rely on state statutes for a cause of action. In the words of Prof. Hauptman, "Oneida I" "overturned one hundred forty-three years of American law."


</doc>
<doc id="29219605" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29219605" title="British Alpine Hannibal Expedition">
British Alpine Hannibal Expedition

The British Alpine Hannibal Expedition was an experimental archeology event that took place in 1959. British engineer John Hoyte led an expedition that tried to reenact aspects of Hannibal's legendary crossing of the Alps during the Second Punic War in 218 BCE. The group successfully took the female Asian elephant "Jumbo", provided by a zoo in Turin, from France over the Col du Mont Cenis into Italy.

After the Carthaginian defeat in the First Punic War of 264–241 BCE, Hamilcar Barca secured an extensive territory in the Iberian peninsula for Carthage. At the beginning of the Second Punic War in 218 BCE, his son Hannibal took an army of perhaps 50,000 men and 37 war elephants from Hispania (modern-day Spain) to Italy, where he led a 15-year campaign against Rome. Hannibal avoided the coastal route, and took his army over the Alps. His march has been described by ancient historians Polybius and Livy. The exact route, however, has been subject of long but inconclusive scholarly discourse. In his 1955 book "Alps and elephants: Hannibal's march", Gavin de Beer lists 12 possible candidates from 30 different books.

In 1955, "The Times" published a debate about the route Hannibal might have taken over the Alps. This debate came to the attention of John Hoyte, then an engineering student at Cambridge University. Hoyte had an interest in both history and mountain climbing, and spent the summer of 1956 with friends hiking the Alps and comparing possible routes to the ancient descriptions. The group came to the conclusion that the Col de Clapier was the most likely pass, an opinion still supported by some modern historians.

A few years later, a friend suggested to test this theory with an actual elephant. Hoyte wrote letters to the British consuls in Lyon, France, Geneva, Switzerland, and Turin, enquiring about the possibility of obtaining an elephant for the experiment, but without a serious expectation of success. However, the Turin Zoo had just acquired a female Asian elephant, "Jumbo", who was trained as a circus animal. The owner of the zoo volunteered "Jumbo" and became the first sponsor of the expedition. Hoyte put together a team of 8 people, including Richard Jolly as the expedition secretary and Colonel John Hickman, Lecturer (later Reader) in Veterinary Surgery at the University of Cambridge Veterinary School, who had gained experience with elephants during World War II in Burma. The group obtained insurance for "Jumbo" from Lloyd's of London and further sponsorship from "Life" magazine, which later published a 7-page photo report.

The expedition started in late July 1959 in Montmelian, France. It followed the valley of the Arc river and then ascended towards the Col de Clapier. However, the route up to the pass had become narrowed and dangerous due to rockfall. The group retracted down into the valley and crossed the Col du Mont Cenis, another pass suggested for Hannibal's route by none less than French emperor Napoleon. After 10 days of travel, the expedition successfully "invaded" Susa in Italy.

The members of the expedition originally planned to call the 5,700 pound (2.6 t) elephant "Hannibella", however, the animal could not be made to respond to the new name and thus remained "Jumbo". "Jumbo" was 11 years old and equipped with leather boots and knee pads for the most treacherous passages. A specially made coat was provided to keep her warm. Despite a diet consisting of of hay, of apples, of bread, of carrots, and a vitamin B supplement per day, she lost an estimated during the first 4 days of the trip, and nearly in total. On arrival in Italy, she consumed cake and a Magnum bottle of Chianti.

In 1960, Hoyte published a report on the expedition as "Trunk Road for Hannibal: With an Elephant Over the Alps". Expedition member Cynthia Pilkington published the book "Elephant Over the Alps" in 1961, telling the story of the expedition.



</doc>
<doc id="29392021" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29392021" title="Christening (The Office)">
Christening (The Office)

"Christening" is the seventh episode of the seventh season of the American version of the comedy television series "The Office" and the show's 133rd episode overall. Written by Peter Ocko and directed by Alex Hardcastle, the episode aired on November 4, 2010 on NBC in the United States. The episode guest stars Linda Purl as Helene Beesly, Rick Overton as William Beesly, Robert Pine as Mr. Halpert, Perry Smith as Betsy Halpert, Bobby Ray Shafer as Bob Vance, and Peggy Stewart as Sylvia.

The series, a mockumentary, depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton, Pennsylvania, branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. In the episode, Pam (Jenna Fischer) and Jim Halpert's (John Krasinski) baby, CeCe, is christened and Michael Scott (Steve Carell) invites the entire office to celebrate. Michael joins a church group of high school graduates on a mission to Mexico, with Andy Bernard (Ed Helms) following along to impress Erin Hannon (Ellie Kemper).

Since the seventh season of "The Office" focused on Michael's departure, the producers wanted to showcase the ensemble cast in various episodes; "Christening" dealt with Pam and Jim. The episode was watched by 7.65 million viewers and received a 3.8 rating among adults between the age of 18 and 49, marking a slight drop in the ratings when compared to the previous week. The episode received mixed reviews from critics; while a few enjoyed the episode, several felt that the main story was unfunny and forced. Cindy White of IGN even called it one of the worst episodes of "The Office" to air.

Pam (Jenna Fischer) and Jim Halpert's (John Krasinski) daughter CeCe is being christened, and Michael Scott (Steve Carell) has invited all the members of the office to the service, much to their disappointment. During the service, CeCe's dress is ruined when Jim changes her diaper. Jim scrambles to replace the gown, and CeCe is eventually baptized in an Arcade Fire T-shirt he found in the back of his car. At the end of the mass, the minister announces there will be a reception hosted by Jim and Pam, who panic because the reception was for family only and they are not prepared for so many guests.

At the reception, food quickly runs out, and CeCe goes missing after Jim asks Pam's grandmother Sylvia (Peggy Stewart) to watch over her. Angela Martin (Angela Kinsey) had been showing a disturbingly intense interest in CeCe, so after finding out from guests that CeCe was last seen with a "short blond woman", Jim thinks Angela has kidnapped CeCe, and calls her out as she is leaving. Kevin Malone (Brian Baumgartner) attacks Angela's purse, only for Jim to realize that Pam's mother Helene (Linda Purl) had CeCe.

Michael is inspired by the fellow churchgoers and, following inappropriate comments from the rest of the office staff, angrily lashes out at them for being disrespectful. As the church's youth ministry—which is going to Mexico to help build a school—leave, Michael decides to go with them. The other employees try to talk him out of it, but Michael refuses. Just before they leave, Andy Bernard (Ed Helms) boards the bus with him in an attempt to impress his ex-girlfriend Erin Hannon (Ellie Kemper). Both get cold feet 45 minutes into the trip, and force the bus to stop. They then have Erin drive them home.

Meanwhile, Toby Flenderson (Paul Lieberstein) hesitates to enter the church throughout the service. He explains that he has a history between himself and "The Big Man". Finally, Toby enters the church after the ceremony. He looks at the crucifix and asks, "Why you always got to be so mean to me?"

The episode was written by Peter Ocko, his first writing credit for "The Office" since joining the staff in its seventh season as a co-executive producer. It was directed by Alex Hardcastle, the first episode of "The Office" he directed. Due to the fact that the seventh season of "The Office" was Carell's last, the writers decided to divide the season into two distinct halves; the first half would "celebrate Carell's finale year and highlight different actors on the show", whereas the second half would focus on his departure and the search for a new manager. As such, "Christening" was written to specifically highlight "potential heirs to the throne", in this case Fischer and Krasinski's characters, Pam and Jim. The episode guest stars Linda Purl as Helene Beesly, Rick Overton as William Beesly, Robert Pine as Mr. Halpert, Perry Smith as Betsy Halpert, Bobby Ray Shafer as Bob Vance, and Peggy Stewart as Sylvia.

Within a week of its airdate the official website of "The Office" released two deleted scenes. In the first 46-second clip, Angela, Kelly Kapoor (Mindy Kaling), Oscar Martinez (Oscar Nunez), and Ryan Howard (B. J. Novak) discuss their feelings about having children. In the second 75-second clip, Jim asks Michael to take a picture of his family, Jim and Pam complain to the camera about the uninvited guests, and Gabe Lewis (Zach Woods) and Ryan talk about their volunteer past. The season seven DVD contains several more deleted scenes from this episode. Notable cut scenes include Jim and Pam discussing the situation surrounding the reception, Dwight placing his business card in the books in the church's pew, Jim and Pam discussing naming CeCe and thanking their friends and family for coming.

During the cold open, Kelly plays a "your mom" joke on Pam. Michael initially thinks that he is CeCe's godfather, and impersonates Marlon Brando's character Don Corleone in the "Godfather" movies. During this scene, Michael also references Robert De Niro's famous line "You talkin' to me?" from the 1976 film "Taxi Driver". Jim wraps CeCe in an Arcade Fire shirt, a reference to the Canadian indie rock band. Pam references the miracle of Jesus feeding the multitude, claiming that she and Jim are "gonna need a loaves and fishes kind of miracle to feed" all their guests. Michael defends the churchgoers, and claims that the office members are being catty like the titular antagonists from the 2004 comedy film "Mean Girls". Erin listens to "A Prairie Home Companion" hosted by Garrison Keillor.

"Christening" first aired on NBC on November 4, 2010. In its original broadcast, it was viewed by an estimated 7.65 million viewers and received a 3.8/10 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49. This means that it was seen by 3.8 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds, and 10 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds watching television at the time of the broadcast. This marked a seven percent drop in the ratings from the previous episode, "Costume Contest". "Christening" was the thirteenth most-watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18–49.

The episode received mixed reviews, with one calling it one of the worst episodes of "The Office" to air. Myles McNutt of "The A.V. Club" wrote that his favorite element of the episode concerned Toby and his relationship with God, but he was slightly critical of the "A-story", calling it "inert." Despite this, McNutt felt that the episode portrayed Michael as "a flawed, yet normal, man". He felt that the episode, like the sixth season episode "Scott's Tots", illustrated that Michael was still "searching for his identity despite being over 40." He ultimately gave the episode a "B+". Joel Keller of AOL's TV Squad praised Michael's maturity in the episode, saying "even when we get an episode that didn't quite hit the mark, like last night's, the maturing of Michael still makes the episode interesting to watch."

Margaret Lyons of "Entertainment Weekly" was more critical, referring to it as "forced, off pitch, and strenuously unfunny". She was also critical of Michael's interaction with the youth group, writing that it "didn't add any development to his character or to the show's broader arcs; it just seemed weird, and not that humorous." Despite this, she praised the cold opening, featuring Pam lecturing the office on proper hygiene. HitFix reviewer Alan Sepinwall called the episode "spectacularly unfunny" and criticized the writers for using Michael's loneliness as a joke instead of taking it seriously like they had in the fourth season episode "Money". Despite this, he complimented Lieberstein's performance as Toby while he was questioning God.

While reviewing the seventh season, Cindy White of IGN said that the episode proved to fans that Jim and Pam dragged the series at times. She wrote that the episode was "one of the worst of the series"—noting that only the sixth season clip show "The Banker" was worse—and blamed it on the writers, who she said "have no idea what to do with [Pam and Jim] anymore".



</doc>
<doc id="29394668" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29394668" title="Aseroe coccinea">
Aseroe coccinea

Aseroe coccinea is a species of stinkhorn fungus in the genus "Aseroe". First reported in Japan in 1989, it was not formally validated as a species until 2007, the delay related to a publication error. The receptacle, or fruit body, begins as a partially buried whitish egg-shaped structure, which bursts open as a hollow white stipe with reddish arms, then erupts and grows to a height of up to . It matures into a star-shaped structure with seven to nine thin reddish tubular "arms" up to long radiating from the central area. The top of the receptacle is covered with dark olive-brown spore-slime, or gleba. "A. coccinea" can be distinguished from the more common species "A. rubra" by differences in the color of the receptacle, and in the structure of the arms. The edibility of the fungus has not been reported.

The fungus was first described provisionally (denoted by "ad interim") as "Aseroe coccinea" by the Japanese mycologists Yoshimi and Tsuguo Hongo in a 1989 publication with a Japanese description, based on a specimen collected on September 29, 1985 in Utsunomiya, Tochigi Prefecture, Japan. The name, however, was not published validly ("nomen invalidum"), according to Article 36.1 of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature, which requires that "in order to be validly published, a name of a new taxon (algal and all fossil taxa excepted) must ... be accompanied by a Latin description or diagnosis or by a reference to a previously and effectively published Latin description or diagnosis". Taiga Kasuya reexamined the type specimen and validated the species in a 2007 "Mycoscience" publication. The holotype specimen is kept at the National Museum of Nature and Science in Tokyo.

The specific epithet "coccinea" is derived from the Latin word "coccineus", and means "bright red". The mushroom's Japanese name is "Aka-hitode-take" (アカヒトデタケ).

Like all Phallaceae species, "A. coccinea" begins its development in the form of a roughly spherical whitish "egg" that is in diameter, lying on or partially submerged in the substrate. On the base of the egg is a white strand of mycelium. The exoperidium (the outer tissue layer) is white to cream-colored with a fibrous surface. The inner layer is membranous, with a hyaline (translucent) endoperidium (inner tissue layer). The slimy spore-bearing mass, the gleba, is olive-brown to greenish-black, with a slightly fetid odor. When the mushroom is mature, it covers the upper surface of a disc on the top of the receptacle. The receptacle has a cylindrical stipe, tall, in diameter at the top, somewhat fusiform (tapered at both ends) or sometimes just tapered towards the base. The stipe is pale pink near the top, white to cream at the base, spongy in texture, and hollow. The top of the receptacle is flattened to form a disc that bears 7–9, narrow, tapering "arms". The arms consist of a single bright red tube-like chamber, that is long and thick.

The thick-walled spores are ellipsoid to cylindrical, and measure 4–5 by 2–2.5 μm. They are hyaline (translucent), have a smooth surface, and are sometimes truncated at the base. The peridium of the "egg" is divided into two distinct layers of tissue. The outer is up to 250–400 μm thick, and made of filamentous, interwoven hyphae measuring 2.5–5 μm in diameter. These hyphae are thick-walled, septate, and hyaline. Also present in this outer layer are thick-walled pseudoparenchymatous cells (angular, randomly arranged, and tightly packed) that are 7–50 μm thick, spherical or nearly so, and yellowish-brown to pale brown. The inner tissue layer of the peridium is 100–250 μm thick and made of elongated filamentous hyphae that are 2–5 μm in diameter. These thick-walled hyphae are arranged in a roughly parallel fashion, septate, and hyaline. The receptacle consists of thick-walled, roughly spherical pseudoparenchymatous cells 5–15.5 μm thick, that contain intracellular pigment.

"A. coccinea" closely resembles "A. arachnoidea", but may be distinguished from the latter by its bright red arms, and its larger spores (4–5 by 2.5–3 μm in "A. coccinea" compared with 2.5–3.5 by 1.5 μm in "A. arachnoidea"). "A. arachnoidea" is known from Asia and West Africa. "A. rubra" is a relatively common pantropical species, and differs from "A. coccinea" in its reddish receptacle (compared with pink to cream-colored in "A. coccinea") and bifurcating arms that are typically multichambered.

Although Kasuya did not explicitly define the mode of nutrition for "A. coccinea", most Phallaceae species are suspected to be saprobic—decomposers of wood and plant organic matter. The fruit bodies of "A. coccinea", known only from temperate regions of Japan (Tochigi Prefecture), grow solitarily or in groups on rice husks, straw, or dung. They are found from summer to autumn.



</doc>
<doc id="29439869" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29439869" title="Hurricane Beth">
Hurricane Beth

Hurricane Beth was a short-lived tropical cyclone which traveled from Florida to Nova Scotia in the middle of August 1971. The second named storm of the 1971 Atlantic hurricane season, Beth's genesis was impeded by a cold environment surrounding the storm. However, as it continued on its northeastward course, it achieved fully tropical characteristics and peaked as a modest Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir–Simpson Hurricane Scale. The cyclone struck Nova Scotia on August 16 before dissipating shortly after. Beth produced substantial precipitation, and the resultant flooding inflicted severe damage to infrastructure and crops.

On August 9, a low pressure system in the upper levels of the atmosphere formed off the east coast of Florida. It became a surface low by the next day and acquired the characteristics of a tropical cyclone; it is officially stated to have become a tropical depression at 1200 UTC on August 10. The depression slowly advanced northeastward within a relatively cold environment, and as such, it did not intensify for several days. The system turned more toward the east as it approached the coast of North Carolina, at which time its structure became conducive to further development. On August 14, the depression was declared a tropical storm and assigned the name Beth following recent data from a reconnaissance aircraft. 

Several hundred miles off the U.S. East Coast, Beth accelerated somewhat – reaching forward speeds of up to as it resumed a northeastward course. Its minimum central pressure deepened to , and correspondingly, maximum sustained winds increased. In response, the cyclone was recognized as a Category 1 hurricane. It continued to mature as it passed east of Cape Cod, achieving peak winds of and a pressure of . Subsequently, the hurricane weakened slightly while nearing Nova Scotia. On August 16, it made landfall near Copper Lake before crossing Cape Breton Island. Shortly thereafter, Beth was swept up by a nearby cold front and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone.

In advance of Hurricane Beth, hurricane warnings were issued for coastal and marine areas of Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. In Halifax, bus service was disrupted by the storm, and in Antigonish, business owners closed their stores and filled sandbags to prepare. 

The hurricane left extensive damage in its wake, especially to crops and infrastructure. Halifax International Airport reported of rainfall over 30 hours. The heavy precipitation throughout the country triggered severe flooding, stranding hundreds of travelers. The mayor of Dartmouth reported that the area was a "disaster", as 500 homes were reportedly inundated. Antigonish also experienced significant flooding; waters there approached the top of parking meters. Impacted crops in the region included cereal grain, corn, and tobacco, whose inundated fields resembled vast lakes. 

Transport suffered severely: several main roads, including part of the Trans-Canada Highway and Nova Scotia Highway 102, in northeastern Nova Scotia received flood damage and were temporarily blocked off. Additionally, the rising waters washed out several bridges in the region and swept away automobiles. Railways were covered by water, forcing trains to suspend their operation. Drinking water in Dartmouth was contaminated due to excessive runoff into Lake Antigonish, and a trailer park in Antigonish flooded, prompting 600 residents to evacuate. Overall monetary damage from Beth is estimated at between $3.5 million and $5.1 million USD. One person was indirectly killed by the hurricane in a traffic accident induced by heavy rain.



</doc>
<doc id="29487921" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29487921" title="U.S. Route 40 Alternate (Hagerstown–Frederick, Maryland)">
U.S. Route 40 Alternate (Hagerstown–Frederick, Maryland)

U.S. Route 40 Alternate (US 40 Alternate) is an alternate route of US 40 in the U.S. state of Maryland. The highway runs from Potomac Street in Hagerstown east to US 40 in Frederick. US 40 Alternate parallels US 40 and much of Interstate 70 (I-70) to the south through eastern Washington County and western Frederick County. The alternate route connects Hagerstown and Frederick with Funkstown, Boonsboro, Middletown, and Braddock Heights. US 40 Alternate crosses two major north–south components of the Blue Ridge Mountains that separate the Great Appalachian Valley and the Piedmont: South Mountain between Boonsboro and Middletown and Catoctin Mountain, which is locally known as Braddock Mountain, at Braddock Heights.

US 40 Alternate is the old alignment of US 40. The highway's path was blazed in the mid-18th century to connect the Hagerstown Valley and Shenandoah Valley with eastern Pennsylvania and central Maryland. In the early 19th century, US 40 Alternate's path was improved as part of a series of turnpikes to connect Baltimore with the eastern terminus of the National Road in Cumberland. The highway was improved as one of the original state roads in the early 1910s and designated US 40 in the late 1920s. Construction on a relocated US 40 between Hagerstown and Frederick with improved crossings of South Mountain and Braddock Mountain began in the mid-1930s; the new highway was completed in the late 1940s. US 40 Alternate was assigned to the old route of US 40 in the early 1950s.

US 40 Alternate is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial from Edgewood Drive in Funkstown to its underpass of I-70 south of Funkstown and from Old Hagerstown Road near Middletown to US 40 in Frederick.

US 40 Alternate begins as Baltimore Street at its intersection with one-way southbound Potomac Street within the Hagerstown Historic District on the southern edge of downtown Hagerstown. Baltimore Street, which continues west as a city street toward the Hagerstown City Park, runs east–west two blocks south of US 40, which comprises a one-way pair of Washington Street eastbound and Franklin Street westbound. After heading east for two blocks, during which US 40 Alternate intersects one-way northbound Locust Street, the municipally-maintained alternate route turns southeast onto Frederick Street at a five-way junction that also includes north–south Mulberry Street. US 40 Alternate intersects Memorial Boulevard, which heads east past Municipal Stadium, home of the minor league baseball Hagerstown Suns. The highway meets a CSX rail spur at grade while passing through an industrial area that extends to the southern city limits of Hagerstown at Kenly Avenue.
US 40 Alternate continues southeast as a state-maintained highway that passes the historic home Garden Hill and crosses Antietam Creek into Funkstown, where the highway's name changes to Westside Avenue. Within the Funkstown Historic District, the alternate route turns east onto Baltimore Street, then southeast onto Frederick Street. At the southern town limits of Funkstown, US 40 Alternate becomes Boonsboro Pike, which passes through farmland as it parallels Antietam Creek. The highway passes under I-70 (Eisenhower Memorial Highway) with no access and intersects Poffenberger Road, which leads west to the historic home Valentia. The highway veers away from Antietam Creek just past the historic Cool Hollow House. It then passes through the hamlet of Benevola and traverses Landis Spring Branch and Beaver Creek on its way to Boonsboro.

US 40 Alternate enters the town of Boonsboro and its name changes to Main Street at its intersection with Maryland Route 68 (MD 68) (Lappans Road). The highway meets the south end of MD 66 (Maple Avenue) next to the Bowman House and the east end of MD 34 (Potomac Street) in the center of town. US 40 Alternate leaves the town of Boonsboro after its intersection with MD 67 (Rohrersville Road). The alternate route continues southeast as Boonsboro Pike and starts to ascend South Mountain. At the summit, known as Turner's Gap, US 40 Alternate intersects Washington Monument Road, which leads north to Washington Monument State Park, and passes the Dahlgren Chapel and the Old South Mountain Inn.

US 40 Alternate's name changes to Old National Pike as it intersects the Appalachian Trail at the Washington–Frederick county line and begins its curvaceous descent of South Mountain into the Middletown Valley. In the western part of the valley, the highway passes the Henry Shoemaker Farmhouse and intersects Mount Tabor Road, which parallels South Mountain north past the historic Daniel Sheffer Farm and Routzahn-Miller Farmstead. In Spoolsville, US 40 Alternate crosses Catoctin Creek and meets Old Hagerstown Road, which passes the Bowlus Mill House. The alternate route's name becomes Main Street as it heads east through Middletown. US 40 Alternate passes the Stonebraker and Harbaugh-Shafer Building and intersects MD 17 (Church Street) within the Middletown Historic District. The highway passes through the Airview Historic District before leaving the town limits.

East of Middletown, US 40 Alternate passes through a suburban area then begins to ascend Braddock Mountain. The highway gains a climbing lane eastbound to the top of the mountain, which contains the community of Braddock Heights. On the descent of Braddock Mountain, US 40 Alternate expands to a four-lane road, with one lane eastbound, two lanes westbound, and a center turn lane. At the base of the mountain, the alternate route temporarily expands to a four-lane divided highway through its half-diamond interchange with I-70, which has ramps to and from the direction of Frederick. East of I-70, US 40 Alternate reduces to two lanes and passes the Highland Lodge. The alternate route reaches its eastern terminus at a partial intersection with US 40 (Patrick Street) at the western edge of Frederick and the Frederick Golden Mile, a heavily commercialized area east to US 15 (Frederick Freeway). There is no direct access from eastbound US 40 Alternate to westbound US 40 or from eastbound US 40 to the westbound alternate route; those movements are made by using Old Camp Road.

The portion of US 40 Alternate between Frederick and Boonsboro roughly follows the Monocacy Road, a pack-horse trail blazed by settlers from Pennsylvania around 1730. The trail connected Philadelphia, Lancaster, and Hanover with Winchester, Virginia by way of what is now Taneytown, Frederick, Boonsboro, and Williamsport. The portion of the Monocacy Road from Frederick to Williamsport was used by the Braddock Expedition on its way from Alexandria to Cumberland to commence its ill-fated assault on Fort Duquesne. Following the founding of Hagerstown in 1762, a road was laid out north from Boonsboro to connect the new town with the eastern part of the colony. While the Monocacy Road as a whole was disused by 1794, the portion followed by US 40 Alternate remained an important connection between Baltimore and Western Maryland.

The Baltimore and Fredericktown Turnpike Company was chartered in 1805 to build a road along the path from Baltimore to Boonsboro. This turnpike was the first step in connecting Baltimore with Cumberland, the eastern terminus of the just-commenced National Road. By 1808, the turnpike had been completed west from Baltimore and another was under construction. The Baltimore and Fredericktown Turnpike was completed in 1812. That same year, keen for an improved road to fully extend between Baltimore and Cumberland, the Maryland General Assembly conscripted the state's banks to fund turnpike companies to complete the gap between Boonsboro and Cumberland with the benefit of having their charters extended from 1816 to 1835. The banks opposed this measure but reluctantly bankrolled the construction of a road from Conocheague Creek to Cumberland between 1816 and 1818 and from Hagerstown to Conococheague Creek in 1818 and 1819. The Maryland General Assembly used their powers again in 1821, agreeing to extend the banks' charters to 1845 if they would fund a turnpike in the gap between Boonsboro and Hagerstown. When the National Turnpike was completed in 1823, it became the first macadam road constructed in the United States. The Baltimore and Fredericktown and National turnpikes remained in operation through 1909.

In 1909, the nascent Maryland State Highway Administration (MDSRC) designated the road between Frederick and Hagerstown for improvement as one of the original state roads. The commission's first task was to acquire the necessary right-of-way by purchasing the two turnpikes in 1911. MDSRC reconstructed the road between Frederick and Hagerstown with a wide macadam surface from Frederick to Middletown and from South Mountain to Boonsboro in 1913. The state road was built from Middletown to South Mountain and from Boonsboro to Hagerstown in 1914. The portion of the highway within Boonsboro was paved in 1915. The last portion of the Frederick–Hagerstown state road to be constructed was within Funkstown, where the highway was surfaced with concrete by 1919. The highway was designated part of US 40 in 1927.

Around 1926, US 40 received its first improvement when concrete shoulders were added to expand the roadway from to in width. By 1934, MDSRC recommended widening the highway to from west of Frederick to east of Hagerstown. Ultimately, the commission decided to construct a new highway between the two cities that would shorten the distance by and bypass the sharp curves and limited sight distances of the old road. Grading and drainage work on the new highway began in 1936 and was completed in 1938 for the first roadway of what would ultimately become a divided highway. The first wide concrete roadway was constructed from downtown Hagerstown southeast to near Beaver Creek Road in 1938. Surfacing of the remainder of the relocated National Pike was delayed by World War II; construction resumed in 1946 and the new highway opened in 1948.

The relocated National Pike was originally designated US 40 Alternate; the old and new roads switched to their present designations in 1952. Despite the construction of a new highway, improvements continued on the original road. Trolley tracks of the Hagerstown and Frederick Railway were removed from the highway in Funkstown and the street was resurfaced in 1940. Hill climbing lanes were added for a length of on both sides of Braddock Mountain and South Mountain around 1942. The highway between Funkstown and Boonsboro had curves modified and was widened and resurfaced in 1949. US 40 Alternate from US 40 in Frederick west to Braddock Mountain underwent the same type of work in 1951 and 1952.


</doc>
<doc id="29555091" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29555091" title="Special Education (Glee)">
Special Education (Glee)

"Special Education" is the ninth episode of the second season of the American musical television series "Glee", and the thirty-first episode overall. It was written by series creator Brad Falchuk, directed by Paris Barclay, and aired on Fox in the United States on November 30, 2010. In "Special Education", the McKinley High School glee club New Directions competes in the Sectionals round of show choir competition against the Hipsters and the Dalton Academy Warblers, while dealing with internal feuding that threatens to rip the club apart.

The episode shows the former member of New Directions, Kurt Hummel (Chris Colfer), at his new school Dalton Academy, where he joins the rival Warblers. With his departure, New Directions must find a new twelfth member to remain eligible for the competition. Club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) decides to feature overlooked performers from the group for Sectionals, to the consternation of the usual lead singers, Rachel Berry (Lea Michele) and Finn Hudson (Cory Monteith). The episode received a wide range of reviews, with a small majority commenting favorably; some viewed it as a lesser version of the first season's Sectionals episode. By contrast, the six songs covered during the show received generally favorable reviews, with the most praise going to "Dog Days Are Over" and "Valerie" as performed by New Directions, and "Hey, Soul Sister" as sung by the Warblers.

Upon its initial airing, this episode was viewed by 11.68 million American viewers and garnered a 4.6/13 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, up significantly from the previous episode, "Furt".

The show choir Sectionals competition is imminent, and the New Directions glee club is one below the required minimum of twelve members now that Kurt Hummel (Chris Colfer) has enrolled at Dalton Academy, home of their Sectionals' rivals the Warblers. At club director Will Schuester's (Matthew Morrison) behest, Puck (Mark Salling) attempts to recruit from his football teammates, but they lock him in a port-a-potty. He is rescued the next day by AV Club president and wrestler Lauren Zizes (Ashley Fink), and she agrees to join New Directions, though he has to bribe her first.

Will invites school guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays) to accompany him to Sectionals. She accepts, and suggests he consider featuring other club members instead of his usual choices, co-captains Finn Hudson (Cory Monteith) and Rachel Berry (Lea Michele). Will gives the lead vocals for one song to duets competition winners Quinn Fabray (Dianna Agron) and Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet), which upsets Rachel and Finn, while Brittany Pierce (Heather Morris) and Mike Chang (Harry Shum Jr.) are given lead dancing roles on another number. When Brittany admits she is nervous about performing, her boyfriend Artie Abrams (Kevin McHale) gives her a "magic comb" to boost her confidence. She and Mike commence time-consuming rehearsals for their dance routine, and Mike's girlfriend Tina Cohen-Chang (Jenna Ushkowitz) suspects that they are having an affair; when Artie confronts Brittany about it, she confesses that she has been avoiding him because she lost his comb. Artie admits that the comb was never magical, and tells Brittany that she is magic.

Kurt attends his first meeting with the Dalton Academy Warblers. He learns that the setlist for Sectionals is selected by a council of upperclassmen, and is offered a chance to audition for a solo at Sectionals. He visits Rachel for advice, and at her recommendation sings "Don't Cry for Me Argentina" from the musical "Evita". Kurt is not given a solo, and his friend Blaine (Darren Criss) suggests that he try to fit in rather than stand out.

Santana (Naya Rivera) tells Rachel that she and Finn had sex the previous spring, and Rachel is furious that Finn's claim to be a virgin was a lie. Emma counsels them, and then realizes that she should not attend Sectionals with Will since her boyfriend Carl (John Stamos) would be hurt; she and Carl fly to Las Vegas, Nevada for the weekend.

At sectionals, the Hipsters and the Warblers perform first, the latter singing Train's "Hey, Soul Sister" with Blaine on lead. Despite much backstage drama, the New Directions set goes smoothly, with Quinn and Sam performing "(I've Had) The Time of My Life" and Santana singing lead on Amy Winehouse's cover of The Zutons' "Valerie"; Brittany and Mike receive several bursts of applause for their dancing. New Directions and the Warblers tie for first place, which means that both groups will advance to the Regionals competition.

Emma tells Will that she married Carl in Las Vegas, and despite his shock, Will says he is happy for her. Finn breaks up with Rachel after she confesses that she made out with Puck to get back at him over Santana. New Directions performs Florence and the Machine's "Dog Days Are Over" to celebrate the club's competition survival, with Tina and Mercedes (Amber Riley) singing lead.

The competitors for Sectionals were announced three episodes prior in "Never Been Kissed": the a cappella Warblers from Dalton Academy, an all-male institution in Westerville—they were seen in that episode performing the song "Teenage Dream"—and the Hipsters from the Warren Township continuing education program, which consists of seniors working toward earning General Educational Development diplomas. While Criss sings lead on the Warblers song, the background vocals are sung by the Tufts Beelzebubs, a male a cappella group from Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts, not the actors playing the Warblers on screen. The Beelzebubs had not yet met Criss at the time the episode aired. The scenes of the Warblers performance of "Hey, Soul Sister" were filmed in a theater over the course of two fifteen-hour days, according to Chris Mann, one of the actors: from the front on the first day, and from the back on the second.

Cheyenne Jackson as Dustin Goolsby and John Stamos as Carl Howell were originally supposed to have scenes in this episode—the Fox publicity included a photograph of a scene between Dustin and Will—but Jackson's was cut entirely, and only a brief shot of Stamos embracing Mays as Emma was retained in the final version. Recurring characters in this episode include glee club members Mike Chang (Shum) and Sam Evans (Overstreet), school bullies Dave Karofsky (Max Adler) and Azimio (James Earl), Stamos as Howell, and Criss as Blaine Anderson, lead singer of the Warblers. Vicki Woodlee, mother of "Glee" choreographer Zach Woodlee, plays one of the Hipsters; as the youngest of the performers at 60, she had to wear a great deal of makeup to emulate an older person's appearance, including "pounds of powder". Zach Woodlee instructed those cast as Hipsters, the oldest of whom was 83, to limit their dance movements to seem more realistic. Scenes were filmed over the course of four days. Actress and former "American Bandstand" member Bunny Gibson plays another group member. Co-stars include Fink, who appears as new glee club member Lauren Zizes, Telly Leung and Titus Makin, Jr., who return as Warblers Wes and David, respectively, and Riker Lynch, Eddy Martin and Curt Mega, who debut as Warblers Jeff, Thad and Nick, respectively.

"Special Education" features cover versions of six songs: "Don't Cry for Me Argentina" from the musical "Evita", Mike + The Mechanics' "The Living Years", Train's "Hey, Soul Sister", "(I've Had) The Time of My Life" from the film "Dirty Dancing", "Valerie" by The Zutons (although specifically a cover of the version by Mark Ronson featuring Amy Winehouse), and Florence and the Machine's "Dog Days Are Over". Each song was released as a single, available for digital download, with two separate versions of "Don't Cry for Me Argentina" released—one by Chris Colfer (Kurt) and the other by Lea Michele (Rachel). "Valerie" and "(I've Had) The Time of My Life" are included on the fifth soundtrack album "", released on November 26, 2010, and "Hey, Soul Sister" was included on the seventh soundtrack album, "", released on April 19, 2011.

"Special Education" was first broadcast on November 30, 2010 in the United States on Fox. It received a 4.6/13 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, and attracted over 11.68 million American viewers during its initial airing, and thus won its time slot despite airing simultaneously with network specials, including "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer" on CBS, "Christmas In Rockefeller Center" on NBC, "Dr. Seuss' How the Grinch Stole Christmas" and "Shrek the Halls" on ABC, and CW's usual offering, "One Tree Hill". The total viewership and ratings for this episode were up significantly from those of the previous episode, "Furt", which was watched by 10.41 million American viewers and acquired a 4.0/12 rating/share in the 18–49 demographic upon first airing on television on November 23, 2010.

In Canada, 2.32 million viewers watched the episode, ranking second for the week. In the UK, the episode was watched by 2.602 million viewers (2.218 million on E4, and 384,000 on E4+1), which made it the most-watched show on cable for the week.

"Special Education" received mixed reviews from television critics. The most enthusiastic reviewers were from "The Atlantic", where both Kevin Fallon and Patrick Burns declared it the "best episode of "Glee" all season", and Meghan Brown suggested that the show should "just do competition episodes from now on". Aly Semigran of "MTV" was similarly laudatory, and said that the show was "back in top form"; she added that the episode "felt very reminiscent of the magic the first season provided".

Others were more tempered in their praise. James Poniewozik of "Time" said the episode was "grounded" and "solid-if-not-spectacular", and highlighted how "Glee" "has developed into a broad ensemble, where any of several characters is capable of taking the spotlight, even an originally comic-relief character like Brittany." Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" and the "Houston Chronicle" Bobby Hankinson both liked the episode—VanDerWerff gave it a "B+"—but they, like Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" who was less complimentary, were disappointed that it failed to measure up to the last time New Directions competed in Sectionals. VanDerWerff wrote, "When the show […] remains, at some level, a show about a bunch of kids who just love to sing and dance and maybe have wacky adventures on the side, it remains fundamentally strong, as it does tonight." He also stated, "The fact that the Warblers and New Directions tied, while probably necessary for whatever reason, is ridiculously anticlimactic and keeps this episode from an A- pretty much singlehandedly."

Amy Reiter of the "Los Angeles Times" was disappointed with almost everything, and said the episode "felt more like a long, slow letdown after a season of gleeful highs". She added, "New Directions' sectionals performance wasn't a total fumble, but it wasn't the touchdown you might've hoped for either", and of the long-awaited opportunity to see other members featured in competition: "the anticipated shining moment turned out to be so dull." Reiter was one of a very few critics to note the absence of cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester in the episode, and only when she lamented the "relative lack of humor". Futterman merely remarked on Sue's non-appearance in passing; she came to the conclusion that "we got a spazzy, unfocused hour at the expense of emotional investment", and though Anthony Benigno of the "Daily News" complimented the "solid acting", he also wrote that "this is the first time the show's started to feel genuinely boring as opposed to, you know, gleeful." He made a general complaint as well: "This show is starting to suffer in a big way from making the music secondary to the plot." Robert Canning of "IGN" gave the episode a 7.5 out of 10 rating. He said that the show "tried to make it all work, and while the hour was enjoyable enough, each storyline felt just a little bit shy of going from good to great."

A few reviewers remarked on how the Hipsters seemed to be a reflection of the New Directions crew in fifty years, with Futterman getting into specifics: "We see future Rachel start the number with a cane and future Mercedes break through to finish the song off with a riff, and it's hard not to be endeared to them." Poniewozik wrote that Rachel's "silent reminder to Kurt to smile on stage was a perfect, sweet little moment", a sentiment shared by Tim Stack of "Entertainment Weekly". Poniewozik also noted that "Lea Michele had some of her strongest non-singing moments of the season by showing not just how Rachel dealt with her problems with Finn but with being on the periphery of the group." The storyline that featured the disintegration of the Rachel–Finn relationship, when commented on at all, was viewed unfavorably; VanDerWerff called it a "stupid twist".

Brown praised the addition of Fink as Lauren to New Directions, and declared, "I hope she's on the team for keeps", while Poniewozik was pleased that "the episode used Lauren for comedy without simply making her the butt of jokes". Brown also wrote, "Kurt's arc was subtler this week, and thereby about 50 times more interesting. I […] am impressed that "Glee" handling his acclimation to Dalton so truthfully." Canning was similarly impressed, and called Kurt at Dalton "the most solid story" of the episode. There was little approval among reviewers for the "canary in a cage" metaphor in the scene between Kurt and Blaine at the end of the episode, with Kurt the "canary" in his new Dalton cage; Hankinson characterized it as "super ham-fisted", and others were nearly as harsh.

The musical performances in this episode were mostly praised by critics, though there was little said about the quality of the abbreviated performance by the Hipsters in competition. There was near-universal approval for the first song heard, "Don't Cry For Me Argentina", which Stack called "totally beautiful" and gave an "A-"; he, like Burns, who said it was "fantastic", loved having "Rachel and Kurt get a chance to sing together". Jen Harper of "BuddyTV" echoed Kurt's words in the episode; she said "Rachel really is as talented as she is irritating", but wished she "didn't always look like she's crying while she's singing", and added that she was "really digging Kurt in a lower register". Futterman noted that Rachel, as is usual with her "power ballads", "uses the time to grapple with the latest obstacle to her future stardom, while we see Kurt deliver a clear, restrained take. Benigno called Michele's voice "astounding", and added that her solo alternated "with Kurt's audition with the Warblers, which is predictably outstanding", and gave the song a "B+". Even those who disliked the song or the composer were won over by the performance: Berk gave it three stars out of five, and Burns thought it was "fantastic"; both liked the song's tag-team presentation.

The performance of Train's "Hey, Soul Sister" by the Dalton Academy Warblers received even more praise than "Don't Cry For Me Argentina". Benigno called it flawless, and gave it an "A++", and Hanh Nguyen of "Zap2it" gave it her "top prize" of the night. Berk gave it four stars out of five, Burns said "the Warblers sounded fantastic and fun", and Harper said she loved it, and that, like the audience on the show, she "would have given it" a "standing ovation". Stack said he "sorta" hated the song "from sheer overexposure", but "Darren Criss sold it for me with his choreography and acting", and gave it a "B+". Pat Monahan, the lead singer of Train, said: "Loved it! I thought they did an amazing job."

The praise was more tepid for Sam and Quinn's "(I've Had) the Time of My Life". Benigno called it "solid", but added "overkill knocks it down to a solid B." Both Futterman and Stack said the number "fell a little flat", though Stack said the duo had "great physical chemistry". Fallon characterized it as an "adorable duet". Berk gave it five stars of five, his best grade for the episode, and called it "oozy, curdling perfection", while Reiter was the least impressed, and wrote that their "voices (and romantic interplay) seemed wan and thin."

The New Directions closing number at Sectionals, "Valerie", received the most commentary, with Santana's solo given enthusiastic praise, though Brittany and Mike's dancing was also lauded. Hankinson, who had tepidly called songs "nice" up to this point, shifted gears and said, "Then Santana burns the roof down with a rendition of Amy Winehouse's 'Valerie'. It was awesome." Raymund Flandez of "The Wall Street Journal" echoed that fervor: "But then Santana came on and killed. With an on-spot rendition of Mark Ronson/Amy Winehouse's 'Valerie,' and wearing a Snooki bun, Santana was electrifying behind the mic, in an energizing display that revved up the audience", and added, "Brittany and Mike's pas de deux rocked". Benigno opined that "Brittany and Mike Chang handle the moves (extraordinarily well), but the vocals here are what steal it. Naya Rivera (Santana) is completely outstanding on lead vocals, and I can't understand why she hasn't gotten a solo before this"; he gave it an "A". Stack was slightly less generous with an "A-", and wrote that it was a "great song choice for Santana"; he gave "bonus points for the phenomenal Mike/Brittany choreography", while Harper said that their dancing "totally made the song". Nguyen liked the dancing, but she was critical of how the song sounded, as she felt "it lacked something and didn't really feel worthy of the standing O", while Futterman said "Santana's sassy vocals are a perfect echo of Winehouse's, but the rest of the song feels a bit like a circus". Reiter felt the entire song "seemed kind of tacked on", both the dancing and Santana's solo.

"Dog Days Are Over" was the favorite song of several reviewers, including Hankinson, who said "it was the exact brand of high-energy jubilation that I love the most." Harper was also enthusiastic: "This performance for me represents what I like about New Directions—and why Kurt needs to come back asap. Everyone got to do their own individual thing, yet they still work really well as a group. I give it best song of the night." In Semigran's view, "From the cute choreographed claps to the unconventional (but oddly fitting) choice to have Tina and Mercedes sing the tune, I wish they'd save this one for regionals. It was a winner", while VanDerWerff wrote, " 'Dog Days Are Over' is right in this show's wheelhouse, so, naturally, it hits the song out of the park." Benigno gave the song a "B+", and Berk awarded three stars out of five, while Stack gave it an "A", and said series creator Ryan Murphy "chose the perfect gals to pull off this cover."

Five of the seven cover versions released as singles debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100, and appeared on other musical charts. The show's rendition of "Dog Days Are Over" debuted at number twenty-two on both the Hot 100 and Canadian Hot 100, and pushed the original version of the song by Florence and the Machine ahead of it to number twenty-one on the Hot 100, up from number fifty-eight in the previous week. The other songs on the Hot 100 were "Hey, Soul Sister" at number twenty-nine, which also made number thirty-two on the Canadian Hot 100; "(I've Had) The Time of My Life" at number thirty-eight, which also made number thirty-nine on the Canadian Hot 100; "Valerie" at number fifty-four, which also made number seventy on the Canadian Hot 100; and "Don't Cry for Me Argentina" in the Lea Michele version, at number ninety-seven.



</doc>
<doc id="29682693" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29682693" title="Action of 28 January 1945">
Action of 28 January 1945

The Action of 28 January 1945 was an inconclusive naval battle of the Second World War fought between two British Royal Navy light cruisers and three "Kriegsmarine" (German navy) destroyers near Bergen, Norway. The battle was the last of many actions between British and German warships off Norway during the war and the second-to-last surface engagement to be fought by the "Kriegsmarine". It resulted in heavy damage to one of the German destroyers and light damage to another destroyer and both British cruisers.

Shortly after midnight on the night of 27/28 January, as the three destroyers of the German 4th Destroyer Flotilla were sailing from northern Norway to the Baltic Sea, they were intercepted by the British cruisers and . The destroyers "Z31" and "Z34" were damaged by gunfire but the German flotilla outran the slower British ships and escaped. The German warships eventually reached the Baltic, though "Z31" was delayed until repairs were completed in Norway.

The "Kriegsmarine"s 4th Destroyer Flotilla comprised the "Narvik"-class destroyers "Z31", "Z34", and "Z38". By January 1945, these ships had been stationed in northern Norwegian waters for three and a half years, but had only occasionally put to sea during 1944. Due to Germany's deteriorating position, the flotilla was directed in January to leave Norwegian waters and return to the Baltic. The three destroyers departed Tromsø on the 25th of the month.

The Royal Navy's Home Fleet conducted a number of attacks on German shipping travelling off the coast of Norway during January 1945. These included successful attacks by motor torpedo boats on three escorted ships between 6 and 8 January and the interception of a convoy by the heavy cruiser and light cruiser near Egersund on the night of 11/12 January. On 27 January, the escort carriers , and departed the Home Fleet's main base at Scapa Flow to conduct a raid against shipping near Vaago which was designated Operation Winded. The carriers were escorted by the heavy cruiser and six destroyers.

The British were alerted to the 4th Destroyer Flotilla's movement by Ultra signals intelligence. The commander of the Home Fleet, Admiral Henry Moore, was informed that the destroyers had sailed on 27 January, shortly after the three carriers and their escort had put to sea. He believed that the German ships were likely to use a route between the coastal islands and the shore, as was common for the "Kriegsmarine". If this route was used, it would be preferable for strike aircraft of No. 18 Group RAF to attack the destroyers as Norway's inshore waters were protected by naval mines and coastal batteries. Alternatively, the German ships could make a high-speed night passage outside of the coastal islands. In case an offshore route was used, Moore ordered Vice Admiral Frederick Dalrymple-Hamilton, the commander of the 10th Cruiser Squadron, to sail with the cruisers "Diadem" and "Mauritius" and patrol off Bergen. The Home Fleet did not have any destroyers available to accompany Dalrymple-Hamilton's force, though Moore considered but decided against cancelling the carrier operation in order to make some of these ships available.

Contrary to British expectations, the commander of the 4th Destroyer Flotilla, Captain H.F. von Wangenheim, chose to take the faster route outside of the coastal islands. On the evening of 27 January, the destroyers were spotted and attacked by British aircraft whilst west of Sognefjord, but continued their voyage. Contact was made between the two naval forces at 00:48 am on 28 January. At this time, the 4th Destroyer Flotilla was proceeding south and was located about southwest of the Utvær lighthouse and northwest of Bergen. The sea was calm and visibility was excellent due to a full moon. The British and German forces spotted each another simultaneously; at the time the cruisers were about west of the 4th Destroyer Flotilla. Upon sighting the destroyers, the British ships fired star shells to illuminate the area and turned to the south on a course parallel to that of the German ships.

"Z31" suffered extensive damage early in the battle. She was struck by seven shells, which caused her to catch fire, damaged the hydrophone compartment and torpedo transmitting stations and destroyed her forward gun turret. "Z31"s speed was not affected, but casualties were heavy, with 55 sailors killed and another 24 wounded. After "Z31" was damaged, Commander Karl Hetz on board "Z34" assumed command of the 4th Destroyer Flotilla. "Z34" made two torpedo attacks on the British cruisers in an attempt to force them to change course, but this was not successful. "Z38" also tried to launch torpedoes, but had to break off this attack when her funnel caught fire and a boiler tube burst. "Z34" suffered a hit on her waterline during this period.

After "Z34" was damaged, Hetz decided to turn to the north and attempt to outrun the British cruisers. "Z34" fired a third salvo of torpedoes as the flotilla made this turn, again without result, and the three ships laid smoke screens in an attempt to conceal their position. The two cruisers also turned north to chase the German ships. This led to a running battle in which "Mauritius" sustained a hit on her mess deck that did not cause any casualties and "Diadem" was struck on her boat deck by a shell six minutes later that killed one man and wounded three. The German destroyers were capable of making while "Diadem" had a maximum speed of and "Mauritius" . As a result, the German vessels gradually pulled ahead and came under the protection of shore batteries at about 2:00 am. The British ships broke off the pursuit and returned to Scapa Flow after these batteries fired on them.

Early in the morning of 28 January, the 4th Destroyer Flotilla resumed its journey south and put into Bergen. "Z31" entered one of the town's docks to be repaired while "Z34" and "Z38" departed on the evening of 28 January. The two ships were attacked from the air the next day, but did not suffer any damage and sheltered in a fjord south of Stavanger during daylight hours. They put to sea again on the evening of 29 January and eventually reached Kiel in Germany on 1 February.

At Bergen, "Z31" received initial repairs, which included removing the wreckage of her forward turret. She departed the town on 8 February bound for Horten. After arriving safely in this port she received further repairs and had her anti-aircraft armament upgraded. Her forward turret was not replaced, but a gun was mounted instead; this was intended to be a temporary measure but remained in place for the remainder of her career. After these repairs were completed, "Z31" eventually reached Gotenhafen on 15 March. The last German destroyer remaining in northern Norwegian waters, "Z33", sailed for Germany on 5 February 1945 but ran aground while en route and suffered further damage in the Allied "Black Friday" air raid on the ninth of the month. Following repairs, she arrived at Swinemünde on 2 April.

Both the British and German navies were dissatisfied with the results of the battle on 28 January. The British were disappointed with the action's inconclusive result, and Admiral Moore regretted his decision to not cancel the escort carrier operation so that destroyers could be attached to the cruiser force. However, historians have judged that the combination of excellent visibility on the night of 27/28 January and the superior speed of the German destroyers meant that the British had no ability to force a result. In a post-war assessment, First Sea Lord Admiral Andrew Cunningham endorsed the tactics Dalrymple-Hamilton used during the engagement, but stated that the size of the British force was "inadequate". The "Kriegsmarine" was also unsatisfied with the conduct of the battle, with German naval authorities believing that the destroyers should have taken shelter in coastal waters after they were sighted by Allied aircraft on the evening of 27 January.

The action of 28 January was the final battle between British and German warships in Norwegian waters during World War II. It was also the second last surface action fought by the "Kriegsmarine", with its final engagement taking place on 18 March 1945 when a force of two torpedo boats and a destroyer was defeated by two British destroyers in the Battle of the Ligurian Sea. By this time, most of the "Kriegsmarine"s remaining warships were stationed in the Baltic Sea where they supported German military operations and the evacuation of civilians until the end of the war in May.



</doc>
<doc id="29799820" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29799820" title="No. 76 Wing RAAF">
No. 76 Wing RAAF

No. 76 Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) wing that operated during World War II. Initially based in Far North Queensland, its headquarters transferred to Darwin, Northern Territory, in September 1944 to take control of three PBY Catalina units: Nos. 20, 42, and 43 Squadrons. The prime task of these squadrons was minelaying in the South West Pacific theatre, and they conducted these operations as far afield as Java, Borneo, the Philippines, and China. As well as minelaying, No. 76 Wing's Catalinas flew bombing, patrol, and transport missions, and dropped millions of propaganda leaflets in the closing months of the war. The wing headquarters disbanded in November 1945.

No. 76 Wing headquarters was established at Townsville, Queensland, on 3 January 1944, and moved to Cairns mid-month. Led by Wing Commander Reginald Burrage, it transferred to Darwin, Northern Territory, in September to coordinate and control minelaying operations in the North-Western Area by Nos. 20, 42, and 43 Squadrons. Each of the squadrons was equipped with PBY Catalina flying boats, nicknamed "Black Cats"; No. 20 had been based in Cairns with No. 76 Wing headquarters, No. 42 had just been formed at Darwin in August, while No. 43 had been operating out of Darwin since March. Minelaying missions carried out by the RAAF over the past year had been credited with successfully disrupting enemy shipping for a much smaller outlay of operating hours than conventional bombing, and were thus considered profitable enough to dedicate a wing with three squadrons to furthering the work. Although the Catalinas were relatively slow and susceptible to enemy fighter attack, their loss rate was no more than one per 95 sorties. In addition to its flying squadrons, the wing controlled No. 2 Flying Boat Maintenance Unit, No. 11 Air Sea Rescue Flight, and No. 3 Mobile Torpedo Unit. All units were located in Darwin except No. 42 Squadron, which was based at Melville Bay.
The Catalina squadrons were expected to carry out a total of 100 missions per month from Darwin. In their first three weeks of operation from 13 September 1944 they accomplished 98, mining targets in Celebes, Java, and Surabaya. In October, they were able to use the recently liberated island of Morotai as a forward base for operations against Balikpapan and Tarakan. On 14 December, No. 43 Squadron, augmented by Catalinas from No. 11 Squadron based at Rathmines, New South Wales, mined Manila Bay to keep Japanese shipping "bottled up", thus supporting the Allied landing at Mindoro taking place the next day. Flying from Leyte, the 24 Catalinas successfully dropped 60 mines in the heavily defended target area for the loss of one of their number, and returned to base at the limit of their fuel reserves.

In the early part of 1945, monsoonal weather in Darwin reduced the number of missions flown by No. 76 Wing. On the night of 5/6 April, three Catalinas kept watch on the Japanese cruiser , which was subsequently struck by Allied bombers and sunk by submarines. During the month, the Catalinas mined Hong Kong harbour, as well as targets on the coast of mainland China, flying up to sixteen hours per mission. On 26 May, they undertook the RAAF's most northerly operation during the Pacific War, against Wenchow. The same month, Group Captain Stuart Campbell, former leader of No. 42 Squadron, took over command of the wing. In May–June, reinforced by a detachment from No. 11 Squadron, No. 76 Wing flew mining and bombing missions in support of the forthcoming Operation Oboe Six, the Battle of North Borneo, and Oboe Two, the Battle of Balikpapan. Before Oboe Six, while some of the Catalinas concentrated on mining the approaches to Surabaya harbour, others bombed airfields in Java and Celebes in concert with RAAF B-24 Liberators. The Catalinas and Liberators combined again in the lead-up to Oboe Two to raid any Japanese airfields that could threaten Balikpapan, in some cases bombing the same target around the clock, the Catalinas by night and Liberators by day.
With the Allies' decision to confine RAAF minelaying operations to areas south of China from June onwards, the number of worthwhile targets for the Catalinas was reduced. Sorties for the month were down to 58, a number of which were carried out from Labuan against Banka Strait. The wing's last minelaying missions of the war took place in July, again in the Banka Strait. In the final months before the Japanese surrender, the Catalinas also delivered propaganda leaflets around the Dutch East Indies and South China Sea, dropping over a million in June alone. No. 76 Wing and its squadrons remained at Darwin in the immediate aftermath of the war, conducting routine patrols, transporting supplies and medicine to prisoners-of-war in the South West Pacific, and assisting in the repatriation of Australian personnel. In November 1945, under a reorganisation of RAAF units at Darwin, the wing headquarters was given orders to disband. It became non-operational on 16 November and was officially dissolved five days later. No. 42 Squadron disbanded the same month, while Nos. 20 and 43 Squadrons transferred to Rathmines, where they disbanded in 1946.



</doc>
<doc id="29837028" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29837028" title="Sale el Sol (song)">
Sale el Sol (song)

"Sale el Sol" (English: "The Sun Comes Out") is a song recorded by Colombian singer-songwriter Shakira for her ninth studio album of the same name. The song was written and produced by the singer and her frequent collaborator Luis Fernando Ochoa and belongs to the "very rock and roll" direction of the album. Musically, "Sale el Sol" is a folk and Latin music-influenced alternative rock track. Its lyrics encourage one to be optimistic during difficult times. Epic Records released "Sale el Sol" as the second single from the album on 4 January 2011.

Critical reception towards the song was positive, with many critics praising its composition and placement as the opening track of the album. Although it appeared on only a few record charts, "Sale el Sol" performed well in Mexico and Spain, peaking at numbers one and eight on the Monitor Latino and Spanish Singles Chart, respectively. It was certified gold in both the countries. In the United States, it reached number ten on the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart. 

An accompanying music video for "Sale el Sol" was directed by Jaume de Laiguana, and features Shakira and her band performing the song in a snow-decked forest. Spanish Cava wine producer Freixenet used the video as their Christmas season commercial. "Sale el Sol" was also included on the set list of The Sun Comes Out World Tour in 2010 and 2011. At the Rock in Rio concert show in May 2010, Shakira sang the song as a tribute to Argentine singer-songwriter Gustavo Cerati, who had fallen into a coma earlier that month.

In 2010, Shakira began work on ninth studio album "Sale el Sol". The singer split the album into three musical "directions," one of which is "very rock and roll." Shakira, who was a rock artist at the beginning of her career but later took on a more pop-influenced approach, said it had been "fun to re-encounter that side of my artistic personality." The title track is an alternative rock song, with additional influences of folk and Latin music. Written and produced by Shakira and her frequent collaborator Luis Fernando Ochoa, "Sale el Sol" is a call for "optimism through difficult times." The words "Sale el Sol" are Spanish for "The Sun Comes Out," and Shakira explained why she chose the motif of the rise of the sun, saying:
"I was a little bit down at the end of last year, but as soon as this year started, the sun started shining for me. I find myself smiling more often, I feel more free and liberated. You go through difficult moments, everybody does, but there's always the sun inside of us that never extinguishes, and it has come out for me. And, hopefully, it will be a long day in the sun." 

"Sale el Sol" was globally released as the second single from the album on 4 January 2011. The song was made available for digitally downloading on the iTunes Store on the same day.
It was a moderate commercial success, performing well in Latin American countries. It reached number one on the Monitor Latino airplay chart in Mexico. The Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas (AMPROFON) certified "Sale el Sol" gold for shipping 30,000 units in the country. It debuted and peaked at number eight on the Spanish Singles Chart and charted for a total of 23 weeks. The Productores de Música de España (PROMUSICAE) too certified "Sale el Sol" gold for achieving sales of 20,000 units in Spain.

In the United States, "Sale el Sol" was a hit on the Latin "Billboard" charts. The song peaked at number ten on the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart and appeared on it for 38 weeks in total. It was more successful on the airplay chart, peaking at number two on the Latin Pop Airplay chart.

"Sale el Sol" received positive reviews from critics. Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic highlighted its rock influences and deemed it "anthemic." "Billboard" commended its lyrics, calling them "evocative and hopeful" and found it emotionally appealing, saying "Wistful and beautiful, it highlights a more pared-down Shakira." Jesus Yanez-Reyes from Northern Arizona News complimented Shakira's vocal delivery and songwriting, and felt the combination of rock and Latin music in the song made it "reminiscent" of Shakira's earlier work. Reyes also praised its placement as the opening track of the album and commented: "Undoubtedly, this song starts the album off on the right track, with only higher expectations to come." The instrumentation of the song reminded Carlos Macias from Terra Music of Shakira's work in her sixth studio album "Fijación Oral, Vol. 1" (2005) and called it a "good welcome" to the album.

At the Premio Lo Nuestro awards ceremony in 2012, "Sale el Sol" was nominated for "Canción Pop del Año" ("Pop Song of the Year"), but lost to another song by Shakira, "Rabiosa".

The accompanying music video for "Sale el Sol" was directed by Shakira's frequent collaborator Jaume de Laiguana. Parts of the video also served as a Christmas season commercial for Spanish Cava wine producer Freixenet, who donated an estimated amount of 500,000 euros to Shakira's charity Barefoot Foundation. The singer's official website announced the music video on 9 February 2011. It was made available to digitally download from the iTunes Store a day earlier.

It begins with the title of the song being shown on a black background, with a bright sun-like circle in place of the letter "o". Dressed in an entirely black attire, Shakira then appears singing the song with a mic stand in a snowy forest setting. She is backed by a four-piece band of musicians, who are also wearing black costumes. As the first chorus of the song ends, it start to snow. In a maze-like structure, Shakira is shown running in a large golden frock, trying to find her way. Changing back to the forest setting, the camera pans upward to reveal that the maze is built behind the wall in front of which Shakira and her band are performing. The song's bridge co-indices with the occurrence of a storm and culminates with Shakira tearing her top open, after which the sun rises and the intensity of the lighting increases. The video ends with Shakira opening a door that leads her out of the maze. Scenes from Laiguana's short documentary film "Hagamos Que Salga el Sol" ("Let the Sun Rise"), which was filmed in Colombia, are interspersed in the video. 

Robbie Daw from Idolator called the music video "sunny" and commented: "What more do you want from a Shakira video than the sizzling hot singer in a beautiful frock, wandering through a long maze while making her way out of the cold and into the sun-drenched scenery."

"Sale el Sol" was included as the thirteenth song on the set list of Shakira's The Sun Comes Out World Tour (2010–11). In May 2010, Shakira sang the song at the Rock in Rio concert show in Madrid, Spain, as a tribute to Argentine singer-songwriter Gustavo Cerati, her frequent-collaborator and close friend who had suffered a stroke earlier in the month and had fallen into a coma.




</doc>
<doc id="29890027" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29890027" title="Oxaziridine">
Oxaziridine

An oxaziridine is an organic molecule that features a three-membered heterocycle containing oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon. In their largest application, oxaziridines are intermediates in the industrial production of hydrazine. Oxaziridine derivatives are also used as specialized reagents in organic chemistry for a variety of oxidations, including alpha hydroxylation of enolates, epoxidation and aziridination of olefins, and other heteroatom transfer reactions. Oxaziridines also serve as precursors to amides and participate in [3+2] cycloadditions with various heterocumulenes to form substituted five-membered heterocycles. Chiral oxaziridine derivatives effect asymmetric oxygen transfer to prochiral enolates as well as other substrates. Some oxaziridines also have the property of a high barrier to inversion of the nitrogen, allowing for the possibility of chirality at the nitrogen center.

Oxaziridine derivatives were first reported in the mid-1950s by Emmons and subsequently by Krimm and Horner and Jürgens. Whereas oxygen and nitrogen typically act as nucleophiles due to their high electronegativity, oxaziridines allow for electrophilic transfer of both heteroatoms. This unusual reactivity is due to the presence of the highly strained three membered ring and the relatively weak N-O bond. Nucleophiles tend to attack at the aziridine nitrogen when the nitrogen substituent is small (R= H), and at the oxygen atom when the nitrogen substituent has greater steric bulk. The unusual electronics of the oxaziridine system may be exploited to perform a number of oxygen and nitrogen transfer reactions including, but not limited to: α-hydroxylation of enolates, epoxidation of alkenes, selective oxidation of sulfides and selenides, amination of "N"-nucleophiles and "N"-acylamidation.

The peroxide process for the industrial production of hydrazine through the oxidation of ammonia with hydrogen peroxide in the presence of ketones was developed in the early 1970s.

Chiral camphorsulfonyloxaziridines proved useful in the syntheses of complex products, such as taxol which is marketed as a chemotherapy agent. Both the Holton Taxol total synthesis and the Wender Taxol total synthesis feature asymmetric α-hydroxylation with camphorsulfonyloxaziridine.

The two main approaches to synthesis of N-H, N-alkyl, and N-aryloxaziridines are oxidation of imines with peracids (A) and amination of carbonyls (B).

Additionally, oxidation of chiral imines and oxidation of imines with chiral peracids may yield enantiopure oxaziridines. Some oxaziridines have the unique property of configurationally stable nitrogen atoms at room temperature due to an inversion barrier of 100 to 130 kJ/mol. Enantiopure oxaziridines where stereochemistry is entirely due to configurationally stable nitrogen are reported.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s Franklin A. Davis synthesized the first "N"-sulfonyloxaziridines, which act exclusively as oxygen transfer reagents, and are the most predominantly used class of oxaziridines today. While originally synthesized with mCPBA and the phase transfer catalyst benzyltrimethylammonium chloride, an improved synthesis using oxone as the oxidant is now most prevalent.

Many N-sulfonyloxaziridines are used today, each with slightly different properties and reactivity. These reagents are summarized in the table below.

With highly electron withdrawing perfluoroalkyl substituents, oxaziridines exhibit reactivity more similar to that of dioxiranes than typical oxaziridines. Notably, perfluoroalkyloxaziridines hydroxylate certain C-H bonds with high selectivity. Perfluorinated oxaziridines may be synthesized by subjecting a perfluorinated imine to perfluoromethyl fluorocarbonyl peroxide and a metal fluoride to act as an HF scavenger.

Oxaziridines are intermediates in the peroxide process for the production of hydrazine. Many millions of kilograms of hydrazine are produced annually by this method that involves a step wherein ammonia is oxidized in the presence of methyl ethyl ketone to give the oxaziridine:
In subsequent steps the oxaziridine is converted to the hydrazone, which is the immediate in the way to hydrazine:

α-Hydroxyketones, or acyloins, are an important synthetic motifs present in many natural products. α-Hydroxyketones have been synthesized in many ways, including reduction of α-diketones, substitution of a hydroxyl for a leaving group and direct oxidation of an enolate. Oxodiperoxymolybdenum(pyridine)-(hexamethylphosphoric triamide) (MoOPH) and "N"-sulfonyloxaziridines are the most common electrophilic sources of oxygen implemented in this process. One advantage of using "N"-sulfonyloxaziridines is that higher chiral induction is almost invariably observed relative to MoOPH and other oxidants. High yield (77–91%) and "dr" (95:5 – 99:1) are reported for α-hydroxylation with the Evans' chiral auxiliary with "N"-sulfonyloxaziridine as the electrophile. Chiral induction has been demonstrated with many other chiral ketones and ketones with chiral auxiliaries, including SAMP and RAMP.

Extensive work has been reported on asymmetric hydroxylation of prochiral enolates with camphorsulfonyloxaziridine derivatives, achieving moderate to high enantiomeric excess. The commonly accepted proposed transition state that justifies this stereochemical outcome involves an open transition state where the steric bulk of R determines the face of approach.

The selectivity of some hydroxylations may be drastically improved in some cases with the addition of coordinating groups alpha to the oxaziridine ring as oxaziridines 3b and 3c in the table above. In these instances it is proposed that the reaction proceeds through a closed transition state where the metal oxyanion is stabilized by chelation from the sulfate and coordinating groups on the camphor skeleton.

α-Hydroxylation with oxaziridines has been widely implemented in total synthesis. It is a key step in both the Holton Taxol total synthesis and the Wender Taxol total synthesis. Additionally, Forsyth implemented the transformation in his synthesis of the C3-C14 (substituted 1,7-Dioxaspiro[5.5]undec-3-ene) System of okadaic acid.

Epoxidation of alkenes is a common reaction because epoxides can be derivatized in a number of useful ways. Classically, laboratory epoxidation is carried out with mCPBA or other peracids. Oxaziridines have been found to be useful for the formation of highly acid sensitive epoxides. (−)-Chaetominine was synthesized via oxaziridine epoxidation as a late stage transformation as seen below.

Another transformation of high synthetic utility is asymmetric epoxidation. A number of asymmetric epoxidations exist: the Sharpless epoxidation, the Jacobsen-Katsuki epoxidation, and the Juliá-Colonna epoxidation. These methods require specific functionality in order to achieve selectivity. The Sharpless epoxidation is specific to allylic alcohols, the Jacobsen epoxidation requires "cis"-disubstituted aryl alkenes, and the Juliá epoxidation requires α-β unsaturated ketones. Chiral oxaziridines act stereospecifically on many unfunctionalized alkenes. It has even possible to effect stereospecific epoxidation catalytically in the oxaziridine chiral unit. Further investigation into these reactions may be required before levels of enantiometic excess become practical for large scale synthesis. Lusinichi et al. have investigated asymmetric epoxidation with a chiral oxaziridinium salt using oxone as the stoichiometric oxidant seen below.

Perfluorinated oxaziridines are known to hydroxylate unactivated hydrocarbons with remarkable regio- and diastereospecificity. This is a highly coveted transformation, and similar reactivity and specificity is seldom rivaled, especially considering the nonmetallic nature of the oxidant. Perfluorinated oxaziridines show high selectivity toward tertiary hydrogens. Hydroxylation of primary carbons and dihydroxylation of a compound with two oxidizable sites have never been observed. Retention of stereochemistry is very high, often 95 - 98%. (retenton of stereochemistry may be further enhanced by the addition of a fluoride salt).

Oxaziridines with unsubstituted or acylated nitrogens are capable of nitrogen atom transfer, although this reactivity has received considerably less attention.

Amination of nucleophiles with "N"-unsubstituted oxaziridines is quite versatile in the breadth of possible nucleophiles and corresponding products. Hydrazines may be derived from the amination of secondary or tertiary amines, hydroxylamine and thiohydroxamines may be formed from their corresponding alcohols and thiols, sulfimides may be formed from thioethers and α-aminoketones may be formed by attack of corresponding enolates.

The transfer of acylated amines is more difficult than that of unsubstituted amines, although, unlike amine transfer by oxaziridines, there are no alternative methods that directly transfer acylated amines. Acylamine transfer has primarily been performed using amines and hydrazines as nucleophiles. Very few transfers of acylated nitrogens to carbon nucleophiles have been successfully performed, although some do exist in the literature.

Oxaziridines have been found to undergo rearrangement reactions via a radical mechanism when irradiated with UV light or in the presence of a single electron transfer reagent such as Cu. spirocylic oxaziridines undergo ring expansions to the corresponding lactam. The migrating substituent is determined by a stereoelectronic effect where the group trans to the lone pair on the nitrogen will always be the predominant migration product. In light of this effect, it is possible to take advantage of the chiral nitrogen due to high inversion barrier to direct the rearrangement. This phenomenon is demonstrated by observed selectivities in the rearrangements below. In the rearrangement on the left the thermodynamically unfavorable product is observed exclusively, while in the reaction on the right the product derived from the less stable radical intermediate is favored.

Aubé takes advantage of this rearrangement as the key step in his synthesis of (+)-yohimbine, a natural medicine classified by the NIH as possibly effective in the treatment of erectile dysfunction and the sexual problems caused by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

It is also notable that oxaziridines will thermally rearrange to nitrones. Cis-trans selectivity of the resulting nitrone is poor, however, yields are good to excellent. It is thought that some oxaziridines racemize over time through a nitrone intermediate.

Oxaziridines undergo cycloaddition reactions with heterocumulenes to afford a number of unique five membered heterocycles, as shown in the figure below. This reactivity is due to the strained three membered ring and weak N-O bond.


</doc>
<doc id="29899972" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29899972" title="Amanita ceciliae">
Amanita ceciliae

Amanita ceciliae, commonly called snakeskin grisette and strangulated amanita, is a basidiomycete fungus in the genus "Amanita". First described in 1854 by Miles Joseph Berkeley and Christopher Edmund Broome, it was given its current name by Cornelis Bas in 1984. It is characterized by bearing a large fruit body with a brown cap across. The cap has charcoal-grey patches, which are easily removable. The stipe is long, white in colour, and there is no ring on it. It is slightly tapered to the top, and has irregular cottony bands girdling the base. The universal veil is grey. Spores are white, spherical in shape, non-amyloid, and measure 10.2–11.7 micrometres. The mushrooms are considered edible, but field guides typically advise caution in selecting them for consumption, due to risks of confusion with similar toxic species. "A. ceciliae" is found in woods throughout Europe and North America, where it fruits during summer and autumn.

"Amanita ceciliae" was first described by Miles Joseph Berkeley, an English cryptogamist and clergyman, and Christopher Edmund Broome, a British mycologist, in 1854. It is placed in the genus "Amanita" and section "Vaginatae". Section "Vaginatae" consists of mushrooms with special characteristics – such as the absence of a ring, and very few clamp connections at the bases of the basidia.

The name "Amanita inaurata", given by Swiss mycologist Louis Secretan in 1833, has also been used for this species. In 1978, the name was declared nomenclaturally incorrect according to the rules of International Code of Botanical Nomenclature. Other synonyms are "Agaricus ceciliae", "Amanitopsis inaurata" and "Amanitopsis ceciliae". The present name, "Amanita ceciliae", was given by Cornelis Bas, a Dutch mycologist, in 1984.

The species is commonly called "snakeskin grisette". Another common name is "strangulated amanita", referring to the tightly clasping volva. It is also called Cecilia's ringless amanita after Cecilia Berkeley, the wife of M. J. Berkeley. The name was meant "to record the services which have been rendered to Mycology by many excellent illustrations and in other ways".

"Amanita ceciliae" is characterized by bearing a large fruit body with a brown cap across. The cap has charcoal-grey patches, which are easily removable. The stipe is long, white in colour, and there is no ring on it. It is slightly tapered to the top, and has irregular cottony bands girdling the base.

The universal veil is grey. Spores are white, spherical in shape, non-amyloid, and measure 10.2–11.7 micrometres.

The cap is across, shape ranging from convex to flat. It is upturned, and has a deep-coloured margin. There is a low umbo. It is grey to a brownish black in colour, darkest in the center and paler towards the margin. Generally smooth, the cap surface is slightly sticky when moist. The cap surface is characterized by having loose, fleecy, charcoal-grey patches of volval remnants scattered across it. The patches are easily removed. The margin is strongly striated. The cap colour may vary, and pale forms are known to exist, for example, as in the types "A. c. f. decolora" and "A. c. var. pallida". "A. c. var. royeri", first described by mycologist L. Maire in 2008 and occurring in France, is a cinder black-capped variation.

Gills are free and closely spaced, and white in colour. They can be thick, and are often forked. The stem is long, and x thick. It is lightly stuffed (filled with a cottony tissue) and then hollow, and there is a slight tapering to the top. It is white in colour, with flat grey hairs, often in a zig-zag pattern. It does not bear a ring and has fragile, cottony, brownish or charcoal-coloured oblique girdles of volval remnants around the stem base and lower stem. The volva is white to grey, powdery and delicate. The flesh is white and does not change colour when cut. Although it lacks any distinctive odor, it tastes sweet.

Spores are white in colour, spherical and are not amyloid. They measure 10.2–11.7 µm. A few large-sized spores are commonly found in a mount of gill tissue. Clamps are not found at bases of basidia.

"Amanita sinicoflava" (occurring in North America) looks quite similar, but it has a sack-like volva, unlike "A. ceciliae". "A. antillana", of the Antilles islands, is somewhat the same, but it has ellipsoid spores unlike the spherical ones of "A. ceciliae". "A. ceciliae" is often used as a misnomer for "A. borealisorora", which largely occurs in North America. "A. borealisorora" is a provisional name, and the species has not yet been validly published. The spores of "A. ceciliae" highly resemble those of "A. cinctipes" (mainly found in Singapore), though the former has larger spores. The discolouration in the volva of "A. colombiana" (from Colombia, as its name states) probably shows a relationship between the mushroom and "A. ceciliae". "A. sorocula" is another lookalike. This Colombian and Mesoamerican species is often mistaken for "A. ceciliae", as both mushrooms have a volva with a weak structure and greying gills. The notable difference is the strong yellow colour of the cap in immature "A. ceciliae" mushrooms. "A. sorocula" is not yet validly published, and currently is a newly accepted name. The Chinese species "A. liquii" is similar but the yellow-brown, red-brown or green-brown coloured cap of "A. ceciliae" are much different from the brown-black cap of "A. liquii". Also, the volval remnants of "A. ceciliae" converge at the base to form a ring-like zone, unlike "A. liquii". Apart from this, the cellular pigments in the sterile strip around the gills and volval remnants are much darker in colour compared to "A. ceciliae".

"Amanita ceciliae" is considered an edible mushroom and used as food, although many field guides recommend to avoid eating it. Others recommend it as a good edible species. A study of 16 edible mushrooms was done to learn about their chemical compositions and antioxidant activities. Among these species, "A. ceciliae" and "Pleurotus ostreatus" were the two mushrooms that showed most powerful radical scavenging activities.

In Europe, "Amanita ceciliae" is widespread everywhere, though infrequently encountered. It often inhabits deciduous forests with hornbeam ("Carpinus"), oak ("Quercus"), beech ("Fagus") and birch ("Betula"), but it can also rarely occur with conifers: pine ("Pinus"), fir ("Abies"), spruce ("Picea") and cedar ("Cedrus"). It has a preference for neutral to calcareous soils.

In North America, it is found mainly in areas east of the Mississippi River, but similar mushrooms also occur in the Pacific Northwest, the Southwest, and Texas. Its range also stretches south into Mexico. They are ecologically mycorrhizal, and habitats include hardwood forests and coniferous forests. The mushroom grows alone, scattered, or in groups during summer and autumn. It is primarily eastern in distribution but also reported in the Pacific Northwest, the Southwest, and Texas (with an apparent association with pecan trees).

Apart from its native area, "A. ceciliae" has also been reported from Asia. These regions include Japan, Azad Kashmir and Iran. There is speculation that North American collections could possibly be an undescribed species differing from the European "A. ceciliae".



</doc>
<doc id="30010737" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30010737" title="Coming Home (Diddy – Dirty Money song)">
Coming Home (Diddy – Dirty Money song)

"Coming Home" is a song by American rapper and producer Diddy and his group Dirty Money, from their debut album "Last Train to Paris" (2010). It was released on November 21, 2010, as the album's fourth single. The contemporary hip-hop pop song was written by J. Cole, Diddy, Jay-Z, Alex da Kid, and Skylar Grey. Kid and Jay-Z produced the song while Grey featured vocals on the song's chorus. Jay-Z and Kid gifted the song to Diddy for "Last Train to Paris". Autobiographically written, "Coming Home" is inspired by moments in Diddy's life, the loss of his close friend The Notorious B.I.G., and references to classic songs by Dionne Warwick, McFadden & Whitehead, and Smokey Robinson & the Miracles.

Critics praised the redemptive ballad for the personal themes and lyrics which were a snapshot of Diddy's life. Praise was also given for Grey's soft vocals which complemented the warmth of the song. An accompanying music video, directed by Rich Lee, follows the trio wandering through the desert in search of home only to find burned belongings and the shell of a home. Singled out as one of the album's highlights, "Coming Home" was promoted with live TV performances including at the American Music Awards on November 21, 2010, the "WWE Tribute to the Troops" concert, and the March 10, 2011 episode of "American Idol" which marked the first live performance of the song featuring Skylar Grey. The song is also one of the theme songs for WWE WrestleMania 29.

To date, "Coming Home" is Diddy-Dirty Money's most successful single and the highest charting single from "Last Train to Paris". Aside from amassing one million digital sales, it peaked at number eleven on the U.S. "Billboard" Hot 100 and number nine in Canada. Internationally, the single topped both Belgium Ultratip charts and the Swiss Singles Chart, as well as reaching top five in the UK. This comes in addition to breaking onto the A-playlists on British urban music radio and mainstream radio, and topping the UK R&B Singles chart for three consecutive weeks.

"Coming Home" is a downtempo hip-hop and pop song, that opens with a "simple piano intro" and a "delicate vocal verse from Skylar Grey". It was written by Grey, Diddy, Jay-Z, J. Cole, and Alex "da Kid" Grant, and produced by Jay-Z and Grant. When speaking to Kid about what he wanted, Diddy said, "I want a beat that makes me feel like a white man in a basement in Atlanta". Diddy later called "Coming Home" a gift from Jay-Z and Kid. On Genius, Grey wrote: "This is actually crazy. I wrote "Coming Home" for T.I. originally because he was getting out of prison, so it was originally written about that. But Puff wanted "Coming Home" when he heard it and the song I had originally written for Puff, which is called "Castle Walls," ended up on T.I.'s album. So they swapped songs. The meaning of "Coming Home" changed and that's the beauty of music: it’s open to interpretation."

According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com, by EMI Music Publishing, the song was written in the key of D major with a time signature of common time and a tempo of 69 beats per minute. It follows the basic chord progression of G–D–Bm–Fm. Jayson Rodriguez of MTV noted that the concept and theme of the song were similar to events in Diddy's life, "referencing mistakes he has made in the past and that he wants to put behind him." Rodriguez also noted the song's tribute to The Notorious B.I.G., in the line "I miss you, B.I.G." The chorus features vocals from the group's female members, Kalenna Harper and Dawn Richard, as well as background vocals from fellow Bad Boy Records recording artist Cassie. The trio use a vocal range of A–A. Grey also sings some of the vocals, predominately during the song's opening chorus.
"Rap-Up" magazine reflected on the lyrics of the song, calling them a personal reflection of Diddy's life and career thanks to lines like "What am I ‘posed to do when the club lights come on/ It’s easy to be Puff, but it’s harder to be Sean/ What if my twins ask why I ain’t married their mom?" Scott Schetler from AOL Radio Blog noted how Diddy referenced a different popular song in each verse. Lamb particularly noted the strong autobiographical lyrics, and the references to the 1979 hit song "Ain't No Stoppin' Us Now" by McFadden & Whitehead. Other songs referenced include Dionne Warwick's "A House Is Not a Home" (1964) and Smokey Robinson & the Miracles' "The Tears of a Clown" (1970). Rodriguez said "Diddy do[es] some soul-searching in his rhymes as the chorus echoes his need for salvation."

Lamb compared the song to Diddy's early releases, saying that "'Coming Home' [welcomes] Diddy back to the upper ranks of pop-oriented hip hop artists". Additionally, Diddy told MTV that although the track had autobiographical elements, it was part of the album's "conceptual love story narrated by his character". When asked by Live Lounge's Trevor Nelson what "Coming Home" was based on, Diddy said: 

Upon release, "Coming Home" was generally met with a positive reception from music critics, who praised the autobiographical lyrics and composition of Skylar Grey's vocals with the Alex da Kid and Jay-Z production. Becky Bain of Idolator wrote, "We have to give some credit to Diddy (or Jay-Z, if he did indeed write [the lyrics]) for dropping some truly introspective lyrics instead of the usual not-so-subtle Cîroc vodka promotions. Simon Vozick-Levinson from "Entertainment Weekly" agreed, and noted "Coming Home" as one of "Last Train to Paris" highlights, saying it was a "must download" as the album's only "redemptive ballad". Jim Farber of the "New York Daily News" also noted the song's redemptive themes. He said 'Coming Home' is the "only song which breaks the flow" of "Last Train to Paris", "Diddy confesses to everything from bad parenting to fear of commitment. It's an interesting moment but an unnecessary one."

Meanwhile, About.com's Bill Lamb awarded the song four out of five stars, calling it the first "pop hit single" in a long time "[which] matches the size of his public persona". He praised the "beautifully sung chorus by Skylar Grey" and Diddy's deep "autobiographical lyrics". Lamb noted that the song "didn't have the same intensity of emotional impact" other Alex da Kid productions (Eminem's "Love the Way You Lie") but it did "deliver a warmth and sense of hope that is a good match with the current holiday season." A reviewer from Sound Savvy said "The latest single 'Coming Home' is another example of some of the great work found on the album. ... it’s a heartfelt anthem of triumph and survival – somber but not depressing."

"Coming Home" premiered on October 31, 2010, just prior to the fourth game of the Baseball World Series. It made its U.S. "Billboard" Hot 100 chart debut at number sixty-one on December 11, 2010, three weeks after its release. In its third week on the U.S. "Billboard" Hot 100, the single experienced a 92% increase in sales, which amounted to 65,000 copies. As a result, the song vaulted from number forty-four to number seventeen on the Digital Songs chart causing the single to move from number fifty-one to twenty-four on the "Billboard" Hot 100. The song peaked at number seven on the "Billboard" Hot Digital Songs chart, number nine on the U.S. Pop Songs, number seven on the Canadian Hot 100 chart, and number eleven on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. It also peaked at number fifteen on the Radio Songs. Consequently, "Coming Home" outperformed all of the group's previous singles on the Hot 100 and Digital Songs charts. Additionally, "Coming Home" also peaked higher than two of the three songs mentioned in the lyrics. "Ain't No Stoppin' Us Now" by McFadden & Whitehead reached number thirteen, while Dionne Warwick's "A House Is Not a Home" only reached number seventy-nine. The song experience some crossover success, including on the Rap Songs chart where it reached number twenty-one. By the end of January 2011, "Coming Home" had sold one million digital copies in the United States. It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on April 19 and 2× platinum on May 17, 2011.

Internationally, the single got off to a strong start in Belgium, debuting on both the Flanders Tip and Wallonia Tip charts at number twenty-six. "Coming Home" would later top both Tip charts, before impacting on the main Ultratop charts. On the Flanders Ultratop Singles chart, the song peaked at number seventeen, while on the Wallonia chart it peaked at number twenty-seven. "Coming Home" debuted in Switzerland at number forty-eight, and dropped seven places to number fifty-five in its second week. In its third week, the single rose fifteen places to number forty, and then continued to rise, eventually reaching number one on the Swiss Singles Chart. As a result of reaching number one, "Coming Home" is Diddy's highest charting single in Switzerland in fourteen years; his last number one in Switzerland was "I'll Be Missing You" with Faith Evans and 112 in 1997. "Coming Home" made its Australian Singles Chart debut at number forty-nine and is thus the first single from Diddy-Dirty Money to chart within the top-fifty. It is since peaked at number four, and number two on the Australian Urban Singles Chart. The single had equal success in Germany, peaking at number four for two weeks.

"Coming Home" was also successful in other territories too, also peaking in the top-ten in Austria, France, Ireland, New Zealand and Poland. On December 15, 2010 the single was added to the playlists on British mainstream radio and a week later to the playlists on British urban music radio. Following its release, "Coming Home" debuted at number four on the UK Singles Chart, becoming Diddy's most successful single in that country since 2006's "Come to Me" with Nicole Scherzinger. Additionally the single topped the UK R&B Chart and as a consequence, "Coming Home" is Diddy-Dirty Money's most successful single in the United Kingdom. In its second week, the single held on to its position of number four on the singles chart, which came in addition to maintaining its position at the top of the UK R&B Singles chart for three consecutive weeks. According to a press release by Interscope Records, as of March 25, 2011, "Coming Home" has sold 1.8 million digital downloads worldwide.

The accompanying music video made its worldwide premiere through E! Online on November 29, 2010. It was filmed entirely in the Mojave Desert, just outside Palm Springs, CA. The video was the first of three released in the three weeks counting down to the album's release. Album cuts "Somebody to Love Me" and "Ass on the Floor" (featuring Swizz Beatz) received video releases on December 10 and December 13, respectively. "Coming Home" was directed by Rich Lee and according to Steven Gottlieb, of Video Static, the theme drew comparisons to some of Diddy's earliest work. "'Coming Home' has Diddy choppering onto a dry lake bed which is dotted by the charred remains of a luxurious lifestyle."

"Coming Home" starts with scenes of a black helicopter (an AgustaWestland AW109) flying over the desert. In some of the shots, Diddy can be seen looking out on to the horizon. As the song progresses into its main verses, the camera follows Diddy walking through the desert. In the background and foreground, the fire-damaged remnants of a home such as a TV set, fur coats and a stereo system are scattered across the landscape. During the chorus Dawn Richard and Kalenna Harper take place in front of the camera, walking behind Diddy miming Grey's words. Later in the clip, during the second verse, Diddy sits in a burned out building singing to himself. Outside, a burned out vehicle is parked. Then during the song's bridge, red smoke surrounds Diddy as the helicopter, from the opening scene, comes to land. However, this time Richard and Harper are seated inside waiting for Diddy. As the song fades, the helicopter flies over the desert toward the horizon.

Staff from E! Online seemed impressed with the video's concept and choice of background scenery. They said "what better place for some introspection than the desert, right? No sexy bikini-clad ladies or blue-haired Nicki Minajs to distract you, and when you're done, just call up the helicopter to pick you up (Pro tip: Hang your leg outside of the chopper for extra cool points.)". Stephen Gottlieb from Video Static said "It's a nice bookend with Diddy's – then Puff Daddy – first solo video, "Can't Nobody Hold Me Down," which featured him and Mase introducing an era of big budget hip-hop while driving a Rolls convertible across the desert." While Ed Easton Jr. from 92.3 Now FM drew comparisons to Diddy's earlier video for his 1997 hit single "Been Around the World", thus awarding the video six out of ten. However Easton was annoyed with the number of videos being released and said that fans were waiting for the actual album to be released.

Diddy-Dirty Money performed the song live for the first time at the 2010 American Music Awards on November 21, 2010. For the performance the group were joined on stage by a full orchestra, with Diddy dressed in all-black but the other half of the group dressed in white gowns. The group reprised this performance on the December 4, 2010 airing of "Saturday Night Live" along with the debut performance of the next scheduled single "Ass On the Floor". On December 14, 2010 the group performed "Coming Home" on two separate occasions. First Diddy appeared on daytime chatshow, "The View", for an interview and was then joined by Richard and Harper to perform "Coming Home" then later the trio performed on the "Late Show with David Letterman". Four days later, the group performed the ballad at the "WWE Tribute to the Troops" concert. On January 20, 2011, the group performed the song live in the United Kingdom, on the "Radio 1 Live Lounge". Diddy-Dirty Money then returned to the United States, where they performed "Coming Home" for the first time with Skylar Grey, on season ten of "American Idol", on March 10, 2011.

The song was used as entrance music by UFC Light Heavyweight champion Jon Bones Jones before his successful title defense against Quinton Rampage Jackson. Also, during the pre-game introductions for the New York Knicks' 2010-11 NBA game against the Milwaukee Bucks on February 23, 2011 (and home debut of newly acquired Syracuse Orange alumnus Carmelo Anthony), the song was used in a pre-game video, welcoming Melo "home" (he started his NBA career with the Denver Nuggets after leaving the Orange) to New York. There is also a friendly version of the song recorded by the cast of Nickelodeon's popular TV show "iCarly", which can be heard on the show's second soundtrack, entitled "iSoundtrack II". It was the official theme song to WWE's WrestleMania 29, and at the event, Sean Combs and Skylar Grey performed it live in front of a sold out venue of 80,676 in MetLife Stadium. Though not used as the official theme song, "Coming Home" has been used in almost every advertisement for the ABC drama series "Resurrection".
On December 4, 2013, "The Fast and the Furious" team released a tribute video to Paul Walker after the actor's untimely death, which contained excerpts from "Coming Home".
On December 30, 2014 newly hired Michigan Wolverines head football coach Jim Harbaugh was introduced to the public during a brief halftime ceremony with the song playing as he walked onto center court. On October 28, 2014, an instrumental was a part of the Cleveland Cavaliers pre-game introductions as it was the first game back in Cleveland for LeBron James since 2010. The song was used in a video by the Los Angeles Rams announcing their return to Los Angeles after more than two decades in St. Louis. As Dwyane Wade returned to his hometown of Chicago in 2016, a video using the song was created to mark the occasion. "Coming Home (Part II)" is also used as the background music for the Kia Stinger commercial, featuring Bryce Dallas Howard.


"Coming Home" was recorded at Chalice Recording Studios and End of Era Studios in Los Angeles, California.


</doc>
<doc id="30034267" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30034267" title="Themes in Minority Report">
Themes in Minority Report

The plot of the 2002 science fiction neo-noir film "Minority Report" concerns itself with a number of themes. The film's plot centers around a trio of psychics called "precogs", who see future images called "previsions" of crimes yet to be committed. These images are processed by "Precrime", a specialized police department, which apprehends the criminals based on the precogs' . The cast includes Tom Cruise as Precrime officer John Anderton, Colin Farrell as Department of Justice agent Danny Witwer, Samantha Morton as the senior precog Agatha, and Max von Sydow as Anderton's superior Lamar Burgess. The film is a combination of whodunit, thriller, and science fiction.

Spielberg has characterized the movie's story as "fifty percent character and fifty percent very complicated storytelling with layers and layers of murder mystery and plot." The film's central theme is the question of free will vs. determinism. It examines whether free will can exist if the future is set and known in advance. It also concerns itself with the role of preventative government in protecting its citizenry, which was apt of the time of the picture's given America's debates over the government's expanding powers after 9/11.

"Minority Report" presents a future of increasing electronic surveillance, personalized advertising, and it analyzes the role of media in a future state where electronic advancements make its presence nearly boundless, the potential legality of an infallible prosecutor, and Spielberg's repeated theme of the broken family. Spielberg's analysis of the familial aspect was motivated by his own parent's divorce when he was a child.
8 ca

The main theme of "Minority Report" is the classic philosophical debate of free will vs. determinism. One of the main questions the film raises is whether the future is set or whether free will can alter the future. As critic C.A. Wolski commented, "At the outset, Minority Report... promises to mine some deep subject matter, to do with: do we possess free will or are we predestined to our fate?" However, there is also the added question of whether the precogs' visions are correct. As reviewer James Berardinelli asked, "is the Precogs' vision accurate, or has it in some way been tampered with? Perhaps Anderton isn't actually going to kill, but has been set up by a clever and knowledgeable criminal who wants him out of the way." The precog Agatha also states that since Anderton knows his future, he can change it. However, the film also indicates that Anderton's knowledge of the future may actually be the factor that causes Leo Crow's death. Berardinelli describes this as the main paradox regarding free will vs. determinism in the film, "[h]ere's the biggest one of all: Is it possible that the act of accusing someone of a murder could begin a chain of events that leads to the slaying. In Anderton's situation, he runs because he is accused. The only reason he ends up in circumstances where he might be forced to kill is because he is a hunted man. Take away the accusation, and there would be no question of him committing a criminal act. The prediction drives the act – a self-fulfilling prophecy. You can see the vicious circle, and it's delicious (if a little maddening) to ponder." Film scholar Dean A. Kowalski argues that in this scenario free will still exists, as the perpetrators control their actions, and the precogs' visions are but the facts that resulted from their choices.

The central theme of the movie is discussed in the film's fourth scene. Witwer discusses the PreCrime system with the division's staff. He believes that its main "legalistic drawback" is that it "arrests individuals who have broken no laws." Jad responds, "But they will!" When Anderton later arrives upon this discussion, he acknowledges the paradox Witwer raises; that the precogs' prevent an event accepted as fact, but one which will never happen. To show him that people regularly use predetermination, Anderton picks up a wooden ball and rolls it toward Witwer, who catches it before it lands on the ground. When asked why he caught the ball, Witwer says "Because it was going to fall." Anderton replies, "But it didn't." Then confidently tells him, "The fact that you prevented it from happening doesn't change the fact that it was going to happen." Kowalski feels this example is faulty in the sense that the ball has no free will; it merely acts according to the laws of physics, but he acknowledges that if an individual were to have freely chosen to commit murder, then it would hold. Film scholar Stephen Mulhall points out that unlike the laws of physics which have a series of scientifically testable causal laws, Anderton merely has the visions of the precogs', whose psychic abilities are not fully explained by science.

Another quandary is that if the precogs' visions are infallible then the future cannot be otherwise, while if they are incorrect people will be punished for crimes they will never commit. Kowalski contends that the precogs only attain knowledge of what he calls the ""conditional" future". He cites as evidence two examples: the scene where Agatha steers Anderton through the mall by foreseeing dangerous events and helping him circumnavigate them, and a later scene where she tells Anderton and his ex-wife what would have happened to their child if he had lived. In the first example, Agatha knows what Anderton will freely choose to do when presented with specific facts so she provides them to him, and, in the second, she knows what will have happened to the Anderton's son based on specific scenarios throughout his life, in which she can see what he would have freely chosen to do, and what selections various people in his life would have freely made. According to Kowalski, the PreCrime unit therefore removes individuals from precise situations where they would freely choose to become a murderer.

Philosophy professor Michael Huemer says "that the only way the otherwise predetermined future seen by the precogs can be averted, we are led to believe, is by the influence of the precogs themselves." He argues that their "knowledge of their would-be future" enables them to make changes to prevent its occurrence. This means that Howard Marks, the arrested potential killer from the film's opening scene, is destined to his fate and no action he could undertake would change it. Individuals with minority reports however, have a chance to change their futures according to Huemer, and since there was no minority report (i.e.; no possible alternative fate) for Anderton, he could only change his future by having access to the precogs' visions. Huemer compares the humans situation to that of a robot; since a robot controls itself, but has a set number of programmed actions, its fate falls within those actions. It lacks free will in the sense that it cannot choose any action outside of its programming, even if one may exist. He also considers a decaying atom which has a 50% chance of survival within the next hour, since the atom has no actions which it can undertake to change those odds, its fate is pure chance. Thus he believes a person needs a set of options, the knowledge of those options, and the ability to choose between them to have free will.

Spielberg said that the arrest of criminals before they have a chance to commit their crimes in the movie had some real-world background in post-9/11 America, saying that "[w]e're giving up some of our freedom so that the government can protect us." The future world in "Minority Report" of retinal scans, robotic human inspectors, and intrusive, individualized, public advertising arrived in American theaters as the country was debating how much governmental intrusion into personal matters was necessary to ensure safety of its citizens. Spielberg said he would be against a PreCrime system if it were ever possible, as he believes that if it did exist, those in control of it would undoubtedly abuse its powers. Kowalski questions what the benevolent precogs in the film could become in the hands of those who trained their skills for political intrigue. Science fiction scholar Gary Westfahl asserts that in a political context, PreCrime may be seen "a metaphor for racial profiling, and one could view the liberation of the precogs as the end of a form of slavery."

Kowalski feels the isolation of the precogs ensures that they see their visions merely as facts, and removes them from having to justify them. The precogs' ignorance of the results of their visions prevents them from knowing the effectiveness of the program. He feels the PreCrime officers are thus more qualified to evaluate their efficacy "than the precogs themselves." In the December 2003 edition of the academic journal "Film Criticism", scholar Mark Garrett Cooper moved past that point by asserting that not only have the precogs "yet to fully understand" their visions, but that the process by which the images are interpreted makes it so that no one individual could understand them without the use of the apparatus. The machinery is so effective and precise according to Cooper however, that the "omnipresent system effectively makes capture more certain than the crime." When the system targets Cruise, instead of fleeing, he remains in the vicinity in the belief that the system will, in its inexorable logic, correct itself. The apparatus is considered so infallible according to Cooper that Cruise knows once he is cleared by it, his life can immediately return to normal. In this respect, Cooper feels that "far from indicting a security state, the film legitimates one." Gareth Higgins argues that "[t]he government is playing God, using an all-seeing eye to prevent murder."

The film presents a legal system where the PreCrime office gathers the images from the minds of the precogs then organizes them into a coherent order for display in front of a set of judges. The judges appear via video feeds, analyze the images, and according to Cooper, they view the images, listen to Anderton rattle off "a string of legalistic verbiage", then give it a "pro forma ratification." Thus the accused is never present, is not allowed a defense, and is convicted before he is aware he is on trial. The program is marketed in a similar basic fashion, as in its tag line: "It works." Cooper says that in a typical American courtroom drama, the audience is treated as if it were the jury, but in this system, instead of desiring the hero be proven innocent, the audience seeks instead to have the guilt transferred from Anderton to Burgess. But to do so, Anderton has to disprove the system, which he does by proving the existence of the minority report. This renders the PreCrime justice system inoperable, as if there is doubt related not merely to the gathering of the images, or their ability to be interpreted, but their ability to be correct even in perfect circumstances, then the system of infallible guilt can not exist.

Spielberg conceived of the idea of a future world permeated with intrusive capitalism and government surveillance after everyone at the "think tank summit" told him that "the right of privacy is a diminishing commodity" which will soon be thrown "right out the window." According to film critic J. Hoberman, "Minority Report" "visualizes (as well as demonstrates) a future where the unconscious has been thoroughly colonized." When the movie first appeared in theaters a common source of reviewers' complaints was the film's product placement, which they found intrusive. Film scholar Martin Hall says that the purpose of the advertisements Anderton runs into are "encouraging him to buy certain products and, by extension, affirm his place in society." The personalized advertising is disconcerting partly because of the invasion of privacy, but also, argues Cooper, because it is cold, impersonalized, and insincere.

Cooper discusses how he feels "Minority Report" emphasizes the future importance over the control of imagery. According to him, the images captured from the precogs' visions in the film bestow power on those who control their processing. He says the film warns viewers that those who control images must be carefully overseen so as to prevent the abuse of power, and that the film presents "governance as a problem of image arrangement." The film also presents a future world where government probes use advanced media technology to monitor its citizenry. Cooper says the quandary arises when the film intimates that there were will be no way to escape the media industry's omnipotence in the future, while at the same time defending "the need for image manipulating institutions." He feels that this logically raises another issue in that the same concern could be leveled towards image-makers such as DreamWorks, and he says the "film's virtue lies in provoking this question." He notes that the film's tranquil ending concludes with the Andertons looking out into a peaceful exterior with only rain visible, and the precogs reading in their isolated, idyllic farm, and both families apparently free of electronic surveillance.

Writing in the academic journal "Rhizomes", scholar Martin Hall, while analyzing the movie, discusses the self-perception an individual develops based on the views of those outside of themselves. The academician notes that when a child first comprehends the function of a mirror, they begin to develop the understanding that their perception of themselves is not self-contained, and learn partly they are what they see in the mirror. He contrasts this to when Anderton discovers the precogs' vision of his future self. At the beginning of the film, Anderton shows little concern for the precogs; when Witwer feels pity for them, he responds: "It's better if you don't think of them as human." Shortly thereafter, however, Anderton is shown in tears at his home, high on the hard drug neuroin while mourning the loss of his son. Agatha enters a similar period of self-examination when she has visions of her mother's death, and is informed they are merely "echoes" i.e. a faulty image in her memory. Anderton becomes flustered when he begins to interpret the images which show him about to commit murder and begins to frantically sort through, According to Hall he begins "searching for whatever possible versions of this representation are available to him, other than the one that represents him as a murderer." Hall says that he is sorting through the images so feverishly, as he is convinced once they are sorted properly and understood, they will not show him to be the murderer, because he is convinced that he is not a murderer. He literally becomes obsessed with himself, seeking to resolve these images with put him at "discordance with his own reality." Previously, at peace with himself, Hall says Anderton cannot accept the image he sees in the precogs' visions. Unable to reconcile the two, Hall says that he is forced to decide that "it is likely that errors have occurred" in the PreCrime system.

When he escapes the building and enters the mall, Hall feels he is disturbed by advertisements calling to him by name not only because they will give away his presence, but also because they remind him of his lost place in society, and he begins "to see through the false consciousness his (illusory) previous position as fixed subject had allowed him." Spielberg said that Anderton is being punished for his previous callous unconcern for anything but the effectiveness of the PreCrime program. "He's dirtied by the fact that he doesn't spend much time thinking about the moral consequences. It's just like a sporting event almost — and then suddenly that whole sporting event makes him the soccer ball." His doubts about his own future lead him to examine his previous life to better understand himself according to Hall. He runs through his role in the PreCrime system, and his son's disappearance "to reconstruct his past." After Leo Crow in fact kills himself, Anderton becomes healed, and later has "recreated himself as the subject he was previously through the knowledge that he is not a killer." Although he has satisfactorily repaired his self-image, Anderton is not the same person, as he not longer believes in the PreCrime system. Hall says that Burgess' final dilemma; namely, his desire to keep PreCrime running, his inability to bring himself to kill Anderton, and his desire to live, drives him to see his only suitable action to be suicide. "Burgess has been left truly alone by events," argues Hall. "His wife fainted when she saw the images of the murder and Anderton has been the cause of this rupture."

"Minority Report" also continues Spielberg's tradition of depicting broken families. In Dick's short story, Anderton is a childless, married man whose main motives are self-preservation and preventing the disassembly of the PreCrime division. While he is also trying to save himself in the movie, his greater concern is uncovering the story behind his son's disappearance. Spielberg would later transform his next science fiction film, "War of the Worlds", from a story about a single man to one about a divorced father concerned with protecting his children. Buckland notes that the two tragic parent-child relationships in the picture (Agatha and Ann Lively, John and Sean Anderton) have a common element. The movie has four shots of them submerged in water. Agatha's face is shown in a close up shot, taken from directly above her, when she is submerged in her photon milk, nutrient bath. When photos of her mother's submerged corpse are shown to her, the emphasized photograph is a similar image of her face taken from directly above. Anderton and his son are shown together in a pool flashback scene in which they have a contest to see who can hold their breath longest. John is underwater when his son is taken, and later in the apartment he is shown lying motionless, immersed in a filled bathtub, in a manner Buckland finds similar to the shots of Agatha and Ann. Buckland notes that co-screenwriter Frank introduced the water theme, as he wrote Agatha and her mother's back stories while adding the bathtub scene.




</doc>
<doc id="30079718" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30079718" title="Fight for You">
Fight for You

"Fight for You" is a song performed by American recording artist Jason Derulo, released as the fourth single from his second studio album, "Future History", on December 2, 2011. The song was written by Derulo, Stevie Hoang, David Paich and Jeff Porcaro, while production was handled by RedOne, BeatGeek and Geo Slam. Musically, "Fight for You" is an urban-pop ballad, that samples the song "Africa" (1982) by American rock band Toto. The lyrics revolve around how Derulo, the protagonist, has "got a girl in his life he isn't ready to let go of just yet". Hoang had originally recorded "Fight for You" for his third independent album, "Unsigned" (2011) with his original track featuring Iyaz.

The song's production and Derulo's vocal performance garnered positive reviews from music critics, however, some criticized its lack of originality. "Fight for You" attained moderate chart success, peaking at number five in Australia, and reaching the top twenty in the United Kingdom. The accompanying music video portrays a fictional relationship between Derulo and his love interest. Derulo performed the song at KDWB-FM's annual Jingle Ball in 2011.

"Fight for You" was written by Jason Derulo, Stevie Hoang, David Paich and Jeff Porcaro, while production of the song was helmed by RedOne, BeatGeek and Geo Slam. "Fight for You" was originally recorded by Hoang, for his third independent album, "Unsigned" (2011). His version of the song features British Virgin Island recording artist Iyaz.

Derulo's version of "Fight for You" was recorded and engineered by Gelly Kusuma, Slam and Teddy Sky at Serenity West Recording Studio and Jim Henson Studios in Los Angeles, California. Derulo, RedOne, Laila Khayat, Samya Khayat and Sky performed background vocals on the song. The recordings were later mixed by Trevor Muzzy. All instruments and programming were provided by RedOne, BeatGeek and Slam. In a cover story for the "Daily Star", Derulo stated that "Fight for You" was the first song he worked on with RedOne, saying "I'm glad it turned out so dope". On working with RedOne, he said: "Red first became hot when he produced the album "The Fame" with Lady Gaga. He is one of the nicest guys I've ever met. ... RedOne was a nice, humble, down-to-earth, special person".

"Fight for You" was added to mainstream radio playlists in the United Kingdom on November 9, 2011. A digital extended play, featuring four remixes of the song, was released in Ireland and the UK on December 2, 2011.

"Fight for You" is an urban-pop ballad with a length of four minutes and two seconds. According to Meena Rupani of DesiHits, the song finds Derulo as the male protagonist singing "that he's got a girl in his life he isn't ready to let go of just yet". The song contains a sample of the song "Africa" (1982) by American rock band Toto. Lewis Corner of Digital Spy noted that "Fight for You" features "airy synths and bouncy castle-sized beats". During an interview with "New!" magazine, Derulo explained the concept of "Fight for You", saying: "It's very relationship-based and the line ["fight for you"] means so much, whatever you believe in you should go for. The song is based on a personal experience, I was in a relationship and I put myself in that place again where you would do anything to keep the relationship together so I went back to that place."

"Fight for You" garnered positive reviews from music critics for its catchy production and Derulo's vocal performance. David Griffiths of 4Music called it a "catchy little ditty" that "is guaranteed to be stuck in your head for the rest of the day". Shawn Kitchener of Entertainment Wise described the song as "the kind of sweet-as-candy R&B fodder" that could have been featured on the "High School Musical" soundtrack. Meena Rupani of DesiHits noted that the song's lyrical theme is similar to "It Girl", and that Derulo's "vocals are enough to put any girl into a trance". However, "Fight for You" also received unfavorable reviews from critics because of its lack of originality. Lewis Corner of Digital Spy gave the song a three out of five star rating, calling Derulo "extremely lazy" for sampling "Africa". Caroline Sullivan of "The Guardian" described the song as "languid", while writing that the sample gives it "a bit of bounce". Although Jess Holton of "The Music Network" described "Fight for You" as a "touching ballad", she added that sampling "Africa" does not do the latter "any form of justice". In an album review of "Future History", Michael Cragg of BBC Music noted that the songs "revolve around the joys of being in a relationship or the pain of not being in one", however disapproved of the lyrical content and sample in "Fight for You", calling it "perhaps the worst offender" on the album.

After the release of "Future History", "Fight for You" debuted and peaked on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 at number 83 on the issue dated October 15, 2011, and on the UK Singles Chart at number 117 on October 22, 2011. Upon its release as a single in the latter country, "Fight for You" managed to peak at number 15 on the UK Singles Chart, and at number four on the UK R&B Singles Chart. In Ireland, the song debuted at number 31 on December 1, 2011, and peaked at number 28 the following week. On the Danish Singles Chart, "Fight for You" debuted and peaked at number 27 on January 20, 2012. In Australia, the song debuted at number 27 on the ARIA Singles Chart on February 20, 2012. "Fight for You" peaked at number five in its third week, and spent a total of seven consecutive weeks inside the top-ten. It was eventually certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA), denoting shipments of 140,000 copies.

The video for "Fight for You" premiered online on November 25, 2011. It begins with Derulo walking on a bridge in a city at night, before the video cuts to scenes of Derulo and his love interest hugging and drinking alcohol, as well showing him standing alone atop a roof of a building in Manhattan. Another scene finds Derulo and his love interest sharing a shower. The video continues to show the pair spending time together, including dining in restaurants, riding the subway, and dancing on the subway platform. David Greenwald of MTV Buzzworthy called it Derulo's "steamiest" video to date.

On December 3, 2011, Derulo performed "Fight for You" at radio station KDWB-FM's annual Jingle Ball, which took place at the Target Center in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The song was part of a set list, which included "Whatcha Say", "In My Head", "Ridin' Solo", "Don't Wanna Go Home" and "It Girl". According to Jon Bream of the "Star Tribune", Derulo "turned it out with sweet vocals and smooth dancing". On May 21, 2012, Taga Paa performed a cover of "Fight for You" on "The Voice Australia". Rosemarie Lentini of "The Daily Telegraph" called it a "moving rendition", while Seanna Cronin of "The Gympie Times" noted that Paa's performance "had a few pitch issues".


Credits adapted from the liner notes for "Future History".


!scope="col" colspan="3"| Streaming


</doc>
<doc id="30270690" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30270690" title="Born This Way (song)">
Born This Way (song)

"Born This Way" is a song by American singer Lady Gaga, and the lead single from her second studio album of the same name. Written by Gaga and Jeppe Laursen, who produced it along with Fernando Garibay and DJ White Shadow, the track was developed while Gaga was on the road with The Monster Ball Tour. Inspired by 1990s music which empowered women and the gay community, Gaga explained that "Born This Way" was her freedom song. She sang part of the chorus at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards in 2010 and announced the song as the lead single from the album, released on February 11, 2011.

"Born This Way" is backed by rumbling synth sounds, a humming bass and additional chorus percussion, with sole organ toward the end. The lyrics discuss the self-empowerment of minorities including the LGBT community as well as racial minorities, referring to "cholas" and "orients". Critics positively reviewed the song, calling it a "club-ready anthem", though it faced criticism for having similarities with Madonna's 1989 single "Express Yourself". The song reached number one in over 25 countries and was her third single to top the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and the 1,000th song in that chart's history (since 1958) to reach number one. "Born This Way" has sold 8.2 million copies worldwide, becoming one of the best-selling singles of all time.

Nick Knight directed the accompanying music video, which was inspired by surrealist painters like Salvador Dalí and Francis Bacon. Gaga is depicted as giving birth to a new race during a prologue. After a series of dance sequences, the video concludes with the view of a city populated by this race. Critics noted the video's references to the work of Madonna, Michael Jackson, Björk, and the late fashion designer Alexander McQueen, as well as to Greek mythology and surrealism.

Gaga performed the song at the 53rd Grammy Awards after coming out of an incubating vessel. Shortly after, she added it to the setlist of the last leg of The Monster Ball Tour. "Born This Way" was later performed on television shows, such as the "Saturday Night Live", "Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve" and "Good Morning America", many of the singer's tours, and it was notably part of her Super Bowl LI halftime show set. The song was treated with different remixes, including a "Country Road" version recorded by Gaga herself and another by Indian production duo Salim-Sulaiman. Alice Cooper, Madonna, Katy Perry, Maria Aragon, and the cast of the TV series "Glee" have covered the song.

In 2010, Lady Gaga was touring for her second world tour, The Monster Ball. At that time she started developing ideas for her second studio album, "Born This Way". The first song written and recorded for the album was the title track itself which she wrote in Liverpool and Manchester, England, described by Gaga as a "magical message" song. She wrote it in ten minutes and compared the process to an Immaculate Conception. White Shadow, one of the producers of the track, credited Gaga for coming up with the idea and the theme behind the song. "We recorded it around the world, on the road, in whatever was available. It sounds like it reads, but not like you think until you hear it," he added. Gaga wanted to record her own freedom song, and explained with "Billboard" her inspiration behind the song:
I want to write my this-is-who-the-fuck-I-am anthem, but I don't want it to be hidden in poetic wizardry and metaphors. I want it to be an attack, an assault on the issue because I think, especially in today's music, everything gets kind of washy sometimes and the message gets hidden in the lyrical play. Harkening back to the early '90s, when Madonna, En Vogue, Whitney Houston and TLC were making very empowering music for women and the gay community and all kind of disenfranchised communities, the lyrics and the melodies were very poignant and very gospel and very spiritual and I said, 'That's the kind of record I need to make. That's the record that's going to shake up the industry.' It's not about the track. It's not about the production. It's about the song. Anyone could sing 'Born This Way'. It could've been anyone.

On February 8, 2011, Gaga tweeted the words "Trois Jours" ("Three Days"), along with a picture of the official single artwork, via TwitPic. Gaga is shown topless in the black-and-white cover art and displays the tattoos on her back. Her hair is air-blown and she wears heavy make-up while sharp edges protrude from her face and shoulders. The artwork was described by Charlie Amter from "The Hollywood Reporter" as harkening back to the classic record covers from the 1980s. He compared it to the artworks by bands like Missing Persons, Roxy Music and Duran Duran. Gordon Smart from "The Sun" also felt that the "stark black and white image" had a glossy eighties air about it. Tanner Stransky from "Entertainment Weekly" gave a positive review of the cover art, feeling that Gaga looked almost "animalistic" in the picture, and her flowing hair made her look like a creature from the African jungle. She also added that the artwork was "totally and completely fierce". Archana Ram from the same publication found similarities between the "Born This Way" cover art and Kylie Minogue's cover art for her 2007 single "2 Hearts". Nicole Eggenberger from "OK!" described the artwork as a perfect balance between the singer's "wild side" and her "glamorous" looks. Leah Collins from "Dose" believed that the extreme make-up and tattoos were an ironic play on the title of the song.

Gaga had sung a few lines from the song while accepting the 2010 MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year, for "Bad Romance". Given as a Christmas gift to her fans, Gaga announced, via Twitter, the release dates of the album and the lead single at the stroke of midnight on New Year's Day, 2011. The single was dated to be released on February 13, 2011, while the album on May 23, 2011. Supplementing this announcement came a black-and-white photograph in which Gaga, according to Jocelyn Vena from MTV, is "nude from the waist down, with her hair blowing about, and sporting a jacket with 'Born This Way' emblazoned in what looks like bedazzled jewels." In late January 2011, Gaga released the lyrics of the song, before announcing that she planned to release the single two days prior to its stipulated date. Hence the song was premiered on radio stations worldwide at 6 a.m. EST on February 11, 2011, and was released for digital download from online retailers at 9 a.m. EST the same day.

"Born This Way" was written by Gaga and Jeppe Laursen (formerly of the band Junior Senior), and produced with Paul Blair (a.k.a. DJ White Shadow) and Fernando Garibay, while it was mixed at Abbey Road Studios in London and Germano Studios in New York. The electropop song begins with Gaga's voice uttering the line "It doesn't matter if you love him or capital H-I-M" on a loop, backed by a rumbling synth sound and a humming bass. As the synths change into a beat, Gaga belts out the song's first verse, followed by the bass dropping off and the percussion-backed chorus, "I'm beautiful in my way, 'cause God makes no mistakes; I'm on the right track, baby, I was born this way", which Jocelyn Vena from MTV likened as being "meant to be heard in a big space. It's fast and hard-hitting." After the chorus she chants the line "Don't be a drag, Just be a queen" a number of times on top of handclaps, before moving to the second verse. After the second chorus an interlude follows, where Gaga chants the names of various communities. Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine felt that the interlude is a mixture of the music from American television show, "Glee", and the song "There But For the Grace of God Go I" by Machine. The music fades out for a moment as Gaga sings a cappella, before the addition of an organ and Gaga closes the song. According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony/ATV Music Publishing, "Born This Way" is written in the time signature of common time, with a moderate dance beat tempo of 124 beats per minute. It is composed in the key of B major as Gaga's voice spans the tonal nodes of F to C. "Born This Way" follows a chord progression of F–F–E–B–F in the chorus.

The lyrics during the verses talk about empowerment, while the chorus talks about making no apologies and accepting one as themselves. It features the names of LGBT and other minority communities, which was due to the support Gaga had received from the community over the years. She also explained that since "The Fame" and "The Fame Monster" did not directly address those communities, "Born This Way" was her chance to create something that not only supported her political and social beliefs, but also empowered her to artistically say, "'I'm not being safe with this record.' I'm not trying to gain new fans. I love the fans I already have, and this is for them."

After the early release of the lyrics, it had garnered criticism from some Asian and Hispanic communities, including Latino groups MECha and Chicanos Unidos Arizona, claiming that the usage of the terms "chola" and "orient" was offensive and derogatory. In response to the lyrics, Robert Paul Reyes of Newsblaze.com stated that while he agreed with its pro-gay stance, he questioned the use of the term "chola", asking, "Are Latinos supposed to be grateful that a white superstar, born of privilege, included a racist shout out to our community? Not all Latino ladies are 'cholas' in the barrio, some of them are teachers, writers, engineers and nurses and doctors." Radio stations in Malaysia chose to censor the part of the lyrics dealing with the acceptance of the LGBT community, due to censorship in the country of content that may be deemed offensive. In response, Gaga urged her Malaysian fans, who wanted the uncensored version to be played, to take action by stating: "It is your job and it is your duty as young people to have your voices heard. You must do everything that you can if you want to be liberated by your society. You must call, you must not stop, you must protest peaceably."

A number of remixes were commissioned by Interscope Records, to accompany the song. The first set of remixes were done by LA Riots, Chew Fu and DJ White Shadow. Titled "Born This Way – The Remixes Part 1", the remixes were released as CD single and digital download on March 15, 2011. Another set of remixes were done by Michael Woods, Grum, Dada Life, Zedd, Bimbo Jones and Twin Shadow. It was released on March 29, 2011, for digital download only, with the name "Born This Way – The Remixes Part 2".

Gaga released a "Country Road Version" of the song on March 15, 2011, via her Twitter account. The version opens with the sound of guitars and then introduces a fuzzed-out slide guitar and harmonica wheeze, with the original disco beats replaced by restrained brush drumming and a more laid-back vibe. Once the first chorus starts, the song chugs alongside the harmonica sounds. Just before the three-minute mark, Gaga sings new lyrics, "If I wanna make it country, baby, then it's OK, cuz I was born, I was born, I was born this way," over a picked mandolin. According to Gil Kaufman of MTV, the song breaks into full-on country-rock mode, reminiscent of late-period Bon Jovi music, in the final minute. A portion of the money earned from sales of "Country Road Version" went to the Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network (GLSEN).

A Bollywood version of the song was done by Indian music producer duo Salim and Sulaiman Merchant. The remix was released on DesiHits.com, a website for South Asian music and entertainment news. The Merchants were discussing music projects with Anjula Acharia-Bath of DesiHits.com, when they came to learn that Gaga, who did not have much reach within the Indian diaspora, was interested in a Bollywood remix for "Born This Way". The Merchants were contacted by Gaga's manager, Troy Carter, and the remix was finalized. Sulaiman explained that they received Gaga's raw vocals from "Born This Way", and using it as a base, they designed the remix. "We sent her a rough cut of our composition for initial feedback on whether we were giving it the right groove. She loved it and that's how we went about it," he added. The Merchants used a number of Indian musical instruments like the dugi, sitar by Sunil Das, and the dhol and dholak in the chorus. Salim said that he sang a little bit of alaap to give the remix a Sufi touch, "as that's the kind of music we do and it was also about adding our signature." Gaga's management team were satisfied with their remix and wanted them to do another remix of her next song, "Judas". The Bollywood remixes were a part of the Indian track list of "Born This Way".

"Born This Way" received generally positive reviews from music critics upon its release. Michael Cragg from "The Guardian" called the song an "almost disco anthem", and said the chorus "crashes in with the weight of a discarded meat dress". He also felt that the "campness" of the music made the lyrics sound less serious than it is. Guthrie Graves-Fitzsimmons of "The Washington Post" stated that "Born This Way" was a "hymn for LGBT Christians". Rick Florino of Artistdirect gave the song five out of five stars and labeled it as "an immediate pop classic", complimenting the hook and the chorus. Alison Schwartz from "People" added that "the club-ready anthem, complete with a few a cappella chants and Italian lyrics, shows off Gaga's powerhouse vocal chords—and knack for powerful songwriting." Jem Aswad from "Billboard" responded positively to the anthemic nature of the song, and felt that it would become a staple song to be played on the radio and dancefloors in the following months. Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song five out of five stars, describing it as a "life-affirming equality anthem, a straight-up club pumper and a flat-out fantastic pop song." Writing for Slant Magazine, Sal Cinquemani understood that Gaga "has tapped into something truly special, maybe even important." He also complimented the song's underlying message of equality. Meghan Casserly of "Forbes" expected "Born This Way" to be the biggest gay anthem ever, since, according to her, it was written with that purpose in mind, and she also points out that it is "the next girl power song". Annie Yuan of "The Hollywood Reporter" labeled the song "a hodge-podge of other pop tunes." Kevin O'Donnell of "Spin" gave a mixed review, pointing out lyrical similarities to Michael Jackson's "Black or White" (1991). He added that seeing the hype surrounding the project, he expected Gaga to release a song "as epic and instantly classic as The Beatles' 'A Day in the Life' or Queen's 'Bohemian Rhapsody'. Imagine what she'd come up with if she'd spent more than ten minutes writing [the song]."
Many critics noted similarities between "Born This Way" and Madonna's 1989 song, "Express Yourself", referring to "similar chords, same uplifting, girl-power theme (...), same tempo". Rob Sheffield of "Rolling Stone" acknowledged the influences of Madonna but pointed out that they would not overshadow the song, as it "[summed] up all the complex Gaga mythos, all her politics and Catholic angst and smeared lipstick, in one brilliant pop blast." Caryn Ganz, while writing for Yahoo! Music, criticized "Born This Way", stating that the song was "overworked, overwrought, noisy, cheesy, and very, very derivative." She specifically noted the similarities to songs like "When Love Takes Over" (2010), "Waterfalls" (1995), and three of Madonna's songs: "Express Yourself", "Ray of Light" (1998), and "Vogue". Megan Friedman from "Time" and Marissa Moss from "The Huffington Post" summarized their reaction as "mixed", due to the similarities they found with "Express Yourself". Neil McCormick of "The Daily Telegraph" noted that the imitative nature of the song would affect perceptions of Gaga's artistry, since "Born This Way" was "[basically] a reworking of Madonna's 'Express Yourself' with a touch of 'Vogue', which is a bit too much Madonna for someone who is trying to establish her own identity as the, er, new Madonna." The song has also attracted some academic attention: Juliet A. Williams, Professor of Gender studies UCLA, mentioning Madonna's "Express Yourself" and Judith Butler's "Gender Trouble", points out its post-essentialist feminist message.

Ann Powers of the "Los Angeles Times" concluded that "Born This Way" had an entirely different message from the Madonna songs it was being compared to and further defended it by saying, "Whether its sound comes too close to one or another Madonna song seems beside the point; what current pop hit doesn't go green by recycling something familiar?". Gaga herself addressed the comparisons on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno", explaining that she had received an e-mail from Madonna's representatives, who had mentioned their support for "Born This Way". "If the Queen says it shall be, then it shall be," she added. CNN later reported that Madonna's representatives were not aware that the singer, or her team, had sent Gaga an e-mail regarding the situation. Two months later, while getting interviewed by "NME" magazine, Gaga further addressed the comparisons to "Express Yourself":
Why would I try to put out a song and think I'm getting one over everybody? That's retarded. I will look in your eyes and tell you that I'm not dumb enough or moronic enough to think that you are dumb or moronic enough not to see that I would have stolen a melody. If you put the songs next to each other, side by side, the only similarities are the chord progression. It's the same one that has been in disco music for the last 50 years. Just because I'm the first fucking artist in 25 years to think of putting it on Top 40 radio, it doesn't mean I'm a plagiarist, it means I'm fucking smart. Sorry.

When interviewed by ABC News in 2012, Madonna was asked about the similarities between "Born This Way" and "Express Yourself", stating: "When I heard ['Born This Way'] on the radio ... I said, 'that sounds very familiar' ... It felt reductive." She also came to report to The Newsweek Daily Beast Company what she had in mind when she heard "Born This Way": "I thought, 'What a wonderful way to redo my song'. I mean, I recognised the chord changes. I thought it was... interesting."

At the end of 2011, Slant Magazine listed "Born This Way" as the fifth best song of the year, with Ed Gonzalez from the website commenting that the song is an "unmistakable landmark pop-cultural moment, a post-irony, post-metaphor, pansexual celebration, aimed squarely at the audience that probably needs it the most." It also placed the same rank on the list by MTV, with Gil Kaufman from the channel saying that the song and the music video "added to Gaga's mind-tripping visual canon and further established her as one of the biggest triple threats in music." PopMatters listed it at position 73 on their list of "The 75 Best Songs of 2011", with Sean McCarthy from the website saying that although "Born This Way" "is a labor to listen to because of its over-the-topness. No such problems exist with the title track. All of the Gaga's strengths on her one-hour monolith are condensed into a four-minute unstoppable ode to the outcasts of the world." Furthermore, "The Guardian" listed "Born This Way" as the 18th best song of 2011.

The video won two awards at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, in the categories of Best Female Video and Best Video With a Message. Along with the song winning the 2011 MTV Europe Music Award for Best Song, Gaga won also the award for Best Video with "Born This Way" at the same event. The song also set a world record at the Guinness World Records as the "Fastest-selling Single" on iTunes, with over a million copies sold in five days since its release.

In the United States, "Born This Way" debuted at number one on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart, for the issue dated February 26, 2011, as well as becoming Gaga's third number one single. "Born This Way" became the nineteenth song to debut at number one on the Hot 100, and the 1000th number one single in the chart's history. The song sold 448,000 digital downloads in three days, the most downloads in a first week by a female artist, beating the previous record held by Britney Spears' "Hold It Against Me". The record would be later broke by Taylor Swift's "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" when it sold 623,000 digital copies in its debut week in the week ending September 1, 2012. "Born This Way" remained at the top the following week, selling another 509,000 copies in its first full week of release, and becoming the first song to enter the Hot 100 at number one and hold that position for a second week since Clay Aiken's "This Is The Night" in 2003. Subsequently, the song held the number one spot for six weeks making it the only song to debut at number one and stay there for over a month since Elton John's "Candle in the Wind 1997" in 1997.

"Born This Way" went on to break the record for the fastest selling song in iTunes history, selling a million copies worldwide in five days. The song's CD single sold 24,000 copies in its first week of release and a total of 40,000 copies till March 2011. "Born This Way" sold 3.47 million digital copies in 2011 and became the tenth-best-selling song of the year in the United States. It is her eighth consecutive song to top the two million mark, and her sixth song to reach three million downloads. As of February 2019, it has sold 4.3 million digital downloads in the US.

"Born This Way" debuted at number 14 on the "Billboard" Pop Songs chart with 4,602 plays after three days of availability, the highest detections total by a debuting song in the chart's history. It was the second-highest debut on that chart, behind Mariah Carey's "Dreamlover" (1993) which debuted at number 12. In its seventh week on the chart, "Born This Way" reached the top, becoming Gaga's seventh number-one song there, thus tying her with Pink and Rihanna as the artist's with the most number one songs on the chart. In addition, the song broke the overall airplay debut record with a first week audience of 78.5 million, entering at number six on the Radio Songs chart; this feat surpassed Janet Jackson's "All for You" (2001) which had debuted at number nine with an audience of 70 million. "Born This Way" topped the chart after seven weeks, becoming her second number-one radio song after "Paparazzi". "Born This Way" topped the Japan Hot 100 and Hot Dance Club Songs charts, reached top-ten on Latin Pop Airplay and Adult Contemporary, and number 11 on Adult Top 40 charts. "Born This Way" took the number one position in its debut week in Canada, remaining atop the Canadian Hot 100 for seven weeks.

On February 20, 2011, the single debuted at number one in Australia on the official ARIA Singles Chart, becoming Gaga's third number-one single there, and the highest selling song to debut at the top. "Born This Way" was certified four-times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for shipment of 280,000 copies of the single. The single debuted at number one on the New Zealand RIANZ charts, becoming Gaga's second number-one single there after "Poker Face" (2008). It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand (RIANZ) for shipment of 15,000 copies of the single. In the United Kingdom, "Born This Way" logged first week sales of 60,000 digital copies, landing it at number three on the UK Singles Chart, which became its peak position. It sold 625,000 copies in 2011 in the UK and 712,600 copies by September 2016. Elsewhere, the song debuted atop the charts in Spain, Finland, Ireland, and the Netherlands. "Born This Way" debuted at number two in Italy, France, Sweden, Norway, Austria, Germany, and Belgium (Flanders). In addition, it debuted at number-four in Denmark and then moved to the second spot. "Born This Way" had sold 8.2 million digital copies by November 2011 and had become the fifth best-selling digital single of the year, worldwide.

The music video was shot the weekend of January 22–24, 2011 in New York City, and was described by Gaga's team as a "profound, so inspiring and so incredibly beautiful" video. The video was directed by Nick Knight. Choreographer Laurieann Gibson told MTV News that the video would be "shocking" and one can expect the execution of the highest level of vocal music art and dance. Hollywoodlife.com reported that Gaga spent the first week of February editing the video at the Greenwich Hotel, New York, working during the night as she had to spend the morning rehearsing for her upcoming Grammy Awards performance. Media reports suggested that the singer might play the character of Jo Calderone, the male model she had portrayed in the September issue of Japanese "Vogue Hommes". Fernando Garibay explained that the video "is of cultural relevance, and hopefully helps people that are an outcast, bullied. Hopefully makes people aware that it's OK to be yourself." According to Gaga, she was inspired by the paintings of Salvador Dalí and Francis Bacon, and their surrealistic images. Gibson explained the inspiration behind the video to MTV News:

When she played it for me, it took me a while to find out the visual interpretation that I could give back to her. And so I woke up one night and I got it, and I said, 'I got it: We have to birth a new race.' From the gate, Gaga was like, 'I want Nick Knight for this video. I want a visual.' She was always birthing something visual in her head, and Nick Knight is just, well, he's prolific but he's so genius. It was about pushing the bar of what a music video should be and can be. [...] It's a different time; it's a different era; there are no limits. It is a viral message. I think that there's something in there for everyone, and that's what's so amazing about the video and so specific about the message.
Gibson recalled having to work with Gaga on her dancing in the video, and to make her a better dancer she wanted Gaga to be confident. Gaga chose New York to shoot the video because the city is her birthplace. Before shooting started, Gibson and Gaga decided there was only one place to work on the avant-garde, modern dance routine for the video, Alvin Alley, where Gibson had studied dance. "We rehearsed there because the choreography is really modern-based. It's, like, more technical than anything she's ever done," she recalled. Shooting also took place in Brooklyn for two days. Since Gaga did not want set pictures to be taken before the video was ready, her team had to hide the location and were successful, except at the last day when paparazzi started sneaking around.

The video featured full-bodied tattooed model Rick Genest (Rico), better known by his stage name Zombie Boy. Gaga painted her face in a similar way to Genest, in one of the main series of sequences. She said that the sequences displayed the fact that she would not allow society or critics to dictate her sense of beauty. "I tell you what I think is beauty, and hence the scene was of me and Rico defining ourselves in artistic way and not relying on society to dictate it," she added. The costumes for the video were designed by Formichetti, who blogged about the various designer pieces shown in it. In the opening sequence of the video, Gaga wore a head accessory by Alexis Bittar, a diamond neckpiece by Erickson Beamon with earrings by Pamela Love, and a stained-glass dress by Petra Storrs. Finger rings were provided by Erickson Beamon and chiffon clothes by Thierry Mugler. For the skeletons sequences, both she and Rico wore tuxedos by Mugler while the slime during the orgy scenes were courtesy of Bart Hess. For her Michael Jackson impression in the alley at the video's end, Gaga wore shirt and pants by Haus of Gaga, shoes by Natacha Marro, a Billykirk belt and LaCrasia gloves.

Released on Monday, February 28, 2011, the video begins with a brief shot of a unicorn's silhouette in a steam-filled alley, inside a pink triangle frame. The triangle transitions to a shot of Gaga, with two opposite facing heads, inspired by Janus, the Roman god of transition and beginnings, sitting in an ornate glass throne amidst a star-filled space. As Bernard Herrmann's prelude to the movie "Vertigo" plays, Gaga tells the story of the creation of an extraterrestrial race that "bears no prejudice, no judgment, but boundless freedom." Gaga sits in the throne, giving birth to a "new race within the race of humanity." She explains that this was followed by the birth of evil, due to which Gaga splits into two opposing forces of good and evil. Her new half gives birth to a machine gun and fires it. The prologue concludes with Gaga questioning, "How can I protect something so perfect, without evil?"

Gaga, with shoulder and facial protrusions (prosthetic makeup mimicking subdermal implants) walks in a seemingly endless black space, where people are on their hands and knees in an organized pattern. She raises her hand and crouches down to join them. When the first verse begins, everyone dances to choreography. The scenes alternate between the dance, and Gaga singing on her throne in space. In the second verse, Gaga and Rico are in tuxedos, with her face painted to mirror his. Alternating clips show Gaga caressing and attempting to dance with him while he stays expressionless and motionless for the most part. When the chorus plays for the second time, Gaga sings in a room of mirrors, with her head displayed in a glass box among oddly distorted mannequin heads. In the succeeding shots, she is once again shown on her throne giving birth to more members of the new race. After choreographed routines by Gaga and her dancers, they all gather in a circle and embrace in a hug.

In the video's conclusion, Gaga's silhouette struts in an alley in a tribute to Jackson's "The Way You Make Me Feel" video. Her face is misconstrued, with sharp horns protruding from her face, glowing eyes, uneven hair, and a distinct Madonna-esque gap between her front teeth. Gaga has commented that she was teased as kids would call her "rabbit teeth". She sheds a single tear as the pink triangle frame appears again, and inside it, a silhouette of Gaga sitting atop the unicorn. A city and a rainbow appear in the background, and Gaga is seen in her zombie makeup, chewing bubble gum and blowing it, as the pink triangle zooms away.

The music video for "Born This Way" was met with generally positive reception among music critics. James Montgomery of MTV praised the overall creationism concept of the music video, adding that it "sort of makes sense, it sort of doesn't, but that 100 percent doesn't really matter much. This is Gaga at her most fabulous, her most out-there, her most, well, Gaga." In conclusion of his review, he wrote that the fantasy aspects of the video is overshadowed by the overall spectacle, which he believed was analogous to Gaga, "after thoroughly dominating this world with 'Born This Way,' [she] seems content to create brand-new worlds to tower over." Myrddin Gwynedd of "The New Zealand Herald" felt that Gaga's penchant for eccentric and provocative imagery, was extreme in the video. Raphael Chestang from "Entertainment Tonight" praised the performance of Gaga and her dancers in the video, also complimenting the fashion. Monica Herrera from "Billboard" noticed that the video bore similarities to the music video of Madonna's "Vogue" and "Borderline" (1984), while believing it to be "more of a high-fashion short film than a conventional music video". Jim Farber from "New York Daily News" wanted Gaga to add more humor in her videos, adding that although the video had "joyous" shock value, it definitely lacked creativity.

Oscar Moralde from Slant Magazine noted that in the video, "Gaga fully embraces the monstrous as a part of her." Moralde further explained that previously the singer had acknowledged her role as "Mother Monster", but never to the visceral, fully embodied extent that she does in the video. "The things that are monstrous, the things that are different—for Gaga, those are the things that are beautiful," he concluded. Gina Serpe from E! Online criticized it for being a "Madonna rip-off", while Matthew Perpetua of "Rolling Stone" noted similarities to some of Madonna's work and the imagery from in the 1927 German expressionist film, "Metropolis". Ann Powers from "Los Angeles Times" noted that the video paid tribute to the Goddess movement and feminism. According to her, with the video Gaga made goddess culture accessible to the mass, by portraying images borrowed from fine art, cinema and cool subcultures. Examples given by her included the portrayal of Rico as her partner, instead of a conventional-looking male or female consort. Powers further added that "Gaga has found a way to place female empowerment at the center of her vision without sacrificing the gains she makes by being a daddy's girl or a 'boy toy'." Megan Powers from "Time" criticized the video and Gaga's usage of shock-imagery, which she still found "strange". The video has been noted for its cultural references and artistic similarities, not only to other recording artists such as Jackson and Madonna, but to Greek and Roman mythology, surrealism and the work of Swiss painter H. R. Giger and late fashion designer Alexander McQueen.

On the February 9, 2011, episode of "The Ellen DeGeneres Show", singers Justin Bieber and James Blunt performed their own rendition of the song along with DeGeneres, improvising the music, while singing the chorus. During the show, Gaga confirmed via telephone that she would perform "Born This Way" on February 13, 2011, at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards. Gaga arrived at the ceremony in a giant incubating vessel that was carried onto the red carpet by numerous fashion models. She later emerged from another bigger egg on stage, dressed in a high ponytail, gold bra top and long skirt, with black and gold makeup and pointed shoulders and horns protruding from her face. The "Born This Way" performance was introduced by Ricky Martin. In the first few seconds after performing the intro of the song, Gaga emerged from the egg, and after the first chorus, she whipped her hair in a manner similar to singer Willow Smith. Before the "No matter gay, straight or bi" line of the song, an organ emerged from the stage floor. Gaga played the music on the organ, which was surrounded by mannequin heads submerged in gel, before belting out the rest of the bridge as her dancers surrounded her. Before leaving the stage, Gaga put on her trench and hat as the song faded out and Gaga and her dancers ended the performance with their hands put up in paws.

According to Gaga the Grammy performance was inspired by many things, including Gregorian music, Alvin Ailey dance moves and Martha Graham's dance energy. On "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" she explained that Smith inspired her to "whip my hair back and forth on stage," referring to Smith's similar named song. Gaga continued that the incubating vessel was meant to signify an artistic statement of birthing a new race with no prejudice. The idea occurred to her when she was in Amsterdam on her tour bus, and was thinking about birth and embryos. She had thought to herself, "Gosh, the thing I hate most about doing award shows is, it can be distracting... I want to exist only for my fans and for the stage. I don't want to exist in this machine or this circus that is the industry. I wish I could be encapsulated for three days and just think only about my performance, think only about the album, think only about the future of my fans. So that's what I did." Jocelyn Vena from MTV felt that the performance was "surprisingly" sparse compared to Gaga's previous "over-the-top" endeavors. Soraya Roberts from "New York Daily News" was disappointed with the "highly expected" performance, feeling that it had copied Madonna and her Blond Ambition World Tour choreography. Jason Lipscultz from "Billboard" described the performance as "spirited", and felt that Gaga's appearance inside the egg was one of the memorable moments of the Grammy Awards. Jennifer Armstrong from "Entertainment Weekly" praised the performance saying that although there were definite influences of Madonna in it, the performance was one of the highlights of the show. Matthew Perpetua from "Rolling Stone" concurred that "It should come as no surprise that Lady Gaga's performance of her new single 'Born This Way' was the evening's most visually stunning and bizarre spectacle."

Starting from the February 19, 2011 date of The Monster Ball Tour, Gaga performed "Born This Way" as a second encore to the show, using the same general attire and choreography as the Grammy performance, however the incubation vessel was not present and slight alterations were made in the outfits of her dancers. Tris McCall from "The Star-Ledger" was most impressed with the performance, calling it one of the highlights of the concert. He added that "reinterpretation of the single, which was far more Laura Nyro than Madonna, was such an improvement over the mechanized, tricked-out hit version that it was hard not to wish she could get back to the studio and re-cut it before the album comes out." Gaga performed an acoustic version on "The Oprah Winfrey Show", in May 2011, along with another song from "Born This Way", "You and I". Sitting atop a high stool, Gaga—in a red leather blazer, a floppy mask-like hat and see-through leopard bodysuit—played a piano made out of a wire high-heel structure.
At "The Graham Norton Show" in May 2011, Gaga performed "Born This Way" as the closing song of the show, while on Radio 1's Big Weekend in Carlisle, Cumbria it was the opening song of the set list. Another performance took place at the season finale of "Saturday Night Live", where the singer wore a metallic dress and a side ponytail. Midway through her performance, she displayed a pregnant belly as she emerged from within her dancers. A few days later, Gaga performed the song on "Good Morning America" as a part of their "Summer Concert Series". She wore gold horns and a gold sequined jacket, and near the end of the performance she joined her dancers in a tank filled with of dyed gel. During a promotional visit in Europe in June 2011, piano versions of the song was performed on the final show of the sixth season of "Germany's Next Topmodel", and at the EuroPride 2011 in Rome.

A medley of "Judas" and "Born This Way" was the closing performance on the "Paul O'Grady Live" show in London. Gaga closed the 2011 MuchMusic Video Awards with "Born This Way", appearing on stage inside a hanging cocoon. While touring Japan, "Born This Way" was performed along with "The Edge of Glory" on the 2011 MTV Video Music Aid Japan. After finishing performing "The Edge of Glory", she sneaked around the stage, and climbed some stairs to reach her piano—which was decked up to look like a giant spider—before launching into an acoustic version of "Born This Way". The song was included on the Born This Way Ball tour (2012–2013), during which she came out screaming from a giant alien womb. Gaga was dressed in Medieval inspired cloths similar to her performance of the song at the Grammys. In 2014, Gaga performed an acoustic version of "Born This Way" during her residency show at Roseland Ballroom and at the tour. In July 2016, Gaga visited an orphanage in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, where she sang an acoustic version of the song described as "emotional" by Megan McCluskey from "Time". Later that year, she appeared in the Carpool Karaoke segment of "The Late Late Show with James Corden", where "Born This Way" was between the selected songs Gaga sang with Corden in the vehicle.

On February 5, 2017, Gaga was the headliner of the Super Bowl LI halftime show and "Born This Way" was part of the performance. Nico Lang from "Salon" noted that compared to other songs performed during the event, which were mostly shortened into a medley, Gaga chose to perform the biggest part of "Born This Way", and "her singing its lyrics made Gaga the first person to ever say the words 'lesbian', 'gay', 'bi', or 'transgender' at the Super Bowl." Many other journalists highlighted the significance of singing the song at the Super Bowl, calling it a subtle political statement. In April 2017, Gaga performed "Born This Way" during both weeks of the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. The song was also part of the Joanne World Tour (2017–2018). After singing songs on the piano, Gaga strapped on a long white skirt for the performance of "Born This Way".

The singer performs the song during Lady Gaga Enigma (2018–2019), her Las Vegas residency, which involves two different shows. During the Enigma shows, Gaga performs it as the penultimate song in a "champagne-hued gold" dress, while on the Jazz and Piano show, she performs the song while playing on the piano. Chris Willman, from "Variety" reacted positively to her latter performance, saying that "Born This Way" "should have been born this way, the way she sings it alone at the piano, as a sort of slow gospel number; it no longer sounds like a kicky 'Vogue' knockoff but something more primal and spiritual, and it's surprisingly moving in this more reverent frame."

On March 3, 2011, during her concert in Toronto (Canada), Gaga performed an acoustic version of the song with ten-year-old Maria Aragon. Gaga had been impressed by Aragon's singing abilities when the ten-year-old uploaded her own version of "Born This Way" to YouTube. Aragon was subsequently invited on stage to sing with Gaga. She appeared wearing a fedora hat and carrying a stuffed monkey. Gaga sat at the piano, pulled Aragon onto her lap, before proceeding to sing a soul-inspired rendition of "Born This Way", trading off verses. "Maria represents what this song is all about," Gaga told the Canadian crowd after the performance. "It's all about the next generation and the future." Later, Aragon was invited at Radio Hot 103, where she sang the chorus of "Born This Way" through the phone. She also performed the song on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" on February 23, 2011. Fellow American singer Katy Perry performed a stripped down version of "Born This Way", on the March 7, 2011, date of her California Dreams Tour, in Paris. The performance was accompanied by two guitarists playing acoustic guitars.
The "Glee" cast covered the song during a thematic episode of their second season. The episode was named "Born This Way", and aired in the United States in April 2011, on Fox. Their version of the song was released for digital download, and sold 73,000 copies to enter the "Billboard" Hot 100 at number 44, and on the Canadian Hot 100 at number 31. Later, the "Glee" cover version was performed at the 2011 leg of the Glee Live! In Concert! tour, the song also was included on the concert-film "" and the original .

American singer-songwriter and parodist "Weird Al" Yankovic had sought permission from Gaga to parody "Born This Way", providing a brief description of the concept for his song. Her management responded that she must hear the song before providing approval. Yankovic obliged with the lyrics of "Perform This Way", which was released on April 25, 2011, as the first single from his thirteenth studio album, "Alpocalypse", on iTunes Store. After what Yankovic described as "considerable expense" in writing, recording, and mastering the song in the studio, he contacted Gaga's management again with a completed recording of the song. He was subsequently refused permission, without Gaga listening to the track and Yankovic getting the impression that the refusal came from the singer herself. Left with a completed song and abandoned plans for an outlandish music video to promote the song and album, Yankovic released it on YouTube. It was then that Gaga actually heard the song, and personally contacted Yankovic, giving him green light to include the song on "Alpocalypse", telling him that her manager had been the one to refuse permission, which was done without her knowledge or input.

BBC Radio 1's Alex Full a.k.a. the Cornish Fairy and singer Kirsten Joy Gill recorded a cover of the song called "Cornish This Way" in August 2011 as a modern Cornish anthem. The song was recorded at the Maida Vale Studios in London, and the music video was shot in Newquay, Cornwall at the Boardmasters Festival. On May 20, 2012, a video leaked from rehearsals of Madonna's The MDNA Tour (2012) showed the singer incorporating "Born This Way" into "Express Yourself" followed by a performance of "She's Not Me", from her 2008 album "Hard Candy". It created a media frenzy with many speculating that she was "dissing" Gaga and the song. Madonna included the sequence in her tour, during the second segment. Alice Cooper added a cover of the song to the 2012 leg of his No More Mr. Nice Guy tour. It features altered lyrics, though it maintains the chorus and melody of Gaga's version. Later, Gaga showed appreciation for the cover on her Twitter account.





Recording and management

Personnel

Credits adapted from "Born This Way" album liner notes.

!scope="row"|Worldwide (IFPI)


</doc>
<doc id="30271971" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30271971" title="Pilophorus acicularis">
Pilophorus acicularis

Pilophorus acicularis, commonly known as the nail lichen or the devil's matchstick, is a species of lichen in the Cladoniaceae family.

"P. aciculare" has both crustose (crust-like) and fruticose thallus (shrub-like) body parts. The lichen starts out as a granular crust on the rock surface, and develops fruticose stalks, or "pseudopodetia", up to tall and about 1 mm thick that have rounded black apothecia at the tips. The stalks are erect and curved so as to appear combed. It grows directly on silicate rocks in dense clusters. It is found on the west coast of North America up to Alaska, and in eastern Eurasia. In addition to green algae, the lichen contains cyanobacteria that help contribute to soil fertility by supplying fixed nitrogen.

It was originally described in 1803, and transferred to the genus "Pilophorus" in 1857.

The species was first described in 1803 as "Baeomyces acicularis" by the Swedish botanist and "father of lichenology" Erik Acharius. The taxon was transferred to several different genera in the next few decades resulting in several synonyms, including "Cenomyces acicularis" (by Acharius in 1810), "Cladonia acicularis" (Elias Magnus Fries in 1831), and "Stereocaulon aciculare" (Edward Tuckerman in 1845). Elias Fries's son Thore Magnus transferred the species to his then newly created genus "Pilophorus" in 1857. William Nylander also published the combination "Pilophorus acicularis" in 1857, but later analysis suggested that Fries's combination was published first, and under the Principle of Priority, the correct citation of the species is "Pilophorus acicularis" (Ach.) Th.Fr. (1857).

The genus "Pilophorus" was until recently considered to be a member of the Stereocaulaceae family by some authors. Analysis of small subunit ribosomal DNA sequences showed "P. acicularis" to be more closely related to the Cladoniaceae, rather than the Stereocaulaceae.

The specific epithet "aciculare" is derived from the Latin "acicularis", meaning "needle-like". The lichen is commonly known as the "devil's matchstick"; the common name for the genus—"nail lichen"—is also used.

The thallus is the vegetative body of a lichen that contains the lichen mycobiont (fungus) and the photobiont (algae and/or cyanobacteria). In "P. acicularis", the primary thallus ("thallus horizontalis") is spread out like a granular crust on the surface of its substrate. It is light green when young, but becomes gray in age or when dry. The pseudopodetia (upright stalk-like extensions of the thallus made of vegetative tissue) range from high, and are about 1 mm thick; they grow in dense clusters. Most pseudopodetia are either unbranched or forked into two branches, with the stalks curved so as to appear as if combed; less frequently, they are erect like pins, and up to tall. Some specimens are highly branched in the upper part of the pseudopodetia, causing them to bear some resemblance to "P. robustus", although this morphology is uncommon. Internally, the pseudopodetia are solid when young, becoming hollow with age, and are composed of long, thin, highly gelatinized hyphae with narrow cavities about 0.5 μm wide. The lower part of older pseudopodetia becomes blackened internally. The algal layer is not continuous—contrasting with lichen species that have thalli that stratify into discrete tissue types, including a photobiont layer—and occurs with the mycobiont in the form of granules. These granules may be absent from some parts of the thallus surface. Pycnidia (flask-like structures, resembling perithecia, in which conidia are produced) occur in the tips of small sterile pseudopodetia or in the tips of small lateral branches of older pseudopodetia.

The conidiophores of "P. acicularis" are 30 μm long, and unbranched. They have terminal sickle-shaped conidia that measure 6 by 1 μm. The apothecia (reproductive structures covered with the spore-producing asci) are abundant, usually with one or several on the tips of the pseudopodetia. They are black, hemispherical or roughly triangular, and measure up to 1.5 mm in diameter. The hymenium (the fertile spore-bearing layer of cells containing the asci) is up to 240 μm thick, and about two-thirds of it is pigmented; the lower part of the hymenium is sterile, consisting of only paraphyses. The asci are eight-spored. The ascospores are rounded when young, becoming spindle-shaped when mature, with dimensions of 21.0–29.5 by 4.5–5.5 μm. The generative tissue (hyphae that eventually forms the thallus) is closely interwoven with short, broad cells that have large cavities. The generative tissue is pigmented black-brown, with the color being most intense below the paraphyses, becoming less so towards the stalk region.

"Pilophorus acicularis" is a tripartite lichen—containing a fungus, a green alga, and a cyanobacterium. Cephalodia (lichenized aggregations of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria) are present on the primary thallus; smaller cephalodia are also on the pseudopodetia. Hemispherical to irregularly shaped, and light to dark brown in color, they contain species from the genus "Nostoc". The green algal photosynthetic symbiont (photobiont) associated with "P. acicularis" is "Asterochloris magna" (formerly "Trebouxia magna").

"Pilophorus acicularis" can be separated from similar species by its tall pseudopodetia. It may be confused with "P. robustus", especially in material from Alaska where both species occur together. Usually, the different branching (umbellate in "P. robustus" versus dichotomous in "P. acicularis") and the lack of a columella (an internal, column-shaped structure) in longitudinal sections of the pseudopodetia of "P. acicularis" make it relatively easy to distinguish between the two.

"Pilophyllus clavatus", a species found in Western North America, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea, resembles "P. acicularis", but it has much shorter pseudopodetia—up to long.

The lichen typically grows on silicate stone, rarely on decaying wood. It is usually in partial shade in openings in low to mid-elevation moist forests, and is also frequently found in rocky roadcuts. Lichens with cephalodia are capable of fixing nitrogen, and contribute nitrogen to the ecosystem.

"P. acicularis" is probably the most abundant species of the genus. Most specimens have been found on the west coast of North America as far north as Alaska, but it has been reported most frequently from British Columbia and Washington. The species is found in China, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan, and has also been reported from the Russian arctic. In general, "P. acicularis" seems to prefer an oceanic climate without extremely low temperatures, at least in comparison with other species of the genus. This assumption is supported by the fact that "P. acicularis" is found more southerly (34 findings in California) than all other species and is less frequently found in northern Alaska where, for example, "P. robustus" and "P. vegae" are more common. "P. acicularis" is rare east of the Rocky Mountains.


</doc>
<doc id="30313867" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30313867" title="Brentwood Academy v. Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Ass'n">
Brentwood Academy v. Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Ass'n

Brentwood Academy v. Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Association, 531 U.S. 288 (2001), is a United States Supreme Court case concerning whether the actions of an interscholastic sport-association that regulated sports among Tennessee schools could be regarded as a state actor for First Amendment and Due Process purposes. The Court held that the sport-association can be sued as a state actor because its actions and history have been "entangled" with state action. While the Supreme Court would reconsider this same case in the future, this specific decision became important in articulating a new principle of what entities are bound by the First Amendment.

The Tennessee Secondary School Athletic Association (TSSAA) is a non-profit membership corporation organized to regulate interscholastic sports among its members (a large portion of the public and private high schools in Tennessee). The association's role in regulating interscholastic competition in public schools was recognized by the state's Board of Education in the case. Brentwood Academy is a private high school that fields interscholastic teams as a member of TSSAA. Brentwood was highly successful in sports competition, winning nine state football championships between 1969, when it was founded, and 1997. This success fostered resentment among opponent schools, which questioned the Academy's tactics for recruiting players. 

In 1997, TSSAA investigated rumors that Brentwood Academy was engaging in illegal practices to recruit public school athletes to the school. No such practices were identified, but TSSAA discovered that Brentwood Academy's football coach had invited eighth grade boys who would be enrolling in the school the following school year to attend spring football practice. TSSAA identified this as a violation of its rules and fined the school $3,000 for contacting student athletes prior to their official enrollment at the school and for violating a TSSAA policy prohibiting "undue influence on a student (or) his or her parents...to secure or to retain a student for athletic purposes." The association also placed the school on four years' probation and banned it from participating in state playoff games for two years. 

Brentwood Academy sued the association over this action. Brentwood argued that the enforcement of the rule constituted state action which they claimed violated the First Amendment and the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause. The school asserted that their due process rights had been violated because there were no evidentiary hearings to determine the validity of the claim that they inappropriately recruited football players. Further, they argued that the rule violated their freedom of speech because it restricted the ways the Academy could recruit. In July 1998, the District Court agreed with this argument and granted summary judgement to the Academy, while enjoining the association from enforcing the rule. A year later, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the lower court's decision, finding that the actions of the association did not constitute 'state action'. The United States Supreme Court granted "certiorari" of the case to review this question.

Before any questions of First Amendment law could be decided, the Court had to first determine whether TSSAA was a state entity and so whether the First Amendment applied.

The Court issued a divided decision, splitting 5-4 in favor of reversing the Sixth Circuit and finding the actions of the association as "state action."

Justice Souter wrote for the five-justice majority, "The nominally private character of the Association is overborne by the pervasive entwinement of public institutions and public officials in its composition and workings, and there is no substantial reason to claim unfairness in applying constitutional standards to it." Part of the basis for this determination were historical statements by the Tennessee Board of Education, which had granted regulatory authority to the association and recognition of its own independent authority. For example, the Board explicitly approved the TSSAA's rules and reserved the right to continuously review them in the future. Further, employees at the association were given state pensions. Because the association could essentially "coerce" the member schools to follow its rules and the state would back it up, it was using state police power. Therefore, Souter concluded, the restrictions on denial of due process would apply to the association, and the lawsuit could proceed in the lower courts.

Justice Clarence Thomas wrote a dissenting opinion, joined by three other Justices. He criticized the usage of a new "entwinement" standard for determining state action, which he said "stretched the doctrine beyond its permissible limits." He attacked the majority's decision as breaking a prohibition on extending the Fourteenth Amendment to "merely private conduct," relying on similar cases that did not extend 'state action' to collegiate sports associations. Further, he said the meaning of 'entwinement' is "unclear" because it was left undefined and possibly too expansive. He concluded by stating that the Court should have affirmed the Sixth Circuit's opinion.

This case created the "entwinement test", the principle that a private organization could be connected in such a way with state organizations that the private organization itself exercises state power. With this new rule announced, the Court sent the case back to lower courts to reconsider the arguments of Brentwood Academy.

The case was sent back to the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals who instructed the association that they could prevail if they showed the enforced rule was narrowly defined to promote "governmental interests". A second District Court trial on this factor again resulted in a finding in favor of Brentwood Academy. The Sixth Circuit this time affirmed. In 2007, the Supreme Court again granted review and this time reversed in favor of the association. In a unanimous decision, Justice John Paul Stevens held that the actual rule did not violate the First Amendment and that the tactics used to recruit football players rose to the level of a governmental interest. On other claims though, the case was sent back again to the Sixth Circuit. The Sixth Circuit rejected the remaining claims and the Supreme Court denied review, ending the case.


</doc>
<doc id="30321326" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30321326" title="Mycena arcangeliana">
Mycena arcangeliana

Mycena arcangeliana (commonly known as the angel's bonnet or the late-season bonnet) is a species of Mycenaceae fungus. It has been known by a number of scientific names, and its taxonomy is still somewhat disputed. It produces small mushrooms with caps varying in colour from whitish to a darker grey-brown, and stems of an olive-greyish that fade with age. The mushrooms can be mistaken for the similar "Mycena flavescens". They have a mild taste, but a strong smell of iodoform; they are not edible. The species grows on dead wood in autumn months, and can be found throughout Europe.

"Mycena arcangeliana" was first described by Giacomo Bresadola in 1904; the species was listed along with 41 others found in Pisa, in an article by Egidio Barsali published in the "Bollettino Della Societa Botanica Italiana" ("Bulletin of the Botanical Society of Italy"). Authors Roger Phillips and Paul Sterry both describe the name "Mycena oortiana" as synonymous; "M. oortiana" was a name given by Frederich Hora in 1960 based on Robert Kühner's 1938 name for the variety "Mycena arcangeliana" var. "oortiana", an invalid name. Phillips had earlier considered "M. arcangeliana" var. "oortiana" to be a synonym of "M. oortiana", and MycoBank lists it as a synonym of Lucien Quélet's "Mycena olivascens". However, Index Fungorum lists both "M. olivascens" and Kühner's "Mycena vitilis" var. "olivascens" as synonyms of "M. arcangeliana". The specific epithet "arcangeliana" may be in honour of Giovanni Arcangeli, who collected the species in the Orto botanico di Pisa. "M. arcangeliana" is commonly known as the angel's bonnet, or the late-season bonnet.

Within the genus "Mycena", it is found in the section "Filipedes", on account of the cheilocystidia covered with evenly spaced, short cylindrical excrescences, and its size and occurrence on wood. It can be separated from the other members of the section on account of a cap with yellowish to olive shades, gills with pinkish hints and stems with vaguely violet colouration.

"Mycena arcangeliana" mushrooms have caps of between in diameter which are conical in shape in younger mushrooms, becoming bell-shaped with a broad umbo in older specimens. The oldest mushrooms have caps which are almost completely flat. The colouration varies from a whitish to a darker grey-brown, sometimes with tints of olive or yellow, and it has furrows on the typically translucent surface. However, it is hygrophanous, and dries to a much paler colour. The cylindrical stem measures between in length, by in width. In young mushrooms, it is an olive-greyish colour, tinted with lilac, though it fades as the mushroom ages. The very top of the stem is a whitish colour, while the base is covered in white hairs. It is smooth and silky in texture, and there is no ring. The crowded gills are adnexed, that is, connected to the stem by only part of their depth, and are white in colour, turning pinkish as the mushroom ages. The gill edges are somewhat toothed. The flesh has a mild taste, but a strong smell of iodoform. In the cap, it is white, while in the stem, it is grey. The mushrooms are not edible.

"Mycena arcangeliana" mushrooms leave a whitish spore print, while the spores are shaped like apple seeds and amyloid, meaning that they stain a dark colour in Melzer's reagent or Lugol's solution. The basidia are four-spored. They measure from between 7 and 8 micrometres (µm) by 4.5 and 5 µm. There are a large number of hyaline cheilocystidia (cystidia on the edge of the gills) which are club-shaped or ovate. They have thin cell walls, and are covered in grain-like warts. The pleurocystidia (the cystidia on the face of the gill) are similar in appearance. The pileipellis is made up of wart-covered hyphae measuring between 2 and 4.5 µm wide and up to 30 µm long. The outermost layer of the stem is made up hyphae with short, cylindrical hairs. The hyphae have clamp connections.

"Mycena arcangeliana" is somewhat similar to the less common "Mycena flavescens", a species found in both hardwood and softwood forests on the floor among leaf or needle litter or grassland. "M. flavescens" typically has a whiter cap and a smell reminiscent of radish. "M. peyerimhoffi", known from Algeria, has a similar cap colour to "M. arcangeliana", but has a yellow stem. "M. limonia", known from the Netherlands, has a lemon-yellow cap and stem and more gills. Another species similar in appearance is "M. metata", which has a sweet taste.

"Mycena arcangeliana" grows on dead deciduous wood, favouring beech and ash, where it grows in "small troops". It has also been recorded less frequently on conifers, bracken and Japanese knotweed. There have been reports from grassland, but these are probably a misidentification of "M. flavescens". It is infrequently to commonly found in late summer to autumn months in the British Isles, though it is more commonly encountered in the south. Its distribution is fairly widespread elsewhere in Europe, though it is less common. It has been listed as vulnerable on the Red List of Threatened Fungi in Norway. ""Mycena oortiana"", which was rarely found in mycological literature, was described as a predominantly west-European species; however, "M. arcangeliana" has also been recorded in Scandinavia, Greenland, and Italy, from where it was first described.


</doc>
<doc id="30371311" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30371311" title="2011 Tucson shooting">
2011 Tucson shooting

On January 8, 2011, U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords and eighteen others were shot during a constituent meeting held in a supermarket parking lot in Casas Adobes, Arizona, in the Tucson metropolitan area. Six people died, including federal District Court Chief Judge John Roll; Gabe Zimmerman, one of Giffords' staffers; and a nine-year-old girl, Christina-Taylor Green. Giffords was holding the meeting, called "Congress on Your Corner", in the parking lot of a Safeway store when Jared Lee Loughner drew a pistol and shot her in the head before proceeding to fire on other people. One additional person was injured in the immediate aftermath of the shooting. News reports identified the target of the attack to be Giffords, a Democrat representing . She was shot through the head at point-blank range, and her medical condition was initially described as "critical".

Loughner, a 22-year-old Tucson man who was fixated on Giffords, was arrested at the scene. Federal prosecutors filed five charges against him, including the attempted assassination of a member of Congress and the assassination of a federal judge. Loughner previously had been arrested (but not convicted) once on a minor drug charge and had been suspended by his college for disruptive behavior. Court filings include notes handwritten by Loughner indicating he planned to assassinate Giffords. Loughner did not cooperate with authorities, invoking his right to remain silent. He was held without bail and indicted on 49 counts. In January 2012, Loughner was found by a federal judge to be incompetent to stand trial based on two medical evaluations, which diagnosed him with paranoid schizophrenia. Judged still incompetent to stand trial on May 25, finally on August 7, Loughner had a hearing at which he was judged competent. He pleaded guilty to 19 counts, and in November 2012 was sentenced to life in prison.

Following the shooting, American and international politicians expressed grief and condemnations. Gun control advocates pushed for increased restrictions on the sale of firearms and ammunition, specifically high-capacity magazines. Some commentators criticized the use of harsh political rhetoric in the United States, with a number blaming the political right wing for the shooting; in particular, Sarah Palin was criticized for a poster by her political action committee that featured stylized crosshairs on an electoral map. Palin rejected claims that she bore responsibility for the shooting, and others defended her by noting that Loughner hated all politicians regardless of their affiliation. President Barack Obama led a nationally televised memorial service on January 12, and other memorials took place.

The shooting took place on January 8, 2011, at 10:10 a.m. MST (17:10 UTC). A United States Representative from Arizona, Gabrielle Giffords, was holding a constituent meeting called "Congress on Your Corner" at the Safeway supermarket in La Toscana Village mall, which is in Casas Adobes, an unincorporated area north of Tucson, Arizona. Giffords had set up a table outside the store and about 20 to 30 people were gathered around her when 22-year-old Jared Lee Loughner suddenly drew a pistol and shot Giffords in the head. The shooting was caught on video by a store security camera, but has not yet been released to the public.

Loughner proceeded to fire apparently randomly at other members of the crowd. He was armed with a Glock 19 semi-automatic pistol with four magazines, two of which were capable of holding 33 rounds. A nearby store employee said he heard "15 to 20 gunshots". Loughner stopped to reload, but dropped the loaded magazine from his pocket to the sidewalk, from where bystander Patricia Maisch grabbed it. Another bystander clubbed the back of the assailant's head with a folding chair, injuring his elbow in the process, representing the fourteenth injury. Loughner was tackled to the ground by Bill Badger, a 74-year-old retired United States Army Colonel who had also been shot himself. Loughner was further subdued by Maisch and bystanders Roger Sulzgeber and Joseph Zamudio. Zamudio, a concealed weapon (CCW) permit holder, had a weapon on his person, but arrived after the shooting had stopped and did not draw his firearm. Thirty-one shell casings were found at the scene by investigators.

The first call from the scene to emergency services was received at 10:11 a.m. While waiting for help to arrive, Giffords' intern Daniel Hernández Jr. applied pressure to the gunshot wound on her forehead, and made sure she did not choke on her blood. Hernández was credited with saving Giffords' life. David and Nancy Bowman, a married doctor and nurse who were shopping in the store, immediately set up triage and attended to nine-year-old Christina-Taylor Green. Police arrived on the scene at 10:15 a.m., with paramedics arriving at 10:16 a.m. Badger observed the assailant attempting to discard a small bag containing money and identification, which was recovered by the officers. Following the shooting, the police shut down roads surrounding the shopping center until late in the day. The intersection was cordoned off and most of the businesses in the shopping center were closed throughout the weekend during the initial investigation. The Safeway store reopened a week later, with a makeshift memorial erected near the front of the store.

Five people died at the scene, including Chief Judge John Roll and Giffords' community outreach director Gabe Zimmerman. Most of the injured were taken to University Medical Center in Tucson. Christina-Taylor Green was later pronounced dead on arrival at the hospital.

When Loughner's parents arrived at their home, unaware of the shootings, they found police tape and police cars around their house. Their neighbor Wayne Smith said Loughner's mother "almost passed out right there", while his father sat in the road and cried. Smith described the family as "devastated", feeling guilty, and wondering "where did they fail?" Loughner's parents released a statement three days later expressing remorse for the victims and saying, "We don't understand why this happened."

Jared Lee Loughner, the suspect, was described as a white male in his mid-20s with short hair and "dressed in a shabby manner". He was arrested after being detained by bystanders, and police later released his name and details. The FBI attempted to question Loughner, but he reportedly refused to cooperate with authorities and invoked his Fifth Amendment rights. Authorities said that Loughner's motive was unknown. They said that evidence seized from a safe in Loughner's home included an envelope marked with notes reading "I planned ahead", "My assassination", and "Giffords", as well as a letter from Giffords' office thanking him for attending a similar event in 2007.

Federal officials charged Loughner the next day with killing federal government employees, attempting to assassinate a member of Congress and attempting to kill federal employees. Police reports reveal he had purchased a Glock pistol at a Sportsman's Warehouse store, after passing the required FBI background check, less than six weeks before and attempted to buy additional ammunition for the pistol at a Walmart on the morning of the shooting, but the clerk refused to sell it to him based on his appearance and demeanor.

As the shooting occurred outside the Tucson city limits in unincorporated Casas Adobes, the Pima County Sheriff's Department started the initial investigation with assistance from the Tucson Police Department and the Arizona Department of Public Safety. The Federal Bureau of Investigation director Robert Mueller was ordered to the location by President Obama, and the FBI took over the investigation. The United States Capitol Police also conducted an investigation.

Jared Lee Loughner, then age 22, lived with his parents Randy and Amy Loughner in Tucson, about from the site of the shooting. His mother worked for the City Parks Department; his father's work was not known. Loughner had been attending Pima Community College. Former classmates stated Loughner (at the time) cared about his education due to his appreciation of knowledge. Because of teacher and student complaints about Loughner's increasingly disruptive behavior in classes, the college suspended him on September 29, 2010, and he dropped out of the school in October. Loughner chose not to return, as the college required him to have a mental health evaluation and clearance to be readmitted.

Before the shooting, Loughner had two previous offenses, one of which was for drug possession. He had become obsessed with Giffords, and had previously met her at a "Congress on your Corner" event in a Tucson mall in August 2007.

U.S. Army officials said that Loughner had attempted to enlist in 2008, but his application had been rejected as "unqualified" for service. They declined further disclosure due to confidentiality rules. An administration official indicated to the media that Loughner had failed a drug test.

Loughner had been posting material online for some time via his Myspace account and on YouTube under the name "Classitup10". He gave his views on terrorism, federal laws, and his belief that the government was brainwashing the citizenry with language. Hours before the incident, Loughner's Myspace page was updated with posts from his account stating, "Goodbye", and said to friends: "Please don't be mad at me."

On November 30, 2010 Loughner purchased a Glock 19 semi-automatic pistol at a Sportsman's Warehouse store in Tucson, passing a background check.

Earlier on the day of the shooting, Loughner reportedly had an altercation with his father regarding a black bag the younger man took from a car trunk. A bag matching the description was later found in a nearby desert area containing 9mm ammunition, and it is believed to belong to Loughner. Later that morning, at approximately 7:30 a.m., Loughner was stopped by an Arizona Game and Fish Department officer after running a red light, but was released with a reminder when it was determined that he did not have any outstanding warrants.

Loughner was held in the Federal Correctional Institution at Phoenix without bail. All Arizona-based federal judges recused themselves from the case because of their ties to Judge Roll, who was killed in the attack. The federal case was assigned to a San Diego-based jurist, federal Judge Larry Alan Burns from the United States District Court for the Southern District of California. The public defender Judy Clarke, also based in San Diego, was appointed to represent Loughner in federal court.

On January 19, 2011, a federal grand jury handed down an indictment for three counts against Loughner for the attempt to assassinate Representative Giffords, and attempting to kill two federal employees, her aides Ron Barber and Pamela Simon. Loughner was indicted on additional charges of murder and attempted murder on March 3, for a total of 49 counts.

Prosecutors representing the state of Arizona filed murder and attempted murder charges on behalf of the victims who were not federal employees. Under Arizona's speedy trial statutes, Arizona state prosecutors normally have ten days from the time a suspect is taken into custody to file charges, but time spent in federal custody does not count toward this limitation. Conviction in either federal or state court meant that Loughner could face the death penalty.

On May 25, 2011, Judge Burns found Loughner incompetent to stand trial based on two medical evaluations. These had diagnosed him as suffering from paranoid schizophrenia. Loughner was ordered to be forcibly medicated following his diagnosis of schizophrenia. A new evaluation was ordered for January 25, 2012.

On February 6, 2012, his stay at the Springfield, Missouri facility was extended by four months. A request by Loughner's lawyers to end forced medication was denied. Another competency hearing was set for June 27, 2012 but later rescheduled.

On August 7, 2012, Loughner's competency hearing began with testimony from Dr. Christina Pietz, Loughner's forensic psychologist, who testified that she believed Loughner was competent to stand trial. After hearing the evidence, Judge Burns ruled that Loughner was competent to stand trial, whereupon Loughner pleaded guilty to 19 counts, sparing himself the death penalty.

On November 8, 2012, Loughner appeared for sentencing, with several of his victims as well as relatives of those he killed in attendance. Judge Burns sentenced Loughner to seven consecutive life terms plus 140 years in prison without parole.

After his sentencing in federal court, Pima County Attorney Barbara LaWall announced that she would not prosecute Loughner on behalf of the state of Arizona. LaWall explained that her decision would afford the victims and their families, as well as the community in Tucson and Pima County, an opportunity to move forward with their lives. She said that, after speaking and consulting personally with each of the surviving victims and with the family members of those killed, it was clear that they would not be benefitted by a state prosecution. Surviving victims and family members told LaWall that they are "completely satisfied with the federal prosecution", that "justice has been served", and that the federal sentence is "suitably severe".

Six people were killed in the attack; all but Christina-Taylor Green died at the scene of the shooting:

In addition to the six dead, thirteen other people were wounded by gunshot in the attack, while a fourteenth person was injured subduing Loughner. Gabrielle Giffords and two other members of her staff were among the surviving gunshot victims. Staffer Ron Barber, shot in the thigh and face, would later succeed Giffords in her House seat.

Gabrielle Giffords was reported to be the target of the shootings. Some news organizations initially reported that she had been killed, but these statements were quickly revised to reflect that she had survived with a gunshot wound to the head. Daniel Hernandez Jr., one of Giffords's interns, assisted her after she was wounded and is credited with saving her life.

Giffords was taken to University Medical Center in critical condition, although she was still conscious. Within 38 minutes, Giffords underwent emergency surgery, and part of her skull was removed to prevent further brain damage caused by swelling. She was placed into a medically induced coma to allow her brain to rest. During a memorial ceremony on January 12, President Obama announced that earlier that day Giffords had opened her eyes for the first time since the attack.

As Giffords' status improved, she began simple physical therapy and music therapy. On January 21, 2011, less than two weeks after the attack, her condition was deemed sufficiently stable for her to be released to Houston's Memorial Hermann Medical Center. A few days later she was moved to the center's Institute for Rehabilitation and Research to undergo a program of physical therapy and rehabilitation. After examination, her Houston doctors were optimistic, saying she has "great rehabilitation potential". Medical experts expect Giffords's recovery to take from several months to more than one year.

On August 1, 2011, she made her first public appearance on the House floor to vote in favor of raising the debt limit ceiling. She was met with a standing ovation and accolades from her fellow members of Congress. Giffords engaged in intensive rehabilitation treatments in Asheville, North Carolina from October 25 through November 4. In 2011, Mark Kelly, Giffords' husband, published a memoir, "Gabby: A Story of Courage and Hope," crediting her with joint authorship. He wrote that Giffords vows to return to Congress, although she continues to struggle with language and has lost 50 percent of her vision in both eyes.

On January 22, 2012, Giffords announced that she would resign from her congressional seat in order to concentrate on her recovery, but promised to return to public service in the future. She submitted her resignation on January 25 on the floor of the House in an emotional appearance; colleagues and the House leadership offered their tributes to her courage and strength.

In the wake of the shooting, Democrats and Republicans both called for a cooling of political rhetoric and a return to bipartisanship. On the eve of the shooting, Giffords had written to a Republican friend, Trey Grayson, Secretary of State of Kentucky, saying, "we need to figure out how to tone our rhetoric and partisanship down." In March 2010, Giffords had expressed concern about the use of crosshairs on a national midterm election map on Sarah Palin's campaign webpage denoting targeted congressional seats, including Giffords's, in Arizona's 8th district. Shortly after the map's posting and the subsequent vandalizing of her office that month, Giffords said, "We're in Sarah Palin's 'targeted' list, but the thing is that the way she has it depicted, we're in the crosshairs of a gun sight over our district. When people do that, they've got to realize that there are consequences to that action." At that point in the interview, however, the interviewer said, "campaign rhetoric and war rhetoric have been interchangeable for years." The image was removed from Palin's "takebackthe20" website following the January shootings. Palin responded to her critics in a January 12 video, rejecting the notion that anyone other than the gunman could bear any responsibility for the Tucson shooting, and accusing the press of manufacturing a "blood libel" to blame her and the right wing for the attacks.

The political climate in the United States and in Arizona in particular was pointed to by some observers as a possible contributing factor for the violent act. For example, Clarence Dupnik, Pima County Sheriff, initially expressed concern that overheated political rhetoric and violence may be related, observing, "When you look at unbalanced people, how they respond to the vitriol that comes out of certain mouths about tearing down the government. The anger, the hatred, the bigotry that goes on in this country is getting to be outrageous." He believed that Arizona had unfortunately become "the capital" of such feelings. "We have become the mecca for prejudice and bigotry," he said. But, Dupnik later said that he had no evidence that the killings were a result of anything particular which Loughner may have read or heard. International media referred to the political climate in the United States and the Palin map in particular. The French newspaper "Le Monde" said that the attack seemed to confirm "an alarming premonition that has been gaining momentum for a long time: that the verbal and symbolic violence that the most radical right-wing opponents have used in their clash with the Obama administration would at some point lead to tragic physical violence." President Obama called the shooting an "unspeakable tragedy", adding that "such a senseless and terrible act of violence has no place in a free society". Arizona Governor Jan Brewer called the attack "senseless and cruel violence" and House Speaker John Boehner said, "An attack on one who serves is an attack on all who serve. Acts and threats of violence against public officials have no place in our society". Chief Justice John Roberts issued a statement noting, "we in the judiciary have suffered the terrible loss of one of our own", with the death of Chief Judge John Roll.

Political figures such as Arizona's United States Senators Jon Kyl and John McCain, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi issued statements. Numerous foreign politicians additionally commented on the shooting, including Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister Lawrence Cannon, British Prime Minister David Cameron, Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, and Cuba's Fidel Castro. The website GiffordsIsLying.com, run by Giffords' former opponent Jesse Kelly, was replaced with a single page urging support for Giffords and her family.

Senator Chuck Schumer called for a fresh look at gun control laws in the United States, including the possibility of high-capacity magazine ban, and prohibiting a person who has been rejected for military service due to drug use from owning a gun. Homeland Security Committee chairman Peter T. King announced that he would introduce a bill to ban the carrying of firearms within of certain federal officials. Representative Carolyn McCarthy announced that she would introduce legislation to ban the sale of high-capacity magazines to civilians.

Some media commentators, such as Howard Kurtz and Toby Harnden, criticized what they perceived as a rush to judgment about the shooter's motivation, disputing suggestions that the shooting was the result of the Tea Party movement or anything in connection to Palin. Paul Krugman wrote an op-ed piece arguing that political rhetoric had become toxic. With renewed calls to tone down political rhetoric after the shooting, Keith Olbermann said, "Violence, or the threat of violence, has no place in our Democracy, and I apologize for and repudiate any act or any thing in my past that may have even inadvertently encouraged violence." Jon Stewart stated that he did not know whether or not the political environment contributed to the shooting, but, "For all the hyperbole and vitriol that's become a part of our political process—when the reality of that rhetoric, when actions match the disturbing nature of words, we haven't lost our capacity to be horrified. ... Maybe it helps us to remember to match our rhetoric with reality more often."

U.S. flags flown by the federal government were displayed at half-staff from January 9, 2011 until sunset on January 15, 2011 in honor of the victims of the Tucson shooting. A national moment of silence was held at 11:00 a.m. EST on January 10, 2011 on the South Lawn of the White House as well as the steps of the United States Capitol. President Obama went to Tucson on January 12 where he met with the families of the victims and visited Giffords at her bedside in the medical center before attending the evening's televised memorial ceremony where he delivered a memorial speech.

Among other memorials: when the Safeway store reopened after the shooting, the staff erected a makeshift memorial; at the 2011 Major League Baseball All-Star Game, Giffords' intern, Daniel Hernandez Jr., was accompanied onto the field by the families of the shooting victims, and threw the ceremonial first pitch; and for the 2011 State of the Union Address, Senator Mark Udall of Colorado proposed that members of both houses sit together regardless of party, with one seat left empty in honor of Giffords.

Christina-Taylor Green, the youngest of the victims, had an interest in politics and said that she had wanted to attend college at Penn State University; she was born in Pennsylvania and had a connection to the state through her grandfather, Dallas Green. The university honored her with a brick on the Alumni Walk on campus, and with a certificate in her memory.

On the night of January 11, 2011, Governor Brewer signed emergency legislation to prohibit protests within of any funeral services, in response to an announcement by the Westboro Baptist Church that it planned to picket the funeral of shooting victim Christina-Taylor Green. The members of the congregation agreed to appear on talk radio in exchange for dropping their plans to picket the funeral.

On Sunday, January 16, 2011, eight days after the shooting, Vietnam War veteran James Eric Fuller, who had been shot in the knee during the attack, was arrested for disorderly conduct at a town hall meeting. After Tucson Tea Party figure Trent Humphries, who had faulted Giffords for not having enough security, stated that gun control measures should not be discussed until all those killed in the shooting were buried, Fuller allegedly took a picture of Humphries and shouted, "You're dead." In an interview during the week after the shooting, Fuller had criticized Palin and what he called the "Tea Party crime-syndicate" for promoting a divisive political climate before the attacks. The police then committed him to an undisclosed medical facility to undergo a psychiatric evaluation. A police spokesman stated that the hospital will determine when he will be released. Meanwhile, Humphries said he was worried about Fuller's threat, and the dozens of other angry e-mails he received from people blaming right-wing political rhetoric for contributing to the assassination attempt on Giffords.




</doc>
<doc id="30387889" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30387889" title="Comeback (Glee)">
Comeback (Glee)

"Comeback" is the thirteenth episode of the second season of the American musical television series "Glee", and the thirty-fifth overall. It was written by series creator Ryan Murphy, directed by Bradley Buecker, and premiered on Fox on February 15, 2011. In the episode, glee club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) allows cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) to join the McKinley High glee club in an attempt to ease her depression. Club member Sam (Chord Overstreet) creates a tribute band to teen singer Justin Bieber in order to win the heart of Quinn (Dianna Agron), and is later joined by the group's other male members, minus co-captain Finn (Cory Monteith), to recreate Bieber's "Somebody to Love" and woo their significant others.

Prior to broadcast, Murphy dismissed rumors that "Comeback" would serve as a tribute to Bieber, and stated that such episodes are reserved for artists with extensive musical catalogs. "Comeback" was met with mixed reception from critics, who deemed it neither bad nor a standout. Critics such as Bobby Hankinson of the "Houston Chronicle" appreciated the episode's early "Glee" aesthetic. Amy Reiter of "The Los Angeles Times" felt that the episode lacked substance. Sue's storyline, which focuses on her depression and a suicide attempt, was widely criticized for its inappropriateness. The other storylines had mixed to positive reviews, as many critics deemed the Bieber-related subplot the strongest. James Poniewozik of "Time" compared it favorably to the Madonna tribute episode "The Power of Madonna".

The episode features six musical performances, five of which were released as singles. Upon its initial airing, "Comeback" was watched by over 10.53 million US viewers, and acquired a 4.2/12 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic. Unlike the story itself, most critics received the musical numbers with acclaim. The "Glee" take on Bieber's songs was praised, as were the vocals of cast members Amber Riley and Lea Michele in their duet of "Take Me or Leave Me" from "Rent", and the confidence and performance of Ashley Fink in "I Know What Boys Like".

After her cheerleading squad loses a competition for the first time in seven years, coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) becomes depressed, and stages an apparent suicide by "overdosing" on gummy vitamins. Her colleague, school guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays), suggests that she temporarily join the school glee club, New Directions, to lift her spirits. Hoping to create discord within the group, Sue pits members Mercedes (Amber Riley) and Rachel (Lea Michele) against one another. Her plan backfires when a duet between the two results in a deepening of their respect for one another vocally. In an attempt to bring out the good in Sue, club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) takes her to a pediatric cancer ward, where they sing "This Little Light of Mine" with the patients.

Club member Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet) establishes a one-man tribute band to teen singer Justin Bieber, which he calls "The Justin Bieber Experience", in the hope of winning over his girlfriend Quinn (Dianna Agron), whom he suspects still has feelings for her ex-boyfriend Finn (Cory Monteith). Sam performs Bieber's "Baby" for the glee club, and dedicates it to Quinn; the performance also excites the other girls in the club. Several of the male members—Puck (Mark Salling), Artie (Kevin McHale) and Mike (Harry Shum, Jr.)—are impressed by the effect he has on the girls, and convince him to let them join his tribute band. The foursome then perform "Somebody to Love", and recreate the music video for the song in the auditorium, which makes the girls go crazy. Quinn chooses Sam over Finn, but when Santana Lopez (Naya Rivera) convinces Sam that Quinn cheated on him, he breaks up with her and begins dating Santana.

Meanwhile, Lauren Zizes (Ashley Fink) enlists Puck to help her with her first glee club solo. With Puck's assistance, she performs "I Know What Boys Like" by The Waitresses, and using a trick he taught her, imagines the club members in their underwear for confidence. Later, Sue suggests that the club perform the anthem "Sing" by My Chemical Romance, as they must present an anthem at the forthcoming Regionals competition. They rehearse the song, and it is well received by most of the members, who disregard Rachel's suggestion that they should instead compose an original anthem. Her week with New Directions over, Sue reveals that she has become the vocal coach for one of the glee club's Regionals competitors, Aural Intensity.

In January 2011, rumors began to circulate that "Glee" was planning a Justin Bieber tribute episode, similar to "The Power of Madonna" for Madonna, and "Britney/Brittany" for Britney Spears. Series creator Ryan Murphy refuted the claims, and stated that such episodes are reserved for artists with extensive musical catalogs. He confirmed, however, that Bieber's music would be used in an episode in season two as a "small plot point", and Overstreet's Sam would perform a song by the artist for Quinn's approval. On the red carpet at the 68th Golden Globe Awards, cast member Riley confirmed to MTV News that Bieber's songs "Baby" and "Somebody to Love" would be featured in the upcoming episode, and the singer would receive a tribute similar to Lady Gaga in "Theatricality"—a tribute, but without a full episode devoted to his catalog. Via his official Facebook page, Bieber stated that he was "truly honoured" to have his music covered on "Glee". Prior to broadcast, Overstreet and Bieber interacted via the social networking website Twitter, where Bieber told him "we just gotta work on those moves", and to "kill it!"

In addition to "Baby" and "Somebody to Love", the episode featured cover versions of "I Know What Boys Like" by The Waitresses performed by Fink, "Take Me or Leave Me" from "Rent" performed by Michele and Riley, "Sing" by My Chemical Romance, and an acoustic performance of the gospel children's song "This Little Light of Mine". The pediatric oncology scenes were filmed at the Children's Hospital Los Angeles' Center for Cancer and Blood Diseases, where eleven real patients performed alongside Morrison and Lynch. Bailey, the pediatric ward nurse, was played by guest-star Charlene Amoia, who had worked for the series' sound department during the first season. In June 2011, she deemed her "Comeback" appearance her favorite guest role in any series, due to working alongside the children, whom she was "so touched by". Amoia expanded: "They were the most vibrant, energetic kids. It was a really awesome storyline to be a part of. I was really moved by everything." Though she was not initially aware that the role would involve singing, Amoia was part of the "This Little Light of Mine" group number. The episode's recurring guest cast members were Overstreet as Sam, Iqbal Theba as Principal Figgins, Shum, Jr. as Mike and Fink as Lauren.

"Comeback" was watched by 10.53 million US viewers. It attained a 4.2/12 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, which made it the highest rated show of the night. It was the third most-watched scripted show of the week amongst adults aged 18–49, and placed 21st amongst all viewers. The episode declined by 9 percent and 1.12 million viewers on the previous episode, "Silly Love Songs".

With its Canadian broadcast, also on February 15, 2011, "Comeback" attained 1.75 million viewers and placed 18th in the weekly program rankings. It was again down on "Silly Love Songs", which ranked tenth and was watched by 2.08 million viewers. In Australia, where the episode aired on February 28, 2011, it was watched by 909,000 viewers and was the 11th most-viewed show of the night. Viewership was marginally down on the previous episode, which attracted 921,000 viewers and also placed 11th. In the UK, the episode was broadcast on April 4, 2011. It attained 2.57 million viewers—2.14 million on E4, and 427,000 on E4+1—and was the most-watched show on cable for the week. Viewership again declined slightly from the previous episode, which drew 2.63 million viewers.

The episode received mixed reviews from critics. Bobby Hankinson of the "Houston Chronicle" and "E! Online" Jenna Mullins were pleased by how "Comeback" reminded them of early episodes of "Glee"—Mullins hailed the return of familiar characterization, and Hankinson commented: "It felt like old times, and it felt good." Though he observed that the episode was light on plot, Hankinson praised the writing and comedy. CNN's Lisa Respers France found the episode's title apt, as "Glee" was "firing on all cylinders" with little room for improvement. Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" was "pleasantly surprised", as she had anticipated a decline in quality from the previous episode, and Kevin Fallon of "The Atlantic" commented that apart from the Bieber jokes, "the rest of the episode was sharply written and loaded with self-referential jokes". Other critics found "Comeback" mediocre. "Entertainment Weekly" Sandra Gonzalez wrote that it was "a bit off", "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff felt that "something was missing, making the whole thing stultifying, lifeless, and boring", and Robert Canning of IGN deemed it "fine and inoffensive", but ultimately forgettable. Amy Reiter of the "Los Angeles Times" was "a little disappointed" in the episode for a lack of substance, creativity and emotional maturity. James Poniewozik of "Time" deemed it amongst his least favorite episodes, for "not even [being] bad in a memorable way". He noted that "Comeback" was "essentially a collection of subplots", and questioned its purpose.

The Sue storyline garnered many unfavorable reviews. Reiter criticized her inconsistent characterization, which made her actions seem "like fragments pasted together to form a disjointed collage." While VanDerWerff was more favorable, he wrote that Sue's jokes about committing "Sue-icide" were "neither dark enough to provoke a startled burst or laughter nor funny enough to overcome their central tastelessness", and called the scene in the pediatric oncology ward "woefully misjudged and inappropriately hilarious." "The Atlantic" Meghan Brown found the use of seriously ill children "borderline offensive", and called Sue's suicide attempt "in totally bad taste". Miriam Krule of NPR felt that "Glee" treated suicide too lightly, and in doing so sent a mixed message to its youth audience. Poniewozik wrote that Sue has become "a burden on the show", and described her as "a breakout character who's broken out of the constraints of recognizable character." He questioned the point of her arc, and suggested that the attempt at humanizing her was redundant, as viewers already know Sue to be capable of compassion.

Other storylines received a more mixed response. Canning disliked the focus placed on Sam and his thin, "loveable dope" characterization. He found that the love-triangle plot made little sense, and as such was hard to invest in. In contrast, Poniewozik called Sam's Bieber subplot the episode's strongest element, and deemed it fun if inessential. He praised "Glee" for capturing the "disposable fun" of Bieber's music, "without either sneering at it or making it more than it is", and called it better in this respect than "The Power of Madonna". Lauren received several positive reviews. While VanDerWerff found her relationship with Puck "a lot less assured" than in "Silly Love Songs", Mullins and Gonzalez praised their "endearing" dynamic. Reiter felt that in "Comeback", while new characters like Sam and Lauren "managed to shine", established favorites fared less well: "Finn continues to be dismayingly drained of all that once made him so adorable, and Rachel, too, has been deprived of the depth and sex appeal she so carefully developed over time." Several critics raised similar criticism of Rachel—Gonzalez found her need for Brittany's help "too much of a regression", and disliked her return to "old, desperate habits" after several episodes of personal growth. Canning felt that the storyline was forced, and Poniewozik observed that the episode "seemed to be trying less to advance her character [than] simply to give her something to do." VanDerWerff wrote that Rachel appeared to have five different subplots, none of which came together cohesively, and that it reflected the awkward construction of the episode.

The episode's musical covers and performances were mostly well received by critics. Hankinson wrote that the songs "blended all of the show's best charms", which he listed as "kitschy ", "slick production" and "raw vocal ability." Futterman also praised all of the music.

The Bieber numbers received a mostly positive reception. Mullins complimented them both, particularly Overstreet's performance of "Baby." Futterman said this performance was impressive, "a total pop star package that recalled the Biebs' swag". She found this element "smooth[ed] over" in "Somebody to Love", but called the recreation admirable nonetheless. Gonzalez highlighted the Bieber songs as the best of the episode; she gave "Baby" and "Somebody to Love" grades of "A" and "B+", respectively. On the former song, Gonzalez enjoyed Sam's performance, particularly his "übercorny dance moves that made [her] ache for the boy-band era." Although she complimented the male vocalists and their "almost perfect re-creation" of the video, Gonzalez was disappointed the show chose to repeat, rather than reinterpret, the choreography. Fallon praised the two songs: he called Sam "quite charming while channeling Bieber" and said "the acoustic opening to 'Baby' was actually very sweet, just as it was when Biebs stripped down the tune to open his Grammy performance". He added that the dancing "stood out" in "Somebody to Love". Raymund Flandez of "The Wall Street Journal" expressed disappointment in the Bieber performances "displayed so awkwardly and so undynamically" by Sam. On "Baby", he opined that Overstreet lacked "swagger", coordination and charm. He was more impressed by the rendition of "Somebody to Love", but noted that Sam was vocally overshadowed by Artie.

The performance of the duet "Take Me or Leave Me" elicited praise from Brown and Fallon, who both deemed it the highlight of the episode. Brown noted that "it had that addictive "Glee" quality of actually feeling like high school, and watching Mercedes and Rachel have a blast blasting each other was a treat." Gonzalez gave the duet a "B", as, while there was "so much to swoon for", she is more partial to ballads because they "discourage oversinging throughout the entire song". Futterman wrote that while Mercedes had more sass than Rachel, "both ladies "sang"". VanDerWerff did not see how the song was relevant, and felt that Michele's voice was ill-suited to it.

Flandez called Lauren's "I Know What Boys Like" the highlight of the episode, and VanDerWerff praised it as the best musical number. He complimented her confidence, but said the underwear joke was "unnecessary and overstated". In contrast, Gonzalez cited the underwear shots as a factor in raising her grade to a "C-" for a song without "basic musicality". Patrick Burns of "The Atlantic" was also unimpressed, and questioned Lauren's spot in glee club, as "her brazen character never ceases to please, but it's just not believable that she would join the glee club if she cannot sing." In December 2012, "TV Guide" named the cover one of "Glee" worst performances.

On the New Directions collaboration with Sue on "Sing", Futterman wrote, "By turning down the rock and bringing in a choral element, the song actually came off as a great anthem for the bunch of misfits that is the New Directions. We kind of wish they had put on their choir robes instead and fully embraced the arrangement." Although Gonzalez gave the performance a "B", she called it "lacking" and not "regionals material": "We need to be blown away." "TV Guide" also listed this rendition as one of "Glee" worst performances.

Of the five cover versions released as singles—the cover of "This Little Light of Mine" was not released—four debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100, and appeared on other musical charts. These same four songs were also featured on the sixth soundtrack album of the series, "". On the Hot 100, the show's rendition of "Baby" debuted at number forty-seven; it was at number fifty-two on the "Billboard" Canadian Hot 100. The "Glee" cover version of "Sing" debuted on the Hot 100 at number forty-nine, placing higher than the original by My Chemical Romance, which climbed from number ninety-two to number fifty-eight, its best showing to that point; in Canada, both versions debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 in the same week, with the "Glee" version at number thirty-seven, the highest of the four "Glee" singles there, while the original charted twenty slots below it at number fifty-seven. The other two songs on the Hot 100 were "Take Me or Leave Me" at number fifty-one, which also made number sixty on the Canadian Hot 100, and "Somebody to Love" at number sixty-two, which also made number fifty-three on the Canadian Hot 100. "I Know What Boys Like" did not chart.



</doc>
<doc id="30388111" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30388111" title="Harry Bassett">
Harry Bassett

Harry Bassett (1868–1878) was an American Thoroughbred racehorse, winner of the 1871 Belmont Stakes and an outstanding racehorse of the 19th century. He also won a number of other stakes races, and was named the Champion male of his age group in 1870, 1871 and 1872. He was retired to stud duties in New Jersey when his five-year racing career ended, having recorded 23 wins from 36 starts. Harry Bassett died in New Jersey in 1878 and was inducted into the United States Racing Hall of Fame in 2010.

Harry Bassett was a chestnut stallion, foaled on 27 April 1868, that was sired by Lexington and out of the mare Canary Bird. Canary Bird was by the imported stallion Albion and out of the mare Panola, who was sired by the imported stallion Ainderby. Canary Bird's second dam, or maternal grandmother, was the imported mare Sweetbriar by Recovery. Harry Basset was bred either by R. A. Alexander or by A. J. Alexander, both of the Woodburn Stud of Woodburn, Kentucky, and was the second of Canary Bird's foals. He was sold at the 1869 S. D. Bruce yearling sale to trainer David McDaniel for $315.

Harry Bassett was trained by his owner David McDaniel; his jockey was W. Miller. As a two-year-old he won the 1870 Nursery Stakes at Pimlico Race Course, the Central Stakes, the Kentucky Stakes, and the Saratoga Stakes. He made a total of four starts as a two-year-old of which he won three, placing third in the other.

Harry Bassett won the fifth running of the Belmont Stakes in 1871 at Jerome Park Racetrack in a time of 2 minutes 56 seconds. He carried pounds in the race, and won $5,400 (approximately $ as of 2019) for his owner. The race was run on June 10 over a distance of miles (13 furlongs/2,600 meters) on a fast track. Harry Bassett won by three lengths from the second-placed finisher Stockwood; the third place went to August Belmont's By The Sea. This was the first of three consecutive wins of the Belmont Stakes by David McDaniel as both owner and trainer, as he went on to win the 1872 race with Joe Daniels and the 1873 race with Springbok.

As a three-year-old, Harry Bassett also won the Jerome Handicap, the Travers Stakes, the Reunion Stakes, the Kenner Stakes, the Champion Stakes and the Jersey Derby. He was undefeated in nine starts at age three.

During his three-year-old year Harry Bassett started 11 times and won eight, finishing second in the remaining three. At four he increased his win record to 14, with wins in the Westchester Cup and a victory in a heat, before he was beaten in the Monmouth Cup by Longfellow. He then won the mile Saratoga Cup, in which he defeated Longfellow. His jockey in that race was James Rowe, Sr., who went on to become a leading trainer for James R. Keene. At age five, Harry Bassett started eight times, winning two, placing second in two, and third once. At six, he started four times, winning once and placing third once.

Harry Bassett's racing career spanned five years and ended with 23 wins from 36 starts; he finished second five times and third three times. His total earnings on the racetrack were $55,920 (approximately $ as of 2019). He was awarded the title of Champion Two-Year-Old Male in 1870, the title of Champion Three-Year-Old Male in 1871, and the Champion Older Horse title in 1872.

When his racing career ended Harry Bassett was retired to McDaniel's stud farm in Trenton, New Jersey, where he sired stakes winners such as Bowstring and Lettina out of the imported mare Letty by imported Australian. Lettina won the Young America Stakes, the Jackson Stakes and the Ladies Stakes in 1881, when she was two years old.

Harry Bassett died on October 27, 1878 at McDaniel's farm in New Jersey. He was inducted into the United States' National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in 2010.




</doc>
<doc id="30406688" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30406688" title="German battleship Scharnhorst">
German battleship Scharnhorst

Scharnhorst was a German capital ship, alternatively described as a battleship or battlecruiser, of Nazi Germany's "Kriegsmarine". She was the lead ship of her class, which included one other ship, . The ship was built at the "Kriegsmarinewerft" dockyard in Wilhelmshaven; she was laid down on 15 June 1935 and launched a year and four months later on 3 October 1936. Completed in January 1939, the ship was armed with a main battery of nine 28 cm (11 in) C/34 guns in three triple turrets. Plans to replace these weapons with six 38 cm (15 in) SK C/34 guns in twin turrets were never carried out.

"Scharnhorst" and "Gneisenau" operated together for much of the early portion of World War II, including sorties into the Atlantic to raid British merchant shipping. During her first operation, "Scharnhorst" sank the auxiliary cruiser in a short engagement (November 1939). "Scharnhorst" and "Gneisenau" participated in Operation "Weserübung" (April–June 1940), the German invasion of Norway. During operations off Norway, the two ships engaged the battlecruiser and sank the aircraft carrier as well as her escort destroyers and . In that engagement "Scharnhorst" achieved one of the longest-range naval gunfire hits in history.

In early 1942, after repeated British bombing raids, the two ships made a daylight dash up the English Channel from occupied France to Germany. In early 1943, "Scharnhorst" joined the in Norway to interdict Allied convoys to the Soviet Union. "Scharnhorst" and several destroyers sortied from Norway to attack a convoy, but British naval patrols intercepted the German force. During the Battle of the North Cape (26 December 1943), the Royal Navy battleship and her escorts sank "Scharnhorst". Only 36 men were rescued, out of a crew of 1,968.

"Scharnhorst" was ordered as "Ersatz Elsass" as a replacement for the old pre-dreadnought , under the contract name "D." The "Kriegsmarinewerft" in Wilhelmshaven was awarded the contract, where the keel was laid on 16 July 1935. The ship was launched on 3 October 1936, witnessed by Adolf Hitler, Minister of War Generalfeldmarschall Werner von Blomberg, and the widow of "Kapitän zur See" Schultz, the commander of the armored cruiser , which had been sunk at the Battle of the Falkland Islands during World War I. Fitting-out work followed her launch, and was completed by January 1939. "Scharnhorst" was commissioned into the fleet on 9 January for sea trials, which revealed a dangerous tendency to ship considerable amounts of water in heavy seas. This caused flooding in the bow and damaged electrical systems in the forward gun turret. As a result, she went back to the dockyard for extensive modification of the bow. The original straight stem was replaced with a raised "Atlantic bow." A raked funnel cap was also installed during the reconstruction, along with an enlarged aircraft hangar; the main mast was also moved further aft. The modifications were completed by November 1939, by which time the ship was finally fully operational.

"Scharnhorst" displaced as built and fully loaded, with a length of , a beam of and a maximum draft of . She was powered by three Brown, Boveri & Cie geared steam turbines, which developed a total of and yielded a maximum speed of on speed trials. Her standard crew numbered 56 officers and 1,613 enlisted men, augmented during the war to 60 officers and 1,780 men. While serving as a squadron flagship, "Scharnhorst" carried an additional ten officers and 61 enlisted men.

She was armed with nine 28 cm (11.1 in) L/54.5 guns arranged in three triple gun turrets: two turrets forward, one superfiring—Anton and Bruno—and one aft—Caesar. The design also enabled the ship to be up-gunned with six 15 inch guns which never took place. Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm (5.9 in) L/55 guns, fourteen 10.5 cm L/65 and sixteen SK C/30 L/83, and initially ten C/30 anti-aircraft guns. The number of 2 cm guns was eventually increased to thirty-eight. Six above-water torpedo tubes, taken from the light cruisers and , were installed in 1942.

At her commissioning, "Scharnhorst" was commanded by "Kapitän zur See" ("KzS") Otto Ciliax. His tenure as the ship's commander was brief; in September 1939, an illness forced him to go on sick leave, and he was replaced by "KzS" Kurt-Caesar Hoffmann. Hoffmann served as the ship's captain until 1942. On 1 April 1942, Hoffmann, who had been promoted to "Konteradmiral" (Rear Admiral) and awarded the Knight's Cross, transferred command of the ship to "KzS" Friedrich Hüffmeier. In October 1943, shortly before "Scharnhorst"s last mission, Hüffmeier was replaced by "KzS" Fritz Hintze, who was killed during the ship's final battle.

"Scharnhorst"s first operation began on 21 November 1939; the ship, in company with her sister , the light cruiser , and nine destroyers, was to patrol the area between Iceland and the Faroe Islands. The intent of the operation was to draw out British units and ease the pressure on the heavy cruiser ("pocket battleship") , which was being pursued in the South Atlantic. Two days later, the German flotilla intercepted the British armed merchant cruiser . At 16:07, lookouts aboard "Scharnhorst" spotted the vessel, and less than an hour later "Scharnhorst" had closed the range. At 17:03, "Scharnhorst" opened fire, and three minutes later a salvo of her 28 cm guns hit "Rawalpindi"s bridge, killing the captain Edward Coverly Kennedy, and the majority of the officers. During the brief engagement, "Rawalpindi" managed to score a hit on "Scharnhorst", which caused minor splinter damage.

By 17:16, "Rawalpindi" was burning badly and in the process of sinking. Admiral Wilhelm Marschall, aboard "Gneisenau", ordered "Scharnhorst" to pick up survivors. These rescue operations were interrupted by the appearance of the cruiser . The German force quickly fled north before using inclement weather to make the dash south through the North Sea. Four allied capital ships, the British , , and the French "Dunkerque" followed in pursuit. The Germans reached Wilhelmshaven on 27 November, and on the trip both battleships incurred significant damage from heavy seas and winds. "Scharnhorst" was repaired in Wilhelmshaven, and while in dock, her boilers were overhauled.

Following the completion of repairs, "Scharnhorst" went into the Baltic Sea for gunnery training. Heavy ice in the Baltic kept the ship there until February 1940 when she could return to Wilhelmshaven, arriving on 5 February. She was then assigned to the forces participating in Operation "Weserübung", the invasion of Denmark and Norway. "Scharnhorst" and "Gneisenau" were the covering force for the assaults on Narvik and Trondheim; the two ships left Wilhelmshaven on the morning of 7 April. They were joined by the heavy cruiser . Later that day, at around 14:30, the three ships came under attack by a force of British bombers, which failed to make any hits. Heavy winds caused significant structural damage that evening, and flooding contaminated a portion of "Scharnhorst"s fuel stores.

At 09:15 the following morning, "Admiral Hipper" was detached to reinforce the destroyers at Narvik, which had reported engaging British forces. Early on 9 April, the two ships encountered the British battlecruiser HMS "Renown". "Gneisenau"s Seetakt radar picked up a radar contact at 04:30, which prompted the crews of both vessels to go to combat stations. Half an hour later, "Scharnhorst"s navigator spotted gun flashes from firing at "Gneisenau"; the Germans returned fire three minutes later. "Gneisenau" was hit twice in the opening portion of the engagement, and one shell disabled her rear gun turret. "Scharnhorst"s radar malfunctioned, which prevented her from being able to effectively engage "Renown" during the battle. At 05:18, the British battlecruiser shifted fire to "Scharnhorst", which maneuvered to avoid the falling shells. By 07:15, "Scharnhorst" and "Gneisenau" had used their superior speed to escape from the pursuing "Renown". Heavy seas and the high speed with which the pair of battleships escaped caused them to ship large amounts of water forward. "Scharnhorst"s forward turret was put out of action by severe flooding. Mechanical problems with her starboard turbines developed after running at full speed, which forced the ships to reduce speed to .

"Scharnhorst" and "Gneisenau" had reached a point north-west of Lofoten, Norway, by 12:00 on 9 April. The two ships then turned west for 24 hours while temporary repairs were effected. After a day of steaming west, the ships turned south and rendezvoused with "Admiral Hipper" on 12 April. An RAF patrol aircraft spotted the three ships that day, which prompted an air attack. The German warships were protected by poor visibility, however, and the three ships safely reached port later that day. "Scharnhorst" returned to Germany, and was repaired at the Deutsche Werke in Kiel. During the repair process, the aircraft catapult that had been installed on the rear gun turret was removed.

The two ships left Wilhelmshaven on 4 June to return to Norway. They were joined by "Admiral Hipper" and four destroyers. The purpose of the sortie was to interrupt Allied efforts to resupply the Norwegians and to relieve the pressure on German troops fighting in Norway. On 7 June, the squadron rendezvoused with the tanker to refuel "Admiral Hipper" and the four destroyers. The next day, a British corvette was discovered and sunk, along with the oil tanker "Oil Pioneer". The Germans then launched their Arado 196 float planes to search for more Allied vessels. "Admiral Hipper" and the destroyers were sent to destroy "Orama", a passenger ship, while "Atlantis", a hospital ship, was allowed to proceed unmolested. Admiral Marschall detached "Admiral Hipper" and the four destroyers to refuel in Trondheim, while he would steam to the Harstad area.

At 17:45, the German battleships spotted the British aircraft carrier and two escorting destroyers, and , at a range of some . "Scharnhorst" was closer and therefore fired first. Six minutes after opening fire, "Scharnhorst" scored a hit at a range of . The shell struck the carrier's upper hangar and started a large fire. Less than ten minutes later, a shell from "Gneisenau" struck the bridge and killed "Glorious"s captain. The two destroyers attempted to cover "Glorious" with smoke screens, but the German battleships could track the carrier with their radar. By 18:26 the range had fallen to , and "Scharnhorst" and "Gneisenau" were firing full salvos at the carrier. After approximately an hour of shooting, the German battleships sent "Glorious" to the bottom. They also sank the two destroyers. Before sinking one of them, "Acasta", managed to hit "Scharnhorst" with a torpedo at 18:39. "Acasta" also hit "Scharnhorst"s forward superfiring turret with her 4.7" QF guns, which did negligible damage. The torpedo hit caused serious damage; it tore a hole and allowed of water into the ship. The rear turret was disabled and 48 men were killed. The flooding caused a 5 degree list, increased the stern draft by almost a meter, and forced "Scharnhorst" to reduce speed to . The ship's machinery was also significantly damaged by the flooding, and the starboard propeller shaft was destroyed.

The damage was severe enough to force "Scharnhorst" to put into Trondheim for temporary repairs. She reached port on the afternoon of 9 June, where the repair ship "Huaskaran" was waiting. The following day a reconnaissance plane from RAF Coastal Command spotted the ship, and a raid by twelve Hudson bombers took place on 11 June. The Hudsons dropped thirty-six armor-piercing bombs, which all missed. The Royal Navy joined in the attacks on the ship by sending the battleship "Rodney" and the aircraft carrier . On 13 June, "Ark Royal" launched fifteen Skua dive bombers; German fighters intercepted the attackers and shot eight of them down. The other seven made it past the air defenses and attacked "Scharnhorst", but only scored one hit, and the bomb failed to detonate. Preliminary repairs were completed by 20 June, which permitted the ship to return to Germany. While "Scharnhorst" was en route under heavy escort on 21 June, the British launched two air attacks, six Swordfish torpedo bombers in the first and nine Beaufort bombers in the second. Both were driven off by anti-aircraft fire and fighters. The Germans intercepted British radio traffic that indicated the Royal Navy was at sea, which prompted "Scharnhorst" to make for Stavanger. British warships were within of "Scharnhorst"s position when she turned to Stavanger. The next day, "Scharnhorst" left Stavanger for Kiel, where repairs were carried out, lasting some six months.

Following the completion of repairs, "Scharnhorst" underwent trials in the Baltic before returning to Kiel in December 1940. There she joined "Gneisenau", in preparation for Operation "Berlin", a planned raid into the Atlantic Ocean designed to wreak havoc on the Allied shipping lanes. Severe storms caused damage to "Gneisenau" but "Scharnhorst" was undamaged. The two ships were forced to put into port during the storm: "Scharnhorst" went to Gotenhafen while "Gneisenau" went to Kiel for repairs. Repairs were quickly completed, and on 22 January 1941, the two ships, under the command of Admiral Günther Lütjens, left port for the North Atlantic. They were detected in the Skagerrak and the heavy units of the British Home Fleet deployed to cover the passage between Iceland and the Faroes. The Germans' radar detected the British at long range, which allowed Lütjens to avoid the British patrols, with the aid of a squall. By 3 February, the two battleships had evaded the last British cruiser patrol, and had broken into the open Atlantic.

On 6 February, the two ships refueled from the tanker "Schlettstadt" south of Cape Farewell. Shortly after 08:30 on 8 February, lookouts spotted convoy HX 106, escorted by the battleship . Lütjens' orders prohibited him from engaging Allied capital ships, and so the attack was called off. "Scharnhorst"s commander, "KzS" Hoffmann, however, closed to in an attempt to lure "Ramillies" away from the convoy so that "Gneisenau" could attack the convoy. Lütjens ordered Hoffmann to rejoin the flagship immediately. The two battleships steamed off to the northwest to search for more shipping. On 22 February, the pair spotted an empty convoy sailing west, which dispersed at the appearance of the battleships. "Scharnhorst" managed to sink only one ship during the encounter, the 6000 ton tanker "Lustrous".

Lütjens then decided to move to a new area, as the surviving members of the dispersed convoy had sent distress signals. He chose the Cape Town-Gibraltar convoy route, and positioned himself to the northwest of Cape Verde. The two ships encountered another convoy, escorted by the battleship , on 8 March. Lütjens again forbade an attack, but he shadowed the convoy and directed U-boats to attack. A pair of U-boats sank a total of 28,488 tons of shipping on the night of 8–9 March. "Malaya" turned on the two battleships and closed to , well within the range of the Germans' guns, but Lütjens refused to be drawn into an engagement. He instead turned toward the mid-Atlantic, where "Scharnhorst" sank the Greek cargo ship "Marathon". The two ships then refueled from the tankers "Uckermark" and "Ermland" on 12 March.

On 15 March, the two battleships, with the two tankers in company, encountered a dispersed convoy in the mid-Atlantic. "Scharnhorst" sank two ships. Several days later, the main body of the convoy was located, and "Scharnhorst" sank another seven ships totaling 27,277 tons. One of the surviving ships radioed the location of the German battleships, which summoned the powerful British battleships "Rodney" and . "Scharnhorst" and "Gneisenau" used their high speed to escape in a squall, and the intervention by the British battleships convinced Lütjens that the chances of further success were small. He therefore decided to head for Brest in occupied France, which the ships reached on 22 March. Throughout the operation, "Scharnhorst" had difficulties with the superheater tubes in her boilers. Repair work lasted until July, which caused the ship to be unavailable during Operation "Rheinübung", the sortie by the new battleship in May 1941.

After repairs were completed in July, "Scharnhorst" went to La Pallice for trials on the 21st, where she easily steamed at . She did not return to Brest to avoid an undesirable concentration of heavy units in one port (the Prinz Eugen had arrived there on 21 July) but moored alongside at La Pallice on 23 July. The RAF had planned a large, complicated raid on the capital ships in Brest for the night of 24 July, but an aerial reconnaissance photograph of "Scharnhorst" in her berth at La Pallice caused a last minute alteration to the operation. The Halifax heavy bombers of No. 35 Squadron RAF and No. 76 Squadron RAF flew the extra 200 miles to reach "Scharnhorst" and the rest of the raid on Brest went ahead as planned, with "Prinz Eugen" and "Gneisenau" as their principal targets. The 15 Halifaxes attacked "Scharnhorst" at her moorings . They scored five hits in an almost straight line on the starboard side, parallel to the centerline. Three of the bombs were armor-piercing bombs, and the other two were high-explosive bombs. One of the 227 kg bombs hit the deck just forward of the starboard 15 cm twin turret next to the conning tower. It passed through the upper and middle decks before exploding on the main armored deck, which contained the blast. The joints with the torpedo bulkhead were weakened enough to cause leaking. The second 227 kg bomb fell forward of the rear main battery turret and penetrated the first two decks. It also exploded on the armored deck and tore a small hole in it. The explosion caused splinter damage and disabled the ammunition hoists for the 37 mm anti-aircraft guns.

Two of the 454 kg bombs hit amidships between the 15 cm and 10.5 cm gun turrets; both failed to explode and penetrated the ship completely. The first went through each deck and exited the ship through the double bottom, while the other was deflected by the torpedo bulkhead and penetrated the hull beneath the side belt armor. The third 454 kg bomb hit aft of the rear 28 cm turret, about from the side of the ship. It too failed to detonate, and passed through the side of the hull, which was not protected by the main armor belt. These three hits caused significant flooding and caused an 8 degree list to starboard. The forward and rear gun turrets were temporarily disabled, along with half of her anti-aircraft battery. Two men were killed and fifteen were injured in the attack. Damage control teams managed to correct the list with counter-flooding, and although draft increased by , "Scharnhorst" was able to leave for Brest at 19:30. On the morning of 25 July, one of the escorting destroyers shot down a British patrol plane. The ship reached Brest later that day and went into dry dock for repairs, which took 4 months. While the damage was being repaired, a new radar system was installed aft, the power output for the forward radar was increased to 100 kW, and the 53.3 cm torpedo tubes were installed.

The strategic position following the damage to "Scharnhorst" was serious. "Gneisenau" was still being repaired following torpedo damage on 6 April and bomb damage on 9–10 April. The "Prinz Eugen" had been seriously damaged by a bomb on 1 July. "Bismarck" had been sunk on 27 May. All German capital ships deployed to the Atlantic were therefore out of action.

On 12 January 1942, the German Naval Command, in a conference with Hitler, made the decision to return "Scharnhorst", "Gneisenau", and the heavy cruiser "Prinz Eugen" to Germany. The intention was to deploy the vessels to Norway to interdict Allied convoys to the Soviet Union. The so-called "Channel Dash", codenamed Operation "Cerberus", would avoid the increasingly effective Allied radar and patrol aircraft in the Atlantic. Vice Admiral Otto Ciliax, "Scharnhorst"s first commander, was given command of the operation. In early February, minesweepers swept a route through the English Channel undetected by the British.

At 23:00 on 11 February, "Scharnhorst", "Gneisenau", and "Prinz Eugen" left Brest. They entered the Channel an hour later; the three ships sped at , hugging the French coast along the voyage. The British failed to detect their departure, as the submarine that had been tasked with observing the port had withdrawn to recharge its batteries. By 06:30, they had passed Cherbourg, at which point they were joined by a flotilla of torpedo boats. The torpedo boats were led by "Kapitän" Erich Bey, aboard the destroyer . "General der Jagdflieger" (General of Fighter Force) Adolf Galland directed Luftwaffe fighter and bomber forces (Operation "Donnerkeil") during "Cerberus". The fighters flew at masthead-height to avoid detection by the British radar network. Liaison officers were present on all three ships. German aircraft arrived later to jam British radar with chaff. By 13:00, the ships had cleared the Strait of Dover Half an hour later, a flight of six Swordfish torpedo bombers, with Spitfire escort, attacked the Germans. The British failed to penetrate the Luftwaffe fighter shield, and all six Swordfish were destroyed.

"Scharnhorst" did not make the voyage unscathed, however; at 15:31 she struck an air-dropped magnetic mine in the mouth of the Scheldt, abreast of the forward superfiring turret. The blast damaged the ship's circuit breakers and knocked out her electrical system for 20 minutes. The explosive shock caused serious damage; turret Bruno was jammed, as were the twin and single 15 cm mounts on the port side. The blast also damaged the fuel oil pumps and the bearings in the turbo-generators, which brought the ship to a halt. The power outage disabled the emergency shut-off switches to the boilers and turbines, which could not be turned off until power was restored. The explosion tore a large gash in the side of the hull and allowed of water into the ship, flooding 30 watertight spaces within five main watertight compartments. "Scharnhorst" took on a list of one degree and was down by the bows by a meter.

While the ship was immobilized, Admiral Ciliax transferred to "Z29". The engine room crews managed to restart the first turbine at 15:49, nearly twenty minutes after the mine explosion. The second and third turbines were restarted at 15:55 and 16:01, respectively, which permitted a speed of . At around the time the last turbine was restarted, a single bomber dropped several bombs approximately off "Scharnhorst"s port side, which caused no damage. Once the ship was back under way, twelve Beauforts launched a 10-minute attack that was beaten off by anti-aircraft fire and the escorting Luftwaffe fighters. The British carried out a series of attacks that were all unsuccessful; "Scharnhorst"s anti-aircraft guns were red-hot by the end of the action, and one 20 mm gun had burst from the strain.

The ship struck another mine off Terschelling on the starboard side at 22:34. The mine briefly knocked out the power system and temporarily disabled the rudders. Two of the three turbines were jammed, and the third had to be turned off. Another tons of water flooded ten watertight spaces in four main compartments. Only the centerline shaft was operational, which permitted a speed of only . Partial power was eventually restored to the starboard turbine, which allowed speed to be increased to . The shock damaged the rotating parts of all of the ship's gun turrets, and three of the 15 cm turrets were seriously jammed. By 08:00, "Scharnhorst" had reached the Jade Bight but ice prevented the ship from entering Wilhelmshaven. While waiting outside the port, Admiral Ciliax returned to the ship. The ice had been cleared by noon, permitting "Scharnhorst"s entrance to Wilhelmshaven. Two days later, "Scharnhorst" went to Kiel for permanent repairs. Work was conducted in a floating dry dock and lasted until July 1942. Afterward, another round of trials were conducted in the Baltic, which revealed the necessity of replacing several of the boiler tubes.

In early August 1942, "Scharnhorst" conducted exercises in cooperation with several U-boats. During the maneuvers, she collided with the , which caused damage that necessitated dry-docking for repairs. Work was completed by September, and the ship conducted further training in the Baltic. "Scharnhorst" steamed to Gotenhafen in late October for a new rudder, the design of which was based on the lessons learned from the torpedoing of "Prinz Eugen" and "Lützow" earlier in the year. Boiler and turbine troubles kept the ship in Germany for the remainder of 1942. By December, only two of the three shafts were operational and a complete overhaul of the propulsion system was required. In early January 1943, the ship was back in service, and after trials, left Germany on 7 January in company with "Prinz Eugen" and five destroyers. Reports of heavy activity in British airfields near the coast prompted the force to return to port, however. Another attempt to reach Norway was canceled under similar circumstances. On 8 March, however, poor weather grounded the British bombers, and so "Scharnhorst" and four destroyers were able to make the journey to Norway. A severe storm off Bergen forced the destroyers to seek shelter but "Scharnhorst" was able to continue on at the reduced speed of . At 16:00 on 14 March, "Scharnhorst" dropped anchor in Bogen Bay outside Narvik. There she met "Lützow" and the battleship .

On 22 March, "Scharnhorst", "Tirpitz", and "Lützow" steamed to Altafjord for repairs to damage incurred in heavy storms. In early April, "Scharnhorst", "Tirpitz", and nine destroyers conducted a training mission to Bear Island in the Arctic Ocean. On the 8th, a serious internal explosion occurred in the aft auxiliary machinery space above the armor deck. The explosion killed or injured 34 men and prompted the crew to flood the magazines for turret Caesar as a precaution against a magazine explosion. A repair ship completed work on the vessel in two weeks. Fuel shortages prevented major operations for the next six months, during which "Scharnhorst" was able to conduct only short training maneuvers.

"Scharnhorst", "Tirpitz", and nine destroyers embarked from Altafjord on an offensive on 6 September known as Operation "Zitronella"; the ships were tasked with bombarding the island of Spitzbergen. During the operation, "Scharnhorst" destroyed a battery of two guns and shelled fuel tanks, coal mines, harbor facilities, and military installations. Of particular importance was the weather station that was transmitting weather information to the Allies, which was used to schedule convoys to the Soviet Union. The destroyers landed some 1,000 troops, which pushed the Norwegian garrison into the mountains, completing the mission without major loss. On 22 September, a pair of British X-craft mini-submarines attacked and seriously damaged "Tirpitz", which reduced the Arctic Task Force to "Scharnhorst" and her five escorting destroyers.

On 25 November 1943 "Scharnhorst" carried out a two-hour full power trial achieving and it was noted that her draught had increased by over from her 1940 trials where she had attained .

With the rapidly deteriorating military situation for the German Army on the Eastern Front, it became increasingly important to interrupt the flow of supplies from the Western Allies to the Soviet Union. By December 1943, the German Army was forced into continuous retreat. The Luftwaffe had been seriously weakened by four long years of war, and increasing Allied anti-submarine capabilities were steadily degrading the effectiveness of the U-boats. The only effective weapon at the disposal of the Germans in Norway was "Scharnhorst"—"Tirpitz" was badly damaged, and the four remaining heavy cruisers were committed to the Baltic. During a conference with Hitler on 19–20 December, "Großadmiral" Karl Dönitz decided to employ "Scharnhorst" against the next Allied convoy that presented itself. Erich Bey, by now promoted to "Konteradmiral", was given command of the task force.

On 22 December Dönitz ordered Bey to be ready to go to sea on a three-hour notice. Later that day, reconnaissance aircraft located a convoy of some 20 transports escorted by cruisers and destroyers approximately west of Tromsø. The convoy was spotted again two days later, and it was determined that the course was definitively toward the Soviet Union. A U-boat reported the convoy's location at 09:00 on 25 December, and Dönitz ordered "Scharnhorst" into action. In his instructions to Bey, Dönitz advised him to break off the engagement if presented with superior forces, but to remain aggressive. Bey planned to attack the convoy at 10:00 on 26 December if the conditions were favorable for the attack. At this time of year, there was only 45 minutes of full daylight and six hours of twilight, which significantly limited Bey's operational freedom. The Germans were concerned with developments in Allied radar-directed fire control, which allowed British battleships to fire with great accuracy in the darkness; German radar capabilities lagged behind those of their opponents.

"Scharnhorst" and her five destroyers left port at around 19:00 and were in the open sea four hours later. At 03:19, Bey received instructions from the Fleet Command that "Scharnhorst" was to conduct the attack alone if heavy seas interfered with the destroyers' ability to fight. Unbeknown to the Germans, the British were reading the radio transmissions between "Scharnhorst" and the Fleet Command; Admirals Robert Burnett and Bruce Fraser were aware of Bey's plan for the attack on the convoy and could position their forces accordingly. At 07:03, "Scharnhorst" was some southwest of Bear Island when she made a turn that would put her in position to attack the convoy at 10:00. Admiral Burnett, commanding the three cruisers , , and escorting Convoy JW 55B, placed his ships between the convoy and "Scharnhorst"s expected direction of attack. Fraser in the powerful battleship , along with the cruiser and four destroyers, moved to a position southwest of "Scharnhorst" to block a possible escape attempt.

An hour after making the turn, Bey deployed his destroyers in a line screening "Scharnhorst", which remained behind. Half an hour later, "Scharnhorst"s loudspeakers called the crew to battle stations in preparation for the attack. At 08:40, "Belfast" picked up "Scharnhorst" on her radar. The Germans were unaware that they had been detected, and they had turned off their radar to prevent the British from picking up on the signals. At 09:21, "Belfast"s lookouts spotted "Scharnhorst" at a range of . The cruiser opened fire three minutes later, followed by "Norfolk" two minutes after. "Scharnhorst" fired a salvo from turret Caesar before turning and increasing speed to disengage from the cruisers. The battleship was hit twice by 20.3 cm (8 in) shells; the first failed to explode and caused negligible damage, but the second struck the forward rangefinders and destroyed the radar antenna. The aft radar, which possessed only a limited forward arc, was the ship's only remaining radar capability.

"Scharnhorst" turned south and attempted to work around the cruisers, but the superior British radar prevented Bey from successfully carrying out the maneuver. By 12:00, "Scharnhorst" was to the northeast of the convoy, but "Belfast" had reestablished radar contact; it took the cruisers twenty minutes to close the range and begin firing. "Scharnhorst" detected the cruisers with her aft radar and opened fire with her main battery guns before turning away to disengage a second time. Shortly before 12:25, "Scharnhorst" hit "Norfolk" twice with 28 cm shells. The first shell hit the forward superstructure and disabled "Norfolk"s gunnery radar. The second 28 cm round struck the ship's "X" barbette and disabled the turret. "Scharnhorst" then turned again and increased speed, in the hopes of escaping the cruisers and finding the convoy. Burnett chose to keep his distance and shadow "Scharnhorst" with radar while Fraser made his way to the scene in "Duke of York". Meanwhile, the five German destroyers continued searching for the convoy without success. At 13:15, Bey decided to return to base, and at 13:43, he dismissed the destroyers and instructed them to return to port.

At 16:17, "Duke of York" made radar contact with "Scharnhorst"; thirty minutes later, "Belfast" illuminated the German battleship with star shells. At 16:50, "Duke of York" opened fire at a range of ; "Scharnhorst" quickly returned the fire. Five minutes after opening fire, one of "Duke of York"s 14 in (35.6 cm) shells struck "Scharnhorst" abreast of her forward gun turret. The shell hit jammed the turret's training gears, putting it out of action. Shell splinters started a fire in the ammunition magazine, which forced the Germans to flood both forward magazines to prevent an explosion. The water was quickly drained from turret Bruno's magazine. The ship was now fighting with only two-thirds of her main battery. Shortly thereafter, another 14 inch shell struck the ventilation trunk attached to Bruno, which caused the turret to be flooded with noxious propellant gases every time the breeches were opened. A third shell hit the deck next to turret Caesar and caused some flooding; shell splinters caused significant casualties. At 17:30, shells struck the forward 15 cm gun turrets and destroyed them both.

At around 18:00, another 14 in shell struck the ship on the starboard side, passed through the thin upper belt armor, and exploded in the number 1 boiler room. It caused significant damage to the ship's propulsion system and slowed the ship to . Temporary repairs allowed "Scharnhorst" to return to . She managed to add to the distance between her and "Duke of York", while straddling the ship with several salvos. Shell splinters rained on "Duke of York" and disabled the fire-control radar.
At 18:42, "Duke of York" ceased fire, after having fired 52 salvos and having scored at least 13 hits, but "Scharnhorst" was pulling away. Many of these hits had badly damaged the ship's secondary armament, which left her open to destroyer attacks, which Fraser ordered. The destroyers and launched a total of eight torpedoes at 18:50, four of which hit. One torpedo exploded abreast of turret Bruno, which caused it to jam. The second torpedo hit the ship on the port side and caused some minor flooding, and the third struck toward the rear of the ship and damaged the port propeller shaft. The fourth hit the ship in the bow. The torpedoes slowed "Scharnhorst" to , which allowed "Duke of York" to close to . With only turret Caesar operational, all available men were sent to retrieve ammunition from the forward turrets to keep the last heavy guns supplied. Fraser then ordered "Jamaica" and "Belfast" to move into range and finish the crippled ship off with torpedoes. After several more torpedo hits, "Scharnhorst" settled further into the water and began to list to starboard. At 19:45, the ship went down by the bow, with her propellers still slowly turning. British ships began searching for survivors, but were soon ordered away after just a few were pulled out of the water even though voices could still be heard calling for help from the darkness. Of the crew of 1,968 officers and enlisted men, only 36 men survived.

In September 2000, a joint expedition to find the sunken battleship conducted by the BBC, NRK, and the Royal Norwegian Navy began. The underwater survey vessel "Sverdrup II", operated by the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment, was used to scan the sea floor. After locating a large submerged object, the research team then used the Royal Norwegian Navy's underwater recovery vessel to examine the object visually. The wreck was positively identified by an ROV on 10 September, which located armament consistent with that of "Scharnhorst". The ship sank in approximately of water. The hull lies upside down on the seabed, with debris, including the main mast and rangefinders, scattered around the wreck. Extensive damage from shellfire and torpedoes is evident; the bow was blown off, presumably from a magazine explosion in the forward turrets, and lies in a tangled mass of steel some distance from the rest of the hull.


Online sources



</doc>
<doc id="30443618" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30443618" title="Marasmius sasicola">
Marasmius sasicola

Marasmius sasicola is a species of Marasmiaceae fungus known from Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan. First collected in 2000, it was described in 2002 by Haruki Takahashi. The species produces small mushrooms with white caps and very short, very thin black stems. Unlike in other, similar species, the stems enter the plant matter on which the mushroom grows. The six to eight white gills are spread out around the cap, and all of them reach the stem. The flesh has no taste or odour. Found in June, the species grows on dead "Sasa" leaves, from which it takes its specific epithet.

"Marasmius sasicola" was first described by Haruki Takahashi (2002) in an article in "Mycoscience", based on specimens collected from Ikuta Ryokuchi Park, Kawasaki, Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan in 2000 and 2001. The specific name "sasicola" refers to the fact the species grows upon the leaves of "Sasa" species. The Japanese common name for the species is "Sasa-no-houraitake". Within the genus "Mycena", it probably belongs to the section "Marasmius", and the subsection "Penicillati", due to characters of the stem, gills and pileipellis (the outer-most layer of the cap).

"Marasmius sasicola" produces mushrooms that have convex caps from in diameter featuring folds or striations. The caps do not expand or flatten with age, and are dry and dull. The cap surface is covered in tiny grains which vanish as the mushrooms age. The caps of young mushrooms are coloured light brown, but paler at the cap margin; as they mature, the caps become paler, approaching white when fully matured. The very thin, smooth stem measures between in length by thick. It connects to the centre of the cap, and is a dark brown to black colour. Mycelial cords cannot be seen at the base of the stem, which anchors itself into the substrate. The white gills can be adnexed (attaching to the stem by only part of their depth) to adnate (attaching by their full depth). They are not at all crowded, with between 6 and 8 separate gills, all of which reach the stem. Each gill is up to broad, though it is thinner at the edge. The mushrooms have a very thin layer of whitish flesh up to thick. The tough but flexible flesh lacks any odour or taste.

"Marasmius sasicola" produces colourless, ellipsoid basidiospores of between 8 and 10 by 4 to 6 micrometres (μm). The spores have no ornamentation, are not amyloid and have thin cell walls. In his examinations, Takahashi did not observe any basidia, but he did describe the club-shaped basidioles (immature basidia) which measured from 18 to 26 by 6 to 10 μm. The tightly packed cheilocystidia (cystidia on the edge of the gill) form a sterile edge to the gill, and there are no pleurocystidia (cystidia on the face of the gill). The pileipellis, the top layer of the cap, forms a hymeniderm, a cell structure reminiscent of the hymenium on the gills. This is made up of club-shaped cells measuring between 2 and 8 by 7 to 10 μm, with reddish-brown, smooth cell walls up to 1 μm thick. The stipitipellis, the outermost layer of the stem, is made up of cylindrical hyphae measuring from 3 to 6 μm in width, which run parallel to one another. They have featureless brown cell walls measuring up to 1 μm thick, and the septa (the walls separating individual cells) have clamp connections.

The flesh in the cap is made up of irregularly arranged cylindrical hyphae from 5 to 15 μm wide. They stain a dark reddish-brown in Melzer's reagent or Lugol's solution. The flesh in the stem is made up of hyphae which run down the stem and measure 4 to 11 μm in thickness. The smooth cell walls are colorless, but again stain a dark reddish-brown in Melzer's reagent or Lugol's solution. The septa have clamp connections.

"Marasmius subconiatus", known from Sri Lanka and Indonesia, is somewhat similar to "M. sasicola". It can be differentiated as its stem does not enter the substrate, and the gills differ. In "M. subconiatus", the gills are orange, and sport cheilocystidia which are pale yellow.

"Marasmius sasicola" is known from the lowland forests of Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan, and can be found in June. Mushrooms grow in large numbers close together, and grow from dead leaves of "Sasa" (grass bamboo) which have fallen.




</doc>
