<doc id="10974498" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10974498" title="History of the Song dynasty">
History of the Song dynasty

The Song dynasty (Chinese: 宋朝; pinyin: Sòng cháo; 960–1279) of China was a ruling dynasty that controlled China proper and southern China from the middle of the 10th century into the last quarter of the 13th century. The dynasty was established by Emperor Taizu of Song with his usurpation of the throne of Later Zhou, ending the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period.

The Song is considered a high point of classical Chinese innovation in science and technology, an era that featured prominent intellectual figures such as Shen Kuo and Su Song and the revolutionary use of gunpowder weapons. However, it was also a period of political and military turmoil, with opposing and often aggressive political factions formed at court that impeded political, social, and economic progress. The frontier management policies of the Chancellor Wang Anshi exacerbated hostile conditions along the Chinese-Vietnamese border. This sparked a border war with Vietnam's Lý dynasty, which was fought to a mutual draw and concluded with a peace treaty in 1082. To the northwest the Song Empire frequently quarreled with the rival Western Xia, led by the Tanguts, as well as the Liao Dynasty to the northeast, led by ethnic Khitans.

The Song Empire suffered a disastrous military defeat at the hands of invading Jurchens from the north in 1127 during the Jin–Song wars. Following the Jingkang Incident, the remnants of the Song court were forced to flee south from Kaifeng and establish a new capital at Hangzhou. The loss of northern territory and shifting of the capital marks the division of the dynasty into two distinct periods: the Northern Song (960-1127) and the Southern Song (1127-1279). The Southern Song developed a new navy to combat the Jurchen's Jin dynasty formed in the north. The Song dynasty was able to defeat further Jurchen invasions and even fought the Jin dynasty in an erstwhile alliance with the Mongols. However, the Mongol rulers Genghis Khan, Ögedei Khan, Möngke Khan, and finally Kublai Khan gradually conquered China, until the fall of the final Song emperor at the Battle of Yamen in 1279.

The Later Zhou was the last of the Five Dynasties that had controlled northern China after the fall of the Tang dynasty in 907. Zhao Kuangyin, later known as Emperor Taizu (r. 960–976), usurped the throne and deposed the last Zhou ruler Guo Zongxun with the support of military commanders in 960, initiating the Song dynasty. Upon taking the throne, his first goal was the reunification of China after half a century of political division. This included the conquests of Nanping, Wu-Yue, Southern Han, Later Shu, and Southern Tang in the south as well as the Northern Han and the Sixteen Prefectures in the north. With capable military officers such as Yang Ye (d. 986), Liu Tingrang (929–987), Cao Bin (931–999) and Huyan Zan (d. 1000), the early Song military became the dominant force in China. Innovative military tactics, such as defending supply lines across floating pontoon bridges led to success in battle such as the Song assault against the Southern Tang state while crossing the Yangzi River in 974. Using a mass of arrow fire from crossbowmen, Song forces were able to defeat the renowned war elephant corps of the Southern Han on January 23, 971, thus forcing the submission of Southern Han and terminating the first and last elephant corps that would make up a regular division within a Chinese army.

Consolidation in the south was completed in 978, with the conquest of Wu-Yue. Song military forces then turned north against the Northern Han, which fell to Song forces in 979. However, efforts to take the Sixteen Prefectures were unsuccessful and they were incorporated into the Liao state based in Manchuria to the immediate north instead. To the far northwest, the Tanguts had been in power over northern Shaanxi since 881, after the earlier Tang court appointed a Tangut chief as a military governor ("jiedushi") over the region, a seat that became hereditary (forming the Xi-Xia dynasty). Although the Song state was evenly matched against the Liao dynasty, the Song gained significant military victories against the Western Xia (who would eventually fall to the Mongol conquest of Genghis Khan in 1227). 
After political consolidation through military conquest, Emperor Taizu held a famous banquet inviting many of the high-ranking military officers that had served him in Song's various conquests. As his military officers drank wine and feasted with Taizu, he spoke to them about the potential of a military coup against him like those of Five Dynasties era. His military officers protested against this notion, and insisted that none were as qualified as him to lead the country. The passage of this account in the "Song Shi" follows as such:

The emperor said, 'The life of man is short. Happiness is to have the wealth and means to enjoy life, and then to be able to leave the same prosperity to one's descendents. If you, my officers, will renounce your military authority, retire to the provinces, and choose there the best lands and the most delightful dwelling-places, there to pass the rest of your lives in pleasure and peace...would this not be better than to live a life of peril and uncertainty? So that no shadow of suspicion shall remain between prince and ministers, we will ally our families with marriages, and thus, ruler and subject linked in friendship and amity, we will enjoy tranquility'...The following day, the army commanders all offered their resignations, reporting (imaginary) maladies, and withdrew to the country districts, where the emperor, giving them splendid gifts, appointed them to high official positions. 
Emperor Taizu developed an effective centralized bureaucracy staffed with civilian scholar-officials and regional military governors and their supporters were replaced by centrally appointed officials. This system of civilian rule led to a greater concentration of power in the central government headed by the emperor than had been possible during the previous dynasties. In the early 11th century, there were some 30,000 men who took the prefectural exams per year (see imperial examination), which steadily increased to roughly 80,000 by the end of the century, and to 400,000 exam takers during the 13th century. Although new municipal governments were often established, the same number of prefectures and provinces were in existence as before the Song came to power. Thus although more people were taking exams, roughly the same number were being accepted into the government as in previous periods, making the civil service exams very competitive amongst aspiring students and scholars.

Emperor Taizu also found other ways to consolidate and strengthen his power, including updated map-making (cartography) so that his central administration could easily discern how to handle affairs in the provinces. In 971, he ordered Lu Duosun to update and 're-write all the Tu Jing [maps] in the world'; a daunting task for one individual. Nonetheless, he traveled throughout the provinces to collect illustrative gazetteers and as much data as possible. With the aid of Song Zhun, the massive work was completed in 1010, with some 1566 chapters. The later "Song Shi" historical text stated (Wade–Giles spelling):

Yuan Hsieh (d. +1220) was Director-General of governmental grain stores. In pursuance of his schemes for the relief of famines he issued orders that each pao (village) should prepare a map which would show the fields and mountains, the rivers and the roads in fullest detail. The maps of all the pao were joined together to make a map of the tu (larger district), and these in turn were joined with others to make a map of the hsiang and the hsien (still larger districts). If there was any trouble about the collection of taxes or the distribution of grain, or if the question of chasing robbers and bandits arose, the provincial officials could readily carry out their duties by the aid of the maps.

Taizu also displayed a strong interest in science and technology. He employed the Imperial Workshop to support such projects as Zhang Sixun's hydraulic-powered armillary sphere (for astronomical observation and time-keeping) that used liquid mercury instead of water (because liquid mercury would not freeze during winter). Emperor Taizu was also quite open-minded in his affairs, especially with those perceived as foreigners: he appointed the Arab Muslim Ma Yize (910–1005) as the chief astronomer of the Song court. For receiving envoys from the Korean kingdom of Goryeo alone, the Song court had roughly 1,500 volumes written about the nuanced rules, regulations, and guidelines for their reception. The Song also sent envoys abroad, such as Wang Yande (939–1006), who was sent as an official envoy to the Uyghur-Turkic city of Gaochang in 981, then under Kara-Khanid control. From the 2nd century onwards, ancient Chinese histories even record that embassies of the Roman Empire ("Daqin") and Byzantine Empire ("Fu lin") arrived in China. As recorded in the "History of Song" and "Wenxian Tongkao", the last known arrival of Byzantine envoys came in 1081, apparently sent by Michael VII Doukas to the court of Emperor Shenzong of Song. However, the "History of Yuan" records that a Byzantine man served as an astronomer and physician at the court of Kublai Khan during the subsequent Yuan dynasty, and in 1371 the Hongwu Emperor of the Ming dynasty sent an alleged Byzantine merchant (who was likely Nicolaus de Bentra, Archbishop of Khanbaliq) to inform the Byzantine ruler of the founding of the new dynasty.

Relations between the Song and Liao (led by the Khitans) were relatively peaceful in the first two decades after Song was founded, the disputed territories of the Northern Han and the Sixteen Prefectures notwithstanding. In 974, the two began exchanging embassies on New Years Day. However, in 979 the Song moved against the Northern Han, long under the protection of the Liao dynasty. The Song emperor succeeded in forcing the Northern Han to surrender, but when marching on the Liao Southern Capital (present-day Beijing) in the Sixteen Prefectures, Song forces were defeated at the Battle of Gaoliang River. This defeat was politically damaging to the prestige of Emperor Taizong of Song (r. 976–997), so much so that his top military commanders orchestrated an aborted coup to replace him with his nephew Zhao Dezhao.

Relations between the Song and Liao remained tense and hostile: in 986 the Song sent three armies against the Liao in an effort to take advantage of an infant emperor and recapture the Sixteen Prefectures, but the Liao successfully repulsed all three armies. Following this, diplomatic relations were resumed. Relations between Song and Liao worsened in the 990s. From 993 to 1004, the Liao observed the Song as the latter built a 'Great Ditch' in northern Hebei province from the Taihang Mountains in the west all the way to the Bohai Sea in the east. This was essentially a series of canals meant to block the advance of Liao cavalry far from the northern border line, although the Liao perceived this engineering project as a means for the Song to dispatch offensive forces more efficiently via new waterways. In 999 the Liao began annual attacks on Song positions, though with no breakthrough victories. The Liao were interested in capturing the Guannan region of northern Hebei, both because the Song general Zhou Shizong had taken it from them and because it contained strategic passes.
In 1004, Liao forces managed to march deep into Song territory, camping out in Shanyuan, about north of the Song capital of Kaifeng. However, their forces were greatly overextended and any possible escape route was in danger of being blocked by Song forces. Eventually, the completion of the 'Great Ditch' as an effective defensive blockade which slowed the advance of Liao cavalry forced the Liao to request a truce. Negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Shanyuan, signed in January 1005 (some sources cite 1004 due to the Chinese Lunar Calendar), which fixed the borders of the Song and Liao as they were before the conflict. The Khitan rulers also wanted to intermarry with the Zhao family line of the Song, an offer that the Song refused in favor of a nominal and figurative imperial kinship. However, the treaty required the Song to make annual tribute payments to the Liao and recognize Liao equality with the Song. The tribute consisted of 283 kg (100,000 oz) of silver along with 200,000 bolts of silk, increasing to 500,000 units by 1042. However, even with the increase in 1042, the Song economy was not damaged by this enforced tribute. The bullion holding of the Liao dynasty did not increase with the tribute either, since the Song exported many goods annually to the Liao, dwarfing the amount of imported goods from Liao. Therefore, much of the silver sent to Liao as tribute was used to pay for Song Chinese goods, and the silver wound up back into the hands of Chinese merchants and the Song government.

Until the Song dynasty took advantage of a large rebellion within the Liao Kingdom in 1125, the Song had to conduct cordial relations with the Liao. Skilled ambassadors were sent on missions to court the Liao and maintain peace, such as the renowned horologist, engineer, and state minister Su Song. The Song also prepared for armed conflict, increasing the overall size of the armed forces to a million soldiers by 1022. By that time, however, the military was consuming three-quarters of the tax revenues gathered by the state, compared to a mere 2 or 3 percent of state income that would be consumed by just providing the Liao with tribute. Due to these circumstances, intense political rivalries would later arise in the Song court over how to handle these issues.

The Song came into conflict with the Tanguts of the Western Xia dynasty as early as the 980s, when Song intended to retake the former Ordos prefectures of the late Tang dynasty, then held by the Tanguts. After the Tangut leader Li Jiqian died in 1004, the Tanguts under his successor Li Deming (r. 1005–1032) had initially attacked the Song, but later sought peaceful relations which brought economic benefits until 1038.

After non-Chinese Song patrol leader Li Jipeng (aka Zhao Baozhong) raided Xia's territory and destroyed some fortified settlements in 1034, the Tanguts under Li Yuanhao (1003–1048) retaliated. On September 12, 1034 the Tanguts raided Qingzhou in Huanqing Circuit, but later Li Yuanhao released Song officers and soldiers he had captured; by January 29, 1035 relations were restored when Li Yuanhao sent tribute of fifty horses to the Song court and requested a copy of a Buddhist canon in return, which he received. Although he retained some unique Tangut customs and had a Tangut script created, Li's administration followed the traditional Chinese model of bureaus. Li proclaimed himself the first imperial ruler of Western Xia, ruling as Emperor Jingzong (r. 1038–1048), and on November 10, 1038 he sent an envoy to the Song capital in order to gain recognition for his new title as "Son of Blue Heaven" and to cease paying tribute to Song to affirm his new status. The Xia began attacks on Song's borders which were repulsed by Song commander Lu Shouqin (fl. 1030–1050), and on January 9, 1039 the Song shut down its border markets and soon after a reward of 100,000 strings of coin was offered to anyone who could capture Emperor Jingzong. Although he won impressive victories in the initial phase of the war, Jingzong gained no additional territory for Western Xia by war's end in 1044, while both sides had lost tens of thousands of troops. Emperor Jingzong also conceded to the Song demand that he refer to himself as an inferior subject when addressing the Song, and that he accept Song ritualists to perform official ceremonies at his court. Throughout the war, the Song had maintained a number of fortified military outposts stretching some from the westernmost prefectures of Shaanxi to Hedong in what is now Shanxi. Since the Song could not rely on water obstacle defenses in this region—like the Great Ditch of Hebei used against Liao—they instead garrisoned the wide expanse with a recorded 200 imperial battalions and 900 provincial and militia battalions by 1043.

The war was costly and the Song state had to raise the taxes by fifty percent in the Hubei, Hedong and Shanxi circuits. Even after the end of the conflict, maintaining standing army in the resource-poor northern regions placed a heavy burden on the economy. Defence expenditures amounted to 50 million strings of cash by 1067, out of the total income of 60 million.

Relations broke down once more in 1067 with the ascension of Emperor Shenzong of Song, and in the 1070s the Song had considerable success in capturing Tangut territory. A mood of frontier adventurism permeated Shenzong's court, as well as a desire to reclaim territories he felt belonged to him as the rightful ruler of China; when a Song general led an unprovoked attack on a Western Xia border town, Shenzong appeared at the border to commend the general himself. To punish the Western Xia and damage their economy, Emperor Shenzong also shut down all commercial border markets along the Song-Western Xia border. The scientist and statesman Shen Kuo (1031–1095) was sent to Yanzhou (now Yan'an, Shaanxi province) in 1080 to stave off Tangut military invasion. He successfully defended his fortified position, yet the new Grand Councillor Cai Que held him responsible for the death of a rival Song military officer and the decimation of that officer's forces; as a result, Shen Kuo was ousted from office and the state abandoned the projected land that Shen was able to defend.

When Empress Dowager Gao died in 1093, Emperor Zhezong of Song asserted himself at court by ousting the political conservatives led by Sima Guang, reinstating Wang Anshi's reforms, and halting all negotiations with the Tanguts of the Western Xia. This resulted in continued armed conflict between the Song dynasty and the Western Xia. In 1099, the Northern Song launched a campaign into Xining and Haidong (in modern Qinghai province), occupying territory that was controlled by the Tibetan Gusiluo regime since the 10th century. By 1116, Song managed to acquire all of its territory and incorporated it into prefectures; the area became the westernmost frontier against the Western Xia.

For roughly a millennium a series of Chinese dynasties had controlled northern Vietnam, until the independence of the Ngô dynasty (939–967). Early Song armies had fought and lost to the Early Lê dynasty (980–1009) of Vietnam at the Battle of Bạch Đằng in 981. Subsequently, the Zhuang rebel Nong Zhigao (Nùng Trí Cao) (1025–1053) attempted to establish his own frontier kingdom in 1042, 1048, and 1052, creating a disturbance on Song's southern border that prompted an invasion against Nong Zhigao/Nùng Trí Cao's forces in the 1050s. This invasion resulted in the Song conquest of border regions inhabited by Tai peoples and a border confrontation with the Lý dynasty (1010–1225) that lasted from 1075 to 1077. The Song court's interest in maximizing the economic benefits of these frontier zones came into conflict with the Lý dynasty, whose goal was to consolidate their peripheral fiefdoms. In the aftermath, an agreement was negotiated by both sides that fixed the borders; the resulting line of demarcation "would largely remain in place through to the present day", according to James A. Anderson, Associate Professor in the History Department at the University of North Carolina.

The Lý court had not intervened when the Song general Di Qing (1008–1061) crushed the border rebellion of Nùng Trí Cao in 1053. During the two decades of relative regional peace that followed, the Lý observed the threat of Song expansion, as more Han Chinese settlers moved into areas which the Lý relied upon for the extraction of natural resources. Initially, a division of Di Qing's soldiers (originally from Shandong) had settled the region, followed by a wave of Chinese settlers from north of the Yangzi River.

The Guangnan West Circuit Fiscal Commissioner, Wang Han (fl. 1043–1063), feared that Nùng Trí Cao's kinsmen Nùng Tông Đán intended to plunder the region after he crossed the Song border in 1057. Wang Han took a personal visit to Nùng Tông Đán's camp and spoke with Nùng Trí Cao's son, explaining that seeking "Interior Dependency" status would alienate them from the Lý court, but if they remained outside of China proper they could safely act as loyal frontier militia. Wang Han then sent a memorial to Emperor Renzong's (r. 1022–1063) court in 1060, advocating the policy agreed with the Nùng. The Song government rejected his proposal and made the Nùng communities (along with other ethnic groups) official dependents of Song imperial authority, and Nùng Tông Đán's request that the territories under his authority be incorporated into the Song Empire was granted in 1062. In 1059—six years before the Song court's New Policies under Chancellor Wang Anshi (1021–1086) organized new self-sufficient militia units throughout the empire and along the border with Đại Việt—the Lý dynasty ruler Lý Thánh Tông reorganized northern frontier administrative units and raised new militias. This bolstered his kingdom's strength in a time of conflict with Champa (located in southern Vietnam).

In the spring of 1060, Giáp Đồng natives under the frontier prefectural leader Thàn Thiệu Thái—an imperial in-law to the Lý court through marriage alliance—raided the Song frontier for cattle and militia recruits. He succeeded in taking the Song military leader Yang Baocai hostage, and in autumn of 1060 Song troops were sent into the frontier to rescue the general but he was not found. The Song court appointed Yu Jing (余靖; 1000–1064) as a new military commissioner of the Guangnan region and charged him with the task of quelling the unrest caused by Thàn Thiệu Thái. Yu Jing also sent an agent to Champa to enlist Cham aid against the Song's enemies in Guangnan.

The Lý court discovered the Song's secret attempt to ally with Champa; while Lý sent a delegation to Yongzhou to thank Song for putting down local rebellions and to negotiate terms of peace, they instructed their agents to gather intelligence on the alleged Champa alliance and the strength of Song's military presence in the Guangnan Western Circuit. Two Vietnamese envoys were permitted to offer tribute to the court of Renzong in Kaifeng, arriving on February 8, 1063 to deliver gifts, including nine tamed elephants. On March 30, 1063, Emperor Renzong died and was succeeded by Emperor Yingzong (r.1063–1067); Vietnamese envoys arrived in Kaifeng again to congratulate Yingzong on his ascension, and on April 7, 1063, Yingzong sent gifts such as calligraphy works by Renzong to Vietnamese King Lý Thánh Tông. On the day that the Vietnamese envoy Lý Kế Tiên prepared to depart from Kaifeng back to Đại Việt, news arrived that Thàn Thiệu Thái had raided Song's Guangnan West Circuit again. Although a plea from a Guangnan official urged Kaifeng to take action, Yingzong left defenses up to local Guangnan forces and labeled Thàn Thiệu Thái as "reckless and mad" in an effort to disassociate him from the Lý court.

The minor Song official Lu Shen, a prefect in Guizhou, sent a message to Kaifeng in 1065 which reported that Nùng Tông Đán had apparently switched allegiance from Song to Lý, as well as united with the Quảng Nguyên chieftain Lưu Ký. When the now "mentally weak and distracted ruler" Yingzong—as Anderson describes him—received the report, he took no other action but to reassign Nùng Tông Đán with new honorific titles. The court took no action to resolve the problem, and Nùng Tông Đán later played a key role in the Lý–Song War of 1075–1077. The Song also gave official titles to other Vietnamese leaders despite their involvement in Nùng Trí Cao's rebellions and their pledged loyalty to Lưu Ký, the latter employed as a tribal official under King Lý Thánh Tông.

Yingzong died on January 8, 1067, and was replaced by Emperor Shenzong (r. 1067–1085), who like his father, heaped rewards on Vietnamese leaders but was more observant of the Vietnamese delegations. When Vietnamese envoys arrived in Kaifeng to congratulate Shenzong on his ascension, he sent lavish gifts to the Lý court, including a golden belt, silver ingots, 300 bolts of silk, two horses, a saddle inlaid with gold and silver plating, and on February 9, 1067 bestowed the Vietnamese ruler Lý Thánh Tông with the official title "King of the Southern Pacified Region" (Chinese:南平王, pinyin: "nán píng wáng", Vietnamese: Nam Bình Vương). Shenzong also countered Nùng Tông Đán's defection by recognizing his kinsman Nùng Trí Hội as the Nùng clan leader in 1069, giving him a title similar to Tông Đán's and command over Guihua prefecture (also known as Wuyang grotto settlement).

In his New Policies sponsored by Shenzong, Wang Anshi enhanced central authority over Song's frontier administrations, increased militia activity, increased troop levels and war horses sent to the frontiers (including the border areas with Đại Việt), and actively sought loyal supporters in border regions who could heighten the pace of extraction of local resources for the state's disposal. Officials at court debated the merits or faults of Wang's policies, yet criticism of his reforms even appeared in Đại Việt, where the high officer Lý Thường Kiệt (1019–1105) publicly announced that Wang's policies were deliberate efforts to seize and control their border frontiers. Tensions between Song and Lý were critical, and in these conditions any sign of hostility had potential to ignite a war.
The Quảng Nguyên chieftain Lưu Ký launched an unexpected attack against Yongzhou in 1075, which was repelled by the Song's Vietnamese officer Nùng Trí Hội in charge of Guihua. Shenzong then sought to cement an alliance with the "Five Clans" of northern Guangnan by issuing an edict which would standardize their once irregular tribute missions to visit Kaifeng now every five years. Shenzong had officials sent from the capital to supervise militiamen in naval training exercises. Shenzong then ordered that all merchants were to cease trade with the subjects of Đại Việt, a further indication of heightened hostility that prompted the Lý court under Lý Nhân Tông (r. 1072–1127) to prepare for war.

In the autumn of 1075, Nùng Tông Đán advanced into Song territory in Guangxi while a naval fleet commanded by Lý Thường Kiệt captured Qinzhou and Lianzhou prefectures. Lý Thường Kiệt calmed the apprehensions of the local Chinese populace, claiming that he was simply apprehending a rebel who took refuge in China and that the local Song authorities had refused to cooperate in detaining him. In the early spring of 1076, Thường Kiệt and Nùng Tông Đán defeated the Song militia of Yongzhou, and during a battle at Kunlun Pass, their forces beheaded the Governor-General of Guangnan West Circuit, Zhang Shoujie (d. 1076). After a forty-two-day siege, Yongzhou was breached and razed to the ground. When Song forces attempted to challenge Lý's forces, the latter retreated, with their spoils of war and thousands of prisoners.

Lý Thường Kiệt had fought a war with the Cham in 1069, and in 1076 Song called on the Khmer Empire and Champa to go to war again in 1076. At the same time, the Song commander Guo Kui (1022–1088) led the combined Song force of approximately 100,000 men against Lý. The Song quickly regained Quảng Nguyên prefecture and in the process captured the resistance leader Lưu Ký. By 1077, the Song had destroyed two other Vietnamese armies and marched towards their capital at Thăng Long (modern Hanoi). Song forces halted at the Nhu Nguyệt River (in modern Bắc Ninh Province), where Lý Thường Kiệt had defensive ramparts built on the southern banks. However, Song forces broke through his defense line and their cavalry advanced to within several kilometers of the capital city. The Vietnamese counterattacked and pushed Song forces back across the river while their coastal defenses distracted the Song navy. Lý Thường Kiệt also launched an offensive, but lost two Lý princes in the fighting at Kháo Túc River. According to Chinese sources, "tropical climate and rampant disease" severely weakened Song's military forces while the Lý court feared the result of a prolonged war so close to the capital. In 1078 China defeated Đại Việt and overran several districts that would later make up part of Cao Bằng Province.

As a result, Thường Kiệt made peace overtures to the Song; the Song commander Guo Kui agreed to withdraw his troops, but kept five disputed regions of Quảng Nguyên (renamed Shun'anzhou or Thuận Châu), Tư Lang Châu, Môn Châu, Tô Mậu Châu, and Quảng Lăng. These areas now comprise most of modern Vietnam's Cao Bằng Province and Lạng Sơn Province. In 1082, after a long period of mutual isolation, King Lý Nhân Tông of Đại Việt returned Yong, Qin, and Lian prefectures back to Song authorities, along with their prisoners of war, and in return Song relinquished its control of four prefectures and the county of Đại Việt, including the Nùng clan's home of Quảng Nguyên. Further negotiations took place from July 6 to August 8, 1084 and were held at Song's Yongping garrison in southern Guangnan, where Lý's Director of Military Personnel Lê Van Thình (fl. 1075–1096) convinced Song to fix the two countries' borders between Quảng Nguyên and Guihua prefectures.

After students passed the often difficult, bureaucratic, and heavily demanding Imperial Exams, as they became officials, they did not always see eye to eye with others that had passed the same examination. Even though they were fully-fledged graduates ready for government service, there was always the factor of competition with other officials. Promotion to a higher post, higher salary, additional honors, and selection for choice assignment responsibilities were often uncertain, as young new officials often needed higher-ranking officials to recommend them for service. Once an official would rise to the upper echelons of central administration based in the capital, they would often compete with others over influence of the emperor's official adoption of state policies. Officials with different opinions on how to approach administrative affairs often sought out other officials for support, leading to pacts of rivaling officials lining up political allies at court to sway the emperor against the faction they disagreed with.

Factional strife at court first became apparent during the 1040s. The unsuccessful war with Tanguts and the mounting economic pressures prompted the first reform movement of the Song: Qingli Reforms initiated by Fan Zhongyan (989–1052). Fan was a capable military leader (with successful battles in his record against the Tanguts of Xi-Xia) but as a minister of state he was known as an idealist, once saying that a well-minded official should be one that was "first in worrying about the world's troubles and last in enjoying its pleasures". When Fan rose to the seat of chancellor, there was a growing opposition to him within the older and more conservative crowd. They disliked his pushing for reforms for the recruitment system, higher pay for minor local officials to discourage against corruption, and wider sponsorship programs to ensure that officials were drafted more on the basis of their intellect and character. However, his reforms were cancelled within a year's time (with Fan replaced as chancellor), since many older officials halfway through their careers were not keen on making changes that could affect their comfortably set positions.
After Fan Zhongyan, there was Chancellor Wang Anshi (1021–1086). The new nineteen-year-old Emperor Shenzong (r. 1067–1085) had an instant liking of Wang Anshi when he submitted a long memorial to the throne that criticized the practices of state schools and the examination system itself. With Wang as his new chancellor, he quickly implemented Wang's New Policies, which evoked some heated reaction from the conservative base. Along with the Baojia system of a community-based law enforcement, the New Policies included:

In addition, Wang Anshi had his own commentaries on Confucian classics made into a standard and required reading for students hoping to pass the state examinations. This and other reforms of Wang's were too much for some officials to bear idly, as there were many administrative disagreements, along with many personal interests at stake. In any case, the rising conservative faction against the reformer Wang Anshi branded him as an inferior-intellect who was not up to par with their principles of governance (likewise, the reformers branded conservatives in the same labeled fashion). The conservatives criticized Wang's reforms as a means of curbing the influence of landholding families by diminishing their private wealth in favor of self-sufficient communal groups. The conservatives argued that the wealth of the landholding class should not be purposefully diminished by state programs, since the land holding class was the essential socio-economic group that produced China's scholar-officials, managers, merchants, and landlords.

Reminded of the earlier Fan Zhongyan, Wang was not about to allow ministers who opposed his reforms to have sway at court, and with his prowess (and perceived arrogance) was known as 'the bullheaded premier'. He gathered to his side ministers who were loyal to his policies and cause, an elite social coalition known as the New Policies Group (新法, Xin Fa). He had many able and powerful supporters, such as the scientist and statesman Shen Kuo. Ministers of state who were seen as obstructive to the implementation of Wang's reforms were not all dismissed from the capital to other places (since the emperor needed some critical feedback), but many were. A more extreme example would be "obstructionist" officials sent far to the south to administer regions that were largely tropical, keeping in mind that northern Chinese were often susceptible to malaria found in the deep south of China. Even the celebrated poet and government official Su Shi was persecuted in 1079 when he was arrested and forced into five weeks of interrogation. Finally, he confessed under guarded watch that he had slandered the emperor in his poems. One of them read:

This poem can be interpreted as criticizing the failure of the salt monopoly established by Wang Anshi, embodied in the persona of a hard-working old man who was cruelly denied his means to flavor his food, with the severity of the laws and the only salt available being charged at rates that were too expensive. After his confession, Su Shi was found guilty in court, and was summarily exiled to Hubei Province. More than thirty of his associates were also given minor punishments for not reporting his slanderous poems to authorities before they were widely circulated to the educated public.

Emperor Shenzong died in 1085, an abrupt death since he was in his mid 30s. His successor Emperor Zhezong of Song was only ten years old when he ascended to the throne, so his powerful grandmother served as regent over him. She disliked Wang's reforms from the beginning, and sought to appoint more Conservative officials at court who would agree to oppose the Reformists. Her greatest political ally was Sima Guang (1019–1086), who was made the next Chancellor. Undoing what Wang had implemented, Sima dismissed the New Policies, and forced the same treatment upon Reformers that Wang had earlier meted out to his opponents: dismissal to lower or frontier posts of governance, or even exile. However, there was still mounted opposition to Sima Guang, as many had favored some of the New Policies, including the substitution of tax instead of forced labor service to the state. Sure enough, when Emperor Zhezong's grandmother died in 1093, Zhezong was quick to sponsor the Reformists like his predecessor Shenzong had done. The Conservatives once more were ousted from political dominance at court. When Zhezong suddenly died in his twenties, his younger brother Emperor Huizong of Song (r. 1100–1125) succeeded him, and also supported the Reformers at court. Huizong banned the writing of Sima Guang and his lackeys while elevating Wang Anshi to near revered status, having a statue of Wang erected in a Confucian temple alongside a statue of Mencius. To further this image of Wang as a great and honorable statesman, printed and painted pictures of him were circulated throughout the country. Yet this cycle of revenge and partisanship continued after Zhezong and Huizong, as Reformers and Conservatives continued their infighting. Huizong's successor, Emperor Gaozong of Song, abolished once more the New Policies, and favored ministers of the Conservative faction at court.

Before the arrival of the Jurchens the Song dynasty was for centuries engaged in a stand-off against the Western Xia and the Khitan Liao dynasty. This balance was disrupted when the Song dynasty developed a military alliance with the Jurchens for the purpose of annihilating the Liao. This balance of power disrupted, the Jurchens then turned on the Song, resulting in the fall of the Northern Song and the subsequent establishment of the Southern Song.

During the reign of Huizong, the Jurchen tribe to the north (once subordinates to the Liao), revolted against their Khitan masters. The Jurchen community already had a reputation of great economic clout in their own region of the Liao and Sungari rivers. They were positioned in an ideal location for horse raising, and were known to muster ten thousand horses a year to sell annually to the Khitans of the Liao dynasty. They even had a martial history of being pirates, in the 1019 Toi invasion of the Heian Japanese islands in modern-day Iki Province, Tsushima Province, and Hakata Bay. From the Jurchen Wanyan clan, a prominent leader Wanyan Aguda (1068–1123) challenged Liao authority, establishing their own Jin (or 'Golden') dynasty in 1115. The Song government took notice of the political dissidence of the Jurchens in Liao's territory, as Council of State Tong Guan (1054–1126) persuaded the emperor to ally with the Jurchens against the Liao . The two nations secretly forged the Alliance on the Sea, so-named because it was negotiated by envoys who crossed the Bohai Sea, and agreed to jointly invade the Liao, and if successful, divide up Liao territory with the Sixteen Prefectures given to the Song.

In 1121-23, Song forces fared badly against the Liao, but the Jin succeeded in driving the Liao to Central Asia. Through the campaign, the Jurchens discovered weaknesses about the Song military based in the north (as the Chinese for so long had been sending tribute to the Liao instead of actually fighting them). Song forces had failed to make a joint attack in a siege with the Jurchens, who viewed the Song generals as incompetent. Banking on the possibility that the Song were weak enough to be destroyed, the Jurchens made a sudden and unprovoked attack against the Song in the north. Soon enough, even the capital at Kaifeng was under siege by Jin forces, only staved off when an enormous bribe was handed over to them. There was also an effective use of Song Chinese war machines in the defense of Kaifeng in 1126, as it was recorded that 500 catapults hurling debris were used. During the siege of Taiyuan, the Jin employed 30 catapults and over fifty carts protected by rawhide and sheets of iron plating so that Jin troops could be ferried to the walls safely to fill in Taiyuan city's defensive moat. The eunuch general Tong Guan, who had initially urged for an alliance with the Jurchens, was blamed for causing the war. He was eventually executed by Emperor Qinzong of Song (r. 1126–1127) after Huizong abdicated the throne to him.
However, the Jin returned soon after with enough siege machinery to scale Kaifeng's layer of walls defended by 48,000 Song troops. The Jin used siege towers taller than Kaifeng's walls in order to lob incendiary bombs into the city. The besieged city was captured by the Jurchens in less than two months. Three thousand members of the Emperor's court were taken as captives, including Qinzong and many of his relatives, craftsmen, engineers, goldsmiths, silversmiths, blacksmiths, weavers and tailors, Daoist priests, and female entertainers to label some. The mechanical clock tower designed by Su Song and erected in 1094 was also disassembled and its components carted back north, along with many clock-making millwrights and maintenance engineers that would cause a setback in technical advances for the Song court. According to the contemporary Xia Shaozeng, other war booty included 20,000 fire arrows that were handed over to the Jurchens upon taking the city.

After capturing Kaifeng, the Jurchens went on to conquer the rest of northern China, while the Song Chinese court fled south. They took up temporary residence at Nanjing, where a surviving prince was named Emperor Gaozong of Song in 1127. Jin forces halted at the Yangzi River, but staged continual raids south of the river until a later boundary was fixed at the Huai River further north. With the border fixed at the Huai, the Song government would promote an immigration policy of repopulating and resettling territories north of the Yangzi River, since vast tracts of vacant land between the Yangzi and Huai were open for landless peasants found in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, and Fujian provinces of the south.

In 1129, Emperor Gaozong designated the site at Hangzhou (known then as Lin'an) to be the temporary settlement of the court, but it was not until 1132 that it was declared the new Song capital. Hangzhou and Nanjing were devastated by the Jin raids; both cities were heavily repopulated with northern refugees who outnumbered the remaining original inhabitants. Hangzhou was chosen not only for its natural scenic beauty, but for the surrounding topographic barriers of lakes and muddy rice-fields that gave it defensive potential against northern armies comprising mostly cavalry. Yet it was viewed by the court as only a temporary capital while the Song emperors planned to retake Kaifeng. However, the rapid growth of the city from the 12th century to the 13th necessitated long-term goals of residency. In 1133 the modest palatial residence of the imperial family was improved upon from a simple provincial lodging to one that at least accommodated strolls with new covered alleyways to deflect the rain. In 1148 the walls of the small palace compound were finally extended to the southeast, yet this was another marginal improvement.
The new triangular arrangement between the Southern Song, Jin, and Western Xia continued the age of division and conflict in China. The region of Huainan (between the Yangzi and Huai rivers) became a new borderland and battleground between Song and Jin from 1128 to 1141, displacing hundreds of thousands of families who had lived there for generations. The Southern Song deployed several military commanders, among them Yue Fei and Han Shizhong, to resist the Jin as well as recapture territory, which proved successful at times. Yue Fei in particular had been preparing to recapture Kaifeng (or Bianjing as the city was known during the Song period), the former capital of the Song dynasty and the then southern capital of the Jin, after a streak of uninterrupted military victories.

However, the possible defeat of the Jurchens threatened the power of the new emperor of the Southern Song, Gaozong and his premier Qin Hui. The reason for this was that Qinzong, the last emperor of the Northern Song was living in Jin-imposed exile in Manchuria and had a good chance of being recalled to the throne should the Jin dynasty be destroyed. Although Yue Fei had penetrated into enemy territory as far as Luoyang, he was ordered to head back to the capital and halt his campaign. Emperor Gaozong signed the Treaty of Shaoxing in 1141 that fixed the borders at the Huai River, as well as conceded territory regained through the efforts of Yue Fei, while Yue was killed during imprisonment. As part of the treaty, the Song were also forced to pay tribute to the Jin, much as it had to the Liao. With the treaty of Shaoxing, hostilities ceased between the Jin and Song dynasties for the next two decades. In the meantime, Emperor Gaozong negotiated with the Jin over his mother's ransom while he commissioned a symbolic art project about her, the "Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute", originally based upon the life of Cai Wenji (b. 177). Gaozong's mother was eventually released and brought south, but Qinzong was never freed from his confinement in the north.

Decades after Yue's death, the later Emperor Xiaozong of Song honored Yue Fei as a national hero in 1162, providing him proper burial and memorial of a shrine. As a means to shame those who had pressed for his execution (Qin Hui and his wife), iron statues of them were crafted to kneel before the tomb of Yue Fei, located at the West Lake in Hangzhou.

As the once great Indian Ocean maritime power of the Chola dynasty in medieval India had waned and declined, Chinese sailors and seafarers began to increase their own maritime activity in South East Asia and into the Indian Ocean. Even during the earlier Northern Song period, when it was written in Tamil inscriptions under the reign of Rajendra Chola I that Srivijaya had been completely taken in 1025 by Chola's naval strength, the succeeding king of Srivijaya managed to send tribute to the Chinese Northern Song court in 1028. Much later, in 1077, the Indian Chola ruler Kulothunga Chola I (who the Chinese called "Ti-hua-kia-lo") sent a trade embassy to the court of Emperor Shenzong of Song, and made lucrative profits in selling goods to China. There were other tributary payers from other regions of the world as well. The Fatimid-era Egyptian sea captain Domiyat traveled to a Buddhist site of pilgrimage in Shandong in 1008, where he presented the Chinese Emperor Zhenzong of Song with gifts from his ruling Imam Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, establishing diplomatic relations between Egypt and China that had been lost during the collapse of the Tang dynasty in 907 (while the Fatimid state was established three years later in 910). During the Northern Song, Quanzhou was already a bustling port of call visited by a plethora of different foreigners, from Muslim Arabs, Persians, Egyptians, Hindu Indians, Middle-Eastern Jews, Nestorian Christians from the Near East, etc. Muslims from foreign nations dominated the import and export industry (see Islam during the Song dynasty). To regulate this enormous commercial center, in 1087 the Northern Song government established an office in Quanzhou for the sole purpose of handling maritime affairs and commercial transactions. In this multicultural environment there were many opportunities for subjects in the empire of foreign descent, such as the (Arab or Persian) Muslim Pu Shougeng, the Commissioner of Merchant Shipping for Quanzhou between 1250 and 1275. Pu Shougeng had gained his reputable position by helping the Chinese destroy pirate forces that plagued the area, and so was lavished with gifts and appraisal from Chinese merchants and officials. Quanzhou soon rivaled Guangzhou (the greatest maritime port of the earlier Tang dynasty) as a major trading center during the late Northern Song. However, Guangzhou had not fully lost its importance. The medieval Arab maritime captain Abu Himyarite from Yemen toured Guangzhou in 993, and was an avid visitor to China. There were other notable international seaports in China during the Song period as well, including Xiamen (or Amoy).
When the Song capital was removed far south to Hangzhou, massive numbers of people came from the north. Unlike the flat plains of the north, the mountainous terrain riddled with lakes and rivers in southern China is largely a hindrance and inhospitable to widespread agriculture. Therefore, the Southern Song took on a unique maritime presence that was largely unseen in earlier dynasties, grown out of the need to secure importation of foreign resources. Commercial cities (located along the coast and by internal rivers), backed by patronage of the state, dramatically increased shipbuilding activity (funding harbor improvements, warehouse construction, and navigation beacons). Navigation at sea was made easier by the invention of the compass and Shen Kuo's treatise of the 11th century on the concept of true north (with magnetic declination towards the North Pole). With military defense and economic policy in mind, the Southern Song established China's first standing navy. China had a long naval history before that point (example, Battle of Chibi in 208), and even during the Northern Song era there were concerns with naval matters, as seen in examples such as the Chinese official Huang Huaixin of the Xining Reign (1068–1077) outlining a plan of employing a drydock for repair of 'imperial dragon boats' (see Science and technology of the Song dynasty). Already during the Northern Song, the Chinese had established fortified trade bases in the Philippines, a noted interest of the court to expand China's military power and economic influence abroad. Provincial armies in the Northern Song era also maintained naval river units. However, it was the Southern Song court that was the first to create a large, permanent standing naval institution for China in 1132. The new headquarters of the Southern Song Chinese admiralty was based at Dinghai, the office labeled as the Yanhai Zhizhi Shisi (Imperial Commissariat for the Control and Organization of Coastal Areas). Even as far back as 1129 officials proposed ambitious plans to conquer Korea with a new navy and use Korea as a base for launching invasions into Jin territory, but this scheme was never achieved and was of secondary importance to maintaining defense along the fluctuating border with Jin.
Capturing the essence of the day, the Song era writer Zhang Yi once wrote in 1131 that China must regard the Sea and the River as her Great Wall, and substitute warships for watchtowers. Indeed, the court administration at Hangzhou lived up to this ideal, and were successful for a time in employing their navy to defend their interests against an often hostile neighbor to the north. In his "Science and Civilization in China" series, Joseph Needham writes:

From a total of 11 squadrons and 3,000 men [the Song navy] rose in one century to 20 squadrons totalling 52,000 men, with its main base near Shanghai. The regular striking force could be supported at need by substantial merchantmen; thus in the campaign of 1161 some 340 ships of this kind participated in the battles on the Yangtze. The age was one of continual innovation; in 1129 trebuchets throwing gunpowder bombs were decreed standard equipment on all warships, between 1132 and 1183 a great number of treadmill-operated paddle-wheel craft, large and small, were built, including stern-wheelers and ships with as many as 11 paddle-wheels a side (the invention of the remarkable engineer Kao Hsuan), and in 1203 some of these were armored with iron plates (to the design of another outstanding shipwright Chhin Shih-Fu)...In sum, the navy of the Southern Sung held off the [Jurchen Jin] and then the Mongols for nearly two centuries, gaining complete control of the East China Sea.

During the reign of Emperor Xiaozong of Song, the Chinese increased the number of trade missions that would dock at ports throughout the Indian Ocean, where Arab and Hindu influence was once predominant. The Chinese sailed regularly to Korea and Japan in the Far East, westwards towards India and Sri Lanka, and into the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea. The Chinese were keen to import goods such as rare woods, precious metals, gems, spices, and ivory, while exporting goods such as silk, ceramics, lacquer-ware, copper cash, dyes, and even books. In 1178, the Guangzhou customs officer Zhou Qufei wrote in "Lingwai Daida" of an island far west in the Indian Ocean (possibly Madagascar), from where people with skin "as black as lacquer" and with frizzy hair were captured and purchased as slaves by Arab merchants. As an important maritime trader, China appeared also on geographical maps of the Islamic world. In 1154 the Moroccan geographer Al-Idrisi published his "Geography", where he described the Chinese seagoing vessels as having aboard goods such as iron, swords, leather, silk, velvet, along with textiles from Aden (modern-day Yemen), the Indus River region, and Euphrates River region (modern-day Iraq). He also commended the silk manufactured at Quanzhou as being unparalleled in the world for its quality, while the Chinese capital at Hangzhou was best known throughout the Islamic world for being a major producer of glass wares. By at least the 13th century, the Chinese were even familiar with the story of the ancient Lighthouse of Alexandria since it is described at length by Zhao Rugua, a Southern Song customs inspector of Quanzhou.

In 1153 the Jin emperor Wanyan Liang moved the empire's capital from Huining Prefecture in northern Manchuria (south of present-day Harbin) to Zhongdu (now Beijing). Four years later in 1157 he razed Beijing, including the nobles’ residences, and moved the Jin's southern capital from Beijing to Kaifeng. It was here at the former seat of the Song dynasty that he began a large project of reconstruction (since the siege against it in 1127). For much of his reign there was peace between Jin and Song, while both states upheld an uninterrupted flow of commercial trade between each other. While amassing tribute from the Southern Song, the Jin dynasty also imported large amounts of tea, rice, sugar, and books from the Southern Song. However, Wanyan Liang reopened the Jin dynasty's armed conflict with the Song by the 1160s.

Wanyan Liang established a military campaign against the Southern Song in 1161, with 70,000 naval troops aboard 600 warships facing a smaller Song fleet of only 120 warships and 3,000 men. At the Battle of Tangdao and the Battle of Caishi along the Yangtze River, Jin forces were defeated by the Southern Song navy. In these battles, the Jin navy was wiped out by the much smaller Song fleet because of their use of fast paddle-wheel crafts and gunpowder bombs launched from trebuchet catapults (since explosive grenades and bombs had been known in China since the 10th century). Meanwhile, two simultaneous rebellions of Jurchen nobles, led by soon-to-be crowned Jin emperor Wanyan Yong and Khitan tribesman, erupted in Manchuria. This forced the reluctant Jin court to withdraw its troops from southern China to quell these uprisings. In the end, Wanyan Liang failed in taking the Southern Song and was assassinated by his own generals in December 1161. The Khitan uprising was not suppressed until 1164, while the Treaty of Longxing (隆興和議) was signed in 1165 between Song and Jin, reestablishing the 1142 border line and ushering in four decades of peace between the two.

In the years 1205 and 1209 the Jin state was under raid attacks by Mongols from the north, and in 1211 the major campaign led by Genghis Khan was launched. His army consisted of fifty thousand bowmen, while his three sons led armies of similar size. Patricia Ebrey writes that at this point the Mongol population could not have been greater than 1.5 million, yet they boosted their numbers by employing Khitans and Han Chinese "who felt no great loyalty to their Jurchen lords." After a Jurchen general murdered the Jin emperor Wanyan Yongji in 1213 and placed Emperor Xuanzong on the throne, a peace settlement was negotiated between Jin and the Mongol forces in 1214, as Genghis made the Jin a vassal state of the Mongol Empire. However, when the Jin court moved from Beijing to Kaifeng, Genghis saw this move as a revolt, and moved upon the old Jin capital at Beijing in 1215, sacking and burning it. Although the now small Jin state attempted to defend against the Mongols and even fought battles with the Song in 1216 and 1223, the Jin were attacked by the Mongols again in 1229 with the ascension of Ögedei Khan. According to the account of 1232, written by the Jin commander Chizhan Hexi, the Jurchens led a valiant effort against the Mongols, whom they frightened and demoralized in the siege of the capital by the use of 'thunder-crash-bombs' and fire lance flamethrowers. However, the capital at Kaifeng was captured by siege in 1233, and by 1234 the Jin dynasty finally fell in defeat to the Mongols after the capture of Caizhou.

The Western Xia met a similar fate, becoming an unreliable vassal to the Mongols by seeking to secure alliances with Jin and Song. Genghis Khan had died in 1227 during the 5-month siege of their capital city, and being held somewhat responsible for this, the last Xia ruler was hacked to death when he was persuaded to exit the gates of his city with a small entourage.

Following the death of Gaozong and the emergence of the Mongols, the Song dynasty formed a military alliance with the Mongols in the hope of finally defeating the Jin dynasty. Several tens of thousands of carts full of grain were sent to the Mongol army during the siege. Following the destruction of the Jurchens in 1234, the Southern Song generals broke the alliance, proceeding to recapture the three historical capitals of Kaifeng, Luoyang and Chang'an. However, the cities, ravaged by years of warfare, lacked economic capacity and yielded little defensibility. This breaking of alliance meant open warfare between the Mongols and the Song Chinese. Ögodei Khan's forces conquered fifty-four out of Sichuan's fifty-eight total districts by 1236, while ordering the slaughter of over a million people that inhabited the city of Chengdu, which was taken by the Mongols with ease.

The Mongols eventually gained the upper hand under Möngke Khan, famed for his battles in Russia and Hungary in Eastern Europe, and ushered in the final destruction of the ruling Ch'oe family of Korea in 1258. In 1252 Möngke commissioned his younger brother Kublai to conquer the Kingdom of Dali in the southwest (modern Yunnan province), which was a successful campaign from the summer of 1253 to early 1254. Möngke also sent a military campaign into northern Vietnam (which was a failure). Möngke sent his renowned general and brother Hulagu west to face Syria and Egypt, after he had sacked and razed medieval Baghdad to the ground in 1258 during the sack of Baghdad, bringing an end to the Abbasid Caliphate and the Islamic Golden Age. Meanwhile, Möngke infiltrated Song territory further, until he died while battling the Song Chinese at Diaoyu Fortress, Chongqing on August 11, 1259. There are several different claims as to how he died; the causes of death include either an arrow wound from a Chinese archer during the siege, dysentery, or cholera epidemic. Whatever the cause, his death halted the invasion of the Southern Song, and sparked a succession crisis that would ultimately favor Kublai Khan as the new Khaghan of the Mongols. Möngke's death in battle also led to the recall of the main Mongol armies led by Hulagu campaigning in the Middle East. Hulagu had to travel back to Mongolia in order to partake in the traditional tribal meeting of the khuriltai to appoint a new successor of the Mongol Khanate. In Hulagu's absence, the emboldened Mamluks of Egypt were ready to face the Mongols. Mongol forces under Christian Kitbuqa's command were defeated in a decisive blow at Ain Jalut. This marked the extent of Mongol conquests west, but in the east, the Song dynasty had to be dealt with.

Although Möngke's forces stalled the war effort immediately after his death, his younger brother Kublai continued to fight the Southern Song along the Yangzi River for the next two months into the autumn of 1259. Kublai made a daring advance across the river during a storm, and assaulted the Southern Song troops on the other side. Both sides suffered considerable casualties, but Kublai's troops were victorious and gained a foothold south of the Yangzi. Kublai made preparations to take the heavily fortified city of Ezhou. Meanwhile, the Song chancellor Jia Sidao dispatched General Lü Wende to lead the reinforcements in the defense of Ezhou, and on October 5 Lü slipped past Kublai's ill-prepared forces and entered the city. Jia Sidao then sent his general and emissary Song Jing to negotiate a tributary settlement with Kublai. He offered Kublai annual tribute of silver like in the earlier treaty with the Khitans, in return for the territories south of the Yangzi that had been taken by the Mongols. Kublai rejected the proposal since he was already in a favorable strategic position on the other side of the Yangzi. However, Kublai had to suspend the war and travel north with the majority of his forces due to the Toluid Civil War. His rival brother Ariq Böke led a sudden movement of troops towards Kublai's home base of Xanadu.

Kublai's absence from the war front was seen by Chancellor Jia Sidao as an opportune moment, so he ordered to resume armed conflict. The Song army routed the small armed detachment that Kublai had stationed south of the Yangzi, and the Song regained its lost territory. With his ally Hulagu busy fighting the Golden Horde and his own forces needed in the north against the rival Khagan claimant Ariq Böke, Kublai was unable to focus on hostilities in the south. On May 21, 1260, Kublai sent his envoy Hao Jing and two other advisors to negotiate with the Southern Song. Upon their arrival and attempts to solve the conflict through diplomatic means, Jia Sidao ordered Kublai's embassy to be detained. Although Kublai would not forget this slight of imprisoning his ambassadors, he nonetheless had to focus on more pressing affairs with the threat of his brother and rival Khan. From 1260 to 1262 the Song forces raided Kublai's southern border which forced Kublai to retaliate with some minor incursions until 1264, when his brother finally surrendered and ended the civil war. In 1265 the first major battle in five years erupted in Sichuan province, where Kublai gained a preliminary victory and considerable war booty of 146 Song naval ships.

While Kublai attended to other matters in the north, the Song court was mobilizing its populace for war and all available resources that could be rendered and drained into the war effort. In the mid 13th century, the Song government led by Jia Sidao began confiscating portions of estates owned by the rich in order to raise revenues in a land nationalization scheme. This had the negative effect of alienating the wealthy landowners and hastening the collapse of the empire, as wealthy landlords and merchants favored what they deemed the inevitable Mongol conquest and rule than the other alternative of paying higher taxes for continual, exhaustive warfare.

There was also mounting political opposition against Chancellor Jia Sidao. Jia had purged several dissident officials who were opposed to his reforms aimed at limiting official corruption and personal profiteering. When he replaced some of these officials with his own cronies, however, political conditions were ripe for a schism at court and within the gentry class that would be favorable to a strong, unified force led by Kublai. Kublai used various ploys and gestures in order to entice defectors from the Southern Song to his side. Kublai Khan established Dadu (Beijing) as his new capital in 1264, catering to the likes of the Chinese with his advisor Liu Bingzhong and the naming of his dynasty with the Chinese word for "primal" ("Yuan"). He made it a policy to grant land, clothing, and oxen to Song Chinese who defected to his side. Kublai Khan chose the moral high ground of releasing Song captives and prisoners while Jia Sidao refused to release Kublai's emissary Hao Jing. In 1261 Kublai personally released seventy-five Song merchants captured at the border; in 1263 he released fifty-seven merchants; in 1269 he released forty-five merchants. In 1264 he publicly reprimanded his own officers for executing two Song generals without trial or investigation. With these acts his reputation and legitimacy in the eyes of the Chinese were greatly enhanced.

The siege of the city Xiangyang was a long, drawn out conflict from 1268 to 1273. Xiangyang and the adjacent town of Fancheng were located on the opposite bank of the Han River and were the last fortified obstacles in Kublai's way towards the rich Yangzi River basin. Kublai made an attempt to starve the city of its supply lines by gaining naval supremacy along the Han River in a gigantic blockade. It was the Song defector Liu Zheng who was the main proponent in advising Kublai Khan to expand the Yuan's naval strength, which was a great factor in their success. An international force — composed of Chinese, Jurchens, Koreans, Mongols, Uyghur Turks, and Middle Eastern Muslims— contributed to Kublai's siege effort in crafting ships and artillery. On several occasions—August 1269, March 1270, August 1271, and September 1272—the Southern Song attempted to break the Yuan blockade with its own navy, yet each attempt was a costly failure of thousands of men and hundreds of ships. After the siege, in the summer of 1273, Kublai appointed the Chinese general Shi Tianze and Turkic general Bayan as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. However, Shi Tianze died in 1275; Bayan was then granted a force of 200,000 (composed mostly of Han Chinese) to assault Song.

In March 1275 the forces of Bayan faced the army of Chancellor Jia Sidao, which was 130,000 strong; the end result was a decisive victory for Bayan, and Jia was forced to retreat after many deserted him. This was the opportune moment for his political rivals to smite him. Jia was effectively stripped of rank, title, and office and banished to Fujian in exile from the court; while en route to Fujian, he was killed by the same commander that was appointed to accompany him. After his death many of his supporters and opposing ministers submitted to Bayan. By 1276 the Yuan army had conquered nearly all of the Southern Song's territory, including the capital at Hangzhou.

Meanwhile, the rebel remnants of the Song court fled to Fuzhou. Emperor Gong was left behind as the empress dowager submitted to Bayan, horrified by reports of the total slaughter of Changzhou. Before the capital was taken, Empress Dowager Xie (1208–1282) made attempts to negotiate with Bayan, promising annual tribute to the Yuan dynasty, but he rejected these proposals. After her attempts at diplomacy had failed, she handed over the Song dynasty's imperial seal to Bayan, "an unambiguous symbol of capitulation." With the submission of Emperor Gong, Bayan ordered that the Song imperial family should be respected, and forbade the pillaging of their imperial tombs or treasuries. Kublai granted the deposed emperor the title "Duke of Ying", but he was eventually exiled to Tibet where he took up a monastic life in 1296.

Any hope of resistance was centered on two young princes, Emperor Gong's brothers. The older boy, Zhao Shi, who was nine years old, was declared emperor on June 14, 1276, in Fuzhou. The court sought refuge in Quanzhou, seeking an alliance with the Superintendent of Maritime Shipping, the Muslim Pu Shougeng. However, he secretly formed an alliance with Kublai, so the Song court was forced to flee in 1277. The court then sought refuge in Silvermine Bay (Mui Wo) on Lantau Island. The older brother became ill and died on May 8, 1278 at age ten, and was succeeded by his younger brother who became Emperor Huaizong of Song, aged seven. The Sung Wong Toi monument in Kowloon commemorates his enthronement. On March 19, 1279 the Song army was defeated in its last battle, the Battle of Yamen, fought against the Yuan army led by the Chinese general Zhang Hongfan in the Pearl River Delta. Song Prime Minister Lu Xiufu is said to have taken the boy emperor in his arms and jumped from his sinking ship into the sea, drowning both of them.

With the death of the last remaining emperor, Song China was eliminated, while Kublai Khan established the realm of the Yuan dynasty over China proper, Mongolia, Manchuria, Tibet, and Korea. For nearly a century to follow, the Chinese would live under a dynasty established by Mongols. However, a native Han Chinese dynasty would be established once more with the Ming dynasty in 1368.

During the Song dynasty, the "Zizhi Tongjian" (Chinese: 資治通鑒/资治通鉴; Wade–Giles : "Tzu-chih t'ung-chien"; literally "Comprehensive Mirror for/to Aid in Government") was an enormous work of Chinese historiography, a written approach to a universal history of China, compiled in the 11th century. The work was first ordered to be compiled by Emperor Yingzong of Song in 1065, the team of scholars headed by Sima Guang, who presented the completed work to Emperor Shenzong of Song in 1084. Its total length was 294 volumes containing roughly 3 million Chinese characters. The "Zizhi Tongjian" covers the people, places, and events of Chinese history from the beginning of the Warring States in 403 BC until the beginning of the Song dynasty in 959. Its size, brevity, and scope has often been compared to the groundbreaking work of Chinese historiography compiled by the ancient historian Sima Qian (145 BC–90 BC), known as the "Shiji". This historical work was later compiled and condensed into fifty nine different books by the Neo-Confucian philosopher Zhu Xi in 1189, yet his pupils had to complete the work shortly after his death in 1200. During the Manchu Qing dynasty, the book was reprinted in 1708, while the European Jesuit Father Joseph Anne Maria de Moyriac de Mailla (1679–1748) translated it shortly after in 1737. It was later edited and published by the Jesuit Abbé, Jean Baptiste Gabriel Alexandre Grosier (1743–1823), in part with Le Roux des Hauterays, where a thirteenth volume and a title page were added. It was also translated and published by the Jesuit astronomer Antoine Gaubil in 1759, whose pupils founded a Russian school of sinology.

Another historical source was the enormous encyclopedia "Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau" published by 1013, one of the Four Great Books of Song. Divided into 1000 volumes of 9.4 million written Chinese characters, this book provided important information on political essays of the period, extensive autobiographies on rulers and various subjects, as well as a multitude of memorials and decrees brought forth to the imperial court. However, the official history of the Song dynasty was the "Song Shi", compiled in 1345 during the Yuan dynasty. The recorded history of the Jurchen Jin dynasty, the "Jin Shi", was compiled in the same year.




</doc>
<doc id="11137605" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11137605" title="Donna Jackson">
Donna Jackson

Donna Jackson is a fictional character from the BBC medical drama "Holby City", played by actress Jaye Jacobs. She appeared in the programme from its sixth series in 2004, to its thirteenth in 2011, and from its nineteenth in 2017. Donna entered the series as a staff nurse, characterised as a wild-child with a chaotic personal life. During her tenure, she grew to take her work more seriously, becoming a ward sister and accepting more personal responsibilities by adopting her half-niece Mia (Jada Wallace-Mitchell). A tart with a heart character, Donna had many romantic liaisons with her colleagues, including a one-night stand with midwife Mickie Hendrie (Kelly Adams). She ultimately fell in love with agency nurse Keiran Callaghan (Barry Sloane), and departed to be with him after he was injured in Afghanistan as part of the Territorial Army.

Jacobs' casting was chronicled in the documentary "Making It at Holby". She made appearances as Donna in both "Holby City" sister show "Casualty", and two crossover editions of the programmes, broadcast as "Casualty@Holby City". After seven years, Jacobs resigned from "Holby City" in order to pursue new projects. The character's reintroduction was announced in February 2017. Donna's relationship with her terminally ill father Derek (Clarke Peters) attracted praise from critics. Her affair with married consultant Michael Spence (Hari Dhillon) proved less popular, with several critics opining that Donna deserved better treatment. She was named "Best Emerging Talent" at the 2005 Screen Nation Awards for her portrayal of Donna, and was nominated for two further awards while part of the series.

Donna arrives at Holby City Hospital as a staff nurse on the general surgery ward, making a poor first impression by being disorganised and insolent. Mistakenly believing that living with her superior will ensure her an easy time at work, Donna invites herself to move in with nurse Lisa Fox (Luisa Bradshaw-White). The two have a strained relationship: within weeks, Donna is evicted for falling behind on her rent, and when she is later allowed to move back in, she lets bailiffs take Lisa's possessions after failing to keep up her own loan repayments. Forced to run a shift in charge of the hospital's Acute Assessment Unit as recompense, Donna struggles to manage and learns a new respect for Lisa. During this period, Donna has a friendship with midwife Mickie Hendrie (Kelly Adams). Mickie is questioning her sexuality, and the two have sex while drunk. Mickie is disappointed when Donna states that it was just a one-night stand, but they are able to reconcile their friendship. When the general surgery ward is downsized, Donna is forced to reapply for her job. Although she gives a good interview and impresses Lisa, other candidates have more experience, so she is unable to retain her position and has to work as a bank nurse.

Following a short-lived relationship with physiotherapist Justin Fuller (Ben Richards), Donna moves on to date hospital manager Bradley Hume (Scott Adkins). Their relationship is terminated by the discovery that Bradley has been running a pharmaceutical scam, resulting in the death of one of Donna's patients due to a morphine overdose. After entering into a scratchcard syndicate at work, Donna wins £20,000. She refuses to share her winnings with the others and resigns from her job, making plans to travel to Australia. On her last day, a patient with bi-polar disorder steals and re-distributes her money. Donna misses her flight, and is forced to remain in Holby. She goes on to begin an affair with consultant general surgeon Michael Spence (Hari Dhillon), despite the fact he is married. When Michael's wife Annalese (Anna-Louise Plowman) begins working at the hospital as a locum anaesthetist, she suspects that Michael has been unfaithful to her and confronts Donna, who confesses the affair and apologises profusely.

Donna is shocked when her estranged father Derek (Clarke Peters) is admitted to the hospital and diagnosed with cancer. He dies soon thereafter, and when dealing with his effects, Donna learns that he unknowingly fathered another daughter. Though her half-sister is recently deceased, Donna meets her half-niece Mia (Jada Wallace-Mitchell), who is being raised by her grandmother, Patti (Barbara Drennan). Within weeks, Patti also dies, and Donna decides to adopt Mia. She and her friend Maria (Phoebe Thomas) compete for a ward sister position on the general surgery ward. Although Maria is the successful applicant, she realises that Donna needs the job in order to support Mia, and withdraws her candidacy so Donna is appointed sister. Donna falls in love with agency nurse Kieran Callaghan (Barry Sloane), and is devastated when he is called to serve in Afghanistan with the Territorial Army (TA). Kieran asks her to marry him, but Donna refuses, terminating their relationship with the intention of giving Mia stability. When Kieran is injured by an improvised explosive device (IED), Donna reconsiders, supporting him through the amputation of his leg. Upon learning that he will be transferred to a rehabilitation unit in Liverpool, Donna resigns in order to move there with him.

Donna has appeared in two editions of "Casualty@Holby City"—crossovers with "Holby City" sister show "Casualty", which is set in the hospital's emergency department (ED). In the first such crossover, originally broadcast in December 2004, Donna works alongside ED staff members when a fuel tanker crashes into the hospital. She reappears in the fourth edition of "Casualty@Holby City", originally broadcast in December 2005, when she is involved in a car crash en route to the staff Christmas party. She and paramedic Paul "Woody" Joyner (Will Thorp) then inadvertently cause a tunnel to collapse while trying to rescue a trapped baby.

In 2010, Donna appeared in "Casualty" itself, for the launch of the show's twenty-fifth series. She was included in the episode at the request of its writer, Mark Cately. "Casualty" series producer Oliver Kent deemed her "hilariously funny" and "one of "Holby" best characters". During the episode, the ED staff work through the aftermath of a school shooting. Jacobs explained that Donna finds the shift difficult and is "really quite scared", as she is used to working with routine rather than emergency patients. In contrast to her typical disorganisation and laziness, Donna is forced to work hard and "put herself on the line" to keep up with the other staff members. Jacobs appears as Donna in a two-part crossover episode with "Holby City" sister show, "Casualty", originally broadcast in March 2019.

Jacobs was cast as Donna immediately after leaving drama school, and considers herself "completely blessed" for having won the role. She was cast alongside fellow series six newcomer Kelly Adams, as midwife Mickie Hendrie. A BBC documentary entitled "Making It at Holby" chronicled their casting process, which entailed seven weeks of auditions, including group workshops to allow the series producers to gauge candidates' personalities. Adams originally auditioned as Donna, however the casting directors felt that she would be better suited to Mickie, the quieter character, and "mild mannered" counterpart to Donna's "sassy staff nurse". She and Jacobs were paired together during a three-hour workshop, and the producers detected an "instant spark" between them, leading to their dual casting. Following her successful audition, Jacobs was mentored by actress Jan Pearson, who played ward sister Kath Fox.
Jacobs characterised Donna as "a working class tart". Upon her arrival in the programme, Donna was said to be a recent college graduate. Lacking career ambition, she selected nursing as the most exciting role available to her, hoping to meet a wealthy surgeon. The BBC stated that, despite her lack of ambition, Donna was likely to succeed on her chosen career path due to her propensity to "land on her feet". On the series' official website, Donna was described as a party girl with a "wild-child reputation". Her negative characteristics included being easily led and materialistic, easily bored, and "outspoken, stubborn and lazy". The website also highlighted her determination to "live life to the full", her fun-loving and straight-talking nature, bravery, honesty and loyalty, and the fact that "her heart's in the right place."

Donna's costume initially involved short skirts, tight-fitting tops, multi-coloured hair extensions and a nose-stud. Jacobs, who affected a Bristolian accent for the role, commented that Donna had "no sense of what she should keep covered up." A size 12, Jacobs was not pressured to lose weight for the role, and considered Donna's figure "part of her loveable charm". In early episodes, the character was seen to partake in recreational drug use and arrive for work hungover. Jacobs described her as "everything that you secretly want to be, but can't get away with in normal society", calling her "very gregarious" and immune to maturing. "The Guardian" Grace Dent deemed her "weak-willed" in a 2006 feature on television medics, and in 2008, the "Daily Mirror" Jane Simon branded her unintelligent.

A 2006 review by Simon noted that Donna lacked dedication to her job, and was easily distracted by her love life. Following an April 2008 interview with Jacobs, the itv.com website for the entertainment show "This Morning" observed that despite Donna's "chaotic" personal life, she had grown more serious about her work. Ultimately, adopting her half-niece Mia forced Donna to grow up, focussing on her career by attaining promotion to ward sister and accepting the resultant responsibilities. Reflecting on Donna's development in January 2011, Jacobs observed that she had changed a great deal from her early days, when she was used as a comical character with "bumbling one-liners", into a serious, more responsible person.

When Donna returned in 2017, Jacobs billed her character as "flirty, brash and ballsy", while Simon Harper, the show's acting executive producer, described Donna as "sparky [and] irreverent". Jacobs told Jessica Ransom of "What's on TV" that although Donna has matured since her departure in 2011, she is "still just Donna Jackson". She summarised Donna as "such a floored, quirky, mental character." Jacobs confirmed that Donna continues to be flirtatious upon her return, because it is in her personality. Sarah Deen, writing for the "Metro", branded the character a "flirty, feisty whirlwind" and described her as "ballsy and bubbly". Reflecting on Donna's character development between leaving and returning, Jacobs commented, "Before she was a girl in her 20s who was very focused on love and men, and now she has two children so her life is a lot more child-focused." She added that Donna tries to focus on her maturer lifestyle while maintaining the lifestyle she had when she was younger. Jacobs stated that Donna's costume reflected that and opined that her dress sense had "regressed" since her departure. A BBC Online contributor characterised Donna as "a sassy, fun-loving nurse and a breath of fresh air." They stated that Donna is able to voice her opinions because she speaks in a comical tone. The reporter added that Donna returned to the nursing profession "a little worldlier" than before.

Donna was raised by her grandmother Shirley (Lynda Baron), who appears in the series eight episode "Bad Blood". Clarke Peters, star of American drama series "The Wire", was cast as her estranged father in 2009. He appeared from 14 July to 11 August 2009, suffering from cancer of the splenic flexure, pancreas and abdominal wall. Jacobs was "thrilled" by Peters' casting, and reported that his first appearance rendered the programme's crew "star-struck" for the first time in her five years on the show. His appearance allowed Donna to confront her father over his abandonment of her as a child, and rendered her devastated upon learning that he had accepted his impending death. Peters assessed that his appearance had an "enormous impact" on Donna, explaining that his role allowed the audience to discover more about her life, as: "This is a way to get into these characters rather than just seeing them as one-dimensional characters, dealing with whatever happens at Holby." Producers Diana Kyle and Tony McHale intended the storyline to reveal a new side to Donna, depicting her attempting to cope, in contrast to the "smiling party girl" viewers were familiar with.

Following her father's death, Donna adopted her half-niece Mia. Discussing the development in the context of her 2010 "Casualty" appearance, Jacobs explained that it made her ED shift particularly stressful as "she now has little Mia to look after – if anything happens to Donna, Mia is completely on her own." She expanded that, "The stakes have really moved on for Donna over the last couple of years. She's had to accept some responsibility and it's not now just about which man she's going to sleep with next".

Perennially "unlucky in love", Donna fits the tart with a heart stereotype. Her numerous romances during her tenure earned her the nickname "Nurse 'Action' Jackson". In 2004, she had a lesbian liaison with Mickie. The scene in which they kissed was edited to half its original length after being deemed too explicit for pre-watershed broadcast. Later that year, Jacobs stated that her ideal storyline would be for Donna to find a good man and gain a promotion, hoping she would find someone who would treat her well and help her give up her recreational drug habit. Her love interests included physiotherapist Justin Fuller, registrars Ed Keating (Rocky Marshall) and Mubbs Hussein (Ian Aspinall), manager Bradley Hume, senior house officer Sean Thompson (Chinna Wodu), and a love triangle with married consultant Michael Spence and his cardiothoracic colleague Connie Beauchamp (Amanda Mealing). Although Michael did not initially disclose to Donna that he was married, Jacobs stated that her character was aware of this "deep down", but was unfortunately unperturbed. He treated her badly, to the point that he would only have sex with her in a toilet stall; nonetheless Jacobs assessed that Donna was in love with him, believing him to be "the one" and different from her previous lovers, branding her deluded in this respect.

In a November 2007 article for the "Daily Mirror", television critic Jim Shelley described Donna as a "nymphomaniac", though qualified his comment with the addendum "to be fair, sex addiction is a job requirement in "Holby"." His "Mirror" colleague Simon branded Donna supremely unsubtle in her pursuit of Michael, deeming her "unsinkable", and in a later piece for "The Guardian", Shelley commented on Donna's proclivity for sleeping with senior staff members at inopportune moments, to the detriment of patient care. She was dubbed "man crazy" by Tina Miles of the "Liverpool Echo", and "shameless" by the "Mirror" Clare Raymond, who noted that she would "stop at nothing to snare a rich doctor".

Despite her numerous sex scenes, Donna did not have a genuinely romantic storyline until beginning a slow-burning romance with agency nurse Kieran Callaghan in late 2010. She initially disliked him, suspecting him of shirking his work duties, and at one point requested that he never return to her ward. Jacobs assessed that Donna was attracted to him, but would not allow herself to accept it at first, having had so many failed relationships with men ill-suited to her. They went on to begin a relationship, with Jacobs describing Kieran as "Donna's dream come true", and co-star Sloane deeming the two a "great match". Their relationship was impeded by Kieran's commitment to the TA and tour of duty in Afghanistan. Sloane felt that Kieran did not sufficiently explain the extent of his involvement with the TA, and assessed that Donna failed to understand his "soldier mentality", stating that their problems stemmed from a mutual stubbornness. Following Kieran's deployment, television magazine "What's on TV" noted a change in Donna's demeanour, observing that she had "soured" in contrast to her former "bubbly" friendliness. In a plot designed to "bring home the horrors of war", Kieran lost a leg in an IED explosion. In the aftermath, he and Donna reunited, before moving away together.

By the time she returns, Donna has become a footballer's wife after marrying footballer Jared Baptiste (Leon Lopez). Jacobs explained that Donna and Jared share a difficult relationship since Donna has "married into a lifestyle without realising it." Donna and Jared have a child, Amber Baptiste, which Jacobs thought was nice for Donna's character development. Donna considers Mia and Amber her top priority; on this, BBC Online contributor commented, "She would do anything to give her two girls all they need in life." Deen ("Metro") observed that Donna has adopted "a new flashy lifestyle" since leaving Holby. Jacobs stated that despite her matured lifestyle, Donna would continue to be flirtatious. She also confirmed that Donna would not have a love interest, which she disliked. The actress hoped that Donna would be given a love interest after becoming reestablished within the series.

Jacobs departed from "Holby City" in 2011, wanting to "broaden [her] horizons" after seven years in the programme. The thirteenth series saw the departure of many regular cast members, and the arrival of a group of new ones, including Guy Henry, Laila Rouass, and Jimmy Akingbola. Jacobs deemed it "a new era with a new cast", one which she was not part of, and stated that the time felt right to leave. She had some input in her exit storyline, the focal point of which was Donna's relationship with Kieran, as they moved away to begin a new life together. Jacobs relayed feedback she had received from the general public with regards to how Donna should leave, and this was incorporated into her departure. The actress felt personal pressure to get Donna's last scenes right, wanting to give the best performance possible. She found the filming "overwhelming", explaining "it was incredibly emotional and intense, and it made it all very hard, and raw. [...] It wasn't until later that I realised I'd put myself under a hideously stressful situation, and that I should just be enjoying the experience." She stated: "I've absolutely loved playing Donna. I know that I'm going to look back very fondly on the time I had with her. I really got to know the character, and she had so many facets and was always fun to play."

Jacobs reprised her role as Donna in 2017 and the character returns in Spring 2017. Donna claims that she is returning to the nursing profession as a "Good Samaritan", following her marriage to a footballer. However, it was teased that her reasons for returning may not be true. Jacobs missed the character and was pleased to return to the role, commenting, "Donna and I have unfinished business." Harper was glad that Jacobs decided to return and called her return "thrilling". Jacobs decided to reprise the role after assessing what she could bring to the character and realising how it could be "exciting" to Donna in this stage of her life. Jacobs signed a year-long contract after agreeing to return. She found it easy to relax back into the cast and found it comforting.

Donna returns following the death of F1 Jasmine Burrows (Lucinda Dryzek) when the hospital's mood is low. Deen ("Metro") thought that Donna's forthright personality would be "the last thing the Holby staff need at the moment". Donna tries to lighten the atmosphere, although her upbeat persona is found to be inappropriate in the circumstances. Jacobs explained that Donna is "trying too hard" and that she "wants it all to work out so badly" because she enjoys being at the hospital. Donna's behaviour causes her to clash with Adrian "Fletch" Fletcher (Alex Walkinshaw), the ward manager of the Acute Assessment Unit (AAU), where Donna is based. Jacobs explained that Donna and Fletch clash when she fails to listen to Fletch's instructions. The actress enjoyed portraying the tension between the characters and preferred it to Donna being everyone's friend. Jacobs and Walkinshaw previously starred together on "Waterloo Road" as a married couple so they share a good relationship. The actress also confirmed that Donna and Fletch would not begin a relationship.

The reasons for Donna's return are unexplained for several episodes. However, Donna returns richer than she departed, which Jacobs thought was "very unlike Donna". The actress confirmed that Donna has developed "skeletons in her closet" after leaving Holby, which she brings with her when she returns. Donna has a close relationship with Ric Griffin (Hugh Quarshie), who acts as a father figure to her. Jacobs liked that Donna had one already established friendship when she returns.

Jacobs won the "Best Emerging Talent" accolade at the 2005 Screen Nation Awards for her role as Donna. She was also nominated for the "Best Newcomer" award at the 2004 National Television Awards, and the "Favourite Female TV Star" Screen Nation award in 2008. Discussing public reaction to her character, Jacobs stated that real nurses enjoyed her "man-eating antics", and were envious that Donna got away with wearing so much make-up. She commented, "I've never met anyone who has been sensitive about Donna throwing herself at men. The women I meet seem to appreciate her tactics." In the aftermath of the Donna/Mickie storyline, the BBC banned its actresses from appearing in raunchy photo-shoots, after Jacobs and Adams were photographed in intimate poses while dressed in nurses uniforms for various "lads' mags".

In November 2007, Shelley deemed Donna one of "Holby City" few "really good, realistic, characters". He named Peters' casting as Donna's father his "Worst TV moment of the year" in 2009, however found their relationship "deeply moving". Donna's farewell speech to Derek was again called moving by both a reviewer for the "Liverpool Daily Post", and Simon, though she had previously despaired at Donna's optimism despite Derek's terminal prognosis. The following year, "What's on TV" named Donna one of their favourite characters, praising her for taking a stance against Director of Surgery Henrik Hanssen (Guy Henry) in defence of her fellow nurses. Harper considered Donna "one of the most popular and iconic "Holby" characters ever".

Donna's relationship with Michael proved unpopular with critics. In an editorial discussing the boundaries between fiction and reality, "The Guardian" Scott Murray and Barney Ronay declared their love for Donna, commending the way she "always has time for people" and recommending that she stay away from Michael as she deserves better. Bree Treacy of "RTÉ.ie" believes that Michael had better chemistry with Donna than with his wife Annalese, however similarly commented that he did not deserve Donna, never having seen her as more than "a notch on his stethoscope". Following her promotion to ward sister, Treacy hoped that the series producers would give Donna a man who would see her "as more than just a good time girl." Simon criticized Donna for failing to observe correct organ donation protocol in an attempt to win Michael's affection, commenting that she had "thrown her own heart willynilly at the first good-looking doctor she s[aw] with an ego the size of Texas." She later branded her "selfish to a fault" for her negative reaction to Kieran's posting to Afghanistan, but opined that Kieran "makes a far more suitable partner for her" than Michael did.

Several of Donna's pivotal episodes were selected as recommended viewing by critics. "Myself, Coming Back", the series ten episode in which she goes on a road-trip and discovers the existence of her niece, Mia, was named a televisual highlight by the "Daily Mirror", "Birmingham Post", and "Liverpool Daily Echo", with the latter publication deeming it "refreshingly different" following the "doom and gloom" of preceding episodes. Many regional newspapers named "Promises", in which she decides to adopt Mia, a "pick of the day", and Sarah Morgan of the "Daily Record" cited Jacobs' appearance as Donna in the premiere episode of "Casualty" twenty-fifth series as a positive example of the BBC "pull[ing] out all the stops to make sure the first edition in this latest run is something of a cracker." Ransom ("What's on TV") looked forward to Donna's return, commenting, "We can't wait to see her get stuck back in to all the action!"



</doc>
<doc id="11142859" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11142859" title="100,000-year problem">
100,000-year problem

The 100,000-year problem ("100 ky problem", "100 ka problem") of the Milankovitch theory of orbital forcing refers to a discrepancy between the reconstructed geologic temperature record and the reconstructed amount of incoming solar radiation, or insolation over the past 800,000 years. Due to variations in the Earth's orbit, the amount of insolation varies with periods of around 21,000, 40,000, 100,000, and 400,000 years. Variations in the amount of incident solar energy drive changes in the climate of the Earth, and are recognised as a key factor in the timing of initiation and termination of glaciations.

While there is a Milankovitch cycle in the range of 100,000 years, related to Earth's orbital eccentricity, its contribution to variation in insolation is much smaller than those of precession and obliquity. The 100,000-year-problem refers to the lack of an obvious explanation for the periodicity of ice ages at roughly 100,000 years for the past million years, but not before, when the dominant periodicity corresponded to 41,000 years.
The unexplained transition between the two periodicity regimes is known as the mid-Pleistocene transition, dated to some 800,000 years ago.

The related "400,000-year-problem" refers to the absence of a 400,000-year periodicity due to orbital eccentricity in the geological temperature record over the past 1.2 million years.

The geologic temperature record can be reconstructed from sedimentary evidence. Perhaps the most useful indicator of past climate is the fractionation of oxygen isotopes, denoted "δ"O. This fractionation is controlled mainly by the amount of water locked up in ice and the absolute temperature of the planet, and has allowed a timescale of marine isotope stages to be constructed.

By the late 1990s, records of air (in the Vostok ice core) and marine sediments was available and was compared with estimates of insolation, which should affect both temperature and ice volume. As described by Shackleton (2000), the deep-sea sediment record of "is dominated by a 100,000-year cyclicity that is universally interpreted as the main ice-age rhythm". Shackleton (2000) adjusted the time scale of the Vostok ice core record to fit the assumed orbital forcing and used spectral analysis to identify and subtract the component of the record that in this interpretation could be attributed to a linear (directly proportional) response to the orbital forcing. The residual signal (the remainder), when compared with the residual from a similarly retuned marine core isotope record, was used to estimate the proportion of the signal that was attributable to ice volume, with the rest (having attempted to allow for the Dole effect) being attributed to temperature changes in the deep water.

The 100,000-year component of ice volume variation was found to match sea level records based on coral age determinations, and to lag orbital eccentricity by several thousand years, as would be expected if orbital eccentricity were the pacing mechanism. Strong non-linear "jumps" in the record appear at deglaciations, although the 100,000-year periodicity was not the strongest periodicity in this "pure" ice volume record.

The separate deep sea temperature record was found to vary directly in phase with orbital eccentricity, as did Antarctic temperature and CO; so eccentricity appears to exert a geologically immediate effect on air temperatures, deep sea temperatures, and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. Shackleton (2000) concluded: "The effect of orbital eccentricity probably enters the paleoclimatic record through an influence on the concentration of atmospheric CO".

Elkibbi and Rial (2001) identified the 100 ka cycle as one of five main challenges met by the Milankovitch model of orbital forcing of the ice ages.

As the 100,000-year periodicity only dominates the climate of the past million years, there is insufficient information to separate the component frequencies of eccentricity using spectral analysis, making the reliable detection of significant longer-term trends more difficult, although the spectral analysis of much longer palaeoclimate records, such as the Lisiecki and Raymo stack of marine cores and James Zachos' composite isotopic record, helps to put the last million years in longer term context. Hence there is still no clear proof of the mechanism responsible for the 100 ka periodicity—but there are several credible hypotheses.

The mechanism may be internal to the Earth system. The Earth's climate system may have a natural resonance frequency of 100 ka; that is to say, feedback processes within the climate automatically produce a 100 ka effect, much as a bell naturally rings at a certain pitch. Opponents to this claim point out that the resonance would have to have developed 1 million years ago, as a 100 ka periodicity was weak to non-existent for the preceding 2 million years. This is feasible—continental drift and sea floor spreading rate change have been postulated as possible causes of such a change. Free oscillations of components of the Earth system have been considered as a cause, but too few Earth systems have a thermal inertia on a thousand-year timescale for any long-term changes to accumulate. The most common hypothesis looks to the Northern Hemisphere ice sheets, which might expand through a few shorter cycles until large enough to undergo a sudden collapse. The 100,000-year problem has been scrutinized by José A. Rial, Jeseung Oh and Elizabeth Reischmann who find that master-slave synchronization between the climate systems natural frequencies and the eccentricity forcing started the 100 ky ice ages of the late Pleistocene and explain their large amplitude.

Orbital inclination has a 100 ka periodicity, while eccentricity's 95 and 125ka periods could inter-react to give a 108ka effect. While it is possible that the less significant, and originally overlooked, inclination variability has a deep effect on climate, the eccentricity only modifies insolation by a small amount: 1–2% of the shift caused by the 21,000-year precession and 41,000-year obliquity cycles. Such a big impact from inclination would therefore be disproportionate in comparison to other cycles. One possible mechanism suggested to account for this was the passage of Earth through regions of cosmic dust. Our eccentric orbit would take us through dusty clouds in space, which would act to occlude some of the incoming radiation, shadowing the Earth.

In such a scenario, the abundance of the isotope He, produced by solar rays splitting gases in the upper atmosphere, would be expected to decrease—and initial investigations did indeed find such a drop in He abundance.
Others have argued possible effects from the dust entering the atmosphere itself, for example by increasing cloud cover (on July 9 and January 9, when the Earth passes through the invariable plane, mesospheric cloud increases). Therefore, the 100 ka eccentricity cycle can act as a "pacemaker" to the system, amplifying the effect of precession and obliquity cycles at key moments, with its perturbation.

A similar suggestion holds the 21,636-year precession cycles solely responsible. Ice ages are characterized by the slow buildup of ice volume, followed by relatively swift melting phases. It is possible that ice built up over several precession cycles, only melting after four or five such cycles.

A mechanism that may account for periodic fluctuations in solar luminosity has also been proposed as an explanation. Diffusion waves occurring within the sun can be modeled in such a way that they explain the observed climatic shifts on earth. However, the He signal again appears to contradict this finding.

The Dole effect describes trends in arising from trends in the relative importance of land-dwelling and oceanic photosynthesizers. Such a variation is a plausible cause of the phenomenon.

The recovery of higher-resolution ice cores spanning more of the past 1,000,000 years by the ongoing EPICA project may help shed more light on the matter. A new, high-precision dating method developed by the team allows better correlation of the various factors involved and puts the ice core chronologies on a stronger temporal footing, endorsing the traditional Milankovitch hypothesis, that climate variations are controlled by insolation in the northern hemisphere. The new chronology is inconsistent with the "inclination" theory of the 100,000-year cycle. The establishment of leads and lags against different orbital forcing components with this method—which uses the direct insolation control over nitrogen-oxygen ratios in ice core bubbles—is in principle a great improvement in the temporal resolution of these records and another significant validation of the Milankovitch hypothesis. An international climate modelling exercise (Abe-ouchi "et al.", Nature, 2013) demonstrated that climate models can replicate the 100,000-year cyclicity given the orbital forcing and carbon dioxide levels of the late Pleistocene. The isostatic history of ice sheets was implicated in mediating the 100,000-year response to the orbital forcing. Larger ice sheets are lower in elevation because they depress the continental crust upon which they sit, and are therefore more vulnerable to melting.


</doc>
<doc id="11165739" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11165739" title="History of surface weather analysis">
History of surface weather analysis

The history of surface weather analysis concerns the timetable of developments related to surface weather analysis. Initially a tool of study for the behavior of storms, surface weather analyses became a work in progress to explain current weather and as an aid for short term weather forecasting. Initial efforts to create surface weather analyses began in the mid-19th century by using surface weather observations to analyze isobars, isotherms, and display temperature and cloud cover. By the mid-20th century, much more information was being placed upon the station models plotted on weather maps and surface fronts, per the Norwegian cyclone model, were being analyzed worldwide. Eventually, observation plotting went from a manual exercise to an automated task for computers and plotters. Surface analysis remains a manual and partially subjective exercise, whether it be via hand and paper, or via a workstation.

The use of weather charts in a modern sense began in the middle portion of the 19th century. Weather map pioneers include William Charles Redfield, William Reid, Elias Loomis, and Sir Francis Galton, who created the first weather maps in order to devise a theory on storm systems. The invention of the telegraph in 1837 made it possible to gather weather information from multiple distant locations quickly enough to preserve its value for real-time applications. The Smithsonian Institution developed its network of observers over much of the central and eastern United States between the 1840s and 1860s once Joseph Henry took the helm. Beginning in 1849, the Smithsonian started producing surface analyses on a daily basis using the 150 stations in their network. The U.S. Army Signal Corps inherited this network between 1870 and 1874 by an act of Congress, and expanded it to the west coast soon afterwards. Three times daily, all stations would telegraph in their observations to the central office which would then plot the information on a map upon which isobars, or lines of equal pressure, would be drawn which would identify centers of high and low pressure, as well as squall lines. At first, all the data on the map was not taken at exactly the same time in the early days of these analyses because of a lack of time standardization. The first attempts at time standardization took hold in the Great Britain by 1855. However, in the United States, standard time did not come to pass until 1883, when time zones started to come into use across America for railroad use. The entire United States did not finally come under the influence of time zones until 1905, when Detroit finally established standard time.
The earliest surface analyses from the United States featured a map of the continental U.S. with indications of cloud cover and wind direction arranged on an early form of what has become a station model. A general indication of the weather for various cities around the country was also included on the bottom of the map. Within a short time, the Signal Corps added a tables showing eight-hour pressure change, 24-hour temperature change, relative humidity, and 24-hour precipitation. The Signal Office also added a general discussion of synoptic weather features and forecast, before adding isobars and isotherms onto the maps. By the end of 1872, the maps had established the format it would use until the introduction of frontal analysis. By the 20th century, most of the weather-related functions under the U. S. Signal Corps branched off into a new civilian agency known as the U. S. Weather Bureau, the forerunner of today's National Weather Service.

Internationally, other countries followed the lead of the United States, in regards to taking simultaneous weather observations, starting in 1873. Other countries then began preparing surface analyses. In Australia, the first weather map showed up in print media in 1877. Japan's Tokyo Meteorological Observatory, the forerunner of the Japan Meteorological Agency, began constructing surface weather maps in 1883.

The "London Times" published the first weather map on April 1, 1875. In the United States, the 1876 Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania demonstrated that daily weather map transmission via telegraph could be accomplished. The "New York Daily Graphic" published weather maps from mid-1879 through the summer of 1882. By 1894, there were four daily newspapers publishing weather maps in Boston, New Orleans, Cincinnati, and San Francisco.

The use of frontal zones on weather maps did not appear until the introduction of the Norwegian cyclone model in the late 1910s, despite Loomis' earlier attempt at a similar notion in 1841. Since the leading edge of air mass changes bore resemblance to the military fronts of World War I, the term "front" came into use to represent these lines. An increasing amount of newspapers published weather maps early in the century across the United States, before the fad passed in 1912. While the number of newspapers carrying weather maps decreased beyond 1912, many continued publishing them until interest in flight increased interest in the maps once more in the 1930s. Beginning in 1930, radiofax broadcasts of weather information and forecasts were broadcast for use by ships at sea, emanating from the United States military and the United States Weather Bureau on a cooperative basis. Starting in 1935, Weather Bureau/National Weather Service weather maps were published in newspapers via the Associated Press in a slightly processed format as Wirephoto weather maps.

Despite the introduction of the Norwegian cyclone model just after World War I, the United States did not formally analyze fronts on surface analyses until August 1, 1941, just before the WBAN Analysis Center opened in downtown Washington, D.C.. The effort to automate map plotting began in the United States in 1969, with the process complete in the 1970s. Hong Kong completed their process of automated surface plotting by 1987. By 1999, computer systems and software had finally become sophisticated enough to allow for the ability to underlay on the same workstation satellite imagery, radar imagery, and model-derived fields such as atmospheric thickness and frontogenesis in combination with surface observations to make for the best possible surface analysis. In the United States, this development was achieved when Intergraph workstations were replaced by n-AWIPS workstations.

By 2001, the various surface analyses done within the National Weather Service were combined into the Unified Surface Analysis, which is issued every six hours and combines the analyses of four different centers. Recent advances in both the fields of meteorology and geographic information systems have made it possible to devise finely tailored products that take us from the traditional weather map into an entirely new realm. Weather information can quickly be matched to relevant geographical detail. For instance, icing conditions can be mapped onto the road network. This will likely continue to lead to changes in the way surface analyses are created and displayed over the next several years.



</doc>
<doc id="11174356" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11174356" title="Greg Young">
Greg Young

Gregory James Young (born 25 April 1983) is an English semi-professional footballer who plays as a defender for club Frickley Athletic.

Young started his career with Sheffield Wednesday's youth system and after being released in 2002 he joined Grimsby Town of the First Division. He made his first-team debut on the last day of the 2002–03 season with the team having already been relegated. Young suffered a second relegation the following season, in which he made 19 appearances. In 2004–05, he spent two periods on loan at Conference National club Northwich Victoria before joining Halifax Town in 2005.

He made 35 appearances for Halifax in 2005–06 and started in the 2006 Conference National play-off Final at the Walkers Stadium, which was lost to Hereford United. Following loans with former club Northwich and Conference North club Alfreton Town, he joined Altrincham in early 2008. He played for Altrincham as a semi-professional and after making over 100 appearances in two and a half seasons joined York City in 2010. After a season at the club he returned to Alfreton.

Born in Doncaster, South Yorkshire, Young started his career with the Sheffield Wednesday youth system. He was released at the end of the 2001–02 season, and was signed by fellow First Division club Grimsby Town on 26 July 2002 following a trial, initially playing in the reserve team. He made his first-team debut by starting in a 2–1 away defeat to Reading on 26 April 2003, the last day of 2002–03, with Grimsby having already been relegated to the Second Division. He signed a new contract with Grimsby on 3 June 2003, with manager Paul Groves saying "Greg has improved since he arrived at the club. He did well on his debut at Reading, but it did show that there is a big step up from the reserves for him to make."

His first appearance of 2003–04 came as a half-time substitute in a 1–0 away victory over Blackpool on 30 September 2003. This season saw him initially used as a stand-in left back as cover for injuries, but after the arrival of Nicky Law as manager, he became a regular starter as a centre back. Young was described as the "stand-out performer" in a 4–4 draw away to Chesterfield on 27 March 2004, despite suffering a dislocated shoulder during the match. He made a "brave" return in the final match of the season on 8 May 2004, a 2–1 defeat away to Tranmere Rovers, which condemned Grimsby to relegation to League Two. He finished the season with 19 appearances for Grimsby and signed a new two-year contract with the club in June 2004.

He was still suffering from the shoulder injury in June 2004, and under new manager Russell Slade, Young endured a frustrating spell. A cold he was suffering from in August 2004 required treatment from physio Dave Moore as it put him out of action. Young joined Conference National club Northwich Victoria on 7 October 2004 on a one-month loan, having made five appearances for Grimsby up to that point in 2004–05. He made his debut two days later in a 0–0 away draw with Crawley Town. On 23 October 2014, he scored his first goal for Northwich in a 3–1 away victory over Forest Green Rovers with a close-range shot. He was recalled by Grimsby later that month due to injuries after making three appearances for Northwich. He rejoined Northwich on 3 December 2004 on another one-month loan, with injury restricting him to three appearances before returning to Grimsby on 6 January 2005.

Young signed for Conference National club Halifax Town on 25 February 2005 a free transfer on a one-and-a-half-year contract. He made his debut the following day as a 57th-minute substitute in a 2–2 home draw with former club Northwich. His first goal for the club came on his sixth appearance against Tamworth after heading in a Martin Foster corner kick, the match ending in a 3–3 home draw. He finished the season with 13 appearances and 2 goals for Halifax. Young suffered an injury in August 2005 and made his return in a 4–0 home win over Tamworth on 10 September 2005. His only goal of 2005–06 came after heading in from a Matt Doughty corner in the 35th minute of a 1–1 home draw with Stevenage Borough on 14 April 2006. He played in both legs of Halifax's play-off semi-final victory over Grays Athletic, which the team won 5–4 on aggregate. He started in the 2006 Conference National play-off Final at the Walkers Stadium on 20 May, being substituted on 61 minutes, which Halifax lost 3–2 to Hereford United after extra time. He finished the season with 35 appearances and 1 goal.

He was affected by a shoulder injury towards the end of the season and had a successful operation on this in May 2006. After recovering, Young made his return in a 2–1 victory away to Cambridge United on 29 August 2006. He joined Northwich for the third time in November 2006 on a one-month loan, having made eight appearances for Halifax up to that point in 2006–07. He made three appearances for Northwich before being recalled by Halifax on 18 December 2006. He made three appearances after returning but his season was ended due to a knee injury sustained on 1 January 2007 in a 1–1 home draw with Altrincham, having made 11 appearances for Halifax that season.

He joined Conference North club Alfreton Town in August 2007 on a one-month loan, making his debut and return from injury in a 2–1 defeat at home to Southport on 18 August. He made six appearances before returning to Halifax on 18 September 2007. He made an immediate return to the team after coming on as a substitute on 88 minutes in a 1–1 home draw with Rushden & Diamonds on 22 September 2007.

Young was released by Halifax while they were enduring financial difficulties and on 4 January 2008 signed for Altrincham as a semi-professional on a contract until the end of 2007–08. He made his debut a day later as a 60th-minute substitute in a 4–0 defeat away to Oxford United and his full debut came after starting in a 2–1 home victory over Kidderminster Harriers on 8 January 2008. His only goal of the season came from the edge of the penalty area in a 2–1 defeat away to Burton Albion on 8 April 2008. He finished the season with 22 appearances and 1 goal for Altrincham and signed a new two-year contract in the summer of 2008.

Young played for Altrincham in their FA Cup first round match and first round replay against League Two team Luton Town, with the latter being lost 4–2 in a penalty shoot-out. His first goal of 2008–09 came after scoring from close range in the 74th minute of a 1–0 away victory over Northwich on 26 December 2008. His second goal of the season came with a header from Doughty's free kick on 52 minutes in a 1–0 away win over Wrexham on 13 April 2009, a result that ensured Altrincham would not finish the season in the relegation zone. He finished the season with 51 appearances and 2 goals.

He contracted mumps in September 2009 and made his return to action against Rushden on 3 October. Young's first goal of 2009–10 came was a close-range finish from a corner on 70 minutes in a 1–0 home win over Wrexham in an FA Trophy first round replay on 15 December 2009. His first league goal of the season came after scoring in a 2–1 victory away to Ebbsfleet United on 16 January 2010 with a header from a Doughty corner. He finished the season with 44 appearances and 6 goals.

Young joined Altrincham's Conference Premier rivals York City on 24 May 2010 on a one-year contract and so returned to playing full-time. He made his debut in a 2–1 loss away to Fleetwood Town on 30 August 2010, scoring York's only goal in the 87th minute with a header from an Alex Lawless cross. After initially being used as an outfield substitute, Young played in goal for the second half of York's 5–0 away defeat to Luton Town on 18 January 2011, conceding one goal, after Michael Ingham was sent off in the 15th minute.

Young returned to former club Altrincham on 7 February 2011 on an emergency loan until the end of 2010–11. His first appearance after returning to the club came in a 2–1 defeat away to Kidderminster on 12 February 2011. After making 11 appearances and scoring 1 goal for Altrincham, Young returned to York after being recalled on 20 April 2011 due to an injury to Daniel Parslow. He did not play following his return and finished the season with 12 appearances and 1 goal for York.

Young signed a two-year contract with former club Alfreton Town, who had recently been promoted to the Conference Premier, on 1 June 2011. He finished 2011–12 with 35 appearances for Alfreton. On 14 June 2012, Young signed for Conference North club Gainsborough Trinity and made his debut in their 2012–13 opening day 1–0 defeat at home to Gloucester City on 18 August.

Young signed with Buxton of the Northern Premier League Premier Division on 6 July 2014. He made 47 appearances and scored 6 goals as Buxton finished 10th in the table in 2014–15. Young dropped down a division in December 2018 to take on a player-coach role with Frickley Athletic under former Buxton manager Martin McIntosh.

Young primarily plays as a left-footed centre back and is also able to play at left back. While at Altrincham, he was also deployed as an auxiliary striker. While being a "classy centre-half", he is an "aggressive player who likes to win the ball" and his play has been described as "shackling". On his goalscoring record, Young said "It's something I have worked on in my own game during the last couple of years. I made a point of improving my scoring record and I've done that slightly" in 2010.

Young studied for a degree in sport and exercise science at university while playing part-time for Altrincham.


</doc>
<doc id="11270263" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11270263" title="No Exit (Miami Vice)">
No Exit (Miami Vice)

"'No Exit" is the seventh episode of the first season of the American police procedural television series "Miami Vice". It premiered on the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) on November 9, 1984. The episode was written by Charles R. Leinenweber and Maurice Hurley, and directed by David Soul. "No Exit" featured guest appearances by Bruce Willis, Katherine Borowitz and Vinnie Curto.

"Miami Vice" focuses on the lives of two undercover Metro-Dade police officers, James "Sonny" Crockett (Don Johnson) and Ricardo Tubbs (Philip Michael Thomas). In this episode, the detectives investigate an arms dealer selling military hardware. The dealer's abuse of his spouse complicates the surveillance.

Written under the working title "Three-Eyed Turtle", the episode has been seen as exploring existentialist themes, including Jean-Paul Sartre's theory that all relationships are based on a struggle for dominance. The episode features a contemporary pop soundtrack, using Phil Collins' "I Don't Care Anymore" and "Stay With Me" by Teddy Pendergrass.

Metro-Dade detectives James "Sonny" Crockett (Don Johnson) and Ricardo Tubbs (Philip Michael Thomas), and lieutenant Martin Castillo (Edward James Olmos) are undercover to arrest a pair of arms dealers. After a brief shoot-out, the dealers are taken into custody, and during the course of their confessions, reveal their supplier to be a man named Tony Amato.

Amato (Bruce Willis) is an international arms dealer who the Federal Bureau of Investigation have been tracking, as they believe Amato is planning the sale of FIM-92 Stinger missiles stolen from a military arms depot. The FBI agrees to allow Metro-Dade to conduct the surveillance as its equipment was in place first. Crockett and Tubbs watch Amato's abusive relationship with his wife Rita (Katherine Borowitz). When Rita attempts to hire a hitman to kill Amato, Crockett intercepts the call and meets with her, arranging her help in their case in return for her safety. She explains that she has tried to leave Amato before, but he hired thugs to rape her divorce lawyer's wife to scare her into place.

Amato's prospective buyer is intercepted and arrested. The FBI had initially planned to send one of their agents undercover in his place, but Tubbs volunteers for the role, fearing the agent is too inexperienced. Tubbs meets with Amato and his henchmen, who demonstrate one of the Stingers and explain how to take out a civilian airplane with an unarmed missile. Tubbs agrees to purchase all of Amato's inventory and arranges another meet to make the buy. That night, Crockett, surveilling Amato's house, sees him beat Rita again, and is unable to intervene.

When Amato breaks his telephone in a rage, he finds one of the surveillance devices. Tubbs quickly calls him, claiming to have been bugged as well, and the two arrange to move the buy to that evening. Amato is noticeably on-edge during the meet, and is desperate to unload the missiles. The buy is set to take place at the docks, and the remainder of the Metro-Dade vice squad arrive with federal agents to complete the bust, taking Amato into custody safely.

However, when Amato is due to be arraigned the next morning, a group of federal agents arrive with paperwork offering him immunity from prosecution in exchange for working for them to supply South American anti-Communist groups. Rita arrives to see Amato going free, draws a gun from her handbag, and shoots him.

"No Exit" was originally given the working title "Three-Eyed Turtle", which was changed when an executive at the National Broadcasting Company (NBC)'s Standards and Practices office realized this was slang for a sexual act. The amended title, "No Exit", has been seen by critics Steven Sanders and Aeon Skoble as a reference to Jean-Paul Sartre's 1944 play "No Exit", as the episode features "an early series engagement with existentialism". The pair have argued that the fractured relationship between Tony and Rita Amato echoes the philosopher's assertion that all human relationships are defined by a struggle for control and supremacy.

"No Exit" was directed by David Soul, whose "Starsky and Hutch" co-star Paul Michael Glaser had also directed for the series. Writer Maurice Hurley would receive writing credits on a number of other "Miami Vice" episodes, including "The Dutch Oven", "Whatever Works", and "Golden Triangle". The location used for Amato's home was the "Pink House", a nickname for the Spear House in Coral Gables, Florida; a 1978 building designed by architecture firm Arquitectonica. The location was chosen for use in the episode by executive producer Michael Mann. Guest star Bruce Willis was one of a number of New York stage actors cast in the series, having only appeared in an Off-Broadway performance of "Fool for Love" before being cast as Tony Amato. Boxer Vinnie Curto was cast as a bodyguard to Willis' character.

As was customary for episodes of "Miami Vice" episodes, "No Exit" makes use of contemporary pop music in its soundtrack, featuring the songs "Stay With Me" by Teddy Pendergrass and "I Don't Care Anymore" by Phil Collins. The latter song featured in a scene of Crockett driving at night, echoing the use of Collins' "In the Air Tonight" in a similar scene in the pilot, "Brother's Keeper". The alienation discussed in "I Don't Care Anymore" has been described as mirroring the violent rift in Amato's marriage, and also the detachment with which Crockett must approach this aspect of the case.

"No Exit" was first broadcast on NBC on November 9, 1984. NBC repeated the episode twice in 1985, before airing it once more in 1986.

Writing for DVD Talk, Todd Douglass Jr. described "No Exit" as being "definitely one of the highlights" of "Miami Vice" first season. Douglass felt that the episode's tight focus left it "one of the more entertaining" installments of the series. "No Exit" has been seen as a "turning point" for "Miami Vice", finalizing what would become the overall tone of the series. This has been credited to the addition of Edward James Olmos to the cast, and Mann becoming the sole executive producer after the departure of Anthony Yerkovich. The episode has also been noted as an example of the series' criticism of the presidency of Ronald Reagan, linking the villain Amato with United States intervention in South America. This critique of the federal government and its handling of foreign intervention would prove to be a recurring element of the series, featuring in the second season episode "Prodigal Son" and the fourth season episode "Baseballs of Death".

Willis' portrayal of Amato has been described by critic Mark T. Conard as an example of a recurring character archetype in the series, that of a troubled male with a checkered past. Other examples given by Conard are Bruce McGill's guest role in "Out Where the Buses Don't Run" and G. Gordon Liddy's appearance in "Stone's War". Conard also identifies the three male protagonists—Crockett, Tubbs and Castillo—among this archetype.




</doc>
<doc id="11410275" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11410275" title="Music of Kingdom Hearts">
Music of Kingdom Hearts

The music of the "Kingdom Hearts" video game series was composed by Yoko Shimomura with orchestral music arranged by Kaoru Wada. The original soundtracks of the games have been released on three albums and a fourth compilation album. The soundtracks to the "Kingdom Hearts" games feature several musical pieces from both Disney films and "Final Fantasy" games, including such pieces as "Mickey Mouse Club March" by Jimmie Dodd, "This Is Halloween" by Danny Elfman, and "One-Winged Angel" by Nobuo Uematsu. They also feature several vocal songs, the most notable being the two main theme songs, "Hikari" and "Passion". The two themes were written and performed by Japanese American pop star Hikaru Utada; in addition to Japanese, English versions of both songs were produced, titled "Simple and Clean" and "Sanctuary", respectively.

Although the majority of the music has been released only in Japan, the first soundtrack was released worldwide and tracks from the "Kingdom Hearts" series have been featured in Video Games Live at multiple venues. The music has overall been well received and several tracks have received particular praise. The two main themes were well received by both video game and music critics, and did well on Japan's Oricon Weekly Singles chart.

The "Kingdom Hearts" games feature music that ranges from dark to cheerful to sorrowful. Several musical pieces are included that have either met with a positive reception or were already well known – mostly from Disney films. Such pieces include "Mickey Mouse Club March" by Jimmie Dodd; "Winnie The Pooh" by Robert B. Sherman and Richard M. Sherman; "This Is Halloween" by Danny Elfman; "He's a Pirate" by Geoff Zanelli, Klaus Badelt, and Hans Zimmer; and "Beauty and the Beast" by Howard Ashman and Alan Menken. Other well-known tracks include "Night on Bald Mountain" (rendered "A Night on the Bare Mountain") by Modest Mussorgsky, and a remixed version of "One-Winged Angel" by "Final Fantasy" series composer Nobuo Uematsu. Some Disney worlds in "Kingdom Hearts" feature corresponding music from their related Disney film. Original tracks include the title screen track, "Dearly Beloved", and the two theme songs, "Simple and Clean" and "Sanctuary". The soundtracks feature a mix of piano and orchestral pieces. The main themes differ from the other music in that they are pop songs. The series also features several vocal songs—the most notable being the two theme songs. "Kingdom Hearts II" includes more vocal songs found specifically in the Atlantica world, which features rhythm-based minigames set in the world of "The Little Mermaid". Such vocal songs include "Part of Your World" and "Under the Sea", both by Alan Menken and Howard Ashman.

 is the theme song to the Japanese release of "Kingdom Hearts", the first game in the series as well as the Game Boy Advance sequel "" and its remake "Re:Chain of Memories", the PlayStation Portable prequel "Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep", as well as the theme to "Kingdom Hearts coded" and its DS remake "Re:Coded". Its English counterpart, "Simple and Clean", is the theme song to the English release of the games as well as the Japanese re-release of the first game, "Kingdom Hearts Final Mix". Both songs were written and performed by Hikaru Utada. This marked the first time she had produced a song for a video game. Although the two songs share a similar melody and background music, the meaning of the songs' lyrics differ as "Simple and Clean" is not a literal translation of ""Hikari"". The single, ""Hikari"", was released in Japan on March 20, 2002 and proved to be very popular; it sold over 270,000 copies in a week. "Simple And Clean" (full version and PLANITb Remix) is included on Utada's single release of "COLORS", which debuted on Japan's Oricon charts at number one and stayed on the charts for 19 weeks. It was later included as a bonus track on Utada's 2009 English-language album "This Is the One". Both songs have a "PLANITb remix", which are house versions, and ""Hikari"" has a "Godson Mix". The different versions are used at various points in the game; the "Short Edit" version of the PLANITb remix is used for the opening sequence and the full version of the original song is used for the ending sequence.

"Passion" is the theme song for the Japanese release of "Kingdom Hearts II", and the Nintendo DS title, "Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days". Its English counterpart, "Sanctuary", is the theme song for the English versions and "Kingdom Hearts II FInal Mix". Like the first theme, Hikaru Utada wrote and performed both the Japanese and English versions, and there are two mixes. The "~opening version~" mix is played during the opening movies, and the "~after the battle~" version is played after defeating the final boss of the games. "Sanctuary" and "~after the battle~" were both used in Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days for DS. "Passion" was included in the "Kingdom Hearts II" Original Soundtrack and a CD single was released on December 14, 2005. "Sanctuary" was first previewed on MTV.com in early 2006. Both the "Opening" and "After the Battle" versions of "Sanctuary" were later released in May 2009 as bonus tracks on Utada's second American album, "This Is the One". The "After the Battle" versions of "Passion" and "Sanctuary" also serve as the ending theme songs for the 3DS game, "".

Yoko Shimomura composed the music for the three main "Kingdom Hearts" games and their remakes. She began composing video game music in 1988, and joined Square in 1993, but left in 2002 to work freelance. In creating music, Shimomura gathers inspiration from different things outside of her daily routine, like traveling or when she is emotionally moved. She has a respect for solo and orchestral pieces, such as Piano Sonata No. 7 by Ludwig van Beethoven, Ballade No. 1 by Frédéric Chopin, and La Valse by Maurice Ravel. Shimomura was initially hesitant to handle the music for the first "Kingdom Hearts"; the mix of a Square-style story and Disney characters made it hard to imagine what the game would be like, which made it difficult to compose the music. Many of the musical pieces are arrangements of Disney themes, which Shimomura stated she enjoyed arranging. Shimomura felt a great deal of pressure working on such recognizable tunes, and made an effort to maintain the original mood and atmosphere of them while complying with the technical specifications of the PlayStation 2. For example, the original orchestrated arrangement of the song "This is Halloween" from "The Nightmare Before Christmas" was impossible to reproduce on the PlayStation 2's sound system. To keep aspects of it intact, Shimomura used a trial and error method to arrange the piece.

In creating original music, Shimomura wanted to create compositions that would make players feel good while playing to accompany the action aspect of "Kingdom Hearts". She played the game and looked over scripts and illustrations for inspiration. After coming up with ideas, she discussed them with director Tetsuya Nomura and the game planners. For the PlayStation 2 re-release of "Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories", she and her team spent much of their time working on the fight music; Shimomura wanted the different fight music to reflect different emotions such as happiness and sadness. To handle the large workload for "Kingdom Hearts coded", "Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days" and "Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep", Shimomura composed the most prominent themes, while the rest was created by other composers. In retrospect, Shimomura has stated that the "Kingdom Hearts" series combined the scenes and music well, and she felt very honored her music has entered into people's hearts. She has also commented that she enjoyed working on the project, despite its hardships, and is proud of the work.

The two main theme songs were written and performed by Japanese American artist Hikaru Utada. She wrote two versions for each, one in Japanese and one in English; the latter is used for international releases of the games. "Hikari" and "Passion" are the Japanese version theme songs for "Kingdom Hearts" and "Kingdom Hearts II" respectively, while their English counterparts are called "Simple and Clean" and "Sanctuary". Utada was the only singer Nomura had in mind for the first "Kingdom Hearts" theme song. He considered Utada an iconic young singer whose music could break language and international barriers. Her involvement, along with the first song's Japanese title, was announced in January 2002. Utada's involvement with the sequel was announced in July 2005. Nomura chose not to have a different singer perform the second theme song because he believed fans associated Utada with "Kingdom Hearts". Utada derived her inspiration from the worlds and characters in "Kingdom Hearts"; she also received written explanations of the stories from Nomura. Nomura stated that the vocals of the second theme tie in more closely with the game's story than "Hikari"/"Simple and Clean" did with "Kingdom Hearts" and "Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories". Conversely, Nomura commented that Utada's theme songs influenced several factors in creating the games.

Aside from being featured in the "Kingdom Hearts" video games, the music has been released via a variety of methods. Soundtracks for the first and third game were released shortly after the games' release. These were followed by a compilation set which featured unreleased tracks from the series, as well as new and rearranged versions of tracks from the re-released versions of the games. The first soundtrack was released in Japan, United States and Europe. All other albums were released only in Japan. Though the two main themes were released as part of the game soundtracks, they were officially released as singles a week prior to the games' releases. Utada's 2009 album "This Is the One" features the theme songs "Simple And Clean" and "Sanctuary". Tracks from "Kingdom Hearts" series have also been played by Play! A Video Game Symphony at various venues in the United States and around the world. Arnie Roth arranged "Kingdom Hearts" pieces for the "Symphonic Fantasies" concerts in September 2009. Music from "Kingdom Hearts" is included in Yoko Shimomura's best works compilation album "Drammatica".

"Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack" is the official soundtrack for the video game "Kingdom Hearts". It was first released in Japan on March 27, 2002 by Toshiba-EMI, and later released in Europe on November 25, 2002 by Virgin Records and the United States on March 23, 2003 by Walt Disney Records. The soundtrack is a 2-CD set which contains most of music in the original version of the game along with two bonus tracks. The music was composed by Yoko Shimomura, with vocals done by Hikaru Utada for "Simple And Clean" and ""Hikari"". The orchestral music was arranged by Kaoru Wada and performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra. Because "Kingdom Hearts Final Mix" was released after the soundtrack, additional tracks from it were not included.

The soundtrack has met with an overall positive reception. IGN listed the opening track for "Kingdom Hearts", "Dearly Beloved", as number four on their top ten list of RPG title tracks. In their "Best of 2002" awards, "Kingdom Hearts" was nominated for the "Best Sound in a PlayStation 2 Game Editor's Choice Award" and was a runner up for "Best Sound in Game 2002
Reader's Choice Award". Allmusic rated the first soundtrack a 3 out of 5. GameSpy described the soundtrack as "pleasant, melodious, and most of all fitting for the various situations in which it plays" and complimented the English translation of "Simple And Clean".

Track listing

"Kingdom Hearts Final Mix Additional Tracks" is a separate CD that features new tracks from the re-release of the first game, "Kingdom Hearts Final Mix". It was released in Japan on December 26, 2002, by Walt Disney Records.

"Kingdom Hearts II Original Soundtrack" is the official soundtrack for "Kingdom Hearts II" video game. The album contains musical tracks from the game, composed and produced by Yoko Shimomura, with the main orchestral tracks arranged by Kaoru Wada and performed by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra. Vocals were performed by Hikaru Utada for the theme song, "Passion". The soundtrack was released in Japan on January 25, 2006.

The soundtrack received positive remarks from critics. G4TV awarded "Kingdom Hearts II" "Best Soundtrack" at their 2006 G-Phoria awards show. GameSpy complimented the soundtrack but stated it was not as good as the first game's soundtrack. Game Informer called the musical score "unforgettable". GameSpot stated the "superb soundtrack" further enhanced the gaming experience and rated the sound a 9 out of 10.

Track listing

"Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack Complete" is a compilation album of the video game music from the three main games in the series, "Kingdom Hearts", "Kingdom Hearts: Chain of Memories", and "Kingdom Hearts II". The boxset contains music composed and produced by Yoko Shimomura, with the main orchestral tracks arranged by Kaoru Wada. The album also features various unreleased tracks from the series, as well as new and rearranged versions of tracks from the two "Final Mix" releases and "Re:Chain of Memories". The compilation boxset was released in Japan on March 28, 2007.

The collection has printed images on each disc and includes a deluxe booklet containing new illustrations designed by director and character designer Tetsuya Nomura and comments from Yoko Shimomura. A special CD carrying case featuring artwork of Sora and Roxas was also released as a bonus. The soundtrack comprises nine discs with 229 tracks in total. Discs one and two contain unaltered tracks from the "Kingdom Hearts Original Soundtrack" while discs three to six contain lengthier and looped tracks from the "Kingdom Hearts II Original Soundtrack". Discs seven and eight contain tracks from "" while disc nine contains bonus tracks from "Kingdom Hearts Final Mix" and "Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix".

Track listing

On May 27, 2009, Square Enix released a collection of "Kingdom Hearts" music arranged for the piano. The tracks are popular pieces chosen by members of Square Enix's music website. A mini concert was held on April 2, 2009 in Tokyo to preview the album, attendees of which were drawn from a lottery held on the Square Enix Members website. There, composer Yoko Shimomura described the album as consisting of easy listening piano solo arrangements. Tracks 5 through 8 are a sonata on the various themes of the series.

"The Other Promise" and "Roxas" are used for a cutscene of "Kingdom Hearts Re:coded" in "Kingdom Hearts HD 2.5 ReMIX". The Piano Collections arrangement of "Dearly Beloved" also features in the title selection screen of "Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5 ReMIX", "Kingdom Hearts HD 2.5 ReMIX", "Kingdom Hearts HD 2.8 Final Chapter Prologue", and "Kingdom Hearts HD 1.5+2.5 ReMIX".

"Piano Collections Kingdom Hearts Field & Battle" is the second compilation album of compositions from the "Kingdom Hearts" series arranged for solo piano by Sachiko Miyano and Natsumi Kameoka. Unlike the first album, which features mostly character themes and background music, this compilation features themes from battles and worlds. Square Enix announced it at the 2009 Tokyo Game Show, and released it in Japan on January 13, 2010.

"Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep & 358/2 Days Original Soundtrack" is a three-disc album containing music from the games "Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep" and "Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days", as well as "Kingdom Hearts Re:coded", composed by Yoko Shimomura. It was released on February 2, 2011. Discs one and two contain music from "Birth by Sleep", and disc three contains music from "358/2 Days" (tracks 1 through 13), "Re:coded" (tracks 14 through 20), and "Birth by Sleep: Final Mix" (tracks 21 through 27). Tracks from "358/2 Days" and "Re:coded" are in pure orchestrated form, and are not digitized as they are in the original game releases.

Track listing

"Kingdom Hearts Dream Drop Distance Original Soundtrack" is a three-disc album containing music from "", released on April 18, 2012. Unlike previous soundtracks, this set features a collaboration between composers Yoko Shimomura, Takeharu Ishimoto, and Tsuyoshi Sekito, containing musical compositions from all three. Among the songs included are tracks from "The World Ends with You", originally composed by Ishimoto, who remixed them for "Dream Drop Distance". Orchestral arrangements were provided by Kaoru Wada.

Track listing

"Kingdom Hearts 10th Anniversary Fan Selection: Melodies & Memories" is a 2-CD album made in commemoration of the series' 10th anniversary. The tracks included in the album were chosen by fans in the series' official website. It was released in Japan on September 19, 2012.

Track listing

The music of "Kingdom Hearts" was overall well received. Greg Kasavin of GameSpot felt the background music was appropriate for each setting. However, he complained that the music loops were too short and repetitive. IGN reviewer David Smith was impressed by the production values that went into the music of "Kingdom Hearts", namely the use of the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra and arrangements of pieces such as "Night on Bald Mountain" and "Under the Sea". He also praised composer Yoko Shimomura's ability to maintain the atmosphere while keeping a "common thread of character running through the soundtrack". Daniel Kalabakov of SoundtrackCentral.com called Shimomura's orchestral composition "sophisticated", and stated that the score possesses unique qualities. He also stated that though the album is "excellent", he considered it one of Shimomura's weaker albums overall. In reviewing Shimomura's compilation album "Drammatica", SoundtrackCentral.com reviewer Adam Corn considered the "Kingdom Hearts" tracks one of the highlights of the album.
Jim Cordeira of Gaming Age stated the music was one of the best aspects of the first game and the orchestrated soundtrack is better quality than the "midi-sounding" tunes of previous "Final Fantasy" games. GameSpy's Benjamin Turner had positive comments about the main theme, but found some worlds' background music weak. A second GameSpy reviewer, Gerald Villoria, complimented both PlayStation 2 game soundtracks, but stated "Kingdom Hearts II"s soundtrack was not as good as the first game's.

Several tracks garnered extra attention and their own positive reception. "Hikari" debuted at number one on the Oricon Weekly Singles chart in Japan. It stayed at number one for three weeks and stayed on the chart for thirteen weeks. "Hikari" sold more than 270,000 copies during its first week on sale, and by August 2002, it sold over 860,000 copies in Japan. In 2008, Guinness World Records listed it as the best-selling video game theme song in Japan. Kalabakov complimented Utada's singing and the instrumentation of "Hikari", but commented that he was not a fan of pop songs. Turner was impressed by the translation of "Hikari" into English, and felt Utada's vocals were a good addition to the opening and ending segments of the game. "Passion" debuted at number four on the Oricon Weekly Singles chart in Japan where it stayed on the chart for nine weeks. G4TV's Miguel Concepcion was particularly pleased by "Dearly Beloved", the track that plays during the title screen. IGN echoed the sentiment and listed it as number four in their top ten list of RPG title tracks. They commented that the track lifted the doubts they had about the game's potential. Kalabakov referred to it as a fitting "fairy tale-style" piece to the game's setting. He further stated that it was a simple piece that was "not short on emotion".



</doc>
<doc id="11466703" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11466703" title="Elizabeth F. Ellet">
Elizabeth F. Ellet

Elizabeth Fries Lummis Ellet (October 18, 1818 – June 3, 1877) was an American writer, historian and poet. She was the first writer to record the lives of women who contributed to the American Revolutionary War.

Born Elizabeth Fries Lummis, in New York, she published her first book, "Poems, Translated and Original", in 1835. She married the chemist William Henry Ellet and the couple moved to South Carolina. She had published several books and contributed to multiple journals. In 1845 she moved back to New York and took her place in the literary scene there. She was involved with a public scandal involving Edgar Allan Poe and Frances Sargent Osgood and, later, another involving Rufus Wilmot Griswold. Ellet's most important work, "The Women of the American Revolution", was published in 1845. The three volume book profiled the lives of patriotic women in the early history of the United States. She continued writing until her death in 1877.

Elizabeth Fries Lummis was born in Sodus Point, New York, on October 18, 1818. Her mother was Sarah Maxwell
(1780–1849) the daughter of American Revolutionary War captain John Maxwell. During the Revolution, John Maxwell was lieutenant of the first company raised in Sussex County, New Jersey. He was promoted to captain and attached to the Second Regiment Hunterdon County Militia. He was also a captain in Colonel Spencer's regiment of the Continental Army from February 7, 1777, to April 11, 1778. He later joined the army of General George Washington as captain of a company of 100 volunteers known as Maxwell's Company.

Her father was William Nixon Lummis (1775–1833), a prominent physician who studied medicine in Philadelphia under the famous Dr. Benjamin Rush. In the early part of 1800, Dr. Lummis left Philadelphia and purchased the Pulteney estate in Sodus Point, Wayne County, New York. Elizabeth Lummis attended Aurora Female Seminary in Aurora, New York, where she studied, among other subjects, French, German and Italian. Her first published work, at age 16, was a translation of Silvio Pellico's "Euphemio of Messina".

In 1835, Elizabeth Lummis published her first book, entitled "Poems, Translated and Original", which included her tragedy, "Teresa Contarini", based on the history of Venice, that was successfully performed in New York and other cities. Around this time she married William Henry Ellet (1806–1859), a chemist from New York City. The couple moved to Columbia, South Carolina, when he was made professor of chemistry, mineralogy and geology at South Carolina College in 1836.

During this time Ellet published several books. In 1839 she wrote "The Characters of Schiller", a critical essay on the writer Friedrich Schiller including her translation of many of his poems. She wrote "Scenes in the Life of Joanna of Sicily", a history of the lifestyles of female nobility, and "Rambles about the Country", a lively description of the scenery she had observed in her travels through the United States, in 1840. She continued writing poems, translations and essays on European literature which she contributed to the "American Monthly", the "North American Review", the "Southern Literary Messenger", the "Southern Quarterly Review" and other periodicals. Ellet wrote abundantly in a wide variety of genres.

In 1845, Ellet left her husband in the south, moving back to New York City where she resumed her place as a member of literary society along with such writers as Margaret Fuller, Anne Lynch Botta, Edgar Allan Poe, Rufus Wilmot Griswold, Anna Cora Mowatt and Frances Sargent Osgood.

During this time, Ellet was a participant in a notorious scandal involving Edgar Allan Poe and Frances Sargent Osgood, both of whom were married to others. Accounts of the particulars of the scandal and the sequence of events differ. At the time, Poe was at the height of his fame, thanks to his work "The Raven". A number of women in literary society sent him letters, including Ellet and Osgood. Some of the letters sent may have been flirtatious or amorous ones. Ellet also spent time with Poe discussing literary matters. It is possible that Ellet felt herself in competition with Osgood for Poe's affections. During this time, Poe had written several poems to and about Osgood, including "A Valentine".

On one visit to Poe's home in January 1846, Ellet allegedly observed letters from Osgood, shown to her by Poe's wife Virginia, and subsequently advised Osgood to ask for their return, implying to Osgood that they were an indiscretion. On behalf of Osgood, Margaret Fuller and Anne Lynch Botta asked Poe to return the letters. Poe, angered by their interference, suggested that Ellet had better "look after her "own" letters". One such letter, written in German, asked Poe to "call for it at her residence this evening", a phrase presumably meant to be seductive, though Poe either ignored it or did not understand its meaning. He then gathered up these letters from Ellet and left them at her house. Despite her letters having been returned, Ellet asked her brother "to "demand of me the letters"". Her brother, Colonel William Lummis, did not believe that Poe had already returned them and threatened to kill him. In order to defend himself, Poe requested a pistol from Thomas Dunn English, who did not believe that Ellet ever sent Poe any letters.

Osgood's husband, Samuel Stillman Osgood, threatened to sue Ellet unless she formally apologized. She retracted her statements in a letter to Osgood saying, "The letter shown me by Mrs Poe "must have been a forgery" created by Poe himself". She put all the blame on Poe, suggesting the incident was because Poe was "intemperate and subject to acts of lunacy." The rumor that Poe was insane was spread by Ellet and by other enemies of Poe and eventually reported in newspapers. After Osgood reunited with her husband, the scandal died down. Poe's sick wife Virginia, however, was deeply affected by the scandal. As early as July 1845 she had been receiving anonymous letters, possibly from Ellet, which reported her husband's alleged indiscretions. On her deathbed, Virginia claimed "Mrs. E. had been her murderer." As Poe described years later, "I scorned Mrs. E simply because she revolted me, and to this day she has never ceased her "anonymous" persecutions." It is believed that Poe wrote the short story "Hop-Frog" as a literary revenge on Ellet and others.

Around 1846, Ellet began a major project in historical writing: to profile the life stories of women who sacrificed for, and were committed to, the American Revolution. She did this by searching out unpublished letters and diaries, and by interviewing descendants of Revolutionary era and frontier women, becoming the first historian of the Revolution to carry out such an effort. She noted the "abundance of materials for the [masculine] history of action" and attempted to add balance by telling the feminine side, referring to the founding "mothers" as giving "nurture in the domestic sanctuary of that love of civil liberty which afterwards kindled into a flame and shed light on the world".

She found so much information about female patriots that the first edition of "The Women of the American Revolution" (1848) had to be published in two volumes. These volumes were well received, and a third volume of additional material was published in 1850. Later historians consider these volumes to represent her most important work. Ellet also authored "Domestic History of the American Revolution" summarizing the same material in narrative form and also published in 1850.

Ellet told the stories of women from every colony and from all ranks of society, with the exception of African Americans, whose role she chose to ignore. Some of the women she wrote about, such as Martha Washington, Abigail Adams, Mercy Otis Warren and Ann Eliza Bleecker, among others, were famous in their own right. She also wrote of the women who were more obscure but equally valuable: the wives of heroes who, in the face of British encroachment, bravely raised children and defended their homes. She wrote, "It is almost impossible now to appreciate the vast influence of woman's patriotism upon the destinies of the infant republic."

Anthologist and critic Rufus Wilmot Griswold had aided Ellet in the production of the book and granted her access to the records of the New-York Historical Society, of which he was a member. She did not acknowledge his assistance, angering the vindictive Griswold. In a review, Griswold said, "with the assistance of a few gentlemen more familiar than herself with our public and domestic experience, she has made a valuable and interesting work."

Now an established and respected author, Ellet went on to write "Family Pictures from the Bible" in 1849. In 1850 she wrote "Evenings at Woodlawn", a collection of German legends and traditions, and "Domestic History of the American Revolution", possibly the only history of the American Revolution told from the perspective of both men and women. From 1851 to 1857 she wrote "Watching Spirits", "Pioneer Women of the West", "Novelettes of the Musicians" and "Summer Rambles in the West". This book was inspired by a boating trip along the Minnesota River in 1852. The local town, Eden Prairie, Minnesota, got its name from Ellet and has dedicated a nature trail in her honor.

In 1857, Ellet published a 600-page encyclopedia of American home economics entitled "The Practical Housekeeper". The guide, which seemed to target middle to upper class readers, was organized into three parts: cooking, housekeeping and pharmaceutical concerns. Its contents included thousands of recipes and advice with references to philosophers, scientists, and ancient civilizations. There were also five hundred wood-engraved illustrations. She wrote in the preface, "No complete system of Domestic Economy, within the limits of a convenient manual, has been published in this country."

Later works included "Women Artists in All Ages and Countries" (1859), the first book of its kind to represent a history of women artists. She wrote"The Queens of American Society" (1867), and "Court Circles of the Republic" (1869), a look at the social life of eighteen presidents from George Washington to Ulysses S. Grant.

In 1850, Ellet and her husband relocated to New York, where he spent his final years as a chemical consultant for the Manhattan Gas Company.

Ellet became involved with the divorce case between Rufus Griswold and his second wife, Charlotte Myers, in 1852. Ellet and Ann S. Stephens wrote to Myers telling her not to allow the divorce, as well as to Harriet McCrillis, who intended to marry Griswold after the divorce, to end her relationship with him. After it was granted, Ellet and Stephens continued writing to Myers and persuaded her to repeal the divorce on September 23, 1853. On February 24, 1856, the appeal went to court, with Ellet and Stephens providing lengthy testimony against Griswold's character. Neither Griswold nor Myers attended and the appeal was dismissed. When Griswold died in 1857, Sarah Anna Lewis, a friend and writer, suggested that Ellet had worsened Griswold's illness and that she "goaded Griswold to his death".

In 1857 Ellet replaced Ann Stephens as literary editor of the New York "Evening Express". Ellet's husband died two years later in 1859. She continued to write, and although they had no children, she promoted charities for impoverished women and children by speaking in public to raise funds. An Episcopalian most of her life, she converted to Catholicism in her later years. She died of Bright's disease in New York City on June 3, 1877, and was buried beside her husband at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn.

Ellet was the first historian to write about the relationship of women to the American Revolution. She felt that women shaped history by their influence, which was done through "sentiment" and "feeling". This was so hard to define that she stated "History can do it no Justice". Her book "The Women of the American Revolution" is still studied.

List of works taken from MSU Historic American project.




</doc>
<doc id="11470124" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11470124" title="Walter Dix">
Walter Dix

Walter Dix (born January 31, 1986) is a retired American sprinter who specializes in the 100 meters and 200 meters. He is the fourth-fastest 200-meter runner ever with a best of 19.53 seconds, and has broken the 10-second barrier in the 100 meters, with a best of 9.88 seconds.

Dix was a highly successful amateur athlete, setting a state record in the 100 m and trying out for the US Olympic Team at the age of eighteen. He joined Florida State University and in his first year he broke the 100 m American junior record and won at the NCAA Outdoor Championships. After a fourth-place finish at the 2005 US Championships, Dix continued with his collegiate success, setting an NCAA record of 19.69 seconds in the 200 m and coming within one hundredth of the 100 m record. He completed a 100 m, 200 m, and 4×100 meter relay sweep at the 2007 NCAA Outdoor Championships, the first to do so since John Carlos in 1969. He closed his amateur career in 2008: another NCAA 200 m title made him the third most decorated track athlete in NCAA history, and he won gold and silver at the 2008 US Olympic Trials.

Dix turned professional in mid-2008, signing a multimillion-dollar contract with Nike. He reached the Olympic finals in the 100 and 200 m, and won two bronze medals; the only American track athlete to win two individual medals at the 2008 Summer Olympics. He suffered an injury at the 2009 US Championships, thus missing out on the World Championships, and a contract dispute with his agent resulted in only a handful of appearances that season. In 2011 he was both the 100 and 200 m American champion and won silver medals in the events at the 2011 World Championships. An injury at the 2012 Olympic trials meant he missed a second Olympic appearance.

The son of a track and field coach, Walter Dix competed at athletics meetings from a young age, specialising in sprinting and the long jump. His speed also translated well to the football field, and he often played the sport at school. Dix was an accomplished high school runner: in his final year at Coral Springs High School in 2004 he recorded 10.28 seconds in the 100 meters, then third all-time on the Florida high school record list behind only Houston McTear and Curtis Johnson, and broke the 200 meters Florida high school record with 20.62 seconds. Aside from J-Mee Samuels' 10.28 seconds in the 100 m, these were the two fastest marks by a high school athlete that year. Both these times were within the Olympic standard for the events. He competed at the US Olympic Trials in the 200 m, but did not progress beyond the heats stage.

He began attending Florida State University (FSU) in late 2004, working with coach Bob Braman. At his first regional meeting for the university, he won the 60-meter dash, 200 m and 4×400 meter relay, and was chosen as the Atlantic Coast Conference rookie of the year. He made his first major impact at the NCAA Indoor Championships: after a sixth-place finish in the 60 m, he came second in the 200 m with a world junior record of 20.37 s, beaten only by Wallace Spearmon. Following this, he became USA Track & Field's Athlete of the Week after setting an American junior record in the 100 m. Running in the Icahn Stadium at the 2005 NCAA East Regional Championships, his heat-winning time of 10.06 seconds bettered Stanley Floyd's 25-year-old mark. Dix went on to win the 100 m final and also won the 200 m in 20.23 seconds, the fourth fastest time by an American junior sprinter.

At his first NCAA Outdoor Championships, Dix became FSU's first winner at the championships since 1980, and the first to do so as a freshman. He won the 100 m in 10.21 seconds, beating the defending NCAA champions DaBryan Blanton and Tyson Gay to the title. After recording a personal best of 20.18 seconds in the semifinals, he managed a fourth-place finish in the 200 m race. Dix competed at his first US senior championships that year and, as the only amateur to reach the 100 m final, he finished fourth. The only athletes to beat him were Leonard Scott, reigning Olympic Champion Shawn Crawford and the eventual world champion Justin Gatlin.

Dix's second year at FSU was characterised by success in the 200 m. He won his first indoor NCAA title in the 200 m and was runner-up in the 60 m, having set a personal best of 6.59 seconds in the heats. His time of 20.27 seconds in the 200 m final was the fastest indoor run in the world that year. His fastest of the season came at the Reebok invitational and his time of 20.25 seconds placed him as the 13th fastest runner in 2006. He completed a 200 m NCAA Championship double by taking the outdoor title, and he also finished as runner-up in the 100 m, second to Xavier Carter.

In his third year as an FSU athlete he won four NCAA Division I titles, starting with a 200 m win indoors. In the 2007 NCAA East Regional final, he won the 100 m dash in 10.05 seconds. His performance in the 200 m was more impressive however: he set the all-time collegiate record of 19.69 seconds in the 200 m, breaking Joe DeLoach's record that had stood since 1988. This made him the sixth fastest 200 m runner ever and it was the seventh fastest run in history at the time.

At the NCAA Outdoor Championships that year, he won three separate national titles, beating all opposition in the 100 m, 200 m, and 4×100 meter relay races. This achievement made him the first man to win the three races at an NCAA Championships since John Carlos did so in 1969. Dix's time of 9.93 seconds in the 100 m was a world-leader at that point of the season, and was just 0.01 behind Ato Boldon's NCAA record. For these accomplishments, he was again named USATF's Athlete of the Week.

In his final year as an amateur athlete, he spent much of early 2008 battling a hamstring injury. However, he returned in April to win his third 200 m NCAA outdoor title, while placing fourth in the 100 m. Although his personal bests rivalled those of top professional athletes, Dix decided to finish his degree in social science at FSU, as his graduation in May 2008 allowed him to focus on the Olympic Trials thereafter.

Over the course of his college career, Dix became only the second athlete to win three NCAA 200 m outdoor titles (after Ralph Metcalfe) and, with six outdoor NCAA titles, he is listed as the joint third on all-time list. Furthermore, he finished with two indoor titles and 18 All-American honors.

Competing at the 2008 US Olympic Trials in Eugene, Oregon, Dix qualified for the 2008 Summer Olympics in both the 100 and 200 m events. After recording a personal-best-equaling 9.93 seconds in the 100 m semifinals, he took second place behind Tyson Gay with a wind-assisted 9.80 seconds. He stated that his NCAA experience had helped raise his confidence and that he was less nervous than he was at the 2005 US Championships. The 200 m favorite Gay suffered an injury in the qualifying rounds, and Dix and Crawford both finished the 200 m final with 19.86 seconds, with Dix elected the winner by a photo finish. After signing a sponsorship deal with Nike worth around $1,000,000 a year, described by his agent as "the largest deal ever for a track athlete just coming out of college", Dix stated that his aims for the Olympics were personal bests in the individual sprints and a gold in the relay race.

Competing in his first Olympics, Dix qualified for the 100 m final with a season's best of 9.95 seconds. In the final he registered a personal best of 9.91 seconds, finishing behind new world record holder Usain Bolt of Jamaica and Richard Thompson of Trinidad and Tobago. The Olympic bronze medal was Dix's first medal at a major international competition.

A few days later, he finished fifth in the 200 m final with a time of 19.98 seconds, some distance off the winner Usain Bolt who had broken the world record. However, it transpired that both the silver and bronze medalists (Churandy Martina of the Netherlands Antilles and American Wallace Spearmon) had stepped out of their lanes thus they were disqualified. As a result, Dix received his second Olympic bronze medal. Further disqualifications occurred in the heats of the Olympic 4×100 meter relay race: Darvis Patton and Tyson Gay misjudged a baton pass, causing the American team to be eliminated and spoiling any chance of Dix receiving a relay medal. He finished the Olympics as the only American sprinter to medal in two individual events. Dix closed the season with two sub-10 second runs at the Weltklasse and Athletissima meetings, finishing second to a Jamaican on both occasions (Bolt and Asafa Powell).

The year after the Olympics, Dix began the season with a world-leading time of 10.00 seconds in Tallahassee in April. He also set a world-leading relay time of 37.92 seconds with Travis Padgett, Shawn Crawford and Darvis Patton at the Penn Relays. However, he failed to maintain this strong form through the rest of 2009. Coach Teddy Long planned to improve Dix's start and acceleration in his races, but the two parted company in April. He placed third behind Michael Rodgers and Asafa Powell at the Prefontaine Classic but, unusually, this proved to one of the highlights of a low-profile year for Dix. He competed at the US Championships, but injuries forced him out of both the 100 m and 200 m races and he did not qualify for the World Championships. Furthermore, he entered a legal battle with his management company, regarding whether they merited the 20% portion of his multimillion-dollar sponsorship contract with Nike. The dispute with his agent Kimberly Holland was resolved in July: although the terms were undisclosed, Dix left Holland's Icon Management and decided to be his own agent. With his father as his coach, a legal battle and no major races to prepare for, Dix ran only a handful of local meetings in the rest of 2009.

Dix returned to national competition with an appearance at the 2010 USA Indoor Track and Field Championships. He took fourth place in the final and set a new 60 m indoor best of 6.58 seconds. Event winner Ivory Williams was disqualified after testing positive for marijuana and Dix was upgraded to third. He opened his outdoor season at the Seminole Twilight meet in May, recording 9.98 seconds in the 100 m and 19.89 seconds for the 200 m. He began to participate in Diamond League meetings, competing on the European circuit for the first time. He beat Wallace Spearmon at the Golden Gala's 200 m race, breaking Michael Johnson's meet record. He also took to the national stage, winning the 100 m and finishing as the 200 m runner-up at the 2010 USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships. A week later, Dix beat Tyson Gay at the Prefontaine Classic for another meet record of 19.72 seconds. In August at a meet in Nottwil, Switzerland, Dix ran a new personal best of 9.88 seconds, finishing second behind Nesta Carter who also set a new personal best of 9.86 seconds. An injury at the London Grand Prix brought an end to his season.

In the first meeting of the 2011 IAAF Diamond League, at the Qatar Athletic Super Grand Prix, he won the 200 m with a time of 20.06 seconds. Dix took further 200 m victories at the Eugene and London legs of the series, while Usain Bolt won the other three 200 m mid-season legs. He achieved a 100/200 sprint double at the 2011 USA Track and Field Championships, winning in the absence of Tyson Gay and Wallace Spearmon. Running in both the events at the 2011 World Championships in Athletics, he first secured the silver medal in the 100 m final – defending champion Bolt was disqualified for a false start and Dix was runner-up to another Jamaican, Yohan Blake, in a comparatively slow 10.08 seconds. In the 200-meter final Bolt beat the field but Dix was the closest to him, running 19.70 seconds to take his second silver of the tournament. He attempted to gain a third medal in the 4 × 100 metres relay final, but a mid-race collision between Darvis Patton and Britain's Harry Aikines-Aryeetey meant the American team's baton never reached Dix's final leg. At the Diamond League 200 m final at the Memorial Van Damme he ran a personal best of 19.53 seconds. Blake was even faster (19.26), however, leaving Dix in second place even as he became the fourth fastest 200 m runner of all-time and then won the league series.

He moved to Southern Ireland in 2012 to train with John Smith and opened his outdoor season with a wind-aided run of 9.85 seconds. A 200 m win followed at the Doha Diamond League meet. He entered the 2012 US Olympic Trials and reached the 100 m final but, having pulled a muscle in his semi-final, he finished last in the race. This brought an end to his season.

Walter Dix is the son of Washington and Plinnie Dix. His father, a former sprinter, is an assistant principal and track coach at New River Middle School, while his mother is a high school teacher. He has two older brothers, Alex and William, who also were track runners. While attending Florida State University, Dix became a member of the Phi Beta Sigma fraternity.

, Dix's best in the 200 m outdoors makes him the fourth fastest man of all time, while his indoor best for the distance makes him the seventh fastest. His best in the 100 m is the eighth fastest by an American athlete.



</doc>
<doc id="11471512" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11471512" title="Franz Burgmeier">
Franz Burgmeier

Franz Burgmeier (born 7 April 1982) is a Liechtenstein retired footballer, who played as a midfielder for Vaduz in the Swiss Super League. Born in Triesen, Burgmeier was a burgeoning footballer and keen skier, until he gave up the latter sport at 16 following a serious injury. Having been a youth player for Triesen, he started his professional career with Vaduz. Burgmeier won several Liechtensteiner Cups with Vaduz, who were promoted to the Swiss Challenge League in 2001, and played in the UEFA Cup. After two unsuccessful attempts to win promotion to the Swiss Super League, Burgmeier left for Aarau in 2005. He spent only one season with Aarau before a move to the previous season's runners-up Basel in 2006. His two seasons with Basel were broken up by a loan spell with Thun, before he moved to England with Darlington in August 2008, where he played for one year.

Burgmeier won 112 caps and scored nine goals for his country. He was a right-footed player competent as either a left midfielder or left back, with the ability to deliver a good cross. He made his international debut in 2001 against Spain and three years later scored one of the goals that helped secure his country's first point in World Cup qualification matches.

Burgmeier was born in Triesen, Liechtenstein, a small town with a population of 4,500, close to the border with Switzerland. He is the younger son of Heinz and Elsbeth, following Patrick Burgmeier, who played football for Vaduz and USV Eschen/Mauren. From a young age, Franz played both football and skied. He played for the Liechtenstein youth team in Swiss competitions from ages 11 to 16, winning the championship when he was 13. However, at 16, a knee injury, which he suffered while skiing, nearly ended his football career and prompted him to stop the former sport.

Burgmeier is married to Monika. She also plays football, as a full back, for FC Triesen, and also is a coach at the youth level for Liechtenstein's women.

Burgmeier started out as a youth at Triesen before moving to Vaduz in 2000. Although based in his home country, like all Liechtenstein clubs Vaduz played league football in Switzerland—at the time in the third tier—but also competed in the Liechtenstein Football Cup. In Burgmeier's first season the team won promotion to the Challenge League and won the Liechtenstein Cup with a 9–0 defeat against Ruggell in the final. He scored his first goal at the higher level on 31 July 2001, in a postponed game from the first round of the season, which finished in a 4–1 victory against Thun. However, Vaduz finished in 11th place in the Fall Season, before results improved and they finished in second place in the Final Table, avoiding being relegated. The team also successfully defended their Liechtenstein Cup defeating USV Eschen/Mauren 6–1 in the final.

Vaduz's success in their nation's cup ensured they gained access to the UEFA Cup, and in August 2002, Burgmeier scored his first European goal during a 1–1 with Livingston, the Scottish side's first game in Europe. In the second leg, Vaduz had a late goal disallowed during a 0–0, and so they went out in the qualifying round for the third successive year, losing on the away goals rule. Vaduz topped the Fall Season table that season, but failed to win promotion to the Swiss Super League after finishing fourth in the Final League. Their failure was offset with another victory in the Liechtenstein Cup, this time defeating Balzers in the final.

In June 2003, he was set to join St. Gallen; however, the deal never went through because the Swiss side could not afford the transfer fee. Instead he started with Vaduz, who came closer to gaining promotion but were again unsuccessful, after they lost in the promotion–relegation play-off match. Burgmeier scored one of the goals in the second leg against Neuchâtel Xamax, but Mobulu M'Futi scored to ensure Neuchâtel won over the two legs, and Vaduz stayed in the Challenge League. Despite his side defending their Liechtenstein Cup, Burgmeier missed the final.

However, their cup success helped Vaduz to another UEFA Cup, which resulted in their first win in the competition with a 4–2 aggregate victory against FAI Cup-holders Longford Town in July 2004. Burgmeier netted his second European goal during the ties, during the 3–2 second-leg victory, before they were defeated in the second qualifying round to Belgian-side Beveren, during which Burgmeier was injured forcing him to undergo a knee operation and miss the first month of the league season. Vaduz repeated their efforts domestically, defeating USV Eschen/Mauren in the cup and reaching the promotion play-off game. However, they were defeated by Schaffhausen and were left with only ten players on secure contracts for the following season. Burgmeier himself left Vaduz after five years with the club, during which he played 115 league games and scored 27 goals.

Burgmeier, instead, moved to Aarau in Switzerland. His debut came in a 2–0 league defeat to Thun, before he was substituted near the end of the second half. Aarau were in the Super League, and finished seventh in Burgmeier's only season with the club,<ref name="switzerland 05/06"></ref> in which he played 35 league games. His only league goal came in the second round of matches against St. Gallen, but he also scored in both the first two rounds of the Swiss Cup—his first games in the cup since Vaduz were not eligible for the competition—before they were eliminated in the quarter-finals on penalties. His form with Aarau won Burgmeier the Liechtensteiner Footballer of the Year award, one point ahead of fellow international Mario Frick, and also earned him a move to Basel, for whom he signed a three-year contract.

Burgmeier's first role with Basel was to play in the Uhrencup as they defeated German-side FC Köln 2–1, to share the trophy with Zürich. Basel had finished the previous season as runners-up in the league to Zürich on goal difference and so qualified for the following season's UEFA Cup. Burgmeier made his Basel debut in the competition as they defeated Kazakhstan's Tobol 3–1 on 13 July, before he was replaced by Scott Chipperfield. The second leg ended in a draw, sending Basel through. The second qualifying round draw gave Burgmeier a chance to return to Vaduz. He was a substitute in both games as his new team won on away goals. They went on to qualify for the group stages, in which they finished bottom of their division, with two points from four games.<ref name="europe 06/07"></ref> Burgmeier scored his first goal for his new club in a 4–2 away defeat against Sion, but again the side only ranked in the Championship behind Zürich, this time by one point. Their disappointment was offset by an extra time victory over Luzern in the final of the Swiss Cup.<ref name="switzerland 06/07"></ref>

Burgmeier injured his ankle at the start of the 2007–08 season, and after playing only four league games, Thun signed him on a six-month loan deal in January 2008. He played 17 times for Thun, who finished bottom of the Super League. Thun were also knocked out of the Swiss Cup by Burgmeier's main employers in the semi-finals.<ref name="switzerland 07/08"></ref> On 13 July 2008, his contract with Basel was terminated early to allow him to find himself a new club after just 23 league appearances because he was seen as surplus to requirements by manager Christian Gross.

While playing for Liechtenstein against England in a 2004 European Championships qualifying match at Old Trafford in 2003, Burgmeier was spotted by Max Houghton. Although Liechtenstein lost 2–0, Houghton was impressed by Burgmeier's stamina and effort. When Burgmeier was released by Basel in 2008, Houghton, then 12 years old, suggested to his grandfather, George Houghton, who was chairman of English side Darlington that he should be given a trial. Following a successful trial, Burgmeier, who was keen to move abroad, was signed by the League Two-side on a one-year contract at the end of August 2008 to become the first Liechtensteiner to play in England.

Burgmeier made his debut on 23 August, in a 2–1 defeat to Gillingham at The Darlington Arena. He scored his first goal for Darlington in a 2–1 win against Port Vale on 13 September. Manager Dave Penney praised Burgmeier for the start he made to the club, both as a goal scorer and creator, which also helped him to play his way into the affections of the club's supporters. When Burgmeier won his 49th cap for Liechtenstein against Wales, it was his fourth in the two months since he joined Darlington. It took him past the club record three caps of Canadian Jason de Vos and New Zealander Adrian Webster, with a coach-load of Darlington fans there to see him play at the Millennium Stadium. His next cap clashed with Darlington's FA Cup first round replay with Conference North-side Droylsden, in which they were defeated.

Darlington's promotion campaign was dealt a blow in February 2009, when club chairman George Houghton placed the club in administration. As a result, the club were deducted 10 points, a penalty from which they could not recover finally finishing 12th. Burgmeier finished with two goals during the season having played 35 games, but like the rest of the playing squad, was told he could find a new club by Darlington's administrators.

Following Darlington's financial problems, Burgmeier returned home to Liechtenstein and signed with his former club Vaduz on a one-year contract after the end of the 2008–09 season.

Burgmeier is a Liechtenstein international who made his debut in a 2002 World Cup qualifier against Spain on 5 September 2001. It was the penultimate game of the side's qualifying campaign, in which they lost all eight games without scoring a goal. Despite starting the qualifying round for 2004 European Championships with a 1–1 draw with Macedonia, Liechtenstein lost their remaining games to finish bottom of their group. Burgmeier featured in seven of the qualification matches.

Burgmeier scored his first international goal in April 2003 in a friendly against Saudi Arabia to give Liechtenstein a 1–0 victory. On 10 October 2004, he scored his first competitive international goal as he helped Liechtenstein to record their first point in World Cup qualification matches. He and Thomas Beck scored Liechtenstein's goals in a 2–2 with Portugal at the Rheinpark Stadion. Burgmeier describes the draw as the "biggest moment of my career". Three days later, Burgmeier scored two more goals as Liechtenstein earned their first World Cup win with a 4–0 victory against Luxembourg. They followed it up with a 0–0 draw against Slovakia and another victory over Luxembourg, to finish the qualifying campaign with eight points from their 12 matches. Burgmeier played in nine games.

Liechtenstein won another two games in their following qualifying campaign—for the 2008 European Championships. They had started with four defeats, in the last of which Burgmeier scored a consolation goal in a 4–1 win for Northern Ireland. A 1–0 victory against Latvia and a draw with Iceland followed, but Liechtenstein picked up only seven points to finish bottom of their group, with Burgmeier playing in all but one game.

Having earned eight points during the 2006 World Cup qualification games, Burgmeier said the target in the 2010 campaign was to pick up "as many points as possible", adding, "For us, the target is not to qualify but to just take each game as it comes, enjoy the matches, and try and do as well as possible." He won his 50th cap in a 4–0 friendly defeat to Slovakia on 19 November 2008. Burgmeier has scored seven goals and picked up a number of opposition shirts which he plans to put in a hall of fame.

On 15 November 2014, he scored his second Euro qualifier and winning goal over Moldova.





</doc>
<doc id="11489722" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11489722" title="Vinkensport">
Vinkensport

Vinkensport (Dutch for ""finch sport"") is a competitive animal sport in which male common chaffinches are made to compete for the highest number of bird calls in an hour. Also called vinkenzetting ("finch sitting"), it is primarily active in the Dutch-speaking region of Flanders in Belgium.

Vinkensport traces its origins to competitions held by Flemish merchants in 1596, and is considered part of traditional Flemish culture. As of 2007, it was estimated that there are over 13,000 enthusiasts, called "vinkeniers" ("finchers"), breeding 10,000 birds every year. Animal rights activists have opposed the sport for much of its history.

In a contest, a row of small cages, each housing a single male finch, is lined up approximately six feet apart along a street. The close proximity of the cages increases the number of calls, as the birds sing for mates and to establish territory. A timekeeper begins and ends the contest with a red flag. Every time a bird sings a correct terminating flourish to their call—most often transcribed as "susk-e-wiet"—a tally mark in chalk is made on a long wooden stick. The bird singing its song the most times during one hour wins the contest. Champion finches regularly sing hundreds of calls in contests.

The earliest known records of vinkeniers are from 1596 (with some sources advocating a slightly earlier 1593 origin) with Flemish merchants competing. By the late nineteenth century, vinkenzetting's popularity had diminished significantly, but it saw a resurgence after the First World War. As of 2007, it was estimated that there are over 13,000 "vinkeniers" breeding 10,000 birds every year. However, the popularity of this folk sport is waning in the 21st century. There is also a museum of the sport ("Nationaal Volkssportmuseum Vinkensport") in the village of Hulste in the Harelbeke municipality of Belgium.

Vinkeniers use a variety of methods to increase the number of calls in their birds. Techniques to develop singing aptitude include selective breeding programs, high-protein diets, and stimulating them with music and recordings of bird song. As wild finches generally begin singing during the spring mating season, keepers may also use artificial lights placed in aviaries to encourage increased song.

Some vinkeniers claim that finches from the different regions of Belgium sing in different dialects; with birds from the Dutch-speaking Flanders singing "in Dutch" and those from the French-speaking Wallonia singing undesirably "in French". The use of "Dutch" and "Walloon" to describe these two supposed types of finches has been suggested to refer to a simple difference in calling not literally linked to either the Flemish or Walloon communities of Belgium, and some linguists even suggest that "Walloon" simply means "foreign". While minute regional differences (a.k.a. dialects) in song have been observed in the chaffinch (also within Belgium), the differences have only been reliably distinguishable by the use of sonograms. Taxonomically, there are no officially recognized subspecies of chaffinch within Belgium.

Speed-singing contests for finches are also a common event in Guyana, Trinidad, Suriname and Brazil. The male finches are placed in cages on poles about one foot apart. The first finch to reach 50 songs wins. The illegal importation of these finches from immigrants of these countries has challenged authorities in New York City.

As with other sports, vinkensport has had its cheating scandals, as well as accusations of artificial enhancement. One finch sang a record 1,278 susk-e-weits in one hour, and the owner was later accused of doping the bird with testosterone. After one contestant sang exactly the same number of calls in two rounds, the box was opened and a mini CD player was discovered within.

Throughout much of its history, certain attributes of the sport have garnered criticism. Early proponents of the sport would blind birds with hot needles in order to reduce visual distractions. Thomas Hardy—the celebrated English author and poet who was also an antivivisectionist and member of the RSPCA—is said to have written his poem "The Blinded Bird" as a protest against the practice. In 1920, a campaign by blind World War I veterans banned the practice, and today the birds are kept in small wooden boxes that let air in but keep distractions out.

Modern animal rights activists, such as those from the Flemish Bird Protection Society, accuse trainers of "brainwashing" birds into singing more than is natural or healthy by playing looped recordings of finch calls, and that caging birds in the intentionally small and dark contest boxes is cruel. The finch is a popular aviary bird in many countries and it is forbidden in the European Union to catch birds in the wild, despite vinkeniers purporting that wild birds sing better than captive ones. Though chaffinch populations are currently not considered to be threatened, a 2002 court case at the Belgian Constitutional Court upheld a 1979 EU law banning the capture of wild finches.




</doc>
<doc id="11506094" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11506094" title="Pundarikakshan Perumal Temple">
Pundarikakshan Perumal Temple

Pundarikakshan Perumal Temple thiruvellaraitemple.com/ or Thiruvellarai in Thiruvellarai, a village in the outskirts of Tiruchirappalli in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu, is dedicated to the Hindu god Vishnu. Constructed in the Dravidian style of architecture, the temple is glorified in the "Divya Prabandha", the early medieval Tamil canon of the Azhwar saints from the 6th–9th centuries AD. It is one of the 108 "Divyadesam" dedicated to Vishnu, who is worshipped as Pundarikakshan and his consort Lakshmi as Pankajavalli.

According to legends, the temple is said to have been built by Sibi Chakravarthy, king of Ayodhya in Treta Yuga 15 lakh years ago. This temple is older than Srirangam temple.The temple has three inscriptions in its two rock-cut caves, two dating from the period of Nandivarman II (732–796 AD) and the other to that of Dantivarman (796–847). It also has Pallava sculptural depictions of Narasimha and Varaha, two of the ten avatars of Vishnu.

A granite wall surrounds the temple, enclosing all its shrines and six of its seven bodies of water. The "rajagopuram", the temple's gateway tower, is unfinished. A "swastika" shaped temple tank built in 800 AD by Kamban Araiyan during the reign of Dantivarman is outside the temple complex. The Vijayanagar and Nayak kings commissioned paintings on the walls of the shrine of Pudarikakshan, some of which are still present.

Pundarikakshan is believed to have appeared to Garuda (vahana of Vishnu), Sibi Chakravarthy, sage Markandeya and Hindu gods Bhoomadevi, Brahma and Shiva. Six daily rituals and three yearly festivals are held at the temple, of which the chariot festival, celebrated during the Tamil month of "Chaitra" (March–April), is the most prominent. The festival is unique in the state as a community feast is offered, a custom stretching back many centuries. The temple is maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board of the Government of Tamil Nadu.

Pundarikakshan Perumal temple is believed to have been built by the Pallavas, as seen from the three inscriptions in its two rock-cut caves. Two of the inscriptions are dated from the period of Nandivarman II (732–796 AD) and the other from the period of Dantivarman (796–847 AD). The temple construction completed presumably during the time of Dantivarman. The influence of Azhwars, the Vaishanva saints of the 7th–9th centuries helped spread Vaishnavism to a greater extent among the public and the ruling Pallava kings, who became temple patrons.

A Chola inscription indicates an endowment to the shrines of Krishna (an avatar of Vishnu) and his consort Rukmini inside the temple by King Parakesarivarman (907-955 AD). The temple had later additions from the subsequent Chola, later Pandyas, Hoysala and the Vijayanagara kings. The temple suffered extensive damage during a flood and was repaired by a merchant around 1262–63.

In modern times, the temple is maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board of the Government of Tamil Nadu. An Executive officer appointed by the Board manages the temple along with Srirangam Ranganathaswamy temple, Sri Azhagiya Manavala Perumal Temple at Woraiyur, Sri Vadivazhagiya Nambi Perumal Temple and Mariamman Temple at Anbil. Annadhanam scheme, which provides free food to devotees, is implemented in the temple by the Board. Under the scheme, free food is offered to hundred devotees every day in the temple and the expenditure is fully funded by the contributions from devotees.

Pundarikakshan Perumal temple is located in Thiruvellarai, a village from Tiruchirappalli, on the Thuraiyur road. The shrine of Pundarikakshan is built on a tall artificial hill. There are two stepped entrances to the sanctum, Utharayana Vaasal and Dhakshanayana Vaasal, each open for a six-month period. From 15 January to 15 June, Utharayanya Vaasal is opened, Dhakshanaya Vaasal is for the other six-month period. Pundarikakshan, the presiding deity of the temple is named "Maayavan" during "Dakshinayanam" and "Thai Maatha Naayagan" during "Uttarayanam". The two gates in the temple are believed to represent the continuous cycle of entering into life and getting out of it. An image of the presiding deity, Pundarikakshan, is seen in a standing posture facing east. He is believed to have appeared to Garuda, Sibi Chakravarthy, Bhoomadevi, sage Markandeya, Brahma and Shiva, all of whose images are housed inside the sanctum. The consort of Pundarikakshan, Shenbagavalli, (also called "Peri Pirattiyaar Lakshmi Devi") has a separate shrine. The Utsavar (festival image) of Pankajavalli is called Shenbagavalli and is housed inside the same shrine. The temple has Pallava sculptural depictions of Narasimha and Varaha, two of the ten avatars of Vishnu. Narasimha is depicted holding a demon in one panel, the other shows him tearing the demon.

The rectangular walls around the temple enclose all the eight shrines and six of the seven water bodies associated with the temple. Besides the main shrine for Pundarikakshan and Pangayavalli, the temple has shrines for Azhwars, Garuda, Ramanujar and Uyyakondar. The seven water bodies are Divya Theertham, Kanda Kshree Theertham, Theertham, Chakkara Theertham, Pushkala Theertham, Padma Theertham and Varaaha Manikarnika Theertham. The "vimanam" (structure over the santum) is called Vimalaakkruthi Vimaanam. There are various sculptural depictions of Krishna on the pillars of the temple, in the most notable of which he is depicted dancing on a pot. He is seen dancing in Swastika posture with his bun like hair-do, ornaments and anklet. In another sculpture, he is seen slaying the demon Bhagasura. The Vijayanagar and Nayak kings commissioned the Krishna paintings on the exterior walls of the shrine of Pundarikakshan; they have clear Telugu language labels. Paintings with some of the popular themes from the epic "Ramayana" were also commissioned by the Nayak kings in the temple.

The "rajagopuram", the main gateway tower, is an unfinished structure. An initiative to complete the estimated has been mooted by the Hindu Religious and Endowment Board in 2017. A swastika-shaped temple tank built during 800 AD is present in the south-western corner of the street around the temple. It has four stepped gateways, each having 51 steps. The tank is believed to have been built by Kamban Araiyan during the reign of Dantivarman. In modern times, it is maintained by the Department of Archaeology of the Government of Tamil Nadu. The temple complex covers an area of , while the tank covers an area of .

A archaeological study in 2010 revealed that the layout of the rock-cut caves in the temple is similar to that of other rock-cut temples such as the Rockfort and Pechipalai cave temple. The unfinished caves in the temple, along with the lower cave temples in Tiruchirappalli and Tiruparankunram, each have a shrine for Shiva in the east and Vishnu in the west, separated by a central bay between them.

The word "Vellarai" means white rock. Owing to the presence of white rocks in the region, the place is historically referred as Thiru Vellara. As per Hindu legend, when Sibi Chakravarthi stayed there with his warriors, a white boar crossed his path. He chased it and the boar hid inside a hole. Markandeya, a sage, was doing penance there and the king narrated the incident to him. The sage asked the king to fill the hole with milk. While doing so, Hindu god Vishnu appeared before them. The sage asked the king to bring 3700 Vaishnavites from the north and build a temple on the site for Vishnu. As requested, the king took 3700 Vaishnavites and started building the temple. While doing so, one of the Vaishnavites was killed in transit and the king was concerned by the accident. Vishnu appeared incognito as Pundarikakshan, a Vaishnavite, and requested to be counted among the 3700. According to another legend Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, performed penance at the temple, and Vishnu appeared before her as Sengamalakannan. The presiding deity has since been called "Thamarai Kannan", meaning the one who has eyes resembling lotus; his consort is called "Pankacha Valli". The Hindu god Shiva in form of Neelivaneswarar is believed to have worshiped Pundarikakshan to absolve himself from the sin of holding Brahma's severed head. Vishnu appeared to both Shiva and Brahma, adhering to their prayers.

The temple is revered in "Nalayira Divya Prabandham", the 7th–9th century Vaishnava canon, by Periazhwar in eleven hymns and Thirumangai Azhwar in thirteen hymns. The temple is classified as a "Divyadesam", one of the 108 Vishnu temples that are mentioned in the book. Some of the ancient Sanskrit books consider the temple as a "uthamakshetram", meaning the place that gives the best to its devotees. The sculptures on the pillars of the temple reveal the earliest practice of Krishna worship in Tamil Nadu.
Vedantha Desikar (1269–1370) has revered the temple in his work "Hamsa Sandesam". As per Hindu legend, the eighteen steps in the temple represent the eighteen chapters of the Hindu scripture "Bhagawad Gita" and the last four steps represent the four "vedas", the sacred Hindu religious texts. The sound made in front of some of the big pillars of the temple echoes around the temple. Some of the sacred verses are recited more than once in front of these pillars during worship. Thiruvellarai is the birthplace of Uyyakondar, a disciple of Nadhamunigal. Also, Thiruvellarai is the birthplace of Engalazhwan (Vishnuchitthar) is believed to have taught "Sri Bhasyam" to Nadadhoor Ammal in the temple.

According to Hindu legend Ramanuja (1017–1137), the leading expounder of Vishishtadvaita philosophy, visited the temple. One of his disciples placed Ramanuja's sandals along with the image of Varadarajar. Ramanujar became furious at this, for which the disciple explained that for Ramanuja Varadarajar is god, but for him, Ramanuja is supreme. Thiruvellarai is the birthplace of Uyyakondar, a disciple of Nathamuni. Swami Engalazhwan is believed to have taught "Sri Bhasyam" to Nadadhoor Ammal in the temple.

The temple priests perform the "pooja" (rituals) during festivals and on a daily basis. As at other Vishnu temples of Tamil Nadu, the priests belong to the Vaishnavaite community, a Brahmin sub-caste. The temple rituals are performed six times a day: "Ushathkalam" at 7 a.m., "Kalasanthi" at 8:00 a.m., "Uchikalam" at 12:00 p.m., "Sayarakshai" at 6:00 p.m., "Irandamkalam" at 7:00 p.m. and "Ardha Jamam" at 10:00 p.m. Each ritual has three steps: "alangaram" (decoration), "neivethanam" (food offering) and "deepa aradanai" (waving of lamps) for both Pundarikakshan and Pankajavalli. During the last step of worship, "nagaswaram" (pipe instrument) and "tavil" (percussion instrument) are played, religious instructions in the "Vedas" (sacred text) are recited by priests, and worshippers prostrate themselves in front of the temple mast. There are weekly, monthly and fortnightly rituals performed in the temple.

The Chariot festival is the most prominent festival of the temple, and for the surrounding villages. It is celebrated during the Tamil month of "Chittirai" (March–April) when devotees pull the chariot round the streets of Tirvellarai. Verses from "Nalayira Divya Prabandham" are recited by a group of temple priests amidst music with "nagaswaram" (pipe instrument) and "tavil" (percussion instrument). The chariot festival is unique in the state as a community feast is offered by several individuals and committees, a custom many centuries old. The processional idols of Pundarikakshan and Pankajavalli are brought to the temple car early in the morning amidst religious chanting. "Ratharohanam", the rituals associated with taking the idols to the temple car, is performed at an auspicious time before commencing the procession.





</doc>
<doc id="11557106" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11557106" title="Batman in film">
Batman in film

The fictional superhero Batman, who appears in American comic books published by DC Comics, has appeared in various films since his inception. Created by Bob Kane and Bill Finger, the character first starred in two serial films in the 1940s: "Batman" and "Batman and Robin". The character also appeared in the 1966 film "Batman", which was a feature film adaptation of the 1960s "Batman" TV series starring Adam West and Burt Ward, who also starred in the film. Toward the end of the 1980s, the Warner Bros. studio began producing a series of feature films starring Batman, beginning with the 1989 film "Batman", directed by Tim Burton and starring Michael Keaton. Burton and Keaton returned for the 1992 sequel "Batman Returns", and in 1995, Joel Schumacher directed "Batman Forever" with Val Kilmer as Batman. Schumacher also directed the 1997 sequel "Batman & Robin", which starred George Clooney. "Batman & Robin" was poorly received by both critics and fans, leading to the cancellation of "Batman Unchained".

Following the cancellation of two further film proposals, the franchise was rebooted in 2005 with "Batman Begins", directed by Christopher Nolan and starring Christian Bale. Nolan returned to direct two further installments through the release of "The Dark Knight" in 2008 and "The Dark Knight Rises" in 2012, with Bale reprising his role in both films. Both sequels earned over $1 billion worldwide, making "Batman" the second film franchise to have two of its films earn more than $1 billion worldwide. Referred to as "The Dark Knight Trilogy", the critical acclaim and commercial success of Nolan's films have been credited with restoring widespread popularity to the superhero, with the second installment considered one of the best superhero movies of all-time.

After Warner Bros. launched their own shared cinematic universe known as the DC Extended Universe in 2013, Ben Affleck was cast to portray Batman in the new expansive franchise, first appearing in 2016 with the Zack Snyder directed film "". The film would help begin a sequence of further DC Comics adaptations, including "Justice League", a crossover film featuring other DC Comics characters, in 2017, and a stand-alone Batman film directed by Matt Reeves. Outside of the DCEU, Dante Pereira-Olson will appear as Bruce Wayne in the 2019 film "Joker", directed by Todd Phillips.

Batman has also appeared in multiple animated films, both as a starring character and as an ensemble character. While most animated films were released direct-to-video, the 1993 animated feature "", based on the 1990s "", was released theatrically. Having earned a total of U.S. $2,407,708,129 the "Batman" series is the fifth-highest-grossing film series in North America.

"Batman" was a 15-chapter serial film released in 1943 by Columbia Pictures and was the first appearance of the comic book character on film. The serial starred Lewis Wilson as Batman and Douglas Croft as Robin. Being a World War II era production, the movie serial like many of this period was used as war-time propaganda and had an anti-Japanese bent with J. Carrol Naish playing the Japanese villain, an original character named Dr. Daka. Rounding out the cast were Shirley Patterson as Linda Page (Bruce Wayne's love interest), and William Austin as Alfred. The plot is based on Batman, a US government agent, attempting to defeat the Japanese agent Dr. Daka, at the height of World War II.

The film is notable for being the first filmed appearance of Batman and for providing two core elements of the Batman mythos. The film introduced "The Bat's Cave" and the Grandfather clock entrance. The name was altered to the Batcave for the comic. William Austin, who played Alfred, had a trim physique and sported a thin mustache, while the contemporary comic book version of Alfred was overweight and clean-shaven prior to the serial's release. The comics version of Alfred was altered to match that of Austin's, and has stayed that way.

"Batman and Robin" was another 15-chapter serial film released in 1949 by Columbia Pictures. Robert Lowery played Batman, while Johnny Duncan played Robin. Supporting players included Jane Adams as Vicki Vale and veteran character actor Lyle Talbot as Commissioner Gordon. The plot dealt with the Dynamic Duo facing off against the Wizard, a hooded villain whose identity remains a mystery throughout the serial until the end.

"Batman" (also known as "Batman: The Movie") is a 1966 film adaptation of the popular "Batman" television series, and was the first full-length theatrical adaptation of the DC Comics character. The 20th Century Fox release starred Adam West as Batman and Burt Ward as Robin, as well as Lee Meriwether as Catwoman, Cesar Romero as the Joker, Burgess Meredith as the Penguin and Frank Gorshin as the Riddler.

The film was directed by Leslie H. Martinson, who also directed for the series a pair of season one episodes: "The Penguin Goes Straight" and "Not Yet, He Ain't".

In the late 1970s, Batman's popularity was waning. CBS was interested in producing a "Batman in Outer Space" film. Producers Michael Uslan and Benjamin Melniker purchased the film rights of Batman from DC Comics on October 3, 1979. It was Uslan's wish "to make the definitive, dark, serious version of Batman, the way Bob Kane and Bill Finger had envisioned him in 1939. A creature of the night; stalking criminals in the shadows." Richard Maibaum was approached to write a script with Guy Hamilton to direct, but the two turned down the offer. Uslan was unsuccessful with pitching "Batman" to various movie studios because they wanted the film to be similar to the campy 1960s TV series. Columbia Pictures and United Artists were among those to turn down the film.

A disappointed Uslan then wrote a script titled "Return of the Batman" to give the film industry a better idea of his vision for the film. Uslan later compared its dark tone to that of "", which his script pre-dated by six years. In November 1979, producer Jon Peters and Casablanca FilmWorks, headed by Peter Guber, joined the project. The four producers felt it was best to pattern the film's development after that of "Superman" (1978). Uslan, Melniker and Guber pitched "Batman" to Universal Pictures, but the studio turned it down. The project was publicly announced with a budget of $15 million in July 1980 at the Comic Art Convention in New York. Casablanca FilmWorks was absorbed into PolyGram Pictures in 1980. Guber and Peters left PolyGram Pictures in 1982 and took the "Batman" film rights with them, although PolyGram would retain at least 7.5% of the profits of said rights due to a contractual agreement. Guber and Peters immediately set up shop at Warner Bros., which finally decided to accept "Batman".

Tom Mankiewicz completed a script titled "The Batman" in June 1983, focusing on Batman and Dick Grayson's origins, with the Joker and Rupert Thorne as villains, and Silver St. Cloud as the romantic interest. Mankiewicz took inspiration from Steve Englehart's and Marshall Rogers's 1970s run in Detective Comics (later reprinted in the trade paperback "Batman: Strange Apparitions"), (), with Rogers himself being hired to provide concept art. "The Batman" was then announced in late 1983 for a mid-1985 release date on a budget of $20 million. Originally, Mankiewicz had wanted an unknown actor for Batman, William Holden for James Gordon, David Niven as Alfred Pennyworth and Peter O'Toole as the Penguin who Mankiewicz wanted to portray as a mobster with low body temperature. Holden died in 1981 and Niven in 1983, so this would never come to pass. A number of filmmakers were attached to Mankiewicz' script, including Ivan Reitman and Joe Dante. Reitman wanted to cast Bill Murray as Batman. For the role of Robin, Eddie Murphy and Michael J. Fox were candidates. Nine rewrites were performed by nine separate writers. Most of them were based on "Strange Apparitions". However, it was Mankiewicz's script that was still being used to guide the project.

Tim Burton took over as director of the first Batman film in 1986. Steve Englehart and Julie Hickson wrote film treatments before Sam Hamm wrote the first screenplay. Numerous A-list actors were considered for the role of Batman before Michael Keaton was cast. Keaton was a controversial choice for the role since, by 1988, he had become typecast as a comedic actor and many observers doubted he could portray a serious role. Jack Nicholson accepted the role of the Joker under strict conditions that dictated a high salary, a portion of the box office profits and his shooting schedule. Nicholson's final salary is reported to be as high as $50 million. Principal photography took place at Pinewood Studios from October 1988 to January 1989. The budget escalated from $30 million to $48 million, while the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike forced Hamm to drop out. Rewrites were performed by Warren Skaaren, Charles McKeown and Jonathan Gems. "Batman" received positive reviews, broke numerous box office records, and won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction. The film grossed over $400 million, and left a legacy over the modern perception of the superhero film genre.

Burton originally did not want to direct a sequel because of his mixed emotions over the previous film. Sam Hamm's first script had the Penguin and Catwoman searching for hidden treasure. Daniel Waters delivered a script that satisfied Burton, which convinced him to direct the film. Wesley Strick did an uncredited rewrite, deleting characterizations of Harvey Dent and Robin and rewriting the climax. Various A-list actresses lobbied hard for the role of Catwoman before Michelle Pfeiffer was cast, while Danny DeVito signed on to portray the Penguin. Filming started at Warner Bros. in Burbank, California in June 1991. "Batman Returns" was released with financial success, but Warner Bros. was disappointed with the film's box office run because it earned less than its predecessor. However, "Batman Returns" was released to generally positive reviews, although a "parental backlash" criticized the film for containing violence and sexual innuendos that were thought to be unsuitable for children. McDonald's shut down its Happy Meal tie-in for "Batman Returns".

Although "Batman Returns" was a financial success, Warner Bros. felt the film should have made more money. The studio decided to change the direction of the "Batman" film series to be more mainstream. Joel Schumacher replaced Tim Burton as director, while Burton decided to stay on as producer. However, Michael Keaton did not like the new direction the film series was heading in, and was replaced by Val Kilmer as Batman. Chris O'Donnell was introduced as Robin, Jim Carrey starred as The Riddler, while Tommy Lee Jones starred as Two-Face. Filming started in September 1994, and Schumacher encountered problems communicating with Kilmer and Jones. "Batman Forever" was released on June 16, 1995 with financial success, earning over $350 million worldwide and three Academy Award nominations, but the film was met with mixed reviews from critics.

After the release of "Batman Forever", Warner Bros. started development on "Batman & Robin", commissioning it on fast track for an adamant June 1997 release. Val Kilmer did not return, because of scheduling conflicts with "The Saint", and was replaced by George Clooney. Arnold Schwarzenegger starred as Mr. Freeze, while Uma Thurman starred as Poison Ivy and Alicia Silverstone starred as Batgirl. Chris O'Donnell reprised his role as Robin. Principal photography began in September 1996 and finished in January 1997, two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule. "Batman & Robin" was released on June 20, 1997, and received primarily negative reviews. Observers criticized the film for its toyetic and campy approach, and for homosexual innuendos added by Schumacher. The film was a financial success, but remains the least commercially successful live-action "Batman" film. "Batman & Robin" received numerous nominations at the Razzie Awards and ranks among the worst rated superhero films of all time.

During the filming of "Batman & Robin", Warner Bros. was impressed with the dailies, prompting them to immediately hire Joel Schumacher to reprise his directing duties for a third film. Writer Akiva Goldsman, who worked on "Batman Forever" and "Batman & Robin", turned down the chance to write the script. In late 1996, Warner Bros. and Schumacher hired Mark Protosevich to write the script for a fifth "Batman" film. A projected mid-1999 release date was announced. Titled "Batman Unchained" but often incorrectly referred to as "Batman Triumphant", Protosevich's script had the Scarecrow as the main villain and the Joker would return as a hallucination in Batman's mind caused by the Scarecrow's fear toxin. Harley Quinn appeared as a supporting character, written as the Joker's daughter trying to kill Batman to avenge her father's death. George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell and Alicia Silverstone were set to reprise the roles of Batman, Robin, and Batgirl. Schumacher had also approached Nicolas Cage for the role of Scarecrow. However, when "Batman & Robin" received negative reviews and failed to outgross any of its predecessors, Warner Bros. was unsure of their plans for "Batman Unchained". The studio decided it was best to consider a live-action "Batman Beyond" film and an adaptation of Frank Miller's "". Warner Bros. would then greenlight whichever idea suited them the most. Schumacher felt he "owe[d] the Batman culture a real "Batman" movie. I would go back to the basics and make a dark portrayal of the Dark Knight." He approached Warner Bros. to do "Batman: Year One" in mid-1998.

Despite Warner Bros. and Schumacher's interest with "Year One", Lee Shapiro, a comic book fan, and Stephen Wise pitched the studio with a script titled "Batman: DarKnight" in mid-1998. "DarKnight", which was largely inspired by "The Dark Knight Returns", had Bruce Wayne giving up his crime fighting career, and Dick Grayson attending Gotham University. Dr. Jonathan Crane uses his position as professor of psychology at Gotham University and as head psychiatrist at Arkham Asylum to conduct his experiments into fear (this element would later appear in "Batman Begins"). During a vengeful confrontation with a colleague, Dr. Kirk Langstrom, Crane unknowingly initiates Kirk's transformation into the creature known as Man-Bat. Citizens of Gotham believe Man-Bat's nightly activities to be Batman's "bloodthirsty" return. Bruce becomes Batman "to clear his name," and solve the mystery of Man-Bat. Kirk struggles with his "man-vs.-monster" syndrome, as he longs to both reunite with his wife and get revenge on Crane, while Crane exacts revenge on those responsible for his dismissal from both Arkham and the university while encountering truths about his past. Warner Bros. decided not to move forward with the project, and passed on "Batman: DarKnight" in favor of "Year One" and "Batman Beyond".

Chris O'Donnell revealed in a 2012 interview with "Access Hollywood" that a Robin spin-off had been considered; the project was cancelled after "Batman & Robin".

By September 2000 Warner Bros. was developing a live action screen adaptation of "Batman Beyond", written by Paul Dini, Neal Stephenson and Boaz Yakin, with the possibility of Yakin directing, as well as an adaptation of Frank Miller's 1987 comic book story arc "". Despite interest from Schumacher, Darren Aronofsky was hired to direct and co-write with Miller, whom he previously collaborated with on an unproduced script for "Ronin". Yakin developed one draft of the "Batman Beyond" screenplay with the writers but soon lost interest, and Warner Bros. abandoned "Batman Beyond" almost instantly in favor of "Batman: Year One". Aronofsky and Miller intended to reboot the "Batman" franchise, "it's "somewhat" based on the comic book," Aronofsky said. "Toss out everything you can imagine about Batman! Everything! We're starting completely anew." Regular Aronofsky collaborator, Matthew Libatique, was set as cinematographer, and Christian Bale had been approached for the role of Batman. Coincidentally, Bale would be cast in the role for "Batman Begins". At the same time, Warner Bros. was moving forward on a "Catwoman" spin-off. Around 2001, Warner commissioned the rewriting of the film's script to "The Matrix" directors The Wachowskis, but the duo's version didn't convince Warner. Joss Whedon was later hired to rewrite the script, but like with The Wachowskis' script, Warner didn't like his script. In June 2002, the studio decided to move forward on "Batman vs. Superman" and abandon "Year One".

Warner Bros. abandoned J. J. Abrams' script for "", which had been greenlighted with McG to direct. When McG dropped out in favor of "", Warner Bros. approached Wolfgang Petersen to direct "Superman: Flyby", however, in August 2001, Andrew Kevin Walker pitched Warner Bros. an idea titled "Batman vs Superman", attaching Petersen as director. "Superman: Flyby" was put on hold, and Akiva Goldsman was hired to rewrite Walker's "Batman vs. Superman".

Goldsman's draft, dated June 21, 2002, had Bruce Wayne going through a mental breakdown after his five-year retirement from crime fighting. Dick Grayson, Alfred Pennyworth and Commissioner Gordon are all dead, but Bruce finds some solace in his fiancée, Elizabeth Miller. Meanwhile, Clark Kent is struggling because of a recent divorce from Lois Lane. Clark and Bruce are close friends, and Clark is Bruce's best man. After the Joker kills Elizabeth on their honeymoon, Bruce swears revenge, while Clark tries to hold him back. Bruce blames Clark for her death, and the two go against one another. Ultimately, Lex Luthor is revealed to have masterminded the entire plot to get Batman and Superman to destroy each other. The two decide to team up and stop Luthor. Christian Bale, who would play the character in Christopher Nolan's "Batman" film trilogy, was simultaneously approached to portray Batman for Darren Aronofsky's "", while Josh Hartnett was offered the role of Superman.

Filming was to start in early 2003, with plans for a five- to six-month shoot. The release date was set for the summer of 2004. However, Warner Bros. canceled development to focus on individual Superman and Batman projects after Abrams submitted another draft for "Superman: Flyby". According to Petersen "[Warner Bros.' chief] Alan Horn was so torn, because it's such a fascinating concept to do a Batman versus Superman film." In the opening scene of "I Am Legend", a billboard displays the Superman symbol within the Batman symbol in Times Square. It is meant as an in-joke by the film's writer, Akiva Goldsman, who also wrote the script for "Batman vs. Superman".

The "Batman OnStar commercials" were a series of six television commercials featuring Batman, created by ad-agency Campbell-Ewald and aired from 2000 to the beginning of 2002.

The ads were based on the film series and were basically an amalgamation of both directors' visuals. For example, the Batmobile was the one used in "Batman" and "Batman Returns", while the Batsuit was a combination of what was worn by Val Kilmer in "Batman Forever" and George Clooney in "Batman & Robin". The commercials also featured the Danny Elfman Batman theme from Tim Burton's two films.

Actor Bruce Thomas portrayed Batman in these ads, while Michael Gough reprised his role of Alfred Pennyworth in one of the ads. "Baywatch" actress Brooke Burns played Vicki Vale in an ad as well. Actor Brian Stepanek played the Riddler in one ad and Curtis Armstrong played the Joker in another.

Following a rejected "Batman" origin story reboot Joss Whedon pitched in December 2002, Warner Bros. hired Christopher Nolan and David S. Goyer to script "Batman Begins". The duo aimed for a darker and more realistic tone, with humanity and realism being the basis of the film. The film was primarily shot in the United Kingdom and Chicago, and relied on traditional stunts and scale models with minimal use of computer-generated imagery. Christian Bale starred as Batman, Liam Neeson as Ra's al Ghul, and Cillian Murphy as The Scarecrow. Katie Holmes appears in the movie as Bruce's love interest, Rachel Dawes, a role created for the film. Alfred, the ex-British Army member was played by Michael Caine and Jim Gordon was portrayed by Gary Oldman. A new Batmobile (called the Tumbler) and a more mobile Batsuit were both created specifically for the film. The film begins with the death of Bruce's parents and then explores his decision to leave Gotham and his training under the League of Assassins with Ra's al Ghul, before he rebels against the League and adopts the guise of Batman, recognising that he cannot condone their use of lethal force. The League attempt to attack Gotham using Jonathan Crane's weaponised fear toxin, but Batman is able to defeat their plan, with Ra's being killed when a train he is in crashes during a fight with Batman.

"Batman Begins" was both critically and commercially successful. The film opened on June 15, 2005, in the United States and Canada in 3,858 theaters. It grossed $48 million in its opening weekend, eventually grossing over $372 million worldwide. The film received an 85% overall approval rating from Rotten Tomatoes. Critics noted that fear was a common motif throughout the film, and remarked that it had a darker tone compared with previous "Batman" films. The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Cinematography and for three BAFTA awards. It was also listed at No. 81 on "Empire"'s "500 Greatest Movies of All Time" and has maintained a standing on IMDb.com's "Top 250".

Christopher Nolan reprised his duties as director, and brought his brother, Jonathan, to co-write the script for the second installment. "The Dark Knight" featured Christian Bale reprising his role as Batman/Bruce Wayne, Heath Ledger as The Joker, and Aaron Eckhart as Harvey Dent / Two-Face. Principal photography began in April 2007 in Chicago and concluded in November. Other locations included Pinewood Studios, Ministry of Sound in London and Hong Kong. On January 22, 2008, after he had completed filming "The Dark Knight", Ledger died from a bad combination of prescription medication. Warner Bros. had created a viral marketing campaign for "The Dark Knight", developing promotional websites and trailers highlighting screen shots of Ledger as the Joker, but after Ledger's death, the studio refocused its promotional campaign. The film depicts Gotham attempting to rebuild after Batman's actions have caused so much damage to its organised crime families, aided by the prosecution of charismatic District Attorney Harvey Dent, but the involvement of the anarchic Joker threatens everything, as his actions lead to the death of Rachel Dawes and Harvey being scarred and transformed into Two-Face. Although Batman is able to stop the Joker from forcing two ferries- one loaded with civilians and the other with prisoners- to destroy each other, he is forced to take the blame for the murders committed by Dent to ensure that the city retains its hope for the future.

The film received broad critical acclaim, and set numerous records during its theatrical run. With just over $1 billion in revenue worldwide, it is the 37th-highest-grossing film of all time, unadjusted for inflation. The film received eight Academy Award nominations; it won the award for Best Sound Editing and Ledger was posthumously awarded Best Supporting Actor.

Nolan wanted the story for the third and final installment to keep him emotionally invested. "On a more superficial level, I have to ask the question," he reasoned, "how many good third movies in a franchise can people name?" He returned out of finding a necessary way to continue the story, but feared midway through filming he would find a sequel redundant. "The Dark Knight Rises" is intended to complete Nolan's "Batman" trilogy. By December 2008, Nolan completed a rough story outline, before he committed himself to "Inception". In February 2010, work on the screenplay was commencing with David S. Goyer and Jonathan Nolan. When Goyer left to work on the "Superman" reboot, Jonathan was writing the script based on the story by his brother and Goyer. Tom Hardy was cast as Bane and Anne Hathaway plays Selina Kyle. Joseph Gordon-Levitt was cast as John Blake, and Marion Cotillard was cast as Miranda Tate. Filming began in May 2011 and concluded in November. Nolan chose not to film in 3-D but, by focusing on improving image quality and scale using the IMAX format, hoped to push technological boundaries while nevertheless making the style of the film consistent with the previous two. Nolan had several meetings with IMAX Vice-President David Keighley to work on the logistics of projecting films in digital IMAX venues. "The Dark Knight Rises" featured more scenes shot in IMAX than "The Dark Knight". Cinematographer Wally Pfister expressed interest in shooting the film entirely in IMAX. During the film, set eight years after "Dark Knight", the arrival of new foe Bane forces Bruce to return to his old role as Batman, only to find himself overpowered and captured by Bane as Gotham is cut off from the rest of the world with a stolen Wayne Enterprises fusion generator prototype set to go off in a few months. With the aid of thief Selina Kyle, Bruce is able to return to Gotham and defeat Bane while redeeming his image as Batman. The film concludes with Bruce having 'retired' as Batman after faking his death to live with Selina Kyle, evidence suggesting that he has passed on the Batcave to new ally Detective John Blake (real first name Robin) while Gotham rebuilds in memory of the Dark Knight's heroism.

Upon release, "The Dark Knight Rises" received a positive critical response and was successful at the box office, going on to outgross its predecessor and become the 24th-highest-grossing film of all time grossing over $1.08 billion. However, unlike its predecessors, the film was not nominated for any Oscars during its year of eligibility at the 85th Academy Awards, much to the surprise of film industry insiders.

In February 2007, during pre-production for "The Dark Knight", Warner Bros. hired husband and wife screenwriting duo Michelle and Kieran Mulroney to script a "Justice League" film featuring a younger Batman in a separate franchise. George Miller was hired to direct the following September, with Armie Hammer cast as Batman a month later and Teresa Palmer as Talia al Ghul. Filming had nearly commenced at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, but was pushed back over the Writers Guild of America strike, and once more when the Australian Film Commission denied Warner Bros. a 45 percent tax rebate over lack of Australian actors in the film. Production offices were moved to Vancouver Film Studios in Canada for an expected July 2008 start and a planned summer 2009 theatrical release date, but Warner Bros. ultimately canceled "Justice League" following the success of "The Dark Knight". Hammer's option on his contract lapsed and the studio was more willing to proceed with Christopher Nolan to finish his trilogy separately with "The Dark Knight Rises".

On June 13, 2013, a source from Warner Bros. told "The Wrap" that they were discussing more "Man of Steel" films, as well as a Superman/Batman film, Wonder Woman, and Aquaman. Warner Bros. announced that Superman and Batman would unite in a new film, a follow-up to "Man of Steel" (2013), taking its inspiration from the comic "The Dark Knight Returns" and set for release in 2015. Goyer stated at the Superman 75th Anniversary Panel at Comic-Con, that Batman and Superman would face off, and titles under consideration were "Superman vs Batman" or "Batman vs Superman".

On August 22, 2013, "The Hollywood Reporter" announced the casting of Ben Affleck as Bruce Wayne/Batman. On January 17, 2014, it was announced that the film had been delayed from its original July 17, 2015 release date to May 6, 2016, in order to give the filmmakers "time to realize fully their vision, given the complex visual nature of the story". The film's release was moved again to March 25, 2016, "avoiding a high-profile showdown with "" on May 6, 2016". At some point prior to the events of the film, Wayne Manor was burnt down, with Bruce and Alfred relocating to a smaller glass house above the Batcave. During the film, Bruce is subtly manipulated by Lex Luthor into perceiving Superman as an alien being too removed from humanity to be fully trusted, with Luthor intending to provoke a conflict between the two that will either force Superman to kill or see Batman defeat 'God'. Bruce's dark views are implied to be the result of the Joker killing Robin in some past confrontation, with Batman showing a lack of concern about whether or not he kills his opponents in battle and branding certain criminals with the mark of the Bat. However, when he faces Superman with kryptonite weapons, he realises how far he has fallen when Superman asks him to 'save Martha' (Luthor using Martha Kent as a hostage to provoke Superman into confronting Batman), the reminder of his own mother helping Batman realise what he has become and acknowledge that Superman is fundamentally human despite his powers. After Batman saves Martha Kent from Luthor's minions, he fights alongside Superman and new hero Wonder Woman to contain the Kryptonian deformity Luthor created to kill Superman, a battle that results in Superman's death when he stabs the deformity with the kryptonite spear and is impaled himself. Taking Luthor's metahuman files, Bruce states that he intends to gather the metahumans to prepare for an implied future threat that Luthor made reference to.

In February 2009, Warner Bros. was developing a "Suicide Squad" film, with Dan Lin producing, and Justin Marks writing the script. In September 2014, David Ayer signed on to direct and write the screenplay for the film. Charles Roven is also set to produce the film. In November 2014 and March 2015, it was announced that Deadshot, Harley Quinn, Killer Croc and the Joker will appear in the film portrayed respectively by Will Smith, Margot Robbie, Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje and Jared Leto. Batman appears in brief flashbacks where he is involved in the capture of Deadshot and Harley Quinn, rescuing Harley from a submerged car after it crashed during a chase and she was abandoned by the Joker, and apprehending Deadshot after an anonymous tip led him to the assassin as Deadshot was Christmas-shopping with his daughter. Batman's history with Killer Croc is also briefly referenced. At the film's conclusion, Amanda Waller—who appears to know that Bruce Wayne is Batman—provides Bruce with files on various metahumans in exchange for his protection from future fallout from the Enchantress's recent attack, Bruce informing Waller to shut down Task Force X as his friends will handle future problems.

Although he does not appear physically, Bruce Wayne is heavily referenced in "Wonder Woman". After the events of "", Bruce successfully retrieves the photo from Lex Luthor's archives which he used to threaten Diana, along with a watch that belonged to the father of Captain Steve Trevor. He transports them through an armored car to Diana, with a letter wishing to know her story someday. Diana recalls the events of the film as a flashback, after which she sends an E-mail to Bruce, "Thanks for bringing him back to me".

Shortly after filming had finished for "Man of Steel", Warner Bros hired Will Beall to script a new "Justice League" film in June 2012. With the release of "Man of Steel" in June 2013, Goyer was hired to write a new "Justice League" script, with the Beall draft being scrapped. In April 2014, it was announced that Zack Snyder would also be directing Goyer's "Justice League" script. Warner Bros. was reportedly courting Chris Terrio to rewrite "Justice League" the following July, after having been impressed with his rewrite of "Batman v Superman".

Bill Dean voices a toy version of Bruce Wayne / Batman in a cameo appearance in David F. Sandberg's "Shazam!".

By July 2015, Ben Affleck was in talks to star in, co-write with Geoff Johns, and possibly direct a standalone "Batman" film. In March 2016, Johns claimed that the appearance of Robin's suit covered in graffiti from "Dawn of Justice" would be explored later and the identity of the deceased character was intentionally unspecified. Following the release of "Dawn of Justice", William Morris Endeavor's co-CEO Patrick Whitesell confirmed that Affleck had written a screenplay for a standalone Batman film that he hoped would be optioned by Warner Bros as well to direct. Warner Bros. CEO Kevin Tsujihara confirmed in April 2016 that the studio was moving ahead with Affleck's stand-alone "Batman" film, which the actor would star in and direct. In May 2016, Jeremy Irons confirmed that he was "tied into "The Batman"", while Affleck stated that his solo "Batman" film would borrow from the comics, but mainly be an "original story". In August 2016, Jared Leto expressed his hope that his version of the Joker would appear in Affleck's "Batman" solo film. Later that month, Deathstroke was teased by Affleck through test footage, later confirmed by Johns that the character would be played by Joe Manganiello. In October 2016, Affleck stated the intended title for the film would be "The Batman", but later clarified that the film could end up having a different title. Manganiello and Irons stated that filming would start in spring 2017.

In December 2016, Affleck confirmed that the film was on track to begin shooting in spring 2017. Later that month, Warner Bros. executive Greg Silverman stated that the film would be released in 2018. Around the same time, Affleck stated that the film had no script and that he may end up not directing it. Affleck planned to shoot the film in Los Angeles as doubling for Gotham City. He reaffirmed his commitment to direct the film in his appearance on "Jimmy Kimmel Live!". In late January 2017, Affleck decided to step down as director, but would remain involved as producer and actor. By this point, writer Chris Terrio, who won an Academy Award for writing Affleck's "Argo" and also helped script "", had turned in a rewrite of the script. On February 10, 2017, it was announced that Matt Reeves was in talks to replace Affleck as the director of the film, however on February 17 it was reported that talks had broken down. Two weeks later, Reeves had officially signed on to direct and co-produce the film. Production was delayed until 2018 as Reeves was tied up in post-production on "War for the Planet of the Apes" until June 2017, and "The Batman" is being re-written to allow Reeves more creative freedom as a director. Reeves stated in an interview that the film will feature "an almost-noir driven, detective version of Batman" that will emphasize the heart and mind of the character and will take inspiration from Alfred Hitchcock.

On August 2, 2018, Reeves appeared on a Television Critics Association panel and revealed many details about the film. He confirmed that "The Batman" is an original, noir-driven story and not an origin story. He also revealed that the script is nearing completion and that the film will be set in the established DCEU continuity. Affleck is no longer involved with the film and will not return as Batman. The film is scheduled to start shooting in early 2019. "The Batman" is scheduled to be released in North America on June 25, 2021.

On October 23, 2018, Dante Pereira-Olson was cast as Bruce Wayne in the upcoming "Joker" film. The film will be set during the 1980s, where a failed stand-up comedian named Arthur Fleck turns to a life of crime and chaos in Gotham City.

Theatrical
Direct-To-Video








</doc>
<doc id="11570954" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11570954" title="T. T. Toliver">
T. T. Toliver

Antoine "T. T." Toliver (born January 31, 1977) is an arena football wide receiver who is currently a free agent. He played football and basketball at Mainland High School in Daytona Beach, Florida. In 1995, he was named the Class 5A Player of the Year in football and was also runner-up for Florida's Mr. Football Award. In basketball, Toliver helped Mainland win the Class 6A state championship in 1995 and 1996. He played college football and basketball at Hinds Community College, where he was named the 1997–98 Junior College Player of the Year as a quarterback. He later transferred to Bethune-Cookman University, where he played basketball but not football.

From 2000 to 2002, Toliver spent time on the practice squads of the St. Louis Rams, San Francisco 49ers and Tampa Bay Buccaneers of the National Football League. He was part of the Buccaneers team that won Super Bowl XXXVII in January 2003. He played for the Tampa Bay Storm of the AFL from 2002 to 2005. In 2003, he was part of the Storm team that won ArenaBowl XVII, becoming the first person to win an ArenaBowl and Super Bowl in the same year. Toliver later played for the AFL's Nashville Kats from 2005 to 2006, the Storm in 2007, the Orlando Predators from 2007 to 2013, the Storm from 2014 to 2016 and the Valor beginning in 2017. He was named First Team All-Arena in 2008 and Second Team All-Arena in 2016. He is the AFL's all-time leader in receptions, receiving yards and all-purpose yards.

Toliver played football and basketball at Mainland High School in Daytona Beach, Florida. He completed 130 of 219 passes for 1,959 yards and 16 touchdowns with 10 interceptions while rushing for 1,098 yards and 15 touchdowns in helping the Buccaneers advance to the Class 5A quarterfinals in 1995. He was named the 1995 Class 5A Player of the Year. Toliver was runner-up for Florida's Mr. Football Award. He also participated in the Florida-Georgia All-Star Game. In basketball, he helped Mainland win the Class 6A state championship in 1995. Toliver was the team's point guard and averaged 12.4 points per game that year. NBA player Vince Carter was also a member of that team. Toliver was also the leading scorer on the 1996 team that won the state championship.

Toliver had initially committed to play college football for the Clemson Tigers in 1996 but did not meet the NCAA's academic admission standards. He instead decided to play football for the Hinds Eagles of Hinds Community College, where he was named the 1997–98 Junior College Player of the Year as a quarterback. He also earned First Team Junior College All-American honors in 1997. Toliver played two years of football at Hinds. He also played basketball for the Eagles. He then transferred to Bethune-Cookman University, where he played for the Wildcats basketball team during the 1999–00 season. Toliver averaged 6.8 points per game in 25 games for the Wildcats. He did not play football at Bethune-Cookman.

Toliver spent a week on the St. Louis Rams' practice squad in November 2000 before being was released by the Rams on November 22, 2000. He signed with the Rams on January 12, 2001. He was released by the team on August 27, 2001.

Toliver signed with the Tampa Bay Storm on June 13, 2002. He recorded 30 solo tackles, 19 tackle assists and 2 interceptions in 5 games for the Storm in 2002.

Toliver was signed by the San Francisco 49ers on August 21, 2002. He was released by the team on September 1 and signed to the 49ers' practice squad on September 2, 2002. He was released by the 49ers on October 1, 2002.

Toliver was signed to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers's practice squad on December 4, 2002. The Buccaneers won Super Bowl XXXVII against the Oakland Raiders on January 26, 2003. He signed a future contract with the Buccaneers on January 31, 2003. He was released by the Buccaneers on April 22, 2003. Toliver did not receive a Super Bowl ring during his time with the Buccaneers as the team said that players needed to have been with the team for a minimum of 10 games to receive a ring. He was with the team for four regular season games and three playoff games.

After being released by the Buccaneers, he was activated from the Storm's exempt list and re-signed by the Storm in April 2003. He accumulated 8 receptions for 126 yards and 2 touchdowns while also recording 12 solo tackles in 2003. Toliver became the first person to win an ArenaBowl and Super Bowl in the same year when the Storm won ArenaBowl XVII against the Arizona Rattlers on June 22, 2003. He caught 64 passes for 749 yards and 14 touchdowns while also totaling 50 solo tackles, 9 tackle assists and 3 interceptions in 2004. He was named to the All-Ironman Team in 2004. He recorded 17 receptions for 169 yards and 5 touchdowns with 4 solo tackles, 1 tackle assist and 1 interception for the team in 2005.

He was traded to the Nashville Kats in exchange for Fred Booker on March 30, 2005. He totaled 38 receptions for 599 yards and 12 touchdowns with 9 solo tackles and 2 tackle assists for the Kats during the 2005 season. He caught 78 passes for 1,273 yards and 28 touchdowns for the team in 2006.

Toliver was traded to the Storm in exchange for future considerations on November 29, 2006. He recorded 99 receptions for 1,193 yards and 17 touchdowns for the Storm in 2007. On May 30, 2007, he informed head coach Tim Marcum that he no longer wanted to play for the Storm. Toliver was subsequently placed on the "left squad" list, meaning he is suspended for the next two games he would have played as a Storm player. Toliver was released by the Storm on June 12, 2007.

Toliver signed with the Orlando Predators on June 13, 2007. He accumulated 20 receptions for 190 yards and 4 touchdowns for the Predators in 2007. He caught 117 passes for 1,647 yards and 31 touchdowns in 2008, earning First Team All-Arena honors. Toliver also returned 78 kicks for 1,398 yards and 3 touchdowns. He totaled 116 receptions for 1,423 yards and 29 touchdowns for the Predators during the 2010 season. He was named the Russell Athletic Offensive Player of the Week for Week 20 of the 2010 season for setting the AFL record for receiving touchdowns in a playoff game with seven touchdowns. He played in 16 games, starting 15, in 2011 and recorded 121 receptions for 1,525 yards and 32 touchdowns. He played in 16 games, starting 15, in 2012 and caught 103 passes for 1,290 yards and 23 touchdowns. He played in 14 games, starting 13, in 2013 and accumulated 127 passes for 1,659 yards and 29 touchdowns.

Toliver was assigned to the Storm on April 9, 2014. He played in 12 games, starting 10, during the 2014 season and recorded 69 receptions for 812 yards and 16 touchdowns. He started all 18 games for the Storm in 2015, catching 112 passes for 1,536 yards and 35 touchdowns. He earned Cutter's Catch of the Week honors for Week 3 of the 2015 season for catching his 1,000th career pass, becoming only the fourth player in AFL history to do so. He started all 16 games for the Storm in 2016, catching 114 passes for 1,578 yards and 25 touchdowns, earning Second Team All-Arena honors. He also caught 3 passes for 51 yards and 2 touchdowns in the Storm's playoff loss to the Philadelphia Soul on August 7. Toliver earned AFL Highlight of the Week honors in Week 9 for an over-the-shoulder game-winning touchdown catch, with three seconds left in the game after the catch. He again earned Highlight of the Week accolades in Week 11 for becoming the league's all-time leader in receiving yards. During the 2016 season, he became the AFL's all-time leader in receptions, receiving yards and all-purpose yards. He also became the first player in AFL history to record 5,000 receiving yards and 400 receptions with two different teams, which he accomplished with both the Predators and Storm. He also joined Chris Jackson as the second player in league history to total 100 receiving touchdowns with two different teams.

Toliver was assigned to the Washington Valor on January 11, 2017. On June 1, 2017, he was placed on injured reserve. On June 29, 2017, he was reactivated from injured reserve. Toliver was named the Week 16 Offensive Player of the Week after catching 6 passes for 113 yards and 3 touchdowns in a 34–30 win against the Baltimore Brigade. He also caught the eventual game-winning touchdown, with only four seconds remaining in the game after his catch. He played in 10 games, starting 8, in 2017, catching 38 passes for 524 yards and 12 touchdowns. As of August 2017, Toliver was the oldest player in the AFL. He was placed on reassignment on June 28, 2018. He was assigned to the Valor on July 5, 2018. He played in 11 games in 2018, catching 17 passes for 195 yards and 6 touchdowns. On July 28, 2018, the Valor won ArenaBowl XXXI against the Baltimore Brigade.

"Stats from ArenaFan":

Toliver's mother nicknamed him "T. T." for 'Toine Toliver.


</doc>
<doc id="11596300" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11596300" title="Sol, Arena y Mar">
Sol, Arena y Mar

"Sol, Arena y Mar" () is a song written by Arturo Perez, Francisco Loyo, and Salo Loyo and co-written, produced, and performed by Mexican singer Luis Miguel. It is a horn-driven uptempo pop song with jazz influence which deals with a strained relationship. The song's lyrics were rumored to have been influenced by Miguel's previous relationship with Daisy Fuentes. It was released as the lead single from the album "Amarte Es un Placer" on 19 July 1999. 

The song received mixed reviews from music critics. Several reviewers complimented Miguel's delivery and favorably compared it to the uptempo tracks from "Aries" (1993) while others criticized its horn arrangements and lyrics. It received a BMI Latin Award in 2001. The single peaked at number three on the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States, number two in Spain, and reached number one in Argentina, Chile, and Mexico and sold over 50,000 copies since its release. 

In 1997, Luis Miguel released his twelfth studio album "Romances", the third record in his "Romance" series on which he covers classic Latin American boleros. It sold over 4.5 million copies and won the Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Performance in 1998. To promote "Romances", he embarked on a tour of the United States, Latin America, and Spain lasting over a year. By 1998, Miguel was considered the most popular Latin artist internationally and his albums had sold over 35 million copies worldwide. Miguel began a relationship with American singer Mariah Carey the following year. After an absence of two years on the music scene, Miguel announced on 19 July 1999 that he would release a new album by September. In the same day, he also released the album's first single "Sol, Arena y Mar". Four versions of the single were released which includes the album version and three remixes done by Danny Saber. He said the upcoming album would be a return to pop as opposed to the bolero cover versions he had recorded on the "Romance" series. He also denied rumors that he was planning to record a duet with Carey. The album's final title, "Amarte Es un Placer" was announced on 17 August 1999.

Miguel confirmed that it was the first album where he was more involved in the tracks' composition. In addition to Miguel co-writing several of the record's tracks, he was assisted by other composers including Armando Manzanero, Juan Carlos Calderón, and Arturo Perez. Recording took place at the A&M Studios, Cello Studios, Ocean Way Recording, Watersound, and the Record Plant in Hollywood, California with Miguel handling the production himself.
"Sol, Arena y Mar" is a horn-driven pop track with jazz influences which describes the "pain of separation" of a love that "disappeared as quickly as the foam at the seashore". It was composed by Miguel, Arturo Perez, Francisco Loyo, an Salo Loyo. The song's lyrics was rumored to have been based on Miguel's previous relationship with Daisy Fuentes. A live version of "Sol, Arena y Mar" was included on the album "Vivo" (2000). The track was also added to the compilation album "Grandes Éxitos" (2005).

"Sol, Arena y Mar" was met with mixed reviews by music critics. AllMusic editor Jose F. Promis felt the horn arrangements gave the song a "jazzy, sophisticated, adult-leaning feel." John Lannert of "Billboard" was unimpressed with the track calling it a "vapid, uptempo number about a downtrodden affair" and criticized its "weary arrangements and uninspired musicianship". "Houston Chronicle" critic Joey Guerra chided the tune as a "tepid mix of blaring horns and uninspired lyrics". "Newsday" editor Richard Torres stated that Miguel's vocals "provides perfect counterpoint to the peppy horn arrangement" on the song. Leila Cobo of the "Miami Herald" editor noted that "Sol, Arena y Mar" was similar to the uptempo tracks from "Aries". 

"The Dallas Morning News" critic Mario Tarradell called "Sol, Arena y Mar" a "guilty pleasure" and found it to be the "most reminiscent of the catchy fare on 1993's wonderful "Aries"". Ernesto Lechner wrote for the "Los Angeles Times" that the song lacks "the sophistication that defines most pop today". Ramiro Burr of the "San Antonio Express-News" praised the track stating that the "sensuous horns are marvelous, the sweeping vocal harmonies enticing, but it's Luis Miguel's piercing tenor that grabs you" "Sol, Arena y Mar" was recognized as one of the best-performing Latin songs of the year at the 2001 BMI Latin Awards.

In the United States, "Sol, Arena y Mar" debuted at number eight on the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart on the week of 21 August 1999. It peaked at number three on the chart two weeks later. The track also peaked at number two on the Latin Pop Songs chart with the number one position being held by Ricky Martin's song "Bella". In Spain, the remix version of the track peaked at number two. The song reached number one in Argentina, Chile, and Mexico. The single has sold over 50,000 copies since its release.

CD Single

Credits adapted from the "Amarte Es un Placer" liner notes.


</doc>
<doc id="11596610" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11596610" title="Dormir Contigo">
Dormir Contigo

"Dormir Contigo" () is a song written by Armando Manzanero and produced and performed by Mexican singer Luis Miguel. The song is a pop ballad in which the protagonist expresses the joy of sleeping with his partner. It was released as the third single from the album "Amarte Es un Placer" in January 2000. The track peaked at number 11 "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States and number two on the Latin Pop Songs chart.

"Dormir Contigo" received positive reviews from music critics who consider it to be one of the best tracks on the album. Manzanero received a BMI Latin Award for the track in 2000. A promotional music video for "Dormir Contigo" was released and features Miguel performing the song live during the first leg of his Amarte Es Un Placer Tour in 1999.

In 1997, Luis Miguel released his twelfth studio album "Romances", the third record in his "Romance" series on which he covers classic Latin American boleros. It sold over 4.5 million copies and won the Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Performance in 1998. To promote "Romances", he embarked on a tour of the United States, Latin America, and Spain lasting over a year. By 1998, Miguel was considered the most popular Latin artist internationally and his albums had sold over 35 million copies worldwide. Miguel began a relationship with American singer Mariah Carey the following year. After an absence of two years on the music scene, Miguel announced on 19 July 1999 that he would release a new album by September. He said the upcoming album would be a return to pop recordings as opposed to the bolero cover versions he had recorded on the "Romance" series. He denied rumors that he was planning to record a duet with Carey. The album's final title, "Amarte Es un Placer" was announced on 17 August 1999.

Miguel confirmed that it was the first album where he was more involved in the tracks' composition. In addition to Miguel co-writing several of the record's tracks, he was assisted by other composers including Armando Manzanero, Juan Carlos Calderón, and Arturo Perez. Recording took place at the A&M Studios, Cello Studios, Ocean Way Recording, Watersound, and the Record Plant in Hollywood, California with Miguel handling the productions himself.

"Dormir Contigo" is a "pop ballad" composed by Manzanero. In the lyrics, the protagonist describes the joy of sleeping with his lover. According to Manzanero, it is one of his two favorite songs that he has composed for Miguel (the other being "Por Debajo de la Mesa"). It was released as the third single from "Amarte Es un Placer" in January 2000. Miguel performed the song live during the first leg of his Amarte Es Un Placer Tour in 1999. Miguel's performance of the song during the tour was released as a promotional music video.

Leila Cobo of the "Miami Herald" called "Dormir Contigo" "beautiful" and mentioned that it has "some of the few memorable lyrics" on "Amarte Es un Placer". "The Dallas Morning News" editor Mario Tarradell regarded "Dormir Contigo" as one of the "sensual and solemn ballads" on the album. Similarly, John Lannert of "Billboard" magazine considered the track to be one of the "pair of moving romantic ballads" (the other being "Soy Yo" which Manzanero also composed). Richard Torres of "Newsday" cited the ballad as one of the best tracks on the record. The track was recognized as one of the best performing Latin songs of the year at the BMI Latin Awards in 2002.

In the United States, "Dormir Contigo" debuted at number 16 on the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart on the week of 1 January 2000. It peaked at number 11 five weeks later. The track also peaked at number two on the Latin Pop Songs chart (the number one position was held by Ricardo Arjona's song "Desnuda").

Credits adapted from the "Amarte Es un Placer" liner notes.


</doc>
<doc id="11644327" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11644327" title="Elizabeth Casson">
Elizabeth Casson

Elizabeth Casson (14 April 1881 – 17 December 1954) was a British doctor and an occupational therapy pioneer. Initially training as a secretary, Casson began studying medicine at the University of Bristol when she was 32. She received her medical degree in 1926, becoming the first woman to receive one from the University of Bristol. She also attained the Gaskell prize from the Royal Medico-Psychological Association and a diploma in psychological medicine from the University of London.

Casson set up a residential clinic for women with mental disorders at Dorset House in Bristol in 1929 with enough residential space for 800 patients, and she opened the first school of occupational therapy in the UK in the same building the following year. She took an active role in the therapeutic activities at Dorset House, even playing a part in the patient's production of "Pride and Prejudice".

Casson moved control of the school to a non-profit company in 1948, remaining as vice-chairman and medical director. She created the Elizabeth Casson Trust in 1949, intended to improve occupation therapy education and treatment. In 1951, Casson was awarded an OBE for her work at Dorset House and was also made an honorary fellow of the World Federation of Occupational Therapists. A memorial lecture was set up in her name, and psychiatric unit was named after her at Callington Road Hospital.

Casson, known as Elsie, was born on 14 April 1881 in Denbigh, Wales. She was the sixth child of a bank manager and amateur organ-builder, Thomas Casson, from Wales, and his wife Laura Ann. One of her brothers, Lewis Casson, went on to be an actor and theatre director. Whilst living in Denbigh, the family encouraged the seven children to enjoy the arts.

In 1891, Thomas decided to set up a business in organ-building and the family moved to London. There, Casson was educated at St Mary's College, Paddington before going to secretarial college at her father's behest. After qualifying, she worked as a secretary for her fathers' organ-building business until his retirement. In 1908, Casson was a working as housing manager for the social reformer, Octavia Hill, taking care of the living conditions of residents at Red Cross Hall in Southwark. For the next five years she organised recreational activities at the hall, focusing on the arts. Octavia Hill's philosophy influenced Casson's work over the following years.

In 1911, Casson's uncle, Isambard Owen, vice-chancellor at University of Bristol, promised her a place studying medicine if she could be formally matriculated to the university. She struggled with her Latin exams for two years, but eventually passed them and registered to study medicine on 1 October 1913 at the age of 32. She graduated with her Bachelor of Medicine degree in 1919, and took on a role at the West Hertfordshire Hospital in Hemel Hempstead. There she noticed that patients in the women's wards were enjoying using artistic talents, and decided that such pursuits were important to treatment. She realised that these pursuits were not only keeping the patients occupied but also helping them gain self-esteem and work through their issues.

Casson became a medical officer at the Holloway Sanatorium in 1921, developing an interest in occupational therapy whilst working there until 1929. In that time she gained a diploma in psychological medicine from the University of London in 1922, achieved her Doctorate of Medicine from the University of Bristol in 1926 (becoming the first woman to do so), and winning the 1927 Gaskell prize from the Royal Medico-Psychological Association. She also helped set up the Standing Committee in Psychological Medicine of the Medical Women's Federation and the Gaskell club for those recipients of the prize.

In 1926, Casson visited an occupational therapy centre in Bloomingdale Hospital, New York City, whilst on holiday, and decided that the UK needed a similar facility; in the late 1920s, Casson decided to establish one. She borrowed £1000 () from her brother, Lewis, to help set up the occupational therapy centre. Dorset House opened in Clifton, Bristol, in 1929 as a residential centre for women with mental health issues. She expanded Dorset House in 1930 to include the UK's first occupational therapy school, known as Dorset House School, and became medical director herself. The school's course would teach not only the medical subjects such as anatomy and physiology, but also occupational treatments such as weaving, bookbinding, and other crafts, as well as how to organise activities such as country dancing and how these activities applied to occupational therapy.

Casson's vision for Dorset House was that of a 'community where every individual was encouraged to feel that she had a real object'. Having seen the benefit, in the United States and at Octavia Hill, she combined medical interventions with education and recreational approaches. She actively involved herself in the daily therapeutic activities, often inspired by her artistic childhood and build closer relationships between patients and staff, creating a community feel. At one point she even cast herself in Dorset House's drama production, playing Mr. William Collins in their 1934 rendition of "Pride and Prejudice".

Days would be structured so that activities would be planned throughout, with occupational therapy carrying on into evenings and at weekends. A typical day would include breakfast then flower arranging until 10:30, followed by an hour in the occupation room for therapy. After their work, the patients would go for a walk or join in community singing until 2pm. Between 2pm and 8pm there would be more time in the occupation room, a period of rest and time in the garden. At 8 pm there would be community games and country dancing. Casson believed it was important to keep the therapy room separate from the rest of the department, as it was specialised knowledge. She also insisted that certain activities, such as knitting, were not used as it was not sufficient distraction from the patient's fantasy system. Some concern existed that patients would not accept being put to work, but of her 100 patients in 1931, only six refused the therapy. A member (and later fellow) of the British Homeopathy Society, Casson also included homeopathic treatments in her programme for the patients.

Dorset House had space for 800 patients in residence during the 1930s, moving to Bromsgrove during World War II. The building was damaged during the war, so in 1946, the School of Occupational Therapy moved to Oxford, whilst the patients moved to Clevedon. To ensure costs were kept down for the patients, Casson subsidised their treatment from her own funds. She began to release control of the projects in 1948, first by passing the school to a nonprofit company with her as vice-president and remaining as medical director. Then, in 1949, Casson created the Elizabeth Casson Trust which focused on occupational therapy treatment and education, with the majority of funds going to Dorset House school. In 1992, the school became part of Oxford Brookes University.

Outside of her work, Casson was a member of Bristol societies. She never lost touch with her Welsh roots, discussing the similarities between Wales and Bristol with the Lord Mayor at a meal in 1931 and becoming president of the Bristol Cambrian Society in 1934. She also became the president of the Soroptimist Club of Bristol between 1938 and 1939 and was vice president of the Bristol branch of the British Social Hygiene Council in 1939.

She was an advocate for women working in roles outside offices, suggesting government grants for women who wanted to be nurses or teachers and giving lectures to parents about her work in occupational therapy in 1935. With the Soroptimist club she gave talks to her fellow members, praising the influence of Octavia Hill and explaining that she was interested more in mental health than physical health. She advocated an ordered life and a happy atmosphere for everyone.

As the vice president of the Social Hygiene Council, she worked to ensure that the people of Bristol could give better sex education to their children, without shocking them. She did this in part by hosting a series of lectures called "Sex Education and the Child", investing the profits from the lectures in providing educational materials for those who could not afford them.

In 1951, Casson received an OBE for her work establish Dorset House and was also elected a fellow of the World Federation of Occupational Therapists. She was considered a pioneer in the field of occupational therapy. Casson died in Bristol on 17 December 1954 after suffering with anaemia. The College of Occupational Therapists hold a memorial lecture in her name and Callington Road Hospital has a psychiatric intensive care unit named after her.


</doc>
<doc id="11728285" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11728285" title="Levi Mackin">
Levi Mackin

Levi Alan Mackin (born 4 April 1986) is a semi-professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Cymru Alliance club Flint Town United.

Mackin started his career with Wrexham in their youth system, before making his first-team debut on the last day of the 2003–04 season. He made 11 appearances the following season and he signed his first professional contract in 2005. He established himself in the team in 2005–06, having made 19 appearances. However, next season, appearances became rarer and in 2008 he was loaned to Conference Premier club Droylsden. After being recalled by Wrexham, he scored in their final match in the Football League before relegation to the Conference Premier. He joined York City on loan in 2009 and played for them in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium. After being released by Wrexham he signed for York permanently and played in the 2010 Conference Premier play-off Final at Wembley Stadium. He was released by York in 2011 before having spells with Alfreton Town, Chester, Bangor City, Conwy Borough and Rhyl.

Mackin has represented Wales at international level. He was on the substitutes' bench twice for the under-17 team, before making an appearance in 2002. He received call ups to the under-19 team but did not make any appearances. Having received his first call up for the under-21 team in 2005, he made his first and only appearance against Northern Ireland in 2006.

Mackin was born in Chester, Cheshire and grew up in nearby Blacon. He played for Blacon Youth Club in their under-12 team and in the 1997–98 season was named League Player of the Year. He played for hometown club Chester City as a schoolboy before moving to Wrexham on the same basis at the age of 15. He progressed through their youth system and captained them in an FA Youth Cup match against Watford. He helped the youth team win a league championship, which resulted in him being given a squad number with the first team. He made his first-team debut at the age of 18 after starting in a 1–1 draw away to Wycombe Wanderers on 1 May 2004, the final match of 2003–04. His first appearance of 2004–05 came as a 50th-minute substitute in a 2–2 away draw with Hull City in the League Cup on 24 August 2004, which Wrexham won 3–1 in a penalty shoot-out. Mackin made his first league appearance of the season in a 5–1 defeat away to Luton Town as a 63rd-minute substitute on 6 November 2005 and his first start came on 11 December in a 3–0 away defeat against Milton Keynes Dons (MK Dons) as a replacement for the suspended Darren Ferguson. He suffered from a sore thigh in January 2005 and made his return as an 88th-minute substitute in a 0–0 home draw with MK Dons on 26 February. He fouled Steve Jenkins inside the penalty area during stoppage time away to Swindon Town on 19 March, which led to Sam Parkin scoring a penalty kick, the final goal in a 4–2 defeat for Wrexham. He finished the season with 11 appearances and signed his first professional contract on 11 July 2005.

Mackin drew praise from manager Denis Smith after scoring against Hereford United in a pre-season friendly in July 2005, saying "We wouldn't keep persevering with him if we didn't think he was any good". His first appearance of 2005–06 came as a 90th-minute substitute in a 1–0 defeat away to Notts County. He sustained a knee injury during a 1–0 home win over Darlington on 29 October 2005, which resulted in him being substituted in the 31st minute. He spent nearly three months injured before rejoining the squad for training towards the end of January 2006 and made his return on 4 February after coming on as a 20th-minute substitute in a 2–0 home victory over Wycombe. He finished the season with 19 appearances for Wrexham, having established himself as a regular member of the team. He entered negotiations over a new contract in June 2006, which he signed in July.

His first appearance of 2006–07 was in a 0–0 home draw with Peterborough United on 12 August 2006, a match he entered as a 59th-minute substitute. The next game he played in was a 4–1 victory away to Championship team Sheffield Wednesday in the League Cup on 23 August 2006. Mackin suffered a knee injury during a reserve-team match in September 2006 and made his return as a 90th-minute substitute in a 4–1 defeat after extra time away to Birmingham City of the Championship in the League Cup second round on 19 September. He picked up another knee injury in October 2006 and made his return in a 2–1 defeat at home to MK Dons on 14 October. An injury to Mark Jones allowed Mackin back into the team for a 4–0 defeat away to Boston United on 9 December 2006. His 2006–07 season finished with 11 appearances as opportunities in the team were "frustratingly rare" and he was offered a new long-term contract by Wrexham in May 2007.

His first appearance of 2007–08 came as a 75th-minute substitute in a 2–0 defeat away to Darlington on 11 August 2007 and following a 2–1 away defeat against Bradford City on 25 August he said "I'm pleased with my form at the moment because I've been working hard to try and stay in the team and I'm happy that things seem to be going well for me at the moment". Mackin joined Conference Premier club Droylsden on 24 January 2008 on a one-month loan, having made seven appearances for Wrexham by that point in 2007–08. He made his debut two days later in a 1–0 home victory over Kidderminster Harriers and on 31 January 2008 the loan was extended until the end of the season after earning "rave reviews" for his performances. His only goal for Droylsden came in the 70th minute against Torquay United on 1 April 2008, which was their only goal in a 2–1 home defeat. He made 15 appearances and scored 1 goal for Droylsden before returning to Wrexham after being recalled from the loan in April 2008. The four appearances he made following his return were described as "battling", and the last of these included his first goal for Wrexham in a 4–2 win away to Lincoln City on 3 May 2008, which was Wrexham's final match in the Football League before their relegation to the Conference Premier. He later commented "I got a little touch on it and I'm not sure if the defender got the final touch but it went straight in and I'm very pleased with it!" He finished the season with 11 appearances and 1 goal for Wrexham, with opportunities in the team again being rare.

A muscle strain forced Mackin to miss a pre-season friendly against Shrewsbury Town in July 2008 and he returned to pre-season training later that month. He was shown a red card after picking up two yellow cards in his first appearance of 2008–09, which was Wrexham's first match in the Conference Premier, as they beat Stevenage Borough 5–0 at home on 9 August 2008. On reflection, Mackin said "As for the second yellow I felt the ball was there to be won and I thought that's what I did. Looking back now I know I should have stayed on my feet". He was handed a one-match suspension and returned in a 1–1 draw away to Rushden & Diamonds on 17 August 2008. Mackin scored his first goal of the season with a 25-yard shot against Grays Athletic, which was Wrexham's only goal in a 2–1 away defeat on 20 September 2008. Despite starting the season as a regular in the team, he found opportunities hard to come by after the arrival of Dean Saunders as manager.

He joined Wrexham's Conference Premier rivals York City on 22 January 2009 on loan until the end of the season, after having made 20 appearances and scored 1 goal for Wrexham up to that point in 2008–09. Following the move, Mackin said "I need a change of scenery. We have a large number of players at the Racecourse at present and it's difficult to get into a side that's doing well and getting the results". He made his debut in a 2–1 defeat away to Eastbourne Borough on 24 January 2009 and was described in "The Press" as looking "off the pace". Mackin played for York in their 13–12 penalty shoot-out victory at home to Kidderminster in the FA Trophy third round on 12 February 2009, which had finished 1–1 after extra time. A tight thigh resulted in him missing a match against Oxford United in April 2009 and he made his return later that month in a 0–0 away draw with Barrow. Following the close of the league season, Mackin was described in "The Press" as one of York's most consistent performers throughout the season. He started in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium on 9 May 2009, which York lost 2–0 to Stevenage. According to "The Press", he was "hardly noticed" in the match before receiving a yellow card for "scything down" Darren Murphy. He finished the loan spell with 21 appearances, and after returning to Wrexham was released after spending around a decade with the club.

Mackin signed for York permanently on 22 May 2009 on a one-year contract. After signing, manager Martin Foyle said "Levi was fantastic for us and came on in leaps and bounds. He was one of our most consistent players, but I know there's more to come from him." Mackin played in the opening match of 2009–10, a 2–1 defeat away to Oxford on 8 August 2009, and according to "The Press" was a "strong presence in the City midfield in a very committed performance". A foot infection led to him missing a match against Gateshead on 25 August 2009 and he made his return in a 2–0 home win over Crawley Town on 5 September as an 84th-minute substitute. His first start since 22 August 2009 came in a 2–2 home draw with Cambridge United on 22 September to fill in for Alex Lawless. This was the first of five consecutive matches to be started by Mackin before he had a six-match spell on the substitutes' bench. This came to an end when he started in the 1–0 victory away to AFC Wimbledon on 21 November 2009 and his performance drew praise from Foyle.

Mackin scored his first goal for York in a 2–1 away defeat to Forest Green Rovers on 6 March 2010, with his shot taking a deflection off David Brown. He picked up his 10th yellow card of the season in a 0–0 away draw with Altrincham, which resulted in a two-match suspension. He played in both legs of York's play-off semi-final victory over Luton, which finished 2–0 on aggregate. He started in the 2010 Conference Premier play-off Final at Wembley Stadium on 16 May 2010, which York lost 3–1 to Oxford. He finished the season with 45 appearances and 1 goal for York and signed a new one-year contract with the club in May 2010.

Mackin made his first appearance of 2010–11 in the opening match, a 2–1 home defeat to Kidderminster on 14 August 2010, and was substituted in the 38th minute due to an injury and Foyle said "It looks a bad one and he might need a scan". The scan revealed no knee ligament damage had occurred and it was estimated he would be injured for a month. He returned to training in November 2010, having been out of the team injured for almost three months, returning as an 87th-minute substitute in a 3–0 home win over League Two team Rotherham United in an FA Cup first round replay on 17 November. He scored at home for the first time for York with the 85th-minute winner against Forest Green on 22 January 2011, the goal being a drilled shot into the bottom corner. Mackin finished the season with 13 appearances and 1 goal before being released by York in June 2011 after being told he could find another club.

Mackin signed for newly promoted Conference Premier club Alfreton Town on 2 July 2011 on a one-year contract. His debut came after starting in a 1–1 home draw with Darlington on 23 August 2011, scoring his first goal with a 43rd-minute penalty in a 1–0 victory away to York on 29 August. After struggling to break into the team he was released by Alfreton on 4 January 2012 after his contract was cancelled by mutual consent, having made 13 appearances and scored 1 goal for the club.

On the same day of his Alfreton release, Mackin signed for his hometown club Chester, joining the Northern Premier League Premier Division club on a contract until the end of 2011–12. Chester had been interested in signing him in the summer but he had opted to remain in full-time football with Alfreton. He scored on his debut with the final goal of a 4–0 victory over Rushall Olympic on 7 January 2011, having entered the match as a 73rd-minute substitute. He finished the season with one goal in six appearances having sustained a collar bone injury in his first start.

Mackin signed for Welsh Premier League club Bangor City on 17 January 2013. He made his debut as an 83rd-minute substitute in a 2–0 victory away to Gap Connah's Quay on 26 January 2013. His first goal came in a 3–3 home draw with Prestatyn Town on 9 February 2013. Mackin finished the season with 10 appearances and 1 goal for Bangor.

He signed for Conwy Borough of the Cymru Alliance on 7 June 2013 and made his debut in a 2–0 win away to Guilsfield on 17 August. He was suspected to have sustained a toe injury in a 3–0 home win over Penycae on 17 September 2013 and this was the last of his eight appearances in 2013–14.

Mackin signed for Welsh Premier League club Rhyl on 24 June 2014. He left by mutual consent in August 2016 because of family and work commitments, and the following month signed for Cymru Alliance club Flint Town United.

Mackin was involved in two matches with the Wales under-17 team, against Scotland and Norway in 2001 and 2002 respectively, although he did not play in either and remained on the substitutes' bench. He was called up for a training camp and match against Bosnia and Herzegovina in the 2003 UEFA European Under-17 Championship first qualifying round, and made an appearance in this match as Wales won 2–1 to progress to the second qualifying round. He was called into the under-19 team for the Milk Cup in July 2004 and another call up came for the 2005 UEFA European Under-19 Championship qualifier against the Faroe Islands in October.

Mackin was called into the under-21 squad for their match against England in September 2005. His first and only appearance came in a 1–0 defeat to Northern Ireland on 28 February 2006, in which he was substituted for Rob Davies in the 56th minute. Mackin returned to the under-21 team after being named on the standby list for a match against Turkey in September. He was named on standby for a two-legged play-off against England in October 2008. He was named in the Semi-Pro squad for a friendly against Poland in September 2009, although he was forced to withdraw due to an injury.

Mackin plays as a central or defensive midfielder and has been described as "tough tackling" and a "reliable holding player". He is "regularly in the right place to pick up loose balls and does not shirk away from tackles". He is energetic and has been praised as a ball-winner.

Mackin's daughter was born in January 2011.


</doc>
<doc id="11755307" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11755307" title="Thomas Quiney">
Thomas Quiney

Thomas Quiney (baptised 26 February 1589 – c. 1662 or 1663) was the husband of William Shakespeare's daughter Judith Shakespeare, and a vintner and tobacconist in Stratford-upon-Avon. Quiney held several municipal offices in the corporation of Stratford-upon-Avon, the highest being chamberlain in 1621 and 1622, but was also fined for various minor offences.

In 1616, Quiney married Judith Shakespeare. The marriage took place during a season when a special licence was required by the church, and the couple had failed to obtain one, leading to Quiney's brief excommunication. Quiney was also summoned before the Bawdy Court fewer than two months after the wedding to answer charges of "carnal copulation" with a Margaret Wheeler, who died in childbirth. Scholars believe that as a result of these events William Shakespeare altered his will to favour his other daughter, Susanna Hall, and excluded Quiney from his inheritance.

Judith and Thomas had three children: Shakespeare, Richard, and Thomas. Shakespeare Quiney died at six months of age, and neither Richard nor Thomas lived past 21. The death of Judith's last child led to legal wrangling over William Shakespeare's will that lasted until 1652. Scholars speculate that Thomas Quiney may have died in 1662 or 1663 when the burial records are incomplete.

Thomas Quiney was born in Stratford-upon-Avon and baptised on 26 February 1589 in Holy Trinity Church. He was the son of Richard and Elizabeth Quiney. He had 10 siblings, among them a Richard Quiney who was a grocer in London, Mary Quiney who later married Richard Watts, the vicar of Harbury, and Elizabeth Quiney who married William Chandler. There is no record of Thomas Quiney's attendance at the local school, but he had sufficient education to write short passages in French, run a business, and hold several municipal offices in his life.

Quiney was a vintner and dealt in tobacco. He held the lease to a house known as "Atwood's" for the purpose of running a tavern, and later traded houses with his brother-in-law, William Chandler, for the larger house known as "The Cage" where he set up his vintner's shop in the upper half. He is recorded as selling wine to the corporation of Stratford-upon-Avon as late as 1650.
He was a man of some education, with knowledge of French and calligraphy. In signing his accounts for 1621 and 1622 as chamberlain he decorated them with a couplet in French from a romance by Mellin de Saint-Gelais. Quiney writes ""Bien heureux est celui qui pour devenir sage, Qui pour le mal d'autrui fait son apprentissage"" but the original is ""Heureux celui qui pour devenir sage, Du mal d'autrui fait son apprentissage"". The original translates into English as ""Happy is he who to become wise, serves his apprenticeship from other men's troubles"" but Quiney's version "… is ungrammatical and without sense".
He was a well-respected man in the borough, and was elected a burgess and constable in Stratford-upon-Avon in 1617. In 1621 and 1662 he was acting Chamberlain. In signing his accounts for 1622–3, he did so "with flourishes", but the records show that the council voted them "imperfect". Quiney did not attend this meeting, but he did attend the later meeting where the accounts were passed, so they appear to have needed further explanation.

Quiney's reputation was slightly spotted; he was fined for swearing and for "suffering townsmen to tipple in his house", and was at one point in danger of prosecution for "dispensing unwholesome and adulterated wine".

On 10 February 1616, Thomas Quiney married Judith Shakespeare, William Shakespeare's daughter, in Holy Trinity Church. The assistant vicar, Richard Watts, who later married Quiney's sister Mary, probably officiated. The wedding took place during the Lenten season, which was prohibited. In 1616 Lent started on 23 January, Septuagesima Sunday, and ended on 7 April, the Sunday after Easter. The marriage therefore required a special licence, issued by the Bishop of Worcester, which the couple had failed to obtain. A Walter Wright of Stratford was cited for marrying without either banns or licence, so since Quiney was only cited for marrying without the required licence it is presumed that they had posted banns in church. The infraction was a minor one, apparently caused by the minister, as three other couples were also wed that February. Quiney was nevertheless summoned by Walter Nixon to appear before the Consistory court in Worcester. (This same Walter Nixon was later involved in a Star Chamber case and was found guilty of forging signatures and taking bribes). Quiney failed to appear by the required date. The register recorded the judgement, which was excommunication, on or about 12 March 1616. It is unknown if Judith was also excommunicated, but in any case the punishment did not last long. In November of the same year they were back in church for the baptism of their firstborn child.

The marriage did not begin well: Quiney had recently impregnated another woman, Margaret Wheeler, who was to die in childbirth along with the child and was buried on 15 March 1616. On 26 March 1616, Quiney appeared before the Bawdy Court, which dealt, among other things, with "whoredom and uncleanliness". Confessing in open court to "carnal copulation" with Margaret Wheeler, he submitted himself for correction. He was sentenced to open penance "in a white sheet (according to custom)" before the congregation on three Sundays. He also had to admit to his crime, this time wearing ordinary clothes, before the Minister of Bishopton in Warwickshire. The first part of the sentence was remitted, essentially letting him off with a five-shilling fine to be given to the parish's poor. Since Bishopton only had a chapel, he was spared any public humiliation.

Where the Quineys lived after being married is unknown. Judith owned her father's cottage on Chapel Lane, Stratford, while Thomas had held, since 1611, the lease on a tavern called "Atwood's" on High Street. The cottage later passed from Judith to her sister as part of the settlement in their father's will. In July 1616 Thomas swapped houses with his brother-in-law, William Chandler, moving his vintner's shop to the upper half of a house at the corner of High Street and Bridge Street. Known as "The Cage", it is the house traditionally associated with Judith Quiney. In the 20th century The Cage was for a time a Wimpy restaurant before being turned into the Stratford Information Office.

The Cage provides further insight into why Shakespeare would not have trusted Judith's husband. Around 1630 Quiney tried to sell the lease on the house but was prevented by his kinsmen. In 1633, to protect the interests of Judith and the children, the lease was signed over to the trust of three relatives: John Hall, Susanna's husband; Thomas Nash, the husband of Judith's niece; and Richard Watts, vicar of nearby Harbury, who was Quiney's brother-in-law and who had officiated at Thomas and Judith's wedding. Eventually, in November 1652, the lease to The Cage ended up in the hands of Thomas' eldest brother, Richard Quiney, a grocer in London.

The inauspicious beginnings of Judith's marriage, in spite of her husband and his family being otherwise unexceptionable, has led to speculation that this was the cause for William Shakespeare's hastily altered last will and testament. He first summoned his lawyer, Francis Collins, in January 1616. On 25 March he made further alterations, probably because he was dying and because of his concerns about Quiney. In the first bequest of the will there had been a provision ""vnto my sonne in L[aw]""; but "sonne in L[aw]" was then struck out, with Judith's name inserted in its stead. To this daughter he bequeathed £100 ""in discharge of her marriage porcion""; another £50 if she were to relinquish the Chapel Lane cottage; and, if she or any of her children were still alive at the end of three years following the date of the will, a further £150, of which she was to receive the interest but not the principal. This money was explicitly denied to Thomas Quiney unless he were to bestow on Judith lands of equal value. In a separate bequest, Judith was given ""my broad silver gilt bole"".

Finally, for the bulk of his estate, which included his main house, "New Place", his two houses on Henley Street and various lands in and around Stratford, Shakespeare had set up an entail. His estate was bequeathed, in descending order of choice, to the following: 1) his daughter, Susanna Hall; 2) upon Susanna's death, ""to the first sonne of her bodie lawfullie yssueing & to the heires Males of the bodie of the saied first Sonne lawfullie yssueing""; 3) to Susanna's second son and his male heirs; 4) to Susanna's third son and his male heirs; 5) to Susanna's ""ffourth ... ffyfth sixte & Seaventh sonnes"" and their male heirs; 6) to Elizabeth, Susanna and John Hall's firstborn, and her male heirs; 7) to Judith and her male heirs; or 8) to whatever heirs the law would normally recognise. This elaborate entail is usually taken to indicate that Thomas Quiney was not to be entrusted with Shakespeare's inheritance, although some have speculated that it may simply indicate that Susanna was the favoured child.

Judith and Thomas Quiney had three children: Shakespeare (baptised 23 November 1616 — buried 8 May 1617); Richard (baptised 9 February 1618 — buried 6 February 1639); and Thomas (baptised 23 January 1620 — buried 28 January 1639). Shakespeare was named for his mother's father. Richard's name was common among the Quineys: his other grandfather and an uncle were both named Richard.

Shakespeare Quiney died at six months of age. Richard and Thomas Quiney were buried within a month of each other; they were 19 and 21 years old, respectively. The deaths of all of Judith's children brought on new legal consequences. The entail on her father's inheritance led Susanna, along with her daughter and son-in-law, to make a settlement, by use of a rather elaborate legal device, for the inheritance of her own branch of the family. Legal wrangling continued for another thirteen years, until 1652.

Of Thomas Quiney's fate the records show little. It is speculated that he may have died in 1662 or 1663 when the parish burial records are incomplete. He certainly had a nephew in London, who by this time held the lease to The Cage.



</doc>
<doc id="11762000" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11762000" title="Seventh generation of video game consoles">
Seventh generation of video game consoles

In the history of video games, the seventh generation of home consoles began in late 2005 with the release of Microsoft's Xbox 360, and continued with the release of Sony Computer Entertainment's PlayStation 3 (PS3) and Nintendo's Wii the following year. Each new console introduced a new type of "breakthrough" in technology: the Xbox 360 could play games rendered natively at high-definition video (HD) resolutions; the PlayStation 3 offered HD movie playback via a built-in 3D Blu-ray Disc player; while the Wii focused on integrating controllers with movement sensors as well as joysticks. Some Wii controllers could be moved about to control in-game actions, which enabled players to simulate real-world actions through movement during gameplay (e.g., in the Wii sports tennis game, the user swings the controller to hit the on-screen image of a tennis ball). The seventh generation of handheld consoles began in November 2004 with the North American introduction of the Nintendo DS (NDS) as a "third pillar", alongside Nintendo's existing Game Boy Advance and GameCube consoles. Another handheld console, the PlayStation Portable (PSP), came out in December. By this generation, video game consoles had become an important part of the global IT infrastructure; it is estimated that video game consoles represented 25% of the world's general-purpose computational power in 2007.

Joining Nintendo in the "motion market", Sony Computer Entertainment released the PlayStation Move in September 2010. The PlayStation Move features motion-sensing gaming, similar to that of the Wii. Microsoft joined the motion-sensing scene in November 2010 with its Kinect (previously announced under the working title "Project Natal" in June 2009). Unlike the other two motion systems (for PlayStation 3 and Wii), Kinect does not use controllers of any sort, and instead makes the players act as the "controllers". Having sold eight million units in its first 60 days on the market, Kinect claimed the Guinness World Record of being the "fastest selling consumer electronics device". While the Xbox 360 offers wired as well as wireless controllers as a standalone product, all PlayStation 3 controllers can be used in wired and wireless configurations.

As for handheld systems, the Nintendo DS (NDS), launched on November 21, 2004, features a touch screen and built-in microphone, and supports wireless IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi) standards. Additionally, the revised version of the NDS, the Nintendo DSi, features two built-in cameras, the ability to download games from the DSi store, and a web browser. The PlayStation Portable (PSP), released later that year on December 12, 2004, followed a different pattern. It became the first handheld video game console to use an optical disc format, Universal Media Disc (UMD), as its primary storage media. Sony also gave the PSP robust multimedia capability; connectivity with the PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, other PSPs; as well as Internet connectivity. The NDS likewise had connectivity to the internet through the Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection and Nintendo DS Browser, as well as wireless connectivity to other DS systems and Wii consoles. Despite high sales numbers for both consoles, PSP sales have consistently lagged behind those of the NDS; thus, the PSP can claim the distinction of being the best-selling "non-Nintendo" handheld gaming system.

A crowdfunded console, the Ouya, received $8.5 million in preorders before launching in 2013. Post-launch sales were poor, and the device was a commercial failure. The business was wound down due to financial problems and sold to Razer Inc., which discontinued the Ouya in July 2015. Additionally, microconsoles like Nvidia Shield Console, Amazon Fire TV, MOJO, Razer Switchblade, GamePop, GameStick, Ouya, and even more powerful PC-based Steam Machine consoles have attempted to compete in the video game console market; however, even though some of these machines are "theoretically powerful" on paper, they are seldom classified as "seventh generation", "eighth generation", or "any generation" consoles.

The seventh generation slowly began to wind down when Nintendo began cutting back on Wii production in the early 2010s by discontinuing the original Wii model in the Western world in 2011, then discontinuing the system altogether in Japan in October 2013. Nintendo ceased production of its "Family Edition" around the same time, leaving the "Wii Mini" as its only surviving variant as of 2014. Shortly afterwards, Sony announced they were discontinuing the production of the PSP worldwide that year, following an earlier announcement from Nintendo that it had discontinued its original line of NDS family devices to move onto the Nintendo 3DS line, while continuing to support the Nintendo DSi. Microsoft then announced, in 2016, that they would discontinue, but continue to support, the Xbox 360 at the end of April, making it the first seventh-generation console to cease production altogether. The following year, Sony announced that it would soon discontinue its PS3 line in Japan, and, within a matter of months, in the rest of the world. Around that time, 2017, the Wii Mini and the Nintendo DSi were also discontinued, marking the complete and final end to the Wii consoles and DS line. In late 2018, the last game for the Wii, "Just Dance 2019", was released, effectively ending the seventh generation. The eighth generation had already began in early 2011, with the release of the Nintendo 3DS.

Nintendo entered this generation with a new approach embodied by its Wii. The company planned to attract current hardcore and casual gamers, non-gamers, and lapsed gamers by focusing on new gameplay experiences and new forms of interaction with games rather than cutting edge graphics and expensive technology. This approach was previously implemented in the portable market with the Nintendo DS. Nintendo expressed hope that the new control schemes it had implemented would render conventionally controlled consoles obsolete, leading to Nintendo capturing a large portion of the existing market as well. This strategy paid off, with demand for the Wii outstripping supply throughout 2007. Since Nintendo profited on each console right from the start unlike its competitors, it achieved very positive returns. With only a few exceptions, monthly worldwide sales for the Wii were higher than those of the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3, eroding Microsoft's early lead and widening the gap between its market share and Sony's. On September 12, 2007, it was reported by the British newspaper "Financial Times" that the Wii's sales surpassed those of the Xbox 360, which had been released one year previously, and became the market leader in worldwide home console sales for the generation.

As in previous generations, Nintendo provided strong support for its new console with popular first-party franchises like "Mario", "The Legend of Zelda", "Metroid", and "Pokémon", among others. To appeal to casual and non-gamers, Nintendo developed a group of core Wii games, consisting of "Wii Sports", "Wii Play", "Wii Fit", and "Wii Music", where players make use of the motion-sensing abilities of the console and its peripherals to simulate real world activities. With the exception of "Wii Music", the games and their sequels have all been highly successful.

Publishers such as Ubisoft, Electronic Arts, Capcom, and Majesco Entertainment continued to release exclusive titles for the console, but the Wii's strongest titles remained within its first-party line-up. Analysts speculated that this would change in time as the Wii's growing popularity persuaded third-party publishers to focus on it; however, some third party developers expressed frustration at low software sales. Goichi Suda, developer of "No More Heroes" for the Wii, noted that "only Nintendo titles are doing well. This isn't just because of the current situation in Japan, as this is happening outside Japan. I am very surprised about the reality about Wii, because before I was making this game, I wasn't expecting that Wii would be a console targeted only for non-gamers. I expected more games for hardcore gamers. The reality is different to what I expected." Conversely, the PAL publisher of "No More Heroes" Rising Star Games were greatly impressed with the game's sales. Goichi Suda later retracted his comment, saying his "point was that "No More Heroes", unlike a lot of Nintendo Wii titles currently available is the kind of product that will attract a different kind of consumer to the hardware, "i.e." gamers who are looking for a different genre to the products that have been successful on this platform thus far."

In early 2008, the NPD Group revealed sales data showing that, while the Wii's life-to-date attach rate was low, in December 2007, it reached 8.11—higher than the attach rates for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 in that month. The Wii's low overall attach rate could be explained by reference to its rapidly increasing installed base, as financial analysts have pointed to the Xbox 360's high attach rates as indicative of an unhealthy lack of installed base growth, and warned that what actually benefits third-party developers is "quicker adoption of hardware and a rapidly growing installed base on which to sell progressively more game units," which tends to lower the attach rate of a product.

On September 23, 2009, Nintendo announced its first price drops for the console. In the United States, the price was reduced by fifty dollars, resulting in a new Manufacturer's Suggested Retail Price (MSRP) of $199.99, effective September 27, 2009. For Japan, the price dropped from ¥25,000 to ¥20,000, effective October 1, 2009. In Europe (with the exception of the United Kingdom), the price of a Wii console dropped from €249 to €199. On May 3, 2010, Nintendo announced that Wii consoles sold in the Americas now would include Wii Sports Resort and Wii MotionPlus, effective May 9, 2010. Since May 15, 2011, the Wii Console is US$149.99 and comes bundled with "Mario Kart Wii".

Microsoft Xbox 360 gained an early lead in terms of market share, largely due to its established Xbox Live online gaming system, and its early launch date, which was one year before its rivals. Sales in North America and Europe have continued to be strong, even after the release of the Wii and PlayStation 3. Like its predecessor, the Xbox 360 received a muted reception in Japan, attributed to the lack of content aimed at Japanese gamers.

This early launch did come with some trouble, as technical problems appeared in a portion of Xbox 360 units sold. The most well-known problem is the "red ring of death" and Error E74, which received a great deal of attention due to some users having to replace their consoles multiple times. Microsoft attempted to address this by offering a three-year warranty on all affected consoles and repairing them free of charge. It also retroactively reimbursed owners of affected systems who paid for repairs. According to "The Mercury News", new models of the console featuring 65-nanometer technology will address this and other issues; the new technology is expected to reduce heat production, which will lower the risk of overheating and system failures; although, this has never been officially confirmed by Microsoft.

As they share many cross-platform games and compete for the same audience as their predecessors, frequent comparisons are made between the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3. The PS3 uses the Blu-ray format, while the Xbox 360 uses a standard DVD9. The Xbox 360 is less expensive to produce, and analysts expect that a mid-revision will allow Microsoft to break-even on manufacturing costs, while industry consensus is that the Xbox 360's conventional architecture is easier to develop for.

At the end of first half of 2007, the console stabilized at 11.6 million units shipped as sales dropped 60% while its rival, Wii, gained momentum and Sony announced a competitive price drop on the PlayStation 3. Microsoft's strategy to boost sales with the release of the highly anticipated "Halo 3" in September 2007 paid off, outselling the Wii that month in North America. Microsoft's Entertainment and Devices Division experienced a huge increase in revenue, largely driven by the release of "Halo 3", and posted a quarterly profit for the first time in two years.

The Xbox 360's advantage over its competitors owes itself to the release of high-profile games, such as additions to the Halo franchise. The 2007 Game Critics Awards honored the platform with 38 nominations and 12 wins – more than any other platform. By March 2008, the Xbox 360 had reached a software attach rate of 7.5 games per console in the US; the rate was 7.0 in Europe, while its competitors were 3.8 (PS3) and 3.5 (Wii), according to Microsoft. At the 2008 Game Developers Conference, Microsoft announced that it expected over 1,000 games available for Xbox 360 by the end of the year. The Xbox 360 has managed to gain a simultaneous release of titles that were initially planned to be PS3 exclusives, including "Devil May Cry", "Ace Combat", "Virtua Fighter", "Grand Theft Auto IV", "Final Fantasy XIII", "Tekken 6", "", and "L.A. Noire".

In August 2007, the first price drop was announced for all Stock Keeping Units (SKU's) of the Xbox 360. The Core system's price was reduced in the United States by $20, the Premium by $50, and the Elite model by $30. Also, the HDMI port, previously exclusive to the Elite system, was added to new models of the Premium and Arcade systems; the Core system was discontinued.

At E3 2010, Microsoft revealed a new US$299.99 Xbox 360 SKU known officially as the Xbox 360 S and referred to as the "Slim" by various media outlets. It replaced the Elite and comes with an integrated 802.11n WLAN adapter, integrated TOSLINK port, 5 USB ports and a 250 GB HDD. It also does not require an additional power supply to make use of Microsoft Kinect motion control accessory. A US$199.99 version was released on August 3, 2010 in the US which replaced the Arcade model. It has 4 GB and a 250 GB model of internal memory, it has a matte or glossy finish and it comes with a headset. At E3 2013 Microsoft revealed the Xbox 360 E, the final iteration of the Xbox 360 series, to be succeeded by Xbox One. The Xbox 360 E was originally priced at US$199.99 for a 4GB model, and US$299.99 for the 250GB model. The 360 E featured a new square design with a simplified exterior akin to the Xbox One.

Sony Computer Entertainment PlayStation 3 was released on November 11, 2006 in Japan and November 17, 2006 in the US and Canada. The system's reliance on new technologies such as the Cell microprocessor and Blu-ray format caused difficulties in manufacturing, especially the Blu-ray diode, leading to shortages at launch and the delay of the PAL region launches; however, by early December 2006, Sony announced that all production issues had been resolved. Market analysts and Sony executives noted that the success of the PlayStation 3 and the Blu-ray format were dependent on each other; Rich Marty, VP of New Business Development at Sony Pictures Home Entertainment stated that the "PS3 is critical to the success of Blu-ray," while Phil Harrison stated that the PlayStation 3's success would be ensured because "the growth of the Blu-ray Disc movie market ... is a positive factor which will play more into the consumer psyche ... as more consumer electronics firms launch standalone disc players, as more Blu-ray Disc movies become available, and as more shelf space is dedicated to the category at retail."

Sony would provide support for its console with new titles from acclaimed first-party franchises such as "Gran Turismo," "Team Ico", and "God of War", and secured a number of highly anticipated third-party exclusive titles, including "", "Yakuza 3" and "Valkyria Chronicles". Titles that were originally exclusive or recognized with the platform, such as "Devil May Cry", "Ace Combat", "Virtua Fighter", and "Monster Hunter", have been released on other platforms. The previous "Grand Theft Auto" titles were originally timed exclusives on the PlayStation 2, before making their release on other platforms, such as the Xbox, months later; however, "Grand Theft Auto IV", the latest installment, was released simultaneously on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3. Announced exclusives titles for the PlayStation 3 such as "Assassin's Creed"; "", and "Fatal Inertia" were released on Xbox 360 as well, with the latter making its release on Xbox 360 before the PlayStation 3 version.

The "Katamari" series, which has long been PlayStation 2 exclusives, found one of the more recent installments, "Beautiful Katamari", exclusive to Xbox 360. These releases fueled rumors and fear that "Final Fantasy XIII" and "Tekken 6", two highly anticipated exclusive PlayStation 3 games at the time, would also be available for Xbox 360, the PlayStation 3's primary competitor and at E3 2008, it was announced that "Final Fantasy XIII" would be simultaneously released on the Xbox 360 in Europe and North America; later on October 8, 2008, it was announced that "Tekken 6" would also be releasing on the Xbox 360. After the multiplatform releases of these games, the fifth installment of the "Metal Gear" series, "", has also been announced for the Xbox 360; "L.A. Noire", which was announced as an exclusive since the beginning of its development, has also been released for the Xbox 360; "Dark Souls," the spiritual successor to "Demon's Souls", has also been released on Xbox 360; the "Persona" series, which has a long history of being PlayStation exclusive, found the seventh generation installment, "Persona 4 Arena" multiplatform; however, "Metal Gear Solid 4", "Yakuza 3", "Tekken 5: Dark Resurrection ONLINE", and "Disgaea 3: Absence of Justice" still remain PlayStation 3 exclusives. Sony has blamed lower-than-expected sales, loss of exclusive titles in the PlayStation 3 software library, its higher price, and stock shortages.

The high launch price of the PlayStation 3 was considered a major drag on its popularity. In July 2007, Sony announced a drop in the price of the console by $100. This measure only applied to the 60 GB models and was exclusive to the United States and Canada, where those models are no longer in production. On October 18, 2007, Sony announced a US$100 price drop for the 80 GB model and a new US$399 40 GB model to launch on November 2, 2007 with reduced features such as the removal of backward compatibility with PS2 games. Within weeks, Sony announced that sales of the 40 GB and 80 GB models by major retailers had increased 192%. In November 2008, Sony launched a $499 160 GB model, and on August 18, 2009, Sony announced the PS3 Slim. The PS3 slim sold 1 million in under a month. It was then announced that a 250GB slim model was to be released. It was released on September 1 (or 3 depending on country) and costs $299, £249 and €299. In Australia the console will cost A$499, which is A$200 less than the standard PS3. In September 2009, a $299 120 GB Slim Model was released. A $349 250 GB Model was later released later in 2009. In August 2010, the 160 GB Slim Model was released for $299. The same price for a 120 GB PS3 slim Model. In Japan, the 160GB slim model is also available in white. On September 17, 2010, Sony released the 320 GB Slim Model, but it only sold with the PlayStation Move for US$399.99.

In September 2012, Sony announced a new slimmer PS3 redesign (CECH-4000), commonly referred to as the "Super Slim" PS3. It was released in late 2012 it became available with either a 250 GB or 500 GB hard drive. The "Super Slim" model was the last model to be produced by Sony before the system was slowly discontinued around the world. Shipments of new units to the United States were terminated in October 2016 and Sony officially discontinued the system in Japan on May 29, 2017, the last territory where it was selling new units up until then.

Worldwide figures are based on data from the manufacturers. The Canada and the United States figures are based on data from the NPD Group, the Japan figures are based on data from "Famitsu"/Enterbrain, and the United Kingdom figures are based on data from GfK Chart-Track.


Early models of the Wii are fully backwards compatible with GameCube software and most of its accessories; the Wii Family Edition and the Wii Mini iterations lack GameCube support. Early versions of the PlayStation 3 and all models of the Xbox 360 only offer partial support and use software emulation for backwards compatibility. Current versions of the PS3 do not offer PlayStation 2 compatibility, though PS1 compatibility is retained. Some models of the first generation of the PS3 offered full backwards compatibility for PS2 games. The Xbox 360's compatibility is increased through game-specific patches automatically downloaded from Xbox Live or downloaded and burned to a CD or DVD from the Xbox website and the PS3's compatibility is expanded with firmware updates.

All three consoles provide titles from older consoles for download; the Xbox 360 through the Xbox Originals service, the PlayStation 3 through the PlayStation Store, and the Wii through the Virtual Console. When purchased, the game is saved to console's internal memory or, optionally on the Wii, to an inserted SD/SDHC card. Initially the Xbox 360 also provided Xbox Live support for backwards compatible games, but the service has since been discontinued for original Xbox games. No more games will be added to the list of backwards compatible games for the Xbox 360. In response to the lack of backward compatibility for most PS3s, many popular games have been released for download as PlayStation 2 Classics and other popular series have been updated with gameplay/graphics as high-definition remasters for PlayStation consoles and have been released on Blu-ray Disc or are available for download on the PlayStation Network.

Both the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 support 1080p high definition video output. However, the output signal may be protected by digital rights management and may require an HDCP-compliant display if HDMI is used. The Xbox Live Marketplace service and the PlayStation Store offer HD movies, TV shows, movie trailers, and clips for download to the console's HDD. Other regional PlayStation Stores only allow download of movie trailers and short segment clips. As of November 2009, the Video Download service present on the American PlayStation Store will be available for select European countries.

While only a small number of games render video in native 1080p, many games can be automatically scaled to output this resolution. The Wii is capable of outputting 480p for the Wii Menu and most games through a component cable, which must be purchased separately.

In the September 2009 issue of "Game Informer" magazine, survey results were published in which among nearly 5000 readers who responded, 54.2% of those who owned an Xbox 360 had experienced a console failure for that system, compared with 10.6% for PlayStation 3, and 6.8% for Wii.

In August 2009, warranty provider SquareTrade published console failure rate estimates, in which the proportion of its customers reporting a system failure in the first two years is 23.7% for Xbox 360, 10.0% for PlayStation 3, and 2.7% for Wii.

For video game handhelds, the seventh generation began with the release of the Nintendo DS on November 21, 2004. This handheld was based on a design fundamentally different from the Game Boy and other handheld video game systems. The Nintendo DS offered new modes of input over previous generations such as a touch screen, the ability to connect wirelessly using IEEE 802.11b, as well as a microphone to speak to in-game NPCs. On December 12, 2004, Sony released its first handheld, PlayStation Portable. The PlayStation Portable was marketed at launch to an above-25-year-old or "core gamer" market, while the Nintendo DS proved to be popular with both core gamers and new customers.

Nokia revived its N-Gage platform in the form of a service for selected S60 devices. This new service launched on April 3, 2008. Other less-popular handheld systems released during this generation include the Gizmondo (launched on March 19, 2005 and discontinued in February 2006) and the GP2X (launched on November 10, 2005 and discontinued in August 2008). The GP2X Wiz, Pandora, and Gizmondo 2 were scheduled for release in 2009.

Another aspect of the seventh generation was the beginning of direct competition between dedicated handheld gaming devices, and increasingly powerful PDA/cell phone devices such as the iPhone and iPod Touch, and the latter being aggressively marketed for gaming purposes. Simple games such as Tetris and Solitaire had existed for PDA devices since their introduction, but by 2009 PDAs and phones had grown sufficiently powerful to where complex graphical games could be implemented, with the advantage of distribution over wireless broadband.

Sony announced in 2014 that they had discontinued the production of the PlayStation Portable worldwide, this follows Nintendo's announcement in 2014 that it had discontinued its original line of DS family devices to move onto the 3DS line.

There were also other consoles released during the seventh generation time period. Generally, they are either niche products or less powerful.

 

Released in China only
Released in South Korea only



</doc>
<doc id="11787589" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11787589" title="Santosh Subramaniam">
Santosh Subramaniam

Santosh Subramaniam (spelt Santhosh Subramaniyam onscreen) is a 2008 Indian Tamil-language romantic comedy film directed by Mohan Raja and produced by Kalpathi S. Agoram. The film stars Jayam Ravi and Genelia D'Souza in the lead roles, while Prakash Raj, Geetha and Sayaji Shinde play supporting roles. It is a remake of the Telugu film, "Bommarillu" (2006). The film revolves around a father and son relationship; the father dotes on his son, who resents the same. The son's choices and his ambitions to achieve something in life are subdued by his father.

The film entered production in July 2007 and in addition to being shot in India, was also shot at the South Island of New Zealand. The film's soundtrack was composed by Devi Sri Prasad, who retained the tunes he composed for "Bommarillu".

"Santosh Subramaniam" was released on 11 April 2008 during the Tamil New Year festival. The film was positively received and commercially successful; critics praised the performances of Ravi, D'Souza and Prakash Raj. The film won the third prize for the Best Film at the Tamil Nadu State Film Awards of 2008. It was nominated for four awards at the 56th Filmfare Awards South, including Best Film, Best Director, Best Actor and Best Actress, but did not win in any category.

Subramaniam is a rich businessman managing his own construction company. He lives with his wife Shanthi and sons Sanjay and Santosh. Subramaniam cares for his family a lot and excessively dotes upon his children. Santosh, the younger son, does not like this as he wants to be independent and free from his father’s guidance and control. But Santosh acts normally to avoid hurting his father. Santosh has in mind that both his career and wife should be of his choice only and not of his father. Subramaniam wants Santosh to assist him in managing the company but Santosh dreams of starting a new company on his own and does not prefer to work in his father’s company. Meanwhile, Subramaniam arranges Santosh’s wedding with Rajeshwari, daughter of his friend Ramamoorthy. Santosh is shocked as he has no other option rather than agreeing for this wedding.

One day, Santosh meets Hasini, a college student and is immediately attracted seeing her childish attitude and jovial nature. Santosh slowly befriends Hasini and both fall in love, but he does not have the courage to inform about his love to his father. Santosh gets spotted along with Hasini by Subramaniam and now he reveals his love affair. Subramaniam is furious upon hearing this as Santosh is already engaged to Rajeshwari. Subramaniam asks Santosh to bring Hasini to his home and make her stay with them for a week so that he will make Santosh understand that Rajeshwari is the better bride for him. Santosh agrees, believing that Hasini will impress Subramaniam. Hasini lies to her father Govindan that she is going for a college trip and leaves for Santosh’s home.

Everyone at Subramaniam’s home view Hasini indifferently seeing her talkative nature compared to Subramaniam’s family members who are more mature and not so talkative, especially Subramaniam. Santosh asks Hasini to try impressing his family members, fearing Subramaniam might not accept for the wedding. Slowly, Hasini starts befriending Santosh’s mother and sisters and gets close with them. Hasini informs them about Santosh’s behaviours such as alcohol consumption, going out at night to meet her, and his plans of getting a bank loan to start his own company which were not known to Santosh’s family before.

Santosh is shocked knowing that Hasini has revealed all his mischievous activities and berates her often for being childish. Hasini worries and decides to leave Santosh’s home even before the one-week time given to her. She apologises to everyone in Santosh’s home and says that she is not the one fit for him and his family. Santosh is worried seeing this but has no option rather than staying calm as even Subramaniam did not like Hasini.

The next day, an argument erupts between Santosh and Subramaniam during which the former becomes emotional and shouts that he has lost so many small things in life because of Subramaniam. But he preferred to stay calm as he does not want to hurt his father. Subramaniam realises his mistake and apologises to everyone saying that he always wanted to take care of his family members so well but had never thought that they are sacrificing a lot to make him happy.

Santosh meets Rajeshwari and apologises to her. He also makes her understand his situation. Rajeshwari convinces Ramamoorthy that she will get a better groom than Santosh. Meanwhile, Subramaniam goes to meet Hasini and apologises to her. Hasini says that her father is angry on her for lying and she will have to obey her father now. But Govindan does not like Santosh as he has seen him before drinking with his friends in road. Subramaniam says that he will send Santosh to Govindan’s home for a week so that he will better understand his character. After numerous incidents between Govindan and Santosh, the former finally agrees for Santosh and Hasini's wedding.



Despite early indications that the same team that worked on the 2006 Telugu film "Bommarillu"including director K. Vijaya Bhaskar and producer Dil Rajuwould remake the film in Tamil, the pair said they were not interested. Raju was willing to sell the remake rights and held twenty previews in Chennai for potential buyers. Editor Mohan, under his home company Jayam Combines, outbid Prakash Raj, who wanted to remake the film with Vishal in the lead role. Others outbid included Vijay, Bhagyaraj for his daughter, Saranya, and A. M. Rathnam for his son Ravi Krishna. Mohan handed the director's role to his first son Raja, and the lead role to his second son Jayam Ravi. The film would become Raja's fourth consecutive remake of a Telugu film. Bhaskar stated that he chose not to work on the remake because he had "invested too much time and energy in its original".

The remake, titled "Santosh Subramaniam", had its launch on 16 July 2007 with the attendance of all the lead actors. For the inauguration function, 300 invitations by word of mouth were made. The invitation for the launch featured many successful father-son duos from various fields, such as Sivaji Ganesan and Prabhu, Sivakumar and Suriya, and Sathyaraj and Sibiraj. Genelia D'Souza was chosen to play the female lead Hasini, reprising her role from the original film. Prakash Raj, who also acted in the original film, was chosen to reprise his role as the protagonist's father and Geetha was signed to play the character's mother. Former cricketer Sadagoppan Ramesh made his acting debut in this film, playing Santosh's elder brother. Raja felt he facially resembled Ravi. Sayaji Shinde was signed to play Hasini's father. Kirat Bhattal was selected to play Santosh's fiancée. Actors Kausalya, Santhanam, Premgi Amaren, Srinath and Sathyan, were also added to the cast. Anu Hasan makes a special appearance as a woman who Santosh converses with at the beginning, and end of the film. She said she accepted the role because, "I have always believed that there is no small role, only small actors".

Raja stated that the film would feature a "huge house" that was constructed at a cost of and a bus with "state-of-the-art" facilities, which was bought for , and that they would be memorable highlights of the film. Two songs were shot at the South Island of New Zealand. An advantage of shooting in New Zealand for the film's crew was that they had 16 hours of sunlight on any given day. Some sequences were even shot around 9:30 pm under "blazing sunlight". One song depicting the marriage of Premji Amaran's character was shot in several temples "in and around Kumbakonam" in Tamil Nadu. According to Raja, the film was inspired by his own life: "My friend took the essence of my story and made the Telugu blockbuster, which I then remade in Tamil".

For the film's music and soundtrack, Raja renewed his association with Devi Sri Prasad, who predominantly used his tracks from the original film. Siddharth, the lead actor in the original, sang the number "Adada Adada Adada", making his debut as a playback singer in Tamil cinema. The audio of the film was released on 23 March 2008, three weeks before the film's release.

The soundtrack received positive response. Behindwoods rated the album 3.5 out of 5, calling it "Overall, a lively album all set to become a chart buster." Rediff rated the album 3 out of 5, and stated that "listening to "Santosh Subramaniyam" music really gives "santhosham"".

"Santosh Subramaniam" was released on 11 April 2008 during the Tamil New Year festival. Despite being released during the season of the Indian Premier League, it took a big opening and enjoyed a theatrical run of one hundred days due to positive critical reviews and favourable word of mouth.

The reception in the United Kingdom, comparatively for a Tamil film, was equally successful, entering the UK box office at number 40. The film collected in its first week of opening and earned a cumulative gross of £24,962 in its three-week box office run.

Pavithra Srinivasan of Rediff gave the film a rating of two and a half out of five; she called the film a "classy remake of the Telugu blockbuster "Bommarillu" (Toy-house), the movie is a love-story but it strives to be something even more". She stated that Ravi "performs with his usual flair", D'Souza's character "appears a little too good to be true, at first. But her character grows on you", and praised Prakash Raj's performance, saying that the role "was a cakewalk" for him. Malathi Rangarajan of "The Hindu" praised the music, locations and the main cast's performances, and wrote that in the film, "dull moments are rare, enjoyable ones aplenty". IndiaGlitz said, "Hats off director Raja and Jeyam Ravi for hitting the bull's eye for the fourth time in a row. The duo continues from where they left in "Unakum Enakum" to provide a feel-good light-hearted family entertainer sure to be enjoyed with the family." and concluded, ""Santosh Subramaniam" is no doubt a film that is sure to spread "santhosam" (happiness) to one and all."

Sify said D'Souza's portrayal is "the soul of the film" and its "biggest strength"; the reviewer called Ravi's performance "mature" and Prakash Raj's "outstanding". Behindwoods gave the film three stars out of five and called it a "well made family entertainer". The reviewer wrote, "watch "Santosh Subramaniam" for that 'feel good' feeling, overlook minor glitches", and said that Prakash Raj is "the real master" who "proves his class yet again". Settu Shankar of Oneindia said, "there are few minuses in the script but those are very minor and not affect the flow of the story" and concluded, "overall, "Santosh Subramaniam" is a promising entertainer that brings the first word of the title in every viewers mind for long time even after come out from the theatre".


</doc>
<doc id="11803815" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11803815" title="Contra la Corriente (Marc Anthony album)">
Contra la Corriente (Marc Anthony album)

Contra la Corriente ("Against the Current") is the third studio album released by American singer Marc Anthony on October 21, 1997 by RMM Records. The album was produced by Puerto Rican musician Angel "Cucco" Peña, with most of the songs written by Panamanian composer Omar Alfanno. The album was well received by critics who praised the vocals of Anthony as well as the songs. The album produced six singles, four of which peaked on the top ten on the Hot Latin Tracks chart. Promoted by a sold-out concert in Madison Square Garden, "Contra la Corriente" became the first salsa album reach number one on the Top Latin Albums chart and to chart on the "Billboard" 200.

"Contra la Corriente" received a Grammy Award and a Latin Billboard Award, and was named the eighth best album of 1997 by "Time" magazine. It has sold over 400,000 copies as of 2000. The album received a gold certification for shipping of 500,000 copies in the United States. This was the last album that Marc Anthony recorded under RMM Records before switching over to Columbia Records to record his first self-titled English album.

Since Anthony's signing on with RMM Records, his first-two albums had been successful, selling over 600,000 copies combined. His second album, "Todo a Su Tiempo", was certified gold in the United States and received a Grammy Award nomination. Record producer Sergio George, who was credited for the success Anthony's earlier albums, was not involved in the production of "Contra La Corriente". Angel "Cucco" Peña, who has worked with salsa veterans such as Gilberto Santa Rosa and Willie Colón, took up the position as producer for the album. "Contra la Corriente", the third studio album by Anthony, was released in October 1997. The album was distributed by MCA Records and was promoted at a sold-out concert in Madison Square Garden days before the release of the album.

For the album, Anthony built a studio near his home. Around that time, he was involved in the production of Paul Simon's musical play "The Capeman" and had to record the album in three weeks. Anthony chose nine songs out of 1,300 samples. He sent tapes to co-producer Peña at the Altamar Music Studios in San Juan, Puerto Rico to get feedback. He made routine flights between New York and Puerto Rico to record the album hours and to rehearse for the play. Panamanian composer Omar Alfanno, who wrote three songs on the last album, had composed five songs for the album. Fernando Arias composed the boleros "No Me Conoces" and "Suceden". "Si Te Vas" is a cover of the Pedro Fernández song. Manny Benito wrote the last track, "Un Mal Sueño".

"Y Hubo Alguien" ("And There Was Somebody") was the lead single from the album. Released in the same month as the album, the single reached number-one on the Hot Latin Tracks. It was his first number one single on the chart and the first single by a salsa musician to reach number one. "Me Voy a Regalar" ("I Am Going to Give") followed later in the year. "Si Te Vas" ("If You Go") was the third single from the album, released in 1998; it reached number-eight on Hot Latin Tracks. "Contra la Corriente" ("Against the Current") and "No Me Conoces" ("You Do Not Know Me") both reached number-two on Hot Latin Tracks., "No Sabes Como Duele" ("You Do Not Know How It Hurts") was the last single to be released from the album in 1999 and reached number-eighteen on the Hot Latin Tracks. Three of the six singles, "Y Hubo Alguien", "Si Te Vas", and "Contra la Corriente", reached number-one on the Latin Tropical Airplay charts. Two songs from the album were made into music videos. The first music video was the lead single "Y Hubo Alguien" which was filmed in New York City. The second music video was "No Me Conoces" which was directed by Benny Coral. Filming took place in México and featured Jennifer Lopez as the supporting actress.

"Contra la Corriente" received mostly positive reviews from critics, who praised Marc Anthony's singing. Terry Jenkins of Allmusic gave the album a 4.5 out of 5 and praised Anthony's vocals as being "sexy" and "near-flawless" though he felt that it "doesn't quite match the dizzying heights of his breakthrough "Todo a Su Tiempo"". Achy Obejas of the "Chicago Tribune" names "Contra la Corriente" as Anthony's best album and felt that the influence of Cuban music was prominent "in the rhythms and harmonies" in comparison to Los Van Van. Ernesto Lechner of the "Los Angeles Times", who was more critical of the album, gave it two-out-of-four stars criticizing the arrangements as "unbearably soapy" and called the album a "flawed masterpiece in the saccharine genre of salsa romantica." An editor for "Billboard" magazine felt Anthony should "build on his towering reputation with another radio-appropriate package". "Contra la Corriente" was named the eighth best album of 1997 by "Time" magazine stating that "...whether you habla espanol or not, Anthony's talent comes through, no translation needed".

At the 41st Grammy Awards, "Contra la Corriente" was given a Grammy Award for Best Tropical Latin Performance. Lechner later said the album was "poppish" and claimed it to "not measure up against most of the competing efforts in his category." "Billboard" awarded the album "Tropical Album of the Year by a Male Artist", citing that the album became the highest selling salsa album when it charted the Billboard 200. It also received a nomination for a 10th Lo Nuestro Awards for "Tropical Album of the Year". The single "Y Hubo Alguien" received a Billboard Latin Music Award and a Lo Nuestro award for "Tropical Song of the Year".

This would be the last time that Anthony worked with the RMM label. After disputes with Ralph Mercado over business practices, he left the record label and later signed on with Columbia Records to record his first self titled English album.

During the Madison Square Garden concert, RMM executive producer Ralph Mercado presented an award to Anthony for selling over 350,000 copies just before release. "Contra la Corriente" was the released on October 21, 1997 in the United States. The album debuted at number-one on the Top Latin Albums chart on the week of November 22, 1997, and stayed at number-one for three consecutive weeks. The album debuted at number-one on the Tropical Albums chart and remained on top for ten non-consecutive weeks. "Contra la Corriente" was the first album Anthony to chart on the "Billboard" 200, peaking at number seventy-four. The album was the fourth best selling Latin album of 1998 and was the second best selling tropical album after "Buena Vista Social Club". The album was certified gold in the United States for shipping of 500,000 units. A remastered edition of the album was released on September 9, 2003 by Universal Music Latino. "Contra la Corriente" has sold over 400,000 units as of 2000.

The following credits are from Allmusic.


</doc>
<doc id="11847728" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11847728" title="SECR N1 class">
SECR N1 class

The SECR N1 class was a type of 3-cylinder 2-6-0 ('mogul') steam locomotive designed by Richard Maunsell for mixed traffic duties, initially on the South Eastern and Chatham Railway (SECR), and later operated for the Southern Railway (SR). The N1 was a development of the basic principles established by the Great Western Railway's (GWR) Chief Mechanical Engineer (CME) George Jackson Churchward and by Maunsell's previous N class design.

The N1 prototype was the result of modifications made to N class No. 822 during construction in 1922. The locomotive became operational in 1923 and used parts interchangeable with other Maunsell locomotive classes. The prototype N1 was the only member of the class constructed before the SECR became part of the Southern Railway at the Grouping in 1923, and featured a variant of the Gresley conjugated valve gear designed by Harold Holcroft. The class set the precedent for the Southern Railway's subsequent 3-cylinder designs.

The N1s compared favourably with the N class, although the type showed little improvement in performance. More of the class were built when it became clear that the type's smaller cylinders provided greater route availability. A total of six engines were built. The N1 class was primarily used on the Eastern section of the Southern Railway network, and used by the Southern Region of British Railways (BR) from 1948. The N1s gave valuable service until they were withdrawn in 1962. None were preserved.

Richard Maunsell's N class mixed-traffic 2-6-0 prototype for the South Eastern and Chatham Railway (SECR) was completed in 1917. It showed a marked improvement in performance over his predecessor Harry Wainwright's 0-6-0 and 4-4-0 designs when tested on freight and local passenger trains. The success of the prototype encouraged the SECR management to order a batch of 15 in 1919 after government restrictions regulating locomotive production during the First World War were relaxed. Ashford locomotive works was already committed to undertaking deferred repair work however, which temporarily slowed construction of new locomotives. This resulted in the gradual completion of the 1919 N class order as works capacity permitted between 1920 and 1923.

Operational experience with the N class prototype demonstrated that it was capable of coping with peacetime passenger and freight traffic on the mainline between London and Ramsgate, but Maunsell anticipated an increase in traffic that would require a more powerful locomotive capable of hauling longer trains. The use of larger engines was prevented by low permitted axle loadings on parts of the SECR network, caused by economies in track construction by using flint beach pebbles as track ballast; this material failed to hold the track in place when under strain and could not support heavy locomotives. In the meantime Maunsell settled upon producing a 3-cylinder version of the N class 2-6-0, which provided the opportunity to test a variant of the Gresley conjugated valve gear developed by his assistant, Harold Holcroft.

Maunsell and Holcroft completed plans for a new 3-cylinder locomotive in 1919. Designated N1, the new design was an attempt to increase the operational flexibility and power of the SECR 2-6-0 without substantially increasing axle loading. Holcroft's previous employment as an engineer involved with the GWR's 4300 class meant that the N1 used the same Churchward features as the N class to aid standardisation and the manufacture of parts. These included the use of long-travel valves for free running at speed, right-hand drive in the cab and driving wheels. The retention of the 2-6-0 wheel arrangement meant ample accommodation for the N class' tapered boiler with Belpaire firebox. As with the N class, detail design on the N1 was left to another of Maunsell's assistants, James Clayton, who brought functional Midland Railway influences to the design: the loading gauge-friendly shape of the cab, the tender and the large-diameter smokebox. The smokebox housed a large superheater, regulator valve and snifting (anti-vacuum) valves. The N1 also retained Walschaerts valve gear on both outside cylinders.

The main design differences with the N class included the cab front, exhaust arrangements, and the addition of an extra (inside) cylinder between the frames to drive the centre driving axle. Clayton had revised the layout of the cab front spectacle plates (small windows on the front of the cab) to improve forward visibility. This incorporated two large single panes of glass either side of the boiler instead of the four smaller windows used on the N class. The inside cylinder was to be actuated by Holcroft's design of conjugated valve gear, which consisted of mechanical links fitted to both sets of outside Walschaerts gear, eliminating the need for a separate set of valve gear between the frames to operate the inside cylinder. The result would be a reduction in weight and the amount of mechanical equipment in this inaccessible part of the locomotive.

Holcroft’s valve gear design was also an attempt to address the problems associated with Gresley’s conjugated valve gear, which was prone to variations in valve events caused by heat expansion of the valve spindles within the pistons. The design utilised the motion of the outside valve rods (the rods transmitting the motion of the driving axles to the valves, such as the combination lever) instead, although the restricted space between the back of the outside cylinders and the front driving wheels made it impossible to locate the rocking arms controlling the conjugating mechanism in the vicinity. Holcroft’s solution was to move the mechanism to a position above the pony truck and ahead of the cylinders and link it to the outside valve rods with extension levers, which had to be accommodated within the strict SECR loading gauge tolerances. This necessitated a new design of cylinder block whereby the outside steam chests were set inwards and the size of the cylinders reduced to stroke and diameter. The sides of the outside cylinders consequently sloped inwards towards the top in a configuration similar to GWR 2-cylinder locomotives, thus providing ample space in which to accommodate the extension levers. The inside cylinder and conjugation assembly were set at an incline of 1 in 8 to clear the front pony truck, leaving space for a third set of independent Walschaerts valve gear between the frames should Holcroft’s conjugation mechanism prove unreliable in service.

Another issue concerned the strength of the locomotive frames around the cylinders. Taking inspiration from the 3-cylinder locomotives designed by Vincent Raven for the North Eastern Railway, Holcroft suggested that all three cylinders and associated steam passages should be cast in a single block, with rectangular holes cut into the frames to enable the outside cylinders to project through them. However, the SECR’s established practice of using outside steam chests on locomotives with outside cylinders prevented this, and the design team resorted to cutting a gap in the frames to accommodate the outside cylinders, which were then secured in place with a bolted splice plate. Production limitations at the Ashford works foundry also prevented the manufacture of a single casting that incorporated all three cylinders. This meant that the cylinder castings were split into two sections, with the left and inside cylinders forming a single unit that would be bolted onto a separate right-hand cylinder casting. Holcroft’s new cylinder block design also incorporated a separate saddle casting, a configuration that allowed the N1 cylinder patterns to be used with any diameter of smokebox, creating a standard component with potential applications on future locomotive designs.

The construction of the prototype at Ashford railway works was approved by the SECR management to commence in 1919. However, Ashford works was heavily engaged in tackling a backlog of repair and maintenance work caused by government restrictions during the First World War with little spare capacity for new construction projects, particularly when approval for the construction of the N1 prototype coincided with a priority order for 15 2-cylinder N class locomotives. In consequence, the works backlog meant that only 12 N class locomotives were completed between June 1920 and October 1922.

Seeing little sign of an increase in production capacity at Ashford, Maunsell decided to construct the prototype N1 locomotive from parts intended for use on the next N class locomotive in the batch, No. 822. The outside cylinders were exchanged for the N1 type, which had been machined at the GWR's Swindon railway works following casting at Ashford to quicken construction once the N class frames were modified to accept the new design of cylinder block. This produced a robust chassis capable of supporting both sets of Walschaerts and the Holcroft conjugated valve gear. The latter was provided with grease-gun lubrication points to ease maintenance.

A distinguishing feature of the locomotive was the high-set N class boiler, which was pitched above the frames to accommodate the inside cylinder assembly, potentially exposing the conjugation mechanism to the elements. To prevent corrosion, Maunsell incorporated a vertical metal cover above the front buffer beam to protect the inside cylinder and valve gear assembly, the main visual difference from the N class. Maunsell and Holcroft anticipated that the standard N class chimney would choke the exhaust blast produced by the three cylinders. To mitigate this, a wider-diameter blastpipe was cast for the locomotive and a new smokebox fabricated to accommodate a wide-diameter cast chimney. The rest of the construction process followed the 1919 N1 specification, and the final three members of the order for 15 N class locomotives were built as intended. The N1 prototype was completed in December 1922 and attached to a standard Maunsell flat-sided Ashford N class tender. It entered service on 24 March 1923 and the boiler pressure was reduced from to for No. 822's fuel consumption to be compared with that of the 2-cylinder N class during trials.

The completion of No. 822 coincided with the absorption of the SECR into the newly created Southern Railway in the 1923 Grouping. Maunsell was appointed the CME of the new company and embarked upon a greatly expanded programme of fleet standardisation to replace the inherited "pre-Grouping" designs. In 1924, No. 822 participated in a series of trials to compare the performance of the N, LSWR S15 and LB&SCR K classes when hauling freight trains of 65 loaded wagons between and . Despite achieving the lowest coal consumption per mile of all the designs tested, the N1 prototype cost more to maintain and displayed poor steaming qualities that affected timekeeping. After the trials, No. 822 remained the sole N1 until 1929, when the Southern Railway ordered a batch of five locomotives (Nos. A876–A880). The intention was to increase the availability of the class to complement the newly introduced U1 class passenger locomotives on gauge-restricted routes.

The batch was constructed at Ashford works and incorporated several refinements based upon operational experience with No. 822 and were given boilers set at . The other change was the discontinuation of the Holcroft valve gear because of the difficulty experienced in acquiring suitable spare parts for the prototype. The Southern Railway had also upgraded the permanent way on many of the former SECR routes by 1929, removing many of the weight restrictions that inspired the use of the Holcroft gear in the first place. Maunsell was therefore free to use three separate sets of Walschaerts valve gear driven by the centre driving wheels and the crank axle, a system that was easier to maintain due to the wide availability of parts.

The new locomotives were completed between March and November 1930. They were noticeably different from the prototype because the Holcroft conjugation mechanism above the outside cylinders was omitted, although the slab-front and angled profile of the outside cylinders was retained. Other variations included a set of footsteps beneath the front buffer beam, reversion to the N class cast chimney design and a revised dome that incorporated the regulator to ease access during routine maintenance. Once complete, Nos.  A876–A880 were attached to flat-sided tenders to increase operational range over the Southern Railway's longer Eastern section routes. No further N1 locomotives were ordered after the completion of No. A880 as the mechanically similar U1 class was capable of undertaking a broader range of tasks. Although intended for intermediate passenger work, the latter's driving wheels were of little disadvantage when used on slower freight duties.

The N1 class prototype was initially based at Bricklayers Arms shed for tests on services over the Eastern section. No. 822 became a familiar sight on freight workings between the Hither Green marshalling yard and and on passenger trains between and , as increased train lengths on these duties had taxed the ex-SECR 4-4-0 and 0-6-0 designs. This allocation also provided an opportunity for comparing performance against the 2-cylinder N class. The tests were complete by December 1923 and No. 822 was moved to Ashford shed and used on passenger services to Charing Cross. In 1925, No. 822 was re-allocated to Bricklayers Arms shed from where it was used on the gauge-restricted Tonbridge–Hastings line for the first time. No.  822 proved ideal for this line but was again re-allocated to for trials over the difficult undulating route to in 1928.

Despite the high maintenance costs and steaming difficulties revealed during the 1924 freight trials, the N1 prototype compared favourably against the N class, allowing the Southern Railway's management to order the final five locomotives in 1929. Nos. A876–A880 were initially allocated to the Central section shed at , from where they were regularly used on through expresses from the LMS between and Brighton and services to Hastings and . Three of the class were moved to Tonbridge shed in 1931 to operate over the Hastings line whilst the other three remained at New Cross. The class was re-allocated in 1935 with three based at Eastbourne on the Central section to haul through trains to the GWR and the London, Midland and Scottish Railway (LMS). By 1939 the class was divided between New Cross, Stewarts Lane and Tonbridge sheds.

As with the preceding N class, the N1s were capable of hauling heavy loads at moderate speeds, a useful attribute that was exploited throughout the Second World War. They were mostly used on freight trains on both Central and Eastern sections although No. 1822 was recorded hauling a 17–carriage troop special over the Redhill to Reading line in April 1942. The entire class operated in the Hastings area during the build-up to Operation Overlord in 1944. On 3 May, No. 1878 was targeted by a German fighter near but was undamaged. The entire class came into British Railways' ownership in 1948 and was used on the Southern Region.

As a development of the N class, the N1 class represented the next step forward for the British 2-6-0 concept, creating a capable workhorse equally adept at hauling passenger and freight traffic. The prototype proved economical in service as it used 10 percent less coal than the N class, but used 11 percent more water. However, the N1 design proved capable of fast speeds; No. 822 reached during trials between Charing Cross and Tonbridge in 1923. Once run-in, No. 822 became popular amongst its regular crews as they favoured the way the three cylinders balanced cyclic forces on the driving axle. This resulted in improved riding characteristics on the footplate at low speeds whilst reducing mechanical wear and the effect of hammerblow on the track. The Holcroft valve gear also meant that No. 822 was a comparatively light locomotive that could be used on weight-restricted routes.

Although successful at overcoming the problems associated with the Gresley conjugated valve gear, the Holcroft variant used on No. 822 suffered under a poor maintenance regime caused by the difficulty and expense of producing non-standard spare parts at Ashford works. The main problems associated with the Holcroft gear included inadequate lubrication of the moving parts and the whipping of the conjugation levers connecting the inside cylinder to the outside motion while running at high speeds, which caused uneven steam distribution to the cylinders. In this respect, the N1 prototype offered little advantage over the simpler 2-cylinder Ns and the locomotive was rarely used on long-distance runs on the Western section. Few modifications were made to the prototype before 1929, although boiler pressure was increased to the full operating pressure in June 1925.

The introduction of Nos. A876–A880 into service allowed No. A822 to be withdrawn for rebuilding with three separate sets of Walschaerts valve gear in August 1931. Other modifications included moving the regulator valve from the smokebox to a new N class-type dome to ease access during routine maintenance and the addition of a front footstep behind the bufferbeam. Despite the opportunity to upgrade to the tender attached to the new class members, No. A822 retained its smaller-capacity flat-sided Ashford tender. The result of the various modifications was a heavier locomotive, although it now benefited from upgraded track on the Eastern section and the interchange of standardised parts that reduced the time needed to complete repairs. The rebuilt locomotive emerged from Ashford works as No. 1822 in October 1931. Although the N1s displayed little overall improvement over the N class, they proved ideal for the gauge-restricted Hastings route, where their narrower profile allowed them to operate through narrow bridges and tunnels, and their power enabled them to haul heavier trains than the predominant ex-SECR 4-4-0 and 0-6-0s.

The last modification of the class undertaken by Maunsell was the gradual introduction of small smoke deflector plates from 1934. These were fitted to improve driver visibility as a result of smoke deflection experiments made on the King Arthur class between 1926 and 1927. Maunsell retired from the Southern Railway in 1937 and his replacement was Oliver Bulleid. Despite making various modifications to the steam circuit on other Maunsell classes, Bulleid saw no reason to make such drastic alterations to the N1 class. As a result, the final set of modifications made under Southern Railway ownership was made after the Second World War and included the removal of superfluous smokebox-mounted anti-vacuum snifting valves and the replacement of the wide-diameter N1 chimney with the U1 type to improve draughting on the prototype; the standard N class chimneys of the other five were also replaced. The class was well-used by British Railways over both Central and Eastern sections between 1948 and 1962 and justified the fitting of Automatic Warning System (AWS) equipment in 1959 alongside the N class.

Suitable work for the class began to decline under British Railways ownership after the widening of bridges and tunnels on the Hastings line, which enabled Bulleid's powerful Q1 class 0-6-0 to be used on freight trains between Hastings and Tonbridge. Following the completion of the Kent Coast electrification in 1959, the class was congregated at Tonbridge shed alongside members of the U1 class to haul local services throughout the Central section. The reduction of work over the Brighton main line and the prevalence of the N class precipitated another move to Stewarts Lane shed in London. However, with remaining work being allocated to Bulleid's "Light Pacifics", the class was withdrawn from service in November 1962.

No. 822 was completed before Grouping, and initially ran in the SECR's unlined dark grey livery with white lettering and numbering. It was repainted at the same time as the resetting of the boiler pressure in June 1925, in a dark olive green livery. The green was complemented with plain white lining, black borders and primrose yellow markings. This livery was also applied to the five locomotives built in 1930. During the Second World War, when labour and paint were in short supply, the class was gradually repainted in matt black. The repainting took place during essential maintenance visits to Ashford works, and included the application of Bulleid's "Sunshine" yellow block lettering and numerals on both tender and cabside. This livery was gradually replaced with gloss black between 1945 and 1947.

The prototype was constructed as part of a batch of 15 N class locomotives ordered by the SECR and became No. 822 within this series. When repainted to Maunsell's dark olive green livery, a prefix "A" was applied to the number to denote a locomotive allocated for overhaul at Ashford. The five locomotives constructed by the Southern Railway between March and November 1930 were numbered A876–A880. Shortly thereafter the prefix was dropped and 1000 added to the numbers as part of a general renumbering of Southern Railway locomotive stock; thus on the rebuilding of the prototype in 1930 it became 1822. The other five members of the class became Nos. 1876–1880.

The class was absorbed by British Railways in 1948, and like their N class counterparts were given the power classification 4MT in 1949. Under British Railways ownership, the class was reclassified from 4MT to 4P5FB in 1953; the "B" denoting the brake power rating when used on unfitted (non-vacuum braked) goods trains. The locomotives at first retained their Southern Railway livery, but No. 1876 was the first locomotive to emerge from Ashford works with "British Railways" painted on the tender in Gill Sans lettering. From 1949 to 1950 N1 class locomotives were gradually repainted in the British Railways mixed-traffic lined black livery with red, cream and grey lining and the British Railways crest on the tender. Numbering was changed to the British Railways standard numbering system: the prototype became No. 31822 and the 1930 batch was allocated the series 31876–31880.

The N1 was a capable class of mixed-traffic locomotive that could operate over the Southern Railway's gauge-restricted routes and was noted by crews for its comfortable riding qualities. The class also provided Maunsell and his assistants with a precedent for other compact 3-cylinder locomotive designs and formed a mechanical template for the Southern Railway's K1 class tank engine of 1925. However, the prototype offered little improvement in performance over the N class when tested on non-restricted routes, which led to an initial reluctance within the management of the Southern Railway to authorise batch construction. This meant that the non-standard Holcroft valve gear proved expensive to maintain because of the consequent lack of spare parts.

The use of three separate sets of valve gear on the 1930 batch eased maintenance and improved the standardisation of parts. The prototype was rebuilt to the same specification as the 1930 batch, creating a robust workhorse capable of a good turn of speed when working heavy passenger and freight trains. The revised valve gear layout was subsequently applied to the 3-cylinder U1 and V class designs. The relatively early withdrawal of the N1s pre-dated the era of preservationists buying withdrawn locomotives from scrap dealers or British Railways, and consequently no examples of the N1 class survived into preservation.




</doc>
<doc id="11876525" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11876525" title="Grandes Éxitos (Luis Miguel album)">
Grandes Éxitos (Luis Miguel album)

Grandes Éxitos (English: "Greatest Hits") is a greatest hits album by Mexican singer Luis Miguel. Released on 22 November 2005 by Warner Music Latina, the album features 24 previously-recorded songs from Miguel's career with his record label as well as two new songs ("Misterios del Amor" and "Si Te Perdiera"); both songs were released as singles from the album. A special edition of the record was also released and features six extra songs as well as a DVD containing music videos from Miguel's career. "Grandes Éxitos" received a favorable review by AllMusic critic, Thom Jurek who commended Miguel's trajectory as an artist. Commercially, it reached number one in Mexico and the top ten in Argentina, Spain, Portugal, and the "Bilboard" Top Latin Albums chart in the United States. It was certified Multi-Platinum in Mexico and the United States (Latin) and Platinum in Spain.

On 15 October 2005, Luis Miguel announced that he was releasing a greatest hits album on 22 November 2005. The contains 24 previously-recorded songs from his music career, ranging from pop music, boleros from his "Romance" series, and mariachi. The set includes tracks he recorded under his label Warner Music Latina since 1987. A special edition of the was also released on 22 November and features six extra songs, as well as a DVD of his music videos. 

Two original songs were composed for "Grandes Éxitos": "Misterios del Amor" and "Si Te Perdiera". The former song was composed by Francisco Loyo and Alejandro Asensi while the latter track was written by Manuel Alejandro; both songs were produced by Miguel. "Misterios del Amor" was released as the album's lead single on 24 October 2005 and peaked at number 29 on the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States. "Si Te Perdiera" was released as the album's second single on 17 January 2006 and peaked at number 47 on the Hot Latin Songs chart. "Si Te Perdiera" served as the main theme for the Mexican telenovela "La verdad oculta" (2006).

AllMusic critic Thom Jurek gave "Grandes Éxitos" four-out-of-five stars noting Miguel's maturity from a teen idol into crooner. He commented some of the songs sounds "dated" but remarked that Miguel's trajectory as "utterly engaging and worthwhile". In the United States, "Grandes Éxitos" peaked at number eight on the "Billboard" Top Latin Albums chart and was certified double platinum in the Latin field by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipping 200,000 copies. In Mexico, the double-disc reached the top of the Top 100 Mexico albums chart and was certified triple platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas (AMPROFON) for shipping 300,000 units. The DVD was certified platinum and gold by AMPROFON as well for shipments of 30,000 units. In Argentina, it peaked at number three on the albums chart. In Europe, the record peaked at number five in Spain and was certified platinum by the Productores de Música de España and reached seven in Portugal.

Adapted from the "Grandes Éxitos" liner notes:




</doc>
<doc id="11888296" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11888296" title="Do or Die (Super Furry Animals song)">
Do or Die (Super Furry Animals song)

"Do or Die" is the eleventh single by Super Furry Animals. It was the last single to be taken from the "Guerrilla" album and was the band's last release for Creation Records. The track reached number 20 in the UK Singles Chart after its release on 17 January 2000. The group had originally wanted to release "Wherever I Lay My Phone (That's My Home)" as the final single from "Guerilla" but Creation instead chose "Do or Die", a decision which the band claimed not to understand.

Although "Do or Die" features "daft lyrics", its name was inspired by Mahatma Gandhi's Quit India speech which called for Indians to "Do or Die" to end British Imperial rule in the country. Critical reaction was largely positive with the song being named 'Single of the Week' by the "Melody Maker" and appearing at number 55 in the "NME"'s single of the year list for 2000 despite an earlier claim by the magazine that there was "no need whatsoever" to release the track as a single. The music video for "Do or Die" was directed by Jake & Jim and features live action footage of the group's heads on brightly coloured cartoon bodies.

According to Gruff Rhys "Do or Die" has a "ridiculously positive outlook" and was written in an attempt to "kickstart [the band] back into gear" after a bad period in the singer's life. The track is a "driving song" and features sampled car noises so that "even if you're not in a car it feels like you are". Although Rhys has called the track a "dumb pop song" with "really daft" lyrics, he has also claimed that the title was inspired by the Quit India speech made by Mahatma Gandhi on 8 August 1942 at the Gowalia Tank in Bombay in which Gandhi called for his countrymen to "Do or Die" and use non-violent resistance to end British Imperial rule in India. Rhys has stated that he feels the fact that "five-year-olds" can jump up and down to the song, singing "Gandhi lyrics", is important, as it contrasts with the "self-important ... pompous" lyrics of singers such as Jim Morrison and Robert Plant. The track was recorded in the middle of 1998 at Real World Studios, Box, Wiltshire, along with the rest of "Guerrilla", and was produced by Super Furry Animals.

"Do or Die" is 1 minute and 59 seconds long and is in the key of A major. The instruments used on the track are tuned slightly sharper than standard. The song begins with an intro featuring a lead guitar and keyboard melody, which plays twice, accompanied by a rhythm guitar riff alternating between A and D chords, drums and bass. The track breaks down to just rhythm guitar, drums and bass for the first verse which begins after 13 seconds. The first chorus begins after 23 seconds with a distorted guitar playing the chord sequence D5, C5, B5 and A5 twice while Rhys sings "If we do or die we should try, if we don't try I say bye-bye, and if I say bye-bye, I'll wonder why we didn't try to do or die" backed by high harmony backing vocals and occasional keyboard noises. The song breaks down again for a second verse before the second chorus enters at 46 seconds. An instrumental passage follows with the lead guitar and keyboard reprising the melody which plays during the intro. The instrumental leads into a double chorus. At the end of the final chorus the track crescendos, with Rhys singing "yeah, yeah, yeah" and all instruments with the exception of the keyboard coming to an abrupt silence after 1 minute and 43 seconds. Keyboard noises continue and gradually fade out until the track ends.

The Super Furry Animals had originally intended to issue the song "Wherever I Lay My Phone (That's My Home)" as the third single from "Guerrilla" but, on returning from an American tour in 1999, found that their record company, Creation, had not done any work regarding the release. Returning from a tour of Europe later the same year the band discovered that both their record label and record plugging company had folded and that Creation made the decision, first to release "Night Vision" instead of "Wherever I Lay My Phone (That's My Home)", and then to replace "Night Vision" with "Do or Die" as the last single from "Guerrilla". Singer Gruff Rhys has expressed dissatisfaction with this choice, claiming that he is not sure how the decision was made and that he wanted "Wherever I Lay My Phone (That's My Home)" to be released as he "quite fancied the idea of a novelty hit". However, the group ultimately felt "Wherever I Lay My Phone (That's My Home)" could not be issued in any case following the December 1999 release of "I Wanna 1-2-1 With You" by Jimmy Cauty's Solid Gold Chartbusters, which was "based on the same Nokia ringtone".

"Do or Die" was issued on CD, cassette and 7" on 17 January 2000, the band's last release for Creation, and reached number 20 in the UK Singles Chart. The track became the shortest song ever to be performed on the BBC's "Top Of The Pops" programme when the group appeared on the show to promote the single's release. The track was included on the band's 'greatest hits' compilation album "", issued in 2004.

"Do or Die" was awarded 'Single of the Week' in the January 19–25, 2000 issue of the "Melody Maker" by guest reviewers Pär Wiksten and Christina Bergmark from The Wannadies who gave the track "all the points we can afford" and claimed that it ends perfectly. The "NME" described the song as "not the best track from ... "Guerrilla", but then not the worst either" and claimed that it was mostly of note because it was the second single by Super Furry Animals to be less than two minutes long following 1996's "God! Show Me Magic". Despite stating that there was "no need whatsoever" for the release, the "NME" ranked "Do or Die" at number 55 in their single of the year list for 2000. In a 2005 review of the reissued "Guerrilla", Pitchfork described the track as "near-perfect sunny pop" while, in an earlier review of "Songbook: The Singles, Vol. 1", the website called "Do or Die" "proggy quasi-Britpop" and likened its guitar part to "Jessica" by The Allman Brothers Band. Also reviewing "Songbook...", the BBC described "Do or Die" as one of several "great hairy rock outs" on the record, "The Washington Post" called it "straightforward pop-punk" and Drowned in Sound labelled it a "guitar-laden sugar rush". Website Cokemachineglow likened the track to the work of The Stooges. Pitchfork claimed that the single's b-sides, the "inescapably sha-la-la-ing 'Colorblind'" and the "piano-accented bounder" "Missunderstanding (sic)", pale beside "Do or Die" and the other tracks on "Guerilla" although they "do manage to scratch the itch for more SFA".

A promotional music video was produced to accompany the release of "Do or Die" as a single. The video was directed by Jake & Jim who also directed the video for the group's previous single, "Fire in My Heart". The video begins with the camera zooming in through the door of a cartoon house in the desert to reveal Super Furry Animals playing along to the track in a room. The band's heads and instruments are live action footage, filmed in London, while their bodies and surroundings are brightly coloured animations. During the first verse, shots of the group playing the track in the room are intercut with images of band members on cartoon surfboards superimposed onto real life footage of giant waves. This process is repeated during the second chorus, with the video cutting between shots of the band playing in the room and images of the band superimposed onto live footage of tornados. After 1 minute and 4 seconds images of the group's heads being swept along in a lava flow are intercut with the band playing along with the track in the now red room with lava visible through the windows. Snow then begins to fall in the room and the video cuts to shots of the group escaping an avalanche in a bobsled. As the track ends the lightbulb in the room begins to swing frantically and Super Furry Animals are bathed in a green "radioactive or alien glow". A shot of the house in front of a nuclear explosion cuts to footage of the band frozen mid-word, with the camera moving through 360 degrees to reveal them as two dimensional cutouts. The "Do or Die" music video was named as 'Video of the week' in the 12–18 January issue of "Melody Maker" and was included on the DVD release of the band's greatest hits album, "".

All songs by Super Furry Animals.




</doc>
<doc id="11917678" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11917678" title="Green Lake (Texas)">
Green Lake (Texas)

Green Lake is a natural tidal lake in Calhoun County, Texas, on the Guadalupe River flood basin. Known for its greenish waters, from which its name derives, the lake is located west of Port Lavaca and south of Victoria on the Gulf Coastal Plain. Despite being less than from the coast of San Antonio Bay, its waters are fresh. It is the largest natural freshwater lake entirely in Texas, covering an area of approximately 10,000 acres (40 km²).

Separated from San Antonio Bay by the Guadalupe River delta around 2,200 years ago, a wetland ecosystem supporting a wide variety of waterfowl developed along the lake shore and the Guadalupe River delta. Archaeological evidence supports claims of Karankawa settlement.

An affluent 19th-century agricultural community of the same name established near the lakeside in the mid-19th century, but dwindled in status, becoming virtually abandoned in the aftermath of the American Civil War. It was strategically important during the early stages of the war, due to its proximity to fresh water and the Gulf of Mexico. After reaching its low point during the Great Depression, the lakeside community modestly rebounded in 1947 following the nearby discovery of oil. A fictional lake of the same name and with a similar history is featured in the 1998 novel "Holes".

Green Lake is about in circumference and about wide. The water level is shallower near the shoreline, but is deepest towards the center of the lake several hundred feet from the shore. The bottom is generally flat and averages about in depth. The nearby Guadalupe River frequently floods the plain, and is the main source of fresh water renewal. The shoreline is naturally grassy and poorly drained with coastal marshes between the lake and San Antonio Bay.

To improve drainage, a levee was constructed in 1967, separating the lake from the Victoria Barge Canal, which runs along the bay's northern and eastern shores; cutting off several bayous from the lake. The canal begins north at an industrial plant outside Victoria and empties in San Antonio Bay in Seadrift. Hog Bayou runs along the western shore of Green Lake, through the Guadalupe Delta Wildlife Management Area to the south, before its confluence with Mission Lake.

Green Lake formed initially as a northern inlet of San Antonio Bay. As the Guadalupe River shifted westward about 2,500 years ago, it deposited silt, developing a delta that prograded into San Antonio Bay. Around 2,200 years ago the delta discharge extended completely across the bay, severing the northern extension from the system, which formed present-day Green Lake. Pottery and burial grounds found in the area suggest a presence of Karankawa Indians at the time of formation. Middens uncovered north of the lake contained shells from the brackish water-species of rangia clams ("Rangia cuneata").

Wealthy cotton farmers from Kentucky established plantations and settled the fertile lands near the lake during the 1850s, establishing the town of Green Lake, Texas. First-hand accounts described it as "the locality of a neighborhood characterized by [the] wealth and social standing of the residents." 

After the American Civil War, returning residents found that their slaves, livestock and farm equipment had been taken. Most residents relocated. However, in the early 20th century, farmers returned and the town of Green Lake modestly grew to an approximate population of 300 in 1914. At the time, much of the land in the vicinity was used for livestock grazing. The only profitable commercial uses for the lake itself included transportation of lumber and fishing. Approximately US$100,000 worth of fish were caught in the lake from 1900 to 1915. Nevertheless, the lake bed remained dry for extended periods and vegetation covered certain areas. Local residents soon began to use the bed to grow cotton.

In 1917, Texas filed a trespass to try title suit to reclaim the lake bed for the state. In "Welder v. State", the Texas Court of Civil Appeals in Austin declared the lake permanent and navigable-in-fact, granting the bed to the state under the purview of the Texas Game, Fish and Oyster Commission (later Texas Parks and Wildlife Department). Without permission from the Texas Attorney General, the Texas Land Commissioner then sold the bed to a private buyer for agricultural use in 1918. In the 1948 case of "State v. Bryan", the Texas Court of Civil Appeals in Austin upheld the sale as valid under color of law, and immune from a trespass to try title suit due to the one-year statute of limitations on land sales. However, under the Texas Water Rights Adjudication Act of 1967, Green Lake was classified as a public body of water. The Supreme Court of Texas affirmed this classification in 1988, rejecting the argument of the bed's then-owner that it was not a lake by definition, but a natural depression flooded with surface runoff.

During the Great Depression, the population of the Green Lake settlement dwindled to 25. It remained low until the discovery of oil in 1947. Twenty wells were constructed at the Green Lake oilfield, although as of 1984, only one still operated. By 2000, the population of Green Lake was 51, the same number reported in 1970 and 1990.

The lake played a role in the evacuation of federal troops from Texas at the onset of the American Civil War. As Texas considered whether to secede from the United States, General David E. Twiggs, commander of federal troops in Texas negotiated with state leaders concerning the transfer of federal property. After learning of such negotiations, the United States military moved to decommission Twiggs, and replace him with Colonel Carlos Waite. Texas viewed this move as a rejection of the negotiations and proceeded to forcefully claim the federal property. Twiggs, while awaiting relief from Waite, surrendered the property on the condition that federal troops could peacefully evacuate. They were allowed to depart, but only from the Texas coast. Waite arrived and relocated troops near Green Lake, where they could await coastal departure near an adequate source of freshwater. During the stay, Fort Sumter fell under siege, and Texas grew concerned about the concentration of armed federal troops in the area. With their respective nations now at war, Texas considered the deal with Twiggs void, and began to capture federal troops to force them to either join the Confederacy or be Prisoners of War. Some of the remaining uncaptured companies elsewhere in the state attempted to flee to Green Lake. Several regiments camped by the lake later in the war, and complained about mosquitos.

In the area around Green Lake there are forests of pecan, black willow, cedar, American elm, hackberry and green ash. To the south, the Guadalupe Delta Wildlife Management Area serves as a wetland habitat for thousands of permanent egrets, and other birds, including the brown pelican, reddish egret, white-faced ibis, wood stork, bald eagle, white-tailed hawk, peregrine falcon, and the whooping crane. American alligators reside in the area as well.

Redfish and trout were once the main species of fish living in the lake, until the construction of an embankment reduced their populations. A large quantity of silt is now deposited in the lake from the Guadalupe River, after the dredging of a freshwater channel that supplies farmers and the Union Carbide plant in Seadrift. The channel has negatively affected the delta ecosystem by diminishing the river's nutritional input.

Green Lake, Texas is the setting for Louis Sachar's 1998 novel "Holes", and the 2003 film adaptation. It is described as a dry lake that had once been the largest in the state, surrounded by an affluent community. After a long drought, the lake dried up and the area became a ghost town. Juvenile delinquents were sent to Camp Green Lake to dig holes in the lakebed as punishment.



</doc>
<doc id="11927826" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11927826" title="Legal disputes over the Harry Potter series">
Legal disputes over the Harry Potter series

Since first coming to wide notice in the late 1990s, the "Harry Potter" book series by J. K. Rowling has engendered a number of legal disputes. Rowling, her various publishers and Time Warner, the owner of the rights to the "Harry Potter" films, have taken numerous legal actions to protect their copyrights, and also have fielded accusations of copyright theft themselves. The worldwide popularity of the "Harry Potter" series has led to the appearance of a number of locally produced, unauthorised sequels and other derivative works, sparking efforts to ban or contain them. While these legal proceedings have countered a number of cases of outright piracy, other attempts have targeted not-for-profit endeavours and have been criticised.

Another area of legal dispute involves a series of injunctions obtained by Rowling and her publishers to prohibit anyone from distributing or reading her books before their official release dates. The sweeping powers of these injunctions have occasionally drawn fire from civil liberties and free speech campaigners and sparked debates over the "right to read". One of these injunctions was used in an unrelated trespassing case as precedent supporting the issuance of an injunction against a John Doe.

Outside these controversies, a number of particular incidents related to "Harry Potter" have also led, or almost led, to legal action. In 2005, a man was sentenced to four years in prison after firing a replica gun at a journalist during a staged deal for stolen copies of an unreleased "Harry Potter" novel, and attempting to blackmail the publisher with threats of releasing secrets from the book. Then in 2007 Bloomsbury Publishing contemplated legal action against the supermarket chain Asda for libel after the company accused them of overpricing the final "Harry Potter" novel, "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows". A comprehensive list of intellectual property and speech lawsuits involving "Harry Potter", Harry Potter Lawsuits and Where to Find Them, was compiled by attorney David Kluft in 2015 for the Trademark and Copyright Law Blog.

In 1999, American author Nancy Kathleen Stouffer alleged copyright and trademark infringement by Rowling of her 1984 works "The Legend of Rah and the Muggles" () and "Larry Potter and His Best Friend Lilly". The primary basis for Stouffer's case rested in her own purported invention of the word "Muggles", the name of a race of mutant humanoids in "The Legend of Rah and the Muggles", and Larry Potter, the title character of a series of activity booklets for children. Larry Potter, like Harry Potter, is a bespectacled boy with dark hair, though he is not a character in "The Legend of Rah and the Muggles". Stouffer also drew a number of other comparisons, such as a castle on a lake, a receiving room and wooden doors. Portions of "Rah" were originally published in booklet form in 1986 by Ande Publishing Company, a company founded by Stouffer together with a group of friends and family. Ande Publishing filed for bankruptcy in September 1987 without selling any of its booklets in the United States or elsewhere. Rowling has stated that she first visited the United States in 1998.

Rowling, along with Scholastic Press (her American publisher) and Warner Bros. (holders of the series' film rights), pre-empted Stouffer in 2002 with a suit of their own seeking a declaratory judgment that they had not infringed on any of Stouffer's works. The court found in Rowling's favour, granting summary judgment and holding that "no reasonable juror could find a likelihood of confusion as to the source of the two parties' works". During the course of the trial, it was held that Rowling proved "by clear and convincing evidence, that Stouffer has perpetrated a fraud on the Court through her submission of fraudulent documents as well as through her untruthful testimony", including changing pages years after the fact to retroactively insert the word "muggle". Her case was dismissed with prejudice and she was fined $50,000 for her "pattern of intentional bad faith conduct" in relation to her employment of fraudulent submissions, along with being ordered to pay a portion of the plaintiffs' legal fees. Stouffer appealed the decision in 2004, but in 2005 the Second Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the ruling. In 2006 she stated on her website that she was planning to republish her books and was entertaining the possibility of another lawsuit against Warner Bros., J. K. Rowling and Scholastic Press.

"The Legend of Rah and the Muggles" is currently out of print. In early 2001, it was published by Thurman House, LLC, a Maryland publishing company. Thurman House, formed by Ottenheimer Publishers to republish the works of Nancy Stouffer, was closed when Ottenheimer ceased operations in 2002 after filing for bankruptcy. Stouffer later asserted that any copies of the book published by Thurman House are unauthorized because the publisher failed to honour its contractual obligations to her.

In 2005, Warner Bros. offered CAD$5,000 (later CAD$50,000) to the Canadian folk band the Wyrd Sisters for the rights to use their name in the film version of "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire". Rowling had written a scene in the novel in which a band called the Weird Sisters appeared at a school dance, and the group owned the rights to the name in Canada. However, the offer was declined, and instead the band undertook a legal action against Warner Bros., as well as Jarvis Cocker of Pulp and Jonny Greenwood and Phil Selway of Radiohead, who were to play the band in the film. All plans to use the name in the movie were later abandoned. Despite that decision, the Canadian band filed a CAD$40-million ($39 million) lawsuit against Warner in Ontario court. In connection with the lawsuit, the band brought an interlocutory injunction hoping to prevent the release of the film. The injunction application was dismissed. The entire suit was dismissed in November 2005. In June 2006, an Ontario judge decreed that the band pay Warner Bros. CAD$140,000 in legal costs, describing their lawsuit as "highly intrusive". The group claimed they planned to appeal the decision. Jarvis Cocker initially wished to release an album of "Weird Sisters"-themed music with collaborators including Franz Ferdinand, Jack White and Iggy Pop, but the project was dropped as a result of the lawsuit. The Wyrd Sisters reported death threats from irate "Harry Potter" fans. As of March 2010, the lawsuit has been settled out of court, the details sealed.

In June 2009, the estate of Adrian Jacobs, a children's author who died in 1997, sued Rowling's publishers, Bloomsbury, for £500 million, accusing her of having plagiarised "substantial parts" of his work in writing the novel "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire". In a statement, Jacobs's family claimed that a scene in "Goblet of Fire" was substantially similar to Jacobs's book "The Adventures of Willy the Wizard: Livid Land:" "'Both Willy and Harry are required to work out the exact nature of the main task of the contest which they both achieve in a bathroom assisted by clues from helpers, in order to discover how to rescue human hostages imprisoned by a community of half-human, half-animal fantasy creatures." They also launched a joint suit against Rowling and her publishers. Bloomsbury countered with a statement of its own, saying that "This claim is without merit and will be defended vigorously," and that Rowling "had never heard of Adrian Jacobs nor seen, read or heard of his book "Willy the Wizard" until this claim was first made in 2004, almost seven years after the publication of the first "Harry Potter" book." The Jacobs estate, driven by his son and grandson, have published a website with details and excerpts from the book, according to the "Toronto Star". In July 2010, the estate filed suit against Rowling's American publisher, Scholastic, demanding that the company burn all copies of "Goblet of Fire".

On 6 January 2011, the US lawsuit against Scholastic was dismissed. The judge in the case stated that there was not enough similarity between the two books to make a case for plagiarism. In the UK courts, on 21 March 2011, Paul Allen, a trustee of the Jacobs estate, was ordered to pay as security to the court 65% of the costs faced by Bloomsbury and Rowling, amounting to over £1.5million, to avoid the claim being struck out. It was reported in "The Bookseller" that Paul Allen has appealed against paying this sum. As a condition of the appeal, he paid £50,000 to the court in May 2011. The claim was formally struck out in July 2011 after the deadline for Allen's initial payment was missed.

In 2002, an unauthorised Chinese-language sequel titled "Harry Potter and Bao Zoulong" (Chinese: Simplified: 哈利波特与豹走龙, Traditional: 哈利波特與豹走龍, Hanyu Pinyin: "Hālì Bōtè yǔ Bào Zǒulóng") appeared for sale in the People's Republic of China. (In English-language media this was mistranslated as "Harry Potter and Leopard-Walk-Up-to-Dragon".)
According to translated excerpts, the book principally consists of the text of J. R. R. Tolkien's "The Hobbit", but with most names changed to those of "Harry Potter" characters. The book was quickly recognised by media outlets as a fake. Rowling and Warner Bros. took steps to stop its distribution. Copies were briefly distributed around the world, including e-book copies traded on the Internet. In November 2002, the Bashu Publishing House, in the southwestern city of Chengdu, agreed to pay a £1,600 (US$3,400) fine and publish an apology in China's "Legal Times" for printing and distributing the novel. As of 2007, the identity of the anonymous "author" has not been discovered. The opening of "Harry Potter and Bao Zoulong", translated into English, was included in several news articles. As of 2007, it is estimated that there are fifteen million copies of fraudulent "Harry Potter" novels circulating in China. In 2007, Rowling's agents, the Christopher Little Literary Agency, began to discuss the possibility of legal proceedings concerning a fake version of "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows" that appeared in China ten days before the actual book's publication.

In 2003, legal pressure from "Harry Potter"'s publishers led an Indian publisher to stop publication of "Harry Potter in Calcutta" by Uttam Ghosh; a work in which Harry meets figures from Bengali literature. The case was settled out of court.

Also in 2003, courts in the Netherlands prevented the distribution of a Dutch translation of "Tanya Grotter and the Magical Double Bass", the first of Dmitri Yemets' popular Russian series about a female apprentice wizard. Rowling and her publishers sued, arguing that the Grotter books violate copyright law. Yemets and his original Moscow-based publishers, Eksmo, argued that the books constitute a parody, permitted under copyright. The Dutch courts ruled that the books did not constitute parody and thus were not allowed to be sold in the Netherlands. Later that year, as the Dutch translation "Tanja Grotter en de magische contrabas" was still legal in Belgium, the Flemish publishers Roularta Books decided to print 1,000 copies (and no more) in order to let people decide whether it was plagiarism, hoping that under those circumstances Rowling and her publishers would not sue. Rowling did not sue, but as there was a lot of interest in the book (Dutch people could buy the book by postal order from another Flemish publisher, Boekhandel VanIn) it was soon sold out. The books continue to be published in Russia and have spawned several sequels.

In August 2008, Warner Bros. filed a lawsuit against production company Mirchi Movies due to the similarity of the title of their Bollywood film "" to the "Harry Potter" film series. Mirchi Movies CEO Munish Purii claimed there is very little similarity between Hari Puttar and any elements in the "Harry Potter" franchise, and explained that Hari is a popular Indian name, while "puttar" means "son" in Punjabi, although Indian versions of "Harry Potter" also translate Harry's name to Hari Puttar. The film was delayed until late September. Warner Bros. claimed that the title was confusing, but Mirchi Movies claimed they registered the name in 2005. On 24 September 2008, the court in Delhi rejected Warner Bros.' claim, saying that "Harry Potter" readers were sufficiently able to distinguish between the two works. They also accused Warner Bros. of delaying the action, since they were aware of the film as far back as 2005.

In 2000, in the lead-up to the release of the first "Harry Potter" film, "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone"; Warner Bros., the film's distributor, sent a series of letters to owners of "Harry Potter" fansites, demanding that, to protect their copyright, they hand over their domain names. The action resulted in negative publicity for the company when Claire Field, the then 15-year-old webmaster of the British fansite harrypotterguide.co.uk, was reduced to tears by what were described by her father as unnecessary bully tactics. Eventually the corporation backed down in the face of media opposition and declared that, as the site was non-commercial, it did not violate the trademark.

In their May 2004 issue, the US Army publication "The Preventive Maintenance Monthly", which instructs soldiers on how to maintain their equipment, featured a spoof comic based on "Harry Potter", featuring a character named Topper who resided at Mogmarts School under Professor Rumbledore. The publication received notice from Rowling's lawyers that the comics breached copyright, though the magazine's editor, Ken Crunk, claimed that no violation had taken place, as "[t]he drawings do not look like any of the characters from "Harry Potter"". After a discussion with Rowling's representatives, the magazine agreed not to use the characters again.

In 2004, Rowling and Time Warner launched legal actions against bazee.com, now the Indian branch of the online auction site eBay. The site had hosted illegally created e-books of "Harry Potter", which Rowling had never agreed to be published. In 2005, Rowling warned her fans on her website that various "signed" "Harry Potter" memorabilia appearing for sale on eBay did not in fact use her signature. She urged her fans to protest eBay to prevent other children from being swindled. In 2007, Rowling launched lawsuits against a number of users of the site, obtaining a series of stay orders preventing them from selling her work. However eBay claimed that in her dealings with the media, Rowling had falsely claimed that her injunctions had been against eBay itself. In June 2007, eBay filed papers with the Delhi High Court, alleging that Rowling had caused them "immense humiliation and harassment". The High Court circumvented the application, claiming that it could not make such a judgment until the case went to trial.

In October 2007, Warner Bros. sued a group constructing a façade during a Hindu religious festival in the Indian city of Kolkata for , claiming that they had erected a giant replica of Harry Potter's school, Hogwarts, without their permission. Initial reports stated that, as the effort was not for profit, it did not violate Rowling's copyright. The Associated Press claimed that the High Court of Delhi, where the petition was filed, allowed the organisers to carry on with the temporary construction with an order that the structure had to be dismantled after the festival was over and that the court refused to impose any compensation on the basis that the organisers were involved in a "non-profit making enterprise". However, these statements were later retracted: the court had in fact ruled in favour of Warner Bros., but no fine had been ordered, and Warner Bros. claimed that they had only requested a fine because such action was necessary under Indian law. In November 2007, Rowling discussed the case on her website, listing the rumours that she had targeted a non-profit organisation as "Toxic" and saying, "The defendants were not religious charities, and theirs was not a religious celebration. On the contrary, it was a large-scale, commercial, sponsored event involving corporations that included a major Indian high street bank. The event was, however, set up while a Hindu festival was going on ... The court ruled that Warner Bros. rights had indeed been infringed, and that events such as the one in question would need Warner Bros.' permission in the future. The court also restrained all the defendants from any future events infringing Warner Bros. rights."

On 31 October 2007, Warner Bros. and Rowling sued Michigan-based publishing firm RDR Books to block the publication of a 400-page book version of the Harry Potter Lexicon, an online reference guide to her work. Rowling, who previously had a good relationship with Lexicon owner Steve Vander Ark, reiterated on her website that she plans to write a "Harry Potter" encyclopedia, and that the publication of a similar book before her own would hurt the proceeds of the official encyclopedia, which she plans to give to charity. A judge later barred publication of the book in any form until the case was resolved. In their suit, Rowling's lawyers also asserted that, as the book describes itself as a print facsimile of the Harry Potter Lexicon website, it would publish excerpts from the novels and stills from the films without offering sufficient "transformative" material to be considered a separate work. The trial concluded on 17 April 2008. On 8 September 2008, the judge ruled in her favour, claiming that the book would violate the terms of fair use. In December, 2008, a modified (and shorter) version of Vander Ark's Lexicon was approved for publication and was released 16 January 2009 as "The Lexicon: An Unauthorized Guide to Harry Potter Fiction".

In November 2007, "The Scotsman" reported that Rowling had threatened legal action against American computer programmer G. Norman Lippert for allegedly violating her intellectual property rights by producing and publishing the online novel, "James Potter and the Hall of Elders' Crossing", an unofficial and unauthorised continuation of the "Harry Potter" series. Written as a fan fiction project for Lippert's wife and sons, the novel is set eighteen years after the end of the last official installment in the series, "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows", and describes the adventures of Harry Potter's son, James Sirius Potter, during his first year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. A specialist in intellectual property law at Strathclyde University commented that, "If an insubstantial character from a novel is taken and built up by another author in a new story, that can be a defence against copyright infringements." However, after Lippert offered Rowling an advance copy of the novel, Rowling dismissed her threat and said she supported the novel and any others like it. Lippert subsequently produced a sequel, "James Potter and the Curse of the Gatekeeper". After the novel first appeared online in early November 2007, some "Harry Potter" fans on the Internet initially speculated that the site might be part of an elaborate viral marketing campaign for an official continuation or spinoff of "Harry Potter", one either written or at least approved by Rowling herself. On 9 November 2007, Rowling's agent Neil Blair denied that Rowling was in any way involved with the purported project, and Warner Bros., the studio which owns the rights to the "Harry Potter" film series, denied that the novel was in any way connected to the official "Harry Potter" franchise.

Rowling and her publishers have brought a series of legal injunctions to ensure the books' secrecy before their launch. These injunctions have drawn criticism from civil liberties campaigners over their potentially sweeping powers over individual freedoms.

In 2003, in an attempt to maintain secrecy over the impending release of the fifth "Harry Potter" book, "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix", Rowling and her publishers sought and received a groundbreaking injunction against "the person or persons who has or have physical possession of a copy of the said book or any part thereof without the consent of the Claimants". The ruling obtained, for the first time in British law, an injunction against unnamed or unknown individuals; before then, injunctions could only be obtained against named individuals. Lawyers Winterbothams noted that, "The new "Harry Potter" style injunction could be used if you expected a demonstration or trespass to take place, but which had not yet begun, so long as you could find a description for the people expected which the Court was satisfied identified 'those who are included and those who are not'". The "Potter injunction" was later used against a camp of Roma travellers. In 2006, pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline employed the injunction against anonymous animal rights campaigners who had sent threatening letters to their investors.

The series garnered more controversy in 2005 with the release of the sixth book, "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince", when a Real Canadian Superstore grocery store accidentally sold several copies before the authorised release date. The Canadian publisher, Raincoast Books, obtained an injunction from the Supreme Court of British Columbia prohibiting the purchasers from reading the books in their possession. A comment by a media lawyer that "there is no human right to read" led to a debate in the public sphere about whether free access to information was a human right. Michael Geist, the Canada Research Chair of Internet and E-commerce Law at the University of Ottawa, said in response, "The copyright law claim was particularly puzzling. While copyright law does provide copyright owners with a basket of exclusive rights, the right to prohibit reading is not among them. In fact, copyright law has very little to say about what people can do with a book once they have purchased it." Free-speech activist Richard Stallman posted a statement on his blog calling for a boycott until the publisher issued an apology. Solicitors Fraser Milner and Casgrain, who represented Raincoast and formulated the legal argument for the embargo, have rebutted this, saying that the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms applies only to the government, not to private litigation, and does not offer any protection of the right to read in any case, and the innocent purchasers of the "Harry Potter" book had no more right to read it than if they had come into possession of someone's secret diary.

In 2007, Scholastic Corporation threatened legal action against two booksellers, Levy Home Entertainment and DeepDiscount.com, for selling copies of the final novel, "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows", before its release date of 21 July. In an official statement, Scholastic appealed "to the "Harry Potter" fans who bought their books from DeepDiscount.com and may receive copies early requesting that they keep the packages hidden until midnight on 21 July." Customers who agreed not to read the book received a special "Harry Potter" t-shirt and a $50 coupon for Scholastic's online store.

In June 2005, Aaron Lambert, a security guard at a book distribution centre in Corby, Northamptonshire, England, stole a number of pages from "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince" six weeks before its intended publication date. He was arrested a day later after negotiations to sell them to John Askill, a journalist from "The Sun", turned violent. Lambert reportedly fired a shot from his imitation Walther PPK pistol, but Askill was unharmed. At his trial the following October, Lambert pleaded guilty to threatening Askill and to attempting to blackmail "Harry Potter"'s publishers, Bloomsbury. In January 2006, Lambert was sentenced to four and a half years in prison. In November 2011, in her testimony before the Leveson Inquiry, Rowling said that the "Sun" had attempted to "blackmail" her into a photo-op in return for returning the stolen manuscript.

In July 2007, a dispute arose between "Harry Potter"'s British publisher, Bloomsbury, and Asda, a British supermarket chain owned by the US corporation Wal-Mart. On 15 July, a week before the release of the final "Harry Potter" novel, "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows", Asda issued a press release accusing Bloomsbury of unfairly fixing their prices. Asda spokesman Peter Pritchard claimed that Bloomsbury was "holding children to ransom" and that, "[i]t seems like Bloomsbury need to do a quid-ditch as they have sent their prices up north on the Hogwarts Express. By setting the recommended retail price at this level can only be seen as blatant profiteering on their part." Pritchard went on to say that Asda was acting to "champion the right of young readers", and that the recommended retail price was "twice the average child's pocket money and £5 more than the average children's bestseller". Asda had planned to sell the book as a loss leader at £8.87 ($16.30), or half Bloomsbury's recommended retail price of £17.99 ($33.00) and below the wholesale price of £9.89 ($18.00).

Two days later, Bloomsbury responded that the claims were "potentially libellous" and that:

Asda's latest attempt to draw attention to themselves involves trying to leap on the "Harry Potter" bandwagon. This is just another example of their repeated efforts of appearing as Robin Hood in the face of controversy about their worldwide group, which would suggest they are perceived as more akin to the Sheriff of Nottingham. Loss leaders were invented by supermarkets and have nothing to do with Bloomsbury Publishing or "Harry Potter" and we deeply regret having been dragged into their price-wars.

Bloomsbury stated that the price hike of £1 from the previous "Harry Potter" novel was due to it having been printed on recycled paper. "There is a price to be paid by the consumer for environmental best practice", a Bloomsbury spokeswoman said.

Bloomsbury CEO Nigel Newton said, "[They have] unleashed a very disingenuous, self-interested attack on us. This is complete nonsense and all they're doing is grandstanding as they've done on the price of aspirin and bread. They try to turn it into a big deal as though it's a moral crusade for them, but it's nothing of the kind."

That same day, Bloomsbury cancelled all Asda's orders of "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows", or roughly 500,000 copies, citing unpaid bills from the company totalling £38,000 ($70,000) for unauthorised returns of the sixth "Harry Potter" book. "The two matters are completely unrelated", said a Bloomsbury spokeswoman, "We decided today that we couldn't risk having arrears with anybody." The dispute had been "going on a while – going on for weeks actually." Asda responded that Bloomsbury owed them £122,000 ($224,000) ("for pulping and for other book trade issues and work we have done for them") and that, as one company spokesman claimed, "It just seems funny that after we expose the potty Potter price hike, Bloomsbury are trying everything they can to stop kids getting hold of "Harry Potter" at a price they can afford."

Asda paid the bill within hours, and claimed that Bloomsbury would be in breach of contract if it did not allow the store to sell its books. However, Bloomsbury claimed that the block on Asda's orders was still in place as, "Unfortunately, we've now had to initiate a significant libel claim against them. That matter will have to be dealt with. If they want their 500,000 books, they'll have to come and make peace with us ... It could be good news for all their disappointed customers, because they don't have to go to a soulless Asda shed to buy their book and they can share the magic of "Harry Potter" at an independent or specialist bookstore instead."

Upon receipt of Bloomsbury's legal letter, Asda responded that, "There is nothing defamatory in our press release. Everything there is factual. It is a commentary on how we see things." Said another Asda spokesperson, "If they don't supply us with the books, it will have a massive implication and [be] a breach of contract – but I don't think they will do that."

Later that day, however, Asda released a statement retracting its original comment: "We apologise unreservedly to Bloomsbury for [our] press release dated 15 July and withdraw our statement. We look forward to a good relationship with Bloomsbury going forward, including selling the latest "Harry Potter" book from 00:01 am BST on Saturday 21 July and many other Bloomsbury books in the future". In response, Bloomsbury lifted the block and Asda was allowed to sell its books. The original press release was then expunged.

The rationale behind Asda's initial press release remains uncertain. Neill Denny, commentator for thebookseller.com, opined that "the whole episode has the whiff of a badly-conceived PR stunt by ill-briefed senior executives at Asda out of touch with the subtleties of the book world." Ralph Baxter of Publishing News concurred: "For Asda ... it may be seen as mission accomplished, a high-risk strategy to maximise publicity for its "Harry Potter" offer rewarded with television, radio, Internet and newspaper coverage. And the association of Asda with low prices has no doubt been entrenched in a few more minds."



</doc>
<doc id="11940816" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11940816" title="Wichita Linebacker">
Wichita Linebacker

"Wichita Linebacker" is the third episode of the third season of the American mystery television series "Veronica Mars", and the forty-seventh episode overall. Written by Phil Klemmer and John Enbom and directed by Harry Winer, the episode premiered on The CW on October 17, 2006.

The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars (Kristen Bell) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective. In this episode, Veronica helps a football player, Kurt Fenstermacher (Armie Hammer) retrieve his stolen playbook. Meanwhile, Piz (Chris Lowell) gains a job at the college radio station, and Veronica meets Dean O'Dell (Ed Begley, Jr.) for the first time after she gets in trouble for events related to the events that occurred in the previous episode, "My Big Fat Greek Rush Week".

Phil Klemmer and John Enbom, the writers of the episode, found the episode difficult to write because they were not very familiar with American football. However, they decided to resolve the problem by making the episode as little about football as possible. "Wichita Linebacker" also features a guest appearance by Armie Hammer, as well as the first appearances by Begley, Jr. as Cyrus O'Dell and Ryan Devlin as Mercer Hayes. The episode received mixed to negative reviews, with criticism primarily focusing on the case of the week.

Veronica watches a football practice before she expresses her frustration with Logan (Jason Dohring). Later, she meets Weevil (Francis Capra), who is working at a car wash. Veronica is called into the Dean O'Dell's office, and he threatens her with expulsion if she does not give up some names in relation to the sorority marijuana scandal. Piz calls Veronica in to help a football player, Kurt Fenstermacher, retrieve his playbook, with Kurt's girlfriend, Trish (Lindsey McKeon) paying for the investigation. Veronica's only suggestion is that he gets a new one. Veronica convinces her father, Keith Mars (Enrico Colantoni), to hire Weevil as his new assistant at Mars Investigations. In an attempt to print a playbook for Kurt, Veronica disguises herself as a cheerleader, but fails to print one. After being called back into the Dean's office, Veronica is in the room during a debate between fraternity boys and feminists. Veronica goes back to the football player, and she hypothesizes that his girlfriend’s ex-boyfriend stole it. Weevil helps Keith at detective work, succeeding beyond Keith's expectations.

Veronica talks to the ex-boyfriend before learning that the Kurt's best friend is probably guilty. Veronica gets a disturbing phone call from Logan, so she tracks his cell phone, finding him gambling. Veronica and Logan have a fight before she learns that Keith had to stop working for a client when Weevil hit a suspect; Keith feels required to fire Weevil. Veronica tells Weevil the news before she gives him a job fixing the Dean’s car. Veronica confronts the best friend, but he’s not the perpetrator, and Veronica suddenly realizes that Trish is. Veronica lies to Trish about what happened to Kurt in order to elicit a true reaction from her; this plan works, and Veronica learns that Trish took the playbook in order to get him off the team. However, she lost it in the process. Kurt, Trish, and Veronica track it down to the ex-boyfriend, who gave the plays to another team to spite the couple.

Veronica goes to Dean O’Dell and asks for an exchange: Veronica tells him that his son spray-painted his car, and he will hire Weevil. Veronica talks to the gambling owner, who acts strangely. Veronica tracks his car before removing the tracker later. Veronica talks to Trish, who says that Kurt left for Kansas. Weevil starts his new job as a Hearst janitor. Piz gets a job on a campus radio show, where he interviews both the feminists and the fraternity boys. In the middle of the show, the feminists get a text that says that Claire, the girl who the fraternity boys pointed out, was raped. Veronica and Logan reconcile their relationship and kiss.

The episode was written by Phil Klemmer and John Enbom and directed by Harry Winer, marking both Klemmer and Enbom's eleventh writing credit, and Winer's third directing credit for the series. Klemmer and Enbom initially thought that they would be unable to write the episode because they didn't know very much about American football—so they tried to make the episode less about football. Enbom stated, "Rob just sort of handed [the episode] down. I think if you play strict attention, you'll find it isn't as footbally as an episode about a football player could possibly be. And I think that's why." The episode did not have the budget to hire a full football team, so several scenes were devoid of extras, including when Veronica meets one of the football players and when she breaks into the locker room.

The episode features the first appearance of Dean Cyrus O'Dell (Ed Begley, Jr.), a recurring character for the third season. Initially, Michael McKean was slated to take the role, but within twelve hours of accepting the part, McKean decided to pass on "Veronica Mars" altogether. Thomas called this "the most depressing casting news in the world." One week later, Begley accepted the role. Both actors had recently appeared in "A Mighty Wind". "Wichita Linebacker" also includes a guest appearance by Armie Hammer, who plays Kurt Fenstermacher, the football player whose playbook is stolen. Ryan Devlin makes his first appearance as Mercer Hayes, a Hearst College student who would be convicted in the serial rape case in the episode "Spit & Eggs". Despite having this role on "Veronica Mars", Devlin would go on to play Duncan Kane, a role originated by Teddy Dunn before he left the show in "Donut Run", in the spinoff web series "Play It Again, Dick".

In its original broadcast, "Wichita Linebacker" received 3.12 million viewers, ranking 84th of 92 in the weekly rankings. This figure was a slight increase from the previous episode, "My Big Fat Greek Rush Week", which was viewed by 2.96 million viewers.

"Wichita Linebacker" received mixed to negative reviews. Eric Goldman of IGN gave the episode a 7.0 out of 10, indicating that it was "good". Despite this, he wrote a mixed review, opining that "as far as mysteries go, this was a so-so one," that "the Hearst campus rapist story just doesn't seem to be getting the proper weight it requires," and that "there's also some strange tonal issues currently." However, he praised the return of Weevil. Rowan Kaiser, writing for "The A.V. Club", was also relatively critical, while focusing praise on Weevil's storyline. He referred to "Wichita Linebacker" as "what I would expect were the show not so ambitious. Here, Veronica isn't going to Hearst College, she's going to Television College, where things that are college-y happen." Television Without Pity gave the episode a "C+". "I don't think it's being overly harsh to say that this was not one of this show's stronger or more exciting episodes. The writing was oddly flat, in the first place, and the attention to detail was subpar as well." In addition, the reviewer criticized the show's treatment of its relationships. "That's one of the things that's made this show great in the past -- layering in complex and important relationships while not actually being a relationship-centered show. I only hope they go somewhere with the gambling thing, because otherwise, in my opinion, this episode will have been a total waste of time."

Price Peterson of "TV.com" wrote that while he "liked it overall", he disliked the focus on Logan and Weevil, writing that he was "more than ready for Weevil to be written off the show" and, "I'm getting slightly tired of [Logan's] storylines. He seems to be alternating between woe-is-me hangdog and shifty bro liar. […] Logan is not my favorite." On his blog What's Alan Watching, Alan Sepinwall wrote that "this was a fairly light-hearted hour, with the two darkest events -- Weevil beating up the abusive boyfriend and the blonde getting raped -- taking place off-screen. And if the purpose of doing shorter arcs was to avoid the loss of momentum that both the bus crash and the bridge stabbing suffered in the middle of last year, I'm not sure if it's working yet." BuzzFeed ranked the episode 47th on its ranking of "Veronica Mars" episodes.



</doc>
<doc id="11979030" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11979030" title="Arts Club of Chicago">
Arts Club of Chicago

Arts Club of Chicago is a private club and public exhibition space located in the Near North Side community area of Chicago in Cook County, Illinois, United States, a block east of the Magnificent Mile, that exhibits international contemporary art. It was founded in 1916, inspired by the success of the Art Institute of Chicago's handling of the Armory Show. Its founding was viewed as a statement that art had become an important component of civilized urban life. The Arts Club is said to have been pro-Modernist from its founding. The Club strove to break new ground with its shows, rather than collect the works of established artists as the Art Institute does.

The club presented Pablo Picasso's first United States showing. In addition, the 1951 exhibition by Jean Dubuffet and his "Anticultural Positions" lecture at the Arts Club were tremendous influences on what would become the mid-1960s Imagist movement. Another important presentation in the history of the Arts Club was the Fernand Léger showing of "Le Ballet Mecanique".

The Club's move in 1997 to its current location at 201 E. Ontario Street was not without controversy because the club demolished its former interior space designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and moved only the central staircase to the new gallery space. However, the new space is , which is larger than the old space.

The inaugural mission of the club was "to encourage higher standards of art, maintain galleries for that purpose, and to promote the mutual acquaintance of art lovers and art workers." The Arts Club of Chicago was founded by artists and patrons in the wake of The Armory Show, which was on view at the Art Institute of Chicago in 1913. The Club's founders–made aware of the exhibition's negative reception by the many Chicagoans who did not understand or accept what they saw–aimed to expose the city to new images, sounds and ideas.

Conceived as an exhibition and social space that would cultivate sophisticated conversations around a range of media, The Arts Club has maintained its core interest in presenting culture "in the making," serving as a key venue in Chicago for the presentation of work by the national and international avant-garde.

The club does not generally show traveling exhibitions curated by others. Instead, it curates its own exhibits, often with very original works. This places emphasis on cutting edge and avant-garde art.

The club was founded in 1916 and experienced its first coverage in the "Chicago Tribune" on March 16, 1916. It had office space in the Fine Arts Building that became too limiting to serve the club's mission. In 1918, the club elected Rue Winterbotham Carpenter to replace Mrs. Robert McGann as president. She moved the club to 610 South Michigan Avenue . The first exhibition included portraits by Whistler, Renoir, Cassatt, Augustus John and others. By 1922, the club had outgrown its quarters and sponsored supplementary space at the Art Institute of Chicago until 1927 when the cost of doing so became prohibitive. In 1924, the club moved to the north tower of the Wrigley Building. Among its first exhibitions at the Wrigley building was the first major United States show (seventeen sculptures, nineteen drawings and a painting) of Brâncuși. The show was installed by Marcel Duchamp. Rue Carpenter died on December 7, 1931, and Mrs. Charles Goodspeed was elected president in 1932. The club moved to more spacious accommodations at the Wrigley Building in 1936. "Bobsy" Goodspeed served as president until 1940. Then, Rue Winterbotham Carpenter's niece Rue Winterbotham Shaw was elected President. In 1947, the club scaled down its operations for four years after losing its Wrigley Building lease. In 1951, it moved to 109 East Ontario in quarters built to specification that were designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Using Arts Club furniture, he designed a gallery, dining room, and lecture hall in a pre-existing building. The gallery was built around Constantin Brâncuși's "The Golden Bird" and the stairway was renowned for its simple elegance. Shaw died in January 1979 and James Phinney Baxter was elected to serve until 1981 when Stanley Freehling was elected. The club struggled financially in the 1980s.

In the 1990s, the club was located west of Michigan Avenue and behind the 620 building which was home to many of Chicago's finest art dealers including Richard Gray and Richard L. Feigen & Co. The Arts club did not own the land upon which their famous Mies clubhouse was built; instead, the club held the land in a longterm leasehold. In 1990, the owner of 620 N. Michigan and the Arts Club land decided to sell. At first the Arts Club hoped to raise the money to purchase its land along with the 620 N. Michigan Avenue property in an effort spearheaded by Richard Gray, but it quickly became apparent that the club would lose a bidding war over this valuable land. A developer bought the property and demolished the entire block to make way for a movie complex and shopping center.

With the prospect of losing its home, the Arts Club opted to sell one of the most valuable items in its collection to finance the purchase of new land. The club decided to sell Brâncuși's Bird to the Art Institute of Chicago. To finance the purchase, the Art Institute sold several second tier works from its famous Impressionist collection at Sotheby's in guaranteed lots which was a new concept in the auction world in 1990. While without permanent home, the club continued to meet regularly in space loaned by the Casino, another famous Near North Side club.

The John Vinci designed building is a two-story structure that cost $9 million for the land, building, landscaping, and interior design. The exterior facade is buff brick with black granite windowsills and thresholds and white-painted steel windows. The building features furniture dating back to the club's founding as well as Mies van der Rohe designs. Several elements of the new building's design are considered homages to Mies. The fact that the building was so Miesian thirty years after his death while the club focused on avant-gard art was a bit of a controversy. The building's atrium that allows filtered light into the central galleries and dining areas is its primary feature. Another focal point of the building is the restored Mies van der Rohe steel staircase that provides access to the second floor. The design includes white-painted steel, travertine marble, floor-to-ceiling curtains, dark-stained wood floors, and large areas of glass. The color palette of saffron, black, gray, scarlet, and white is consistent with the former building. Also notable are the veil of north side metal screens. The building also has a outdoor landscaped garden. The building accommodates a 200-person audience seating.

The Arts Club's collection is a combination of acquisitions from its exhibitions and donations from both members and artists. It includes works by Georges Braque, Alexander Calder, Natalia Goncharova, Paul Klee, Henri Matisse, Joan Miró, Henry Moore, Isamu Noguchi, Francis Picabia, and Pablo Picasso. The club has made recent acquisitions of contemporary works by Malcolm Morley, Alex Katz, and Peter Doig. The Club maintains a document collection, mostly of correspondence with its artists, at the Newberry Library. Further information on the club collection can be found in "The Arts Club of Chicago: The Collection 1916–1996" by Sophia Shaw, granddaughter of the Club's dynamic past president Rue Winterbotham Shaw.

Notable works in the club's private collection include:


Until the Museum of Modern Art was founded in 1929, Chicago and The Arts Club in particular was the most receptive exhibitor of modern art in the United States. At that time, no institution in the United States, especially none in Manhattan, would exhibit European modernism. By renting space at the Art Institute of Chicago's Building the Arts Club was able to arrange showings in Chicago's most prestigious museum.

The club has exhibited an impressive number of well-known 20th century visual artists. Many of the century's most controversial artists made their United States or midwest solo exhibition debuts at the club including: Alexander Calder, Marc Chagall, Salvador Dalí, Jean Dubuffet, Pablo Picasso, Jackson Pollock, Auguste Rodin, Georges Seurat, and Henri Toulouse-Lautrec. In addition, many artists have given lectures at the Club, including Martha Graham, Kathleen Battle, Leonard Bernstein, Kenneth Branagh and Robert Altman. Aside from visual artists, the Club also has hosted lectures and performances from such prominent musicians as John Cage, Philip Glass, Ramsey Lewis and Igor Stravinsky, and poets W. H. Auden, Gertrude Stein and William Butler Yeats. Most notable among these exhibitions was Picasso's first United States solo exhibition, "Original Drawings by Pablo Picasso" from March 20 to April 22, 1923, by the Arts Club at its installation at the Art Institute of Chicago. (Picasso's work had first been shown the US in a group show in New York curated by Edward Steichen in 1911.) In the 1930s, when Isamu Noguchi was still known as a sculptor, they hosted him. In 1970 when Varujan Boghosian was a timely sculptor known for depicting the legend of orpheus, The Arts Club hosted a showing.

The current location is the club's seventh location. However, this is the first building owned by the club. The location history is listed below.

The first home at the Fine Arts Building had no exhibition space. The club was not able to put on its first exhibition until December 18 when it moved to a location with exhibition space. The club's early gallery spaces were not sufficient to achieve the club's goals and it agreed to assume cost and selection responsibilities for works in a series of shows at The Arts Club Exhibition Room at the Art Institute of Chicago from 1922 to 1927.

The club has had eleven presidents:

To become a member of the Arts Club of Chicago, a currently established member of the club must request an application for membership on their behalf. The membership application packet is only made available to current members. Within the packet are details describing the application process for potential inductees.

The gallery is open to the public Tuesday – Friday 11 a.m. – 6 p.m. and Saturdays 11 a.m. – 3 p.m. when there is an exhibition on view. The Arts Club is closed between the last week of December and the first week of January. Admission is free.

A two-tiered dues system, established at The Arts Club's inception, is maintained to this day: professional members pay lower dues than patrons, ensuring that fine and performing artists remain a vital component of The Arts Club membership.



</doc>
<doc id="11982412" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11982412" title="Premiership of Gordon Brown">
Premiership of Gordon Brown

The premiership of Gordon Brown began on 27 June 2007 when Brown accepted the Queen's invitation to form a government, replacing Tony Blair as the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. It ended with his resignation as Prime Minister on 11 May 2010. While serving as Prime Minister, Brown also served as the First Lord of the Treasury, the Minister for the Civil Service and the Leader of the Labour Party. He was succeeded as Prime Minister by David Cameron after the 2010 general election.

Brown's style of government differed from that of Tony Blair, who had been seen as presidential. Brown rescinded some of the policies which had been introduced or were planned by Blair's administration. He remained committed to close ties with the United States and to the war in Iraq, although he established an inquiry into the reasons for Britain's participation in the conflict. He proposed a "government of all the talents" which would involve co-opting leading personalities from industry and professional occupations into government positions. Brown also appointed Jacqui Smith as the UK's first female Home Secretary, while Brown's former position as Chancellor of the Exchequer was taken over by Alistair Darling.

Brown's government introduced monetary and fiscal policies to help keep the banks afloat during the financial crisis in 2008, and as a result the United Kingdom's national debt increased dramatically. The Government took majority shareholdings in Northern Rock and Royal Bank of Scotland, both of which experienced financial difficulties. Large amounts of money were injected into several other banks, including newly merged HBOS-Lloyds TSB, which received £17 billion. Domestic policies focusing on education, employment and health were introduced by the administration. The Labour Party was persuaded to give Gurkhas settlement rights in Britain by the campaign of actress Joanna Lumley and attracted criticism for its handling of the Scottish Government's release of Abdelbaset al-Megrahithe only person to have been convicted over the 1988 Lockerbie bombing. Brown was also dogged by allegations of bullying.

During the first four months of his premiership, Brown enjoyed a substantial lead in the polls. His popularity amongst the public may have been because his handling of numerous serious events during his first few weeks as Prime Minister, including two attempted terrorist attacks in London and Glasgow at the end of June 2007. However, between the end of 2007 and September 2008, his popularity fell significantly; two contributing factors were believed to be his perceived change of mind over plans to call a general election in October 2007 and his handling of the 10p tax rate cut in 2008, which led to allegations of weakness and dithering. His unpopularity led eight Labour MPs to call for a leadership contest in September 2008, less than 15 months into his premiership. The threat of a leadership contest receded due to his perceived strong handling of the global financial crisis in October, but his popularity hit an all-time low and his position became increasingly untenable after the May 2009 expenses scandal and Labour's poor results in the 2009 Local and European elections. Brown's cabinet began to rebel; there were several key resignations in the run up to local elections in June 2009. However, Brown was backed by his party. He faced a second attempt to launch a leadership challenge by former Cabinet colleagues Geoff Hoon and Patricia Hewitt in January 2010, but the plot failed to gather momentum and Brown remained as both Labour leader and Prime Minister to lead his party into the 2010 General Election. The election resulted in a hung parliament, with the Conservative Party winning the largest number of seats. Brown remained as Prime Minister while the Liberal Democrats entered separate negotiations with Labour and the Conservatives with a view to forming a coalition government. He announced his intention to resign on 10 May 2010 to help broker a Labour-Liberal Democrat deal. However, this became increasingly unlikely and on 11 May, Brown announced his resignation as Prime Minister and as Leader of the Labour Party.

On 11 May 2007, after months of speculation, Gordon Brown formally announced his bid for the Labour leadership and replaced Tony Blair as Prime Minister on 27 June 2007. On 16 May, Channel 4 News announced that Andrew MacKinlay had nominated Brown, giving him 308 nominationsenough to avoid a leadership contest. A BBC report states that the decisive nomination was made by Tony Wright with MacKinlay yet to nominate at that point.

Following Blair's announcement of his resignation and Brown's bid for leadership, the Labour Party rose in popularity in the polls, gaining three points after months of low polls and trailing behind the opposition Conservative Party. However, Labour subsequently lost this lead.

Brown launched his campaign website the same day as formally announcing his bid for leadership, titled "Gordon Brown for Britain".

In 2007, one year before the global economic crisis, Brown delivered his final Mansion House speech as Chancellor before moving into Number 10; he told financiers, "A new world order has been created", that everyone needed to follow the City's "great example", and "an era that history will record as the beginning of a new Golden Age".

Brown was careful not to imply that there would be any reversals in the key areas of Blair's social policy, or any radical breakaway from New Labour. He did propose a different style of government than that of Blair's much-criticised 'presidential-style' government. Brown was unclear on certain parts of his policies, but he said that a Brown-led government would introduce the following;:

On his first day in office, Brown rescinded the Order in Council which gave his predecessor's political advisers Alastair Campbellwho left office in 2003and Jonathan Powell, authority to issue instructions to civil servants. Brown's senior advisers, including Spencer Livermore, Sue Nye, Mike Ellam and Gavin Kelly, continued to exert considerable influence on the government. Brown's other senior advisers included former Treasury Special Advisers Damian McBride, Jonathan Ashworth and Jo Dipple, and former senior Labour Party official Fiona Gordon.

Brown faced a major prime-ministerial challenge two days after entering office, when two unexploded car bombs were discovered in London on 29 June. The following day, a car was driven into the entrance of the main terminal of Glasgow International Airport in a second apparent terrorist attack, causing a fire and considerable damage to the building. Brown was born in Glasgow, leading to speculation that the attacks were motivated against him. As a result of both the London and Glasgow incidents, Brown chaired emergency COBRA meetings to review plans to protect the British public. He also spoke to the First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond regarding the incidents.

On 3 July, Brown announced a programme of constitutional reforms, including limits to the powers of the Prime Minister, extensions to the powers of Parliament, a consultation on a bill of rights and a possible lowering of the minimum voting age. On 7 July 2007, he announced £14m in aid for the flood-hit areas in the north of England. On 11 July, Brown announced that housing would be at the top of his political agenda, promising that three million new homes would be built by 2020.

The minimum statutory entitlement for paid holidays was increased from 4.8 to 5.6 weeks per annum, and Child Benefit was disregarded in calculating income for Housing and Council Tax Benefit as a means of improving work incentives and the incomes of many low-income families. Parents with children up to the age of 16 were given the statutory right to request flexible working arrangements.

Extra penalties for employers paying wages below the national minimum were introduced, while the September Guarantee was extended to 17-year-olds in 2008. The Mortgage Repossessions (Protection of Tenants Etc.) Act of 2010 created protection for unauthorised tenants. The Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 granted new powers to tackle erosion and "underwrote a path to run round England's coastland", while the Community Energy Saving Programme (2009) obliged energy suppliers and generators to deliver energy efficiency measures in certain low income areas.

Compulsory personal, social and health education was introduced in 2009. The Additional Paternity Leave Regulations 2010 provided parents with the option to split the year's maternity leave the mother could then take from her employment, allowing parents greater flexibility with childcare arrangements. An extension of 10–15 hours free nursery provision for disadvantaged 2-year olds was also carried out. Between 2008 and 2010, additional money was put into tax credits for families with children, while child poverty fell during Brown's last year as Prime Minister.

The Education and Skills Act 2008 introduced measures to extend educational opportunities and raised the school-leaving age to 18, while the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009 introduced a statutory framework for apprenticeships and the right to an apprenticeship for suitably qualified 16- to 18-year-olds. The Housing and Regeneration Act 2008 created a new Homes and Communities Agency tasked with improving the supply and quality of housing in England. The Concessionary Bus Travel Act 2007 entitled disabled people and those past retirement age to free travel on local buses at off-peak times anywhere in England. The Pensions Act 2007 and the Pensions Act 2008 introduced improvements to pension provisions, while the Employment Act 2008 strengthened existing legislation governing working conditions.

Brown promised free prescription cancer medicines, which became available in January 2009, although concerns were raised in September that year that many patients entitled to such prescriptions were not benefiting from them. A Health in Pregnancy Grant which provided financial assistance to expectant mothers was also introduced. In 2008, a Local Housing Allowance for people on low incomes or on benefits who were renting from private landlords was introduced.

The Autism Act 2009 was passed to improve services and support for adults with autism. The Agency Workers Regulations 2010 was intended to improve the workplace rights of people working for employment agencies. The Equality Act 2010 required equal treatment in access to employment, private and public services. The Child Poverty Act 2010 set targets for governments to eliminate child poverty.

Brown appointed his first cabinet in the first few days of his premiership. David Miliband was appointed Foreign Secretary while Alistair Darling succeeded Brown as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Brown's team also included Jacqui Smith, who became Britain's first female Home Secretary. Jack Straw was appointed to the new role of Secretary of State for Justice. Brown advocated a "Government of All the Talents" (GOAT) in which people who had not previously been members of the Labour Party but had expertise in specific areas would be appointed as ministers. Consequently, five new ministers, including Sir Ara Darzia consultant surgeon who became a health minister in the House of Lords, Sir Digby Jonesa former director general of the CBI who became minister of state for trade and investment and Sir Alan Westthe former head of the Royal Navy who became a security minister at the Home Office.

Brown's first overseas trip as Prime Minister was to Berlin, where he spoke with German Chancellor Angela Merkel.

In a speech to the Labour Friends of Israel in April 2007, Brownwhose father was the chairman of the Church of Scotland's Israel Committee spoke of his long-standing interest in Israel and the Jewish community. He said that he "had a very clear view from household slides and projectors about the history of Israel, about the trials and tribulations of the Jewish people, about the enormous suffering and loss during the Holocaust, as well as the extraordinary struggle that he described to me of people to create this magnificent homeland".

Brown did not attend the opening ceremony of the 2008 Summer Olympics on 8 August 2008 in Beijing, and instead attended the closing ceremony on 24 August 2008. Brown had been under intense pressure from human rights campaigners to send a message to China, concerning the 2008 Tibetan unrest. His decision not to attend the opening ceremony was not an act of protest; the decision was made several weeks in advance of the Games.

There was widespread speculation on the nature of the UK's relationship with the US under Brown's government. Brown's close aide Douglas Alexander said in a Washington D.C speech, "In the 21st century, strength should be measured on what we can build together ... we need to demonstrate by our deeds, words and our actions that we are internationalist, not isolationist, multilateralist, not unilateralist, active and not passive, and driven by core values, consistently applied, not special interests". This was widely reported as both a policy shift and a message to the US.

However, Downing Street's spokesman strongly denied the suggestion that Alexander was trying to distance Britain from US foreign policy and show that Britain would not necessarily, in Tony Blair's words, stand "shoulder to shoulder" with George W. Bush over future military interventions. The spokesman said, "I thought the interpretation that was put on Douglas Alexander's words was quite extraordinary. To interpret this as saying anything at all about our relationship with the U.S. is nonsense."

Brown personally clarified his position. He said, "We will not allow people to separate us from the United States of America in dealing with the common challenges that we face around the world. I think people have got to remember that the relationship between Britain and America and between a British prime minister and an American president is built on the things that we share, the same enduring values about the importance of liberty, opportunity, the dignity of the individual. I will continue to work, as Tony Blair did, very closely with the American administration."

Brown continued to be dogged by controversy about not holding a referendum on the EU Treaty of Lisbon. On the morning of 13 December 2007, Foreign Secretary David Miliband stood in for Brown at the official signing ceremony in Lisbon of the EU Reform Treaty, which was attended by all other European heads of government. At the time, Brown was appearing before the Liaison Committee; he went to Portugal to sign the treaty that afternoon. Brown was criticised by opponents on both sides of the House and in the press. His critics said that neither Brown nor Labour had a mandate to ratify the treaty without public consent. Conservative leader David Cameron pointed to Labour's 2005 manifesto, which had pledged to give the British public a referendum on the original EU Constitution. Brown said the Treaty differed on significant points from the Constitution and was no longer a constitution but an ordinary treaty, and as such did not require a referendum. He also responded with plans for a lengthy debate on the topic and stated that he believed the document to be too complex to be decided by referendum.

Brown remained committed to the Iraq War, but said in June 2007 that he would learn from the mistakes made in Iraq. Brown said in a letter published on 17 March 2008 that the UK would eventually hold an inquiry into the war. The Iraq Inquiry was announced on 15 June 2009; Brown said that it would investigate the UK's role in the Iraq War and would be held in camera, a decision which was subsequently changed. Brown stated, "no British documents and no British witness will be beyond the scope of the inquiry". The announcement and nature of the inquiry were widely criticised. David Cameron dismissed the inquiry as "an establishment stitch-up", and the Liberal Democrats threatened a boycott. The open sessions of the inquiry began on 24 November 2009 and were televised from the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre.

On 5 March 2010, Gordon Brown appeared before the inquiry. In a four-hour hearing he told the inquiry that he believed the war had been "right" and that intelligence briefings had convinced him that Iraq was a threat that "had to be dealt with". He said that his predecessor Tony Blair had kept him informed despite Blair not being aware of some developments and that the main issue which concerned him was that Iraq was in breach of UN resolutions. He feared the "new world order we were trying to create would be put at risk" if the international community did not act together to deal with Iraq. When asked about equipment, Brown said that British troops in Iraq had all the equipment they needed. The BBC's political editor Nick Robinson said, "Gordon Brown's aim today appears to be to look and sound different from Tony Blair whilst simultaneously opening up no gap of substance with him and the decisions he took".

On 24 April 2009, the Brown government announced a long-awaited decision on Gurkhas' rights to settle in the UK, leading to criticism of its decision to apply five criteria to any Gurkha soldier applying for British citizenship. On 29 April 2009, with the support of both opposition parties and Labour rebel MPs a Liberal Democrat motion that all Gurkhas be offered an equal right of residence was passed, allowing Gurkhas who served before 1997 to live in the UK. Following the Government defeat, the Minister for Immigration Phil Woolas announced that a further review would be completed by the middle of July. This was followed by a high-profile campaign by actress Joanna Lumley, which included a meeting with Brown at 10 Downing Street and a confrontation with Phil Woolas at the BBC Westminster studios, leading to an impromptu press conference in which she pressured Woolas into further talks over the issue. Finally, after a Commons Home Affairs Committee meeting between campaigners, the Ministry of Defence and the Home Office on 19 May, Brown announced to the House of Commons on 20 May that the Home Secretary Jacqui Smith would make a statement on the issue the following day. Smith subsequently announced that all Gurkha veterans who had served four years or more in the British Army before 1997 would be allowed to settle in Britain.

In the days following the release and high-profile return to Libya of Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset al-Megrahi in August 2009, speculation about the possible involvement of the UK Government in the Scottish Government's decision to release him grew, particularly after Saif Gaddafi, the son of Libyan leader Colonel Gaddafi, said that Megrahi's case had been discussed during business talks with the UK, and after Colonel Gaddafi thanked Brown for "encouraging" the release. This prompted Downing Street to confirm that Brown had discussed a possible release with Gaddafi during the G8 summit in Italy in July 2009, but that a letter sent by Brown to the Libyan leader had stated, "When we met I stressed that, should the Scottish Government decide that Megrahi can return to Libya, this should be a purely private, family occasion".

On 16 August 2009, "The Financial Times" reported that Business Secretary, Peter Mandelson had met with Saif Gaddafi a week before Megrahi's release, and that a possible release had been discussed. Mandelson confirmed this, but said that he had told Gaddafi that any release was a matter for the Scottish Justice Secretary. Saif Gaddafi told Libyan television the discussion was part of a wider conversation about a trade deal involving Libyan oil and gas, but Mandelson described suggestions that a release had been linked to a trade deal with Libya as "offensive".

On 14 September 2007, the Northern Rock Bank sought and received a liquidity support facility from the Bank of England, following problems in the credit markets during the financial crisis of 2007–2010. The government took Northern Rock into public ownership in February 2008 as a result of its financial problems caused by the subprime mortgage crisis.

The global recession grew steadily worse throughout 2008, and saw large falls in the stock market at the beginning of October when Britain's leading share index, the FTSE100, recorded its largest single-day points fall since 1987. On 8 October, in response to the crisis, the government announced a bank rescue package of £500 billion; approximately . The plan aimed to restore market confidence, help stabilise the British banking system and provide for a range of short-term loans and guarantees of interbank lending, and up to £50 billion of state investment in the banks themselves. Paul Krugman, the Nobel prize-winning economist, said that Brown "defined the character of the worldwide financial rescue effort".

With the onset of the recession, the UK government led calls to stimulate aggregate demand. Throughout 2008, a number of fiscal measuresincluding a £145 tax cut for basic rate (below £34,800 pa earnings) tax payers, a temporary 2.5% cut in Value Added Tax (VAT), £3 billion worth of spending brought forward from 2010 and a £20 billion Small Enterprise Loan Guarantee Schemewere introduced. The cost of these measures, most of which were announced in the November 2008 Pre-Budget Report, was about £20 billion excluding counting loan guarantees. Further measures worth £5 billionincluding training for the young unemployed and a car scrappage scheme which offered a £2,000 subsidy for the purchase of a new car in exchange for the scrapping of a car more than 10 years oldwere announced in the 2009 budget.

Despite entering the crisis with a low level of public debtroughly 40% of GDPand a moderate deficit compared to many European nations, the UK's ability to take discretionary fiscal action was limited by the burden of bank bail-outs on public finances. The tax revenue from financial services, which was conservatively estimated at 13.9% of UK tax income in 2007, fell alarmingly as the crisis affected bank profits. This contributed to a significant rise in the deficit to an estimated £175 billion (12.4% of GDP) in 2009–10 and a rise in the national debt to above 80% of GDP at its peak. The UK had significant automatic stabilisers which contributed far more than discretionary action and more than most other countries.

On 9 December, in his final pre-Budget report before the 2010 general election, Chancellor Alastair Darling said that the recession had been deeper than predicted during the Budget in April, and that the government's programme of quantitative easing had made a "real difference" to families and businesses. He also announced measures to help economic recovery, including a public sector pay freeze, a levy on bank bonuses and a package of measures to help the unemployed. He said the country must choose "between securing the recovery or wrecking it". Darling also said that the UK's total net debt would continue to rise until the financial year 2014–15. Borrowing would reach 56% of GDP in 2009–10 and peak at 78% in 2014–15; later than previously forecast and in line with other G7 economies.

The measures would see tax increases for a large section of the population. Shadow Chancellor George Osborne said that Labour should "never be trusted" with people's money again, while Labour was also accused of electioneering after Darling announced a 1.5 percent rise in Child Benefit and Disability Living Allowance from April 2010weeks ahead of an expected electionbut made no comment on whether the rise could be sustained after April 2011. Labour was also criticised because it had delayed vital spending decisions until after the general election. Darling said on Radio 4's "Today" programme the following day that he had not carried out a full spending review because of continued economic uncertainty. He said that he had announced he was over-riding the normal requirement to link the rise in benefits to the previous September's rate of inflation; the benefits would have effectively been frozen because inflation was negative at that point. Later the same day, Brown also said that the announcement had not been a pre-election stunt.

in December 2009, the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) estimated that there would be a public spending shortfall of £36 billion in the three years from 2011with £15 billion of the cuts needed yet to be identified. The country's leading economic think tank forecast that with spending on health and education protected, defence, housing, transport and higher education would be the most likely areas to be cut. The IFS also estimated that the cost to each family of paying back the national debt would be £2,400 a year for eight years. On 11 December, the BBC reported that the Treasury had wanted a tougher approach to public spending to lend credibility to its plan to cut the deficit, but that Brown had over-ruled it following an aggressive campaign for a real-terms increase in education spending by Schools Minister Ed Balls. Brown said the report was "completely wrong".

In November 2007, several former Chiefs of Defenceincluding General Lord Guthrie, Admiral Lord Boyce, Marshal of the Royal Air Force Lord Craig, Field Marshal Lord Bramall and Field Marshal Lord Ingecriticised Brown for departing from the military covenanta convention within British politics stating that in exchange for risking their lives for the sake of national security, members of the armed forces should be suitably looked after by the government. Brown was accused by senior opposition politicians, including Conservative leader David Cameron, and Nick Clegg of the Liberal Democrats of failing to provide proper support for soldiers and their families.

Following the rejection of a previous bill under Tony Blair's government to allow the detention of terror suspects for up to 90 days without charge, Brown championed a new bill extending the pre-charge detention period to 42 days. The bill was opposed on both sides of the House and Brown was facing a growing backbench rebellion. Jenny Percival wrote in The Guardian that Brown's critics accused him of "vote-buying" to ensure he won the vote on this issue.<ref name="Percival/Guardian"></ref> The bill was passed by nine votes, with Brown relying on the support of Conservative MP Ann Widdecombe and a handful of Democratic Unionist MPs.

In a session of Prime Minister's Questions some weeks later, David Cameron challenged Brown to concede on record that "no deals were done" in ensuring the bill was passed. Brown stood before the House and said, "yes". Cameron quoted from a letter written by Labour's Chief Whip Geoff Hoon to Keith Vazthe Chairman of the Home Affairs Committeein which Hoon expressed deep thanks for Vaz's support and closed the letter with the line, "I trust that you will be appropriately rewarded". Hoon said that this was just a joke between friends but others, such as Conservative leader David Cameron and Shadow Home Secretary David Davis viewed this letter as proof that deals were indeed done behind the scenes and that Brown lied on the record when he said there had been none. The House of Lords defeated the bill, which Lords said was "fatally flawed, ill thought through and unnecessary", stating that "it seeks to further erode ... fundamental legal and civil rights".

Gordon Brown caused controversy during September and early October 2007 by letting speculation that he would call a snap general election continue. The Labour Party launched an advertising campaign, "Not Flash, Just Gordon", which was seen largely as pre-election promotion of Brown as Prime Minister. Following the negative reaction to his visit to British troops in Iraq during the 2007 Conservative Party Conference, an unrehearsed conference speech made by David Cameron and an opinion poll showing Labour 6% behind the Conservative Party in key marginal seats, Brown announced that there would be no election in the near future. He was subsequently accused by his political opponents as being indecisive. Cameron accused Brown of "bottling" the election because of opinion polls, which Brown denied.

The first signs of internal disquiet towards Brown's policies surfaced in May 2008. The 2007 budgethis last as Chancellorabolished the 10% income tax rate for the lowest earners (5.1 million people), increasing their rate to the next highest, 20%. Earners who fell within the 22% tax rate band had their rate reduced to 20%, and tax allowances were also made for over-65s. These measures came into effect in April 2008. The "10p tax rate cut" as it was commonly referred to, was sharply criticised by Frank Field and several other backbenchers. Field also said that Brown did not seem to be enjoying his job. Health Secretary Alan Johnson believed that Field was motivated primarily by a personal dislike of Brown, and Field later apologised, saying that he had regretted allowing his campaign to become personal. Chancellor Alistair Darling cut the tax rate for 22 million people and borrowed around £2.7 billion to reimburse those on lower and middle incomes who had suffered.

In mid-2008, a large number of senior MPs openly called upon Brown to resign. This event was dubbed the "Lancashire Plot"; two backbenchers from North West England urged Brown to step down and a third questioned his chances of holding on to the Labour Party leadership. Several MPs said that if Brown did not recover in the polls by early 2009, he should call for a leadership contest. However, prominent MPsincluding Jacqui Smith and Bill Rammellsaid that Brown was the right person to lead Britain through its economic crisis.
A second assault upon Brown's premiership was launched in September 2008 when Siobhain McDonaghan MP who had never voted against the governmentspoke of the need for discussion over Brown's position. McDonagh, a junior government whip, was sacked from her role on 12 September. McDonagh did not state that she wanted Brown deposed, but she implored the Labour Party to hold a leadership election. McDonagh spoke of a "huge number" of Labour MPs who wanted a leadership election. In the following days, several Labour MPsincluding Field, Joan Ryan (who applied, as McDonagh had, for leadership nomination papers, and became the second rebel to be fired from her job), Jim Dowd, Greg Pope, and others who had previously held positions in governmentsaid they wanted a contest. In an unrelated incident, 12 backbenchers signed a letter criticising Brown that was published in "Progress" magazine. One of these MPs, Eric Joyce, said that Brown's future hinged on his performance at the upcoming Labour Party conference.

A Downing Street source responded to these incidents by stating, "The Blairites have been talking up the idea of loads of ministers resigning. But the best they can come up with is an assistant government whip". Tony Lloyd, chairman of the parliamentary Labour Party, called the rebellion a "bit of a sideshow", and Emily Thornberry MP called Brown the "best qualified" to lead Britain through the economic crisis of 2008. The Labour Party said that it had received letters from a small number of MPs asking why no nomination papers had been released. David Miliband continued to show his support for Brown in the face of the challenge in September, as did Business Secretary John Hutton, Environment Secretary Hilary Benn, and Chief Whip Geoff Hoon.

Despite growing speculation over Brown's future, most of his ministers wanted him to lead the party. Harriet Harman and Foreign Secretary David Miliband said they were not preparing leadership bids. After Labour lost the Glasgow East by-election in July, Harmanthe deputy leader of the partysuppressed rumours regarding her intentions, saying that Brown was the "solution", not the "problem"; Home Secretary Jacqui Smith, Justice Secretary Jack Straw, Schools Secretary Ed Balls and Cabinet Office Minister Ed Miliband re-affirmed their support for Brown. The deputy Prime Minister under Blair, John Prescott, also pledged his support. David Miliband was then forced to deny that he was plotting a leadership bid; in July, an article written by him for "The Guardian" was interpreted by the media as an attempt to undermine Brown. In the article, Miliband outlined the party's future but did not mention the Prime Minister. Miliband was forced to quell rumours that he would run against Brown in a leadership election, adding that he was confident Brown could lead Labour to victory in the 2010 General Election, and that his article was actually an attack against the fatalism that had dogged the party since the loss of Glasgow-East.

Labour suffered a historic defeat in the local elections and European elections, finishing third place behind the Conservatives and the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP). Voter apathy was evident in the historically low turnout of around 33%. In Scotland, voter turnout was only 28%. In the local elections, Labour finished third place behind the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats; Labour lost control of the four councils it had held prior to the election. The vote was widely considered to be a reaction to the expenses scandal; the share of the votes for all the major parties fell; Labour was down 1%, the Conservative share was down 5%. The minor parties, including the Green party and UKIP, were considered to have benefited from the public backlash against the major parties. Brown said that the results were "a painful defeat for Labour", and that "too many good people doing so much good for their communities and their constituencies have lost through no fault of their own".

The days leading up to the elections saw the resignations of several high-profile cabinet ministers. These included the Europe Minister Caroline Flint, Home Secretary Jacqui Smith, the Minister for Children Beverley Hughes, Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government Hazel Blears, and Work and Pensions Secretary James Purnell, who resigned minutes after the polls for the local and European elections had closed and sent a letter to the Prime Minister calling on him to step aside.

The results of the local elections were announced the following day; the remaining councils under Labour control all became Conservative-controlled. The projected national vote shares predicted that the Conservatives achieved 38% of the vote, the Liberal Democrats 28% and Labour 23%. In the aftermath of these results, Brown reshuffled his cabinet amidst some pressure on his leadership. Further pressure followed the results of the European parliamentary elections, which were announced on 7 June. These showed large declines in the Labour Party's vote. The far-right British National Party won seats in North West England and Yorkshire and the Humberits first ever seats won in a national election.

All of these events led to mounting speculation about Brown's future as Prime Minister and a possible leadership challenge. However, Brown faced down his critics and was applauded at a meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party on 8 June 2009. Brown continued to be unpopular; in September, Britain's biggest selling newspaper "The Sun" announced that after 12 years of supporting Labour, it would withdraw its support in favour of the Conservatives. A challenge to Brown's leadership was made in January 2010 when Patricia Hewitt and Geoff Hoon wrote to Labour MPs calling for a secret ballot on the issue. Their letter said that the party was "deeply divided" and the issue should be sorted out "once and for all". However, the plot failed to gather any momentum after several senior cabinet ministers spoke out in support of Brown.

On 31 January 2010, the "Mail on Sunday" reported that a book, "The End of the Party" written by the journalist Andrew Rawnsley, would make allegations that Brown had flown into a series of rages and had physically attacked members of his staff. The claims were fiercely denied by Brown and his colleagues. In an interview with the television presenter Piers Morgan, Brown said, "I have never hit anybody in my life".

In February 2010 Christine Pratt, founder of the National Bullying Helpline said that the helpline had taken calls from Downing Street staff, although she later stated that the calls did not refer to Brown himself. This led to the resignations of three of the charity's patrons; Cary Cooper, Ann Widdecombe and Sarah Cawood. The Charity Commission later said that it had received over 160 complaints about the helpline's handling of the situation. The helpline service was voluntarily suspended; it resumed two days later.

On 6 April 2010, Brown visited Buckingham Palace to seek the Queen's permission to dissolve Parliament on 12 April, initiating a general election on 6 May. He announced the election shortly afterwards and described it as the "least well-kept secret of recent years", since 6 May had been predicted as the most likely date for an election for some time. Brown unveiled Labour's election manifesto on 12 April under the party's election slogan "A future fair for all", saying that Labour had a "plan for the future". Key pledges in the manifesto included:


The main opposition parties were critical in their responses to the manifesto. The Conservative Party said that it would "change nothing", while the Liberal Democrats said that Labour would not reform tax and politics. Conservative leader David Cameron said, "There is nothing new there, there is nothing different there". Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg asked how Labour could deliver "fairness and new politics" when they had promised the same at previous general elections but had failed to do so.

The election campaign saw the UK's first televised debates between the leaders of the three main parties. While Cameron and Clegg were generally perceived to have performed well in these, Brown was perceived to have done less well. Brown also attracted criticism from the media after privately describing a 65-year-old pensioner as a "bigoted woman" after she stated that entitled people were not receiving benefits because non-entitled people are receiving them. She also expressed her displeasure at immigration from Eastern Europe. His remarkssaid on 28 April whilst in a car with his staffwere picked up by a Sky News microphone he was still wearing following a visit to Rochdale and were widely broadcast.

At the election, Labour lost 91 seats in the House of Commons, but the Conservatives failed to achieve an overall majority, resulting in the first hung parliament since 1974. Under the constitution governing what happens in the event of a hung parliament, Brown remained temporarily as Prime Minister, while the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives entered into talks aimed at forming a coalition government. Talks between the Liberal Democrats and Labour also took place. On 10 May, Brown announced his intention to resign as leader of the Labour Party and instructed the party to initiate the election of a new leader. Brown's continued presence as Prime Minister was seen an obstacle to the negotiation of a Labour-Liberal Democrat deal. By 11 May, the possibility of a deal was becoming less likely as talks between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats continued. After a telephone conversation with his predecessor Tony Blair where Blair informed Brown that the election had shown that the British voters had lost faith in both him and the Labour Party and that the United Kingdom would not accept him continuing as Prime Minister. With this he concluded that he would not be able to form a government, Brown announced his resignation as Prime Minister. He also resigned as leader of the Labour Party with immediate effect. Brown was succeeded as Prime Minister by David Cameron, while Harriet Harman became acting leader of the Labour Party.



</doc>
<doc id="12030273" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12030273" title="Yavapai">
Yavapai

Yavapai are a Native American tribe in Arizona. Historically, the Yavapai – literally “people of the sun” (from "enyaeva" “sun” + "pai" “people”) – were divided into four geographical bands who identified as separate, independent peoples: the Ɖo:lkabaya, or Western Yavapai; the Yavbe', or Northwestern Yavapai; the Guwevkabaya, or Southeastern Yavapai; and the Wi:pukba, or Northeastern Yavapai - Verde Valley Yavapai. 

Another Yavapai band, which no longer exists, was the Mađqwadabaya or "Desert People." Its people are believed to have mixed with the Mojave and Quechan peoples. (Several Mohave and Quechan families trace their ancestry to Yavapai roots.) The Yavapai have much in common with their linguistic relatives to the north, the Havasupai and the Hualapai. Often the Yavapai were mistaken as Apache by American settlers, who referred to them as "Mohave-Apache," "Yuma-Apache," or "Tonto-Apache".

Before the 1860s, when settlers began exploring for gold in the area, the Yavapai occupied an area of approximately 20,000 mi² (51800 km²) bordering the San Francisco Peaks to the north, the Pinaleno Mountains and Mazatzal Mountains to the southeast, and the Colorado River to the west, and almost to the Gila River and the Salt River to the south.

Before being confined to reservations, the Yavapai were mainly hunter-gatherers, following an annual round, migrating to different areas to follow the ripening of different edible plants and movement of game. Some tribes supplemented this diet with small-scale cultivation of the "three sisters" – maize, squash, and beans – in fertile streambeds. In particular, the Ɖo:lkabaya, who lived in lands that were less supportive of food gathering, turned to agriculture more than other Yavapai. They had to work to cultivate crops, as their land was also less supportive of agriculture. In turn, Ɖo:lkabaya often traded items such as animal skins, baskets, and agave to Quechan groups for food. 

The main plant foods gathered were walnuts, saguaro fruits, juniper berries, acorns, sunflower seeds, manzanita berries and apples, hackberries, the bulbs of the Quamash, and the greens of the Lamb's quarters, "Scrophularia," and "Lupinus" plants. Agave was the most crucial harvest, as it was the only plant food available from late fall through early spring. The hearts of the plant were roasted in stone-lined pits, and could be stored for later use. Primary animals hunted were deer, rabbit, jackrabbit, quail, and woodrat. Fish and water-borne birds were eschewed by most Yavapai groups. Some groups of Tolkepaya began eating fish after contact with their Quechan neighbors.

The early Yavapai practiced traditional dances such as the Mountain Spirit Dance, War Dances, Victory Dances and Social Dances. The Mountain Spirit dance was a masked dance, which was used for guidance or healing of a sick person. The masked dancers represented Mountain Spirits, who were believed by Yavapai to dwell in Four Peaks, McDowell Mountains, Red Mountain (near Fort McDowell), Mingus Mountain-(Black Hills) near Camp Verde, and Granite Mountain near present-day Prescott. The Yavapai also believe that the Mountain Spirits dwelled in the caves of Montezuma Castle and Montezuma Well in the Verde Valley.

The modern Yavapai take part in several dances and singing, such as the Apache Sunrise Dance and the Bird Singing and Dancing of the Mojave people.


The Yavapai built brush shelter dwellings called "Wa'm bu nya:va" (Wom-boo-nya-va). In summer, they built simple lean-tos without walls. During winter months, closed huts (called "uwas") would be built of ocotillo branches or other wood and covered with animal skins, grasses, bark, and/or dirt. In the Colorado River area, Ɖo:lkabaya built "Uwađ a'mađva," a rectangular hut, that had dirt piled up against its sides for insulation, and a flat roof. They also sought shelter in caves or abandoned pueblos to escape the cold.

The Yavapai main social-political organization were local groups of extended families, which were identified with certain geographic regions in which they resided. These local groups would form bands in times of war, raiding or defense. For most of Yavapai history, the family was the focal group, be it the nuclear family, or extended. This is partly because most food-providing sites were not large enough to support larger populations. However, exceptions are known. 

Near Fish Creek, Arizona, was "Ananyiké" (Quail's Roost), a Guwevkabaya summer camp that supported upwards of 100 people at a time. It supported a prickly pear fruit harvest, and hunting of rabbits and woodrats. 
In winter, camps were formed of larger groups, consisting of several families. They separated into smaller groups at the end of winter, in time for the spring harvest.

Government among the Yavapai tended to be informal. There were no tribal chiefs, such as "Chief of the Guwevkabaya" or "Chief of the Ɖo:lkabaya." Certain men became recognized leaders based on others choosing to follow them, heed their advice, and support their decisions. Men who were noted for their skills as warriors were called "mastava" (″not afraid″) or "bamulva" (″person who goes forward″). Other warriors were willing to follow such men into combat. Some Yavapai men were noted for their wisdom and speaking ability. Called "bakwauu" (″person who talks″), they would settle disputes within the camp and advise others on the selection of campsites, work ethics, and food production.

The Yavapai peoples were not a political or social unit, but rather four separate autonomous groups. Although culturally, linguistically and ethnically related, they did not identify as Yavapai in a centralized way. These four groups were, for geographical, historical, cultural and familial reasons, in various alliances with neighboring tribes, without regard to the concerns of the adjacent Yavapai groups. The four groups consisted of different local groups, composed primarily of kinship groups known as clans.

The Yavapai divided into subsequent four groups:


Both in the Walkamepa and Wikedjasapa, the following clans were represented and shared mostly overlapping territories:

The "Wi:pukba" ("People from the Foot of the Red Rock") and "Guwevkabaya" lived alongside the Dilzhę́’é Apache (Tonto Apache) of central and western Arizona. The Tonto Apache lived usually east of the Verde River and most of the Yavapai bands lived west of it. The Wi:pukba tribal areas in the San Francisco Peaks, along the Upper Verde River, Oak Creek Canyon and Fossil Creek, overlapped with those of the Northern Tonto Apache.

Likewise the Guwevkabaya shared hunting and gathering grounds east of the Verde River, along Fossil Creek, East Verde River, Salt River and in the Superstition Mountains, Sierra Ancha and Pinaleno Mountains with Southern Tonto Apache and bands of the San Carlos Apache. Therefore they formed bilingual mixed-tribal bands. Outsiders, such as the Spanish, Mexicans and Americans distinguished the peoples primarily by language, but often referred to them as one name. The Apache spoke the Tonto dialect of the Western Apache language ("Ndee biyati' / Nnee biyati"), and the Yavapai spoke the Yavapai language, a branch of Upland Yuman. Living together in common rancherias, families identified as Apache or Yavapai based on their “Mother tongue.” Both groups had matrilineal kinship systems, with children considered born into the mother's family and clan, with inheritance and property figured through the maternal line.

Most of the people in these mixed groups spoke both languages. The headman of each band usually had two names, one from each culture. Therefore the enemy Navajo to the north called both, the Tonto Apache and their allies, the Yavapai, "Dilzhʼíʼ dinéʼiʼ" – "People with high-pitched voices." The ethnic Europeans referred to the Yavapai and Apache together as "Tonto" or "Tonto Apache." The peoples raided and warred together against enemy tribes such as the "Tohono O'odham" and the "Akimel O'odham".

Scholars cannot tell from records whether the writers of the time, when using the term Tonto Apache, were referring to Yavapai or Apache, or those mixed bands. In addition, the Europeans often referred to the "Wi:pukba" and "Guwevkabaya" incorrectly as the "Yavapai Apache" or "Yuma Apache." The Europeans referred to the "Ɖo:lkabaya," the southwestern group of Yavapai, and the "Hualapai" (who belonged to the Upland Yuma Peoples), as "Yuma Apache" or "Mohave Apache."

Ethnological writings describe some major physical differences between Yavapai and Tonto Apache peoples. The Yavapai were described as taller, of more muscular build, well-proportioned and thickly featured, while the Tonto Apache were slight and less muscular, smaller of stature and finely featured. The Yavapai women were described as stouter and having "handsomer" faces than the Yuma, in a historic Smithsonian Institution report. The Yavapai often acquired tattoos, but the Apache seldom used tattoos. They created different painted designs on faces. They also had different funeral practices. In clothing, Yavapai moccasins were rounded, whereas those of the Apaches were shaped with pointed toes. Both groups were hunter-gatherers. They left campsites so similar that scholars are seldom able to distinguish between them.

According to their creation story, the Yavapai believe that their people originated "in the beginning," or "many years ago," when either a tree, or a maize plant sprouted from the ground in what is now Montezuma Well, bringing the Yavapai into the world. Most archeologists agree that the Yavapai originated from Patayan groups who migrated east from the Colorado River region to become Upland Yumans. Archeological and linguistic evidence suggests that they split off to develop as the Yavapai somewhere around 1300 AD.

Warfare was not uncommon in the Yavapai world, and they made changing alliances for security. "Wi:pukba" (Wipukepa) and "Guwevkabaya" (Kwevkepaya) bands formed alliances with Western Apache bands, to attack and defend against raids by the Pima and Maricopa bands from the south. Because of the greater strength of the Pima/Maricopa, Yavapai/Apache raids generally conducted small-scale quick raids, followed by a retreat to avoid counter-attack. The Yavapai defended their lands against Pima incursions, when the Pima would invade to harvest saguaro fruits.

To the north and northwest, Wi:pukba and Yavbe' bands had off-and-on relations with the Pai people throughout most of their history. Though Pai and Yavapai both spoke Upland Yuman dialects, and had a common cultural history, each people had tales of a dispute that separated them from each other. According to Pai myth, the dispute began with a "mudball fight between children." Scholars believe this split occurred around 1750 AD.

The last big battle between the Colorado-Gila River alliances took place in August 1857, when about 100 Yavapai, Quechan, and Mohave warriors attacked a settlement of Maricopa near Pima Butte. After overwhelming the Maricopa, the Yavapai left. A group of Pima, supplied with guns and horses from US troops, arrived and routed the remaining Mohave and Quechans.

The first recorded contact with Yavapai was made by Antonio de Espejo, who was brought to Jerome Mountain by Hopi guides in 1583, looking for gold. De Espejo was disappointed to find only copper. In 1598, Hopi brought Marcos Farfán de los Godos and his group to the same mines, to their excitement. Farfán referred to the Yavapai as ""cruzados"" because of the crosses painted on their heads. A group led by Juan de Oñate led another group through Yavapai lands in 1598, and again in 1604-5, looking for a route to the sea which Yavapai had told them about. After this, no other European contact was made for more than 200 years.

In the intervening time, through contact with other tribes that had more European contact, the Yavapai began to adopt certain European practices. They raised some livestock and planted crops, also adopting some modern tools and weaponry. In a syncretic way, they adopted elements of Christianity. An estimated 25% of the population died as a result of smallpox in the 17th and 18th centuries, smaller losses than for some tribes, but substantial enough to disrupt their societies. With the use of guns and other weapons, they began to change methods of warfare, diplomacy, and trade. They used livestock raiding, either from other tribes such as the Maricopa, or from Spanish settlements to their south, to supplement their economy. They often acquired human captives in raids, whom they traded as slaves to Spaniards in exchange for European goods.

In the 1820s, beaver trappers, having depleted the beaver population of the Rocky Mountains, began entering Yavapai territory. They trapped beaver along the Salt, Gila, and Bill Williams rivers. When Kit Carson and Ewing Young led a trapping group through the territory in 1829, the group was "nightly harassed..." Traps were stolen and some of their horses and mules killed.

Following the declaration of war against Mexico in May 1845 and especially after the claim by the US of southwest lands under the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, US military incursions into Yavapai territory greatly increased. After gold was discovered in California in 1849, more White emigrants passed through Yavapai territory than ever had before. Despite the thousands of emigrants passing through their territory, the Yavapai avoided contact with Whites.

The first fighting between US troops and Yavapai came in early 1837, when the Tolkepaya joined with their Quechan neighbors to defend against Major Samuel Heintzelman over a Quechan ferry crossing on the Colorado River. The Quechan used the ferry to transport settlers over the river, into California. After they killed a group led by John Glanton, who had taken over the crossing, the US government retaliated by burning the fields of the Quechans, and taking control of the crossing.

According to Thomas Sweeney, the Tolkepaya would tell US officers encountered in Quechan territory, that they had a 30-day march to their own territory. They wanted to discourage US encroachment on their land.

In 1851, the Oatman family was ambushed by a group of "Ɖo:lkabaya" Yavapai (though many historians argue that it is impossible to know whether or not these were Yavapai, or some other tribe). Roys Oatman and his wife were killed, along with four of their children. The son, Lorenzo, was left for dead but survived, while sisters Olive and Mary Ann were later sold to Mojaves as slaves. The story was widely published, and increased White settlers' fears of attack in Arizona.

When in early 1863, the Walker Party discovered gold in Lynx Creek (near present-day Prescott, Arizona), it set off a chain of events that would have White settlements along the Hassayampa and Agua Fria Rivers, the nearby valleys, as well as in Prescott, and Fort Whipple would be built, all by the end of the year, and all in traditional Yavapai territory.

With the Mohave people's power greatly diminished, Tolkepaya saw that they needed to make new alliances to protect their safety. In April 1863, Quashackama, a well-known Tolkepaya, met with Arizona Territory superintendent of Indian affairs Charles Poston, along with representatives of the Pimas, Mohaves, Maricopas and Chemehuevis, at Fort Yuma, to sign an agreement intended "to promote the commerce in safety between the before mentioned tribes and the Americans." However, the agreement was not an official treaty, so therefore not legally binding in any way.

Despite this, the growing numbers of settlers (very quickly outnumbering Yavapai) began to call for the government to do something about the people occupying the land that they wanted to occupy and exploit themselves. The editor of a local newspaper, the "Arizona Miner", said "Extermination is our only hope, and the sooner it is accomplished the better."

Early in January 1864, the Yavapai raided a number of ranches that supplied cattle to the miners in the Prescott and Agua Fria area. As a result of this and a series of recent killings, a preemptive attack was organized to discourage future depredations. Therefore, a group of well-armed volunteers were quickly outfitted with King S. Woolsey as their leader. Their mission was to track the raiding party back to their rancheria. What followed was an infamous footnote in Arizona history known today as the Bloody Tanks incident.

According to Braatz, "In December 1864, soldiers from Fort Whipple attacked two nearby Yavapé camps, killing 14 and wounding seven." The following month, Fort Whipple soldiers attacked another group of Yavapé, this time killing twenty-eight people, including their headman, Hoseckrua. Included in the group were employees of Prescott's US Indian agent John Dunn.

In 1864, Arizona Territory Governor John Goodwin advised the territorial legislature that all tribes be subdued and sent to reservations. The same year, a dispatch from the US Army stated "All Apache [Yavapai were routinely lumped in with their neighboring Apache] Indians in that territory are hostile, and all Apache men large enough to bear arms who may be encountered in Arizona will be slain whenever met, unless they give themselves up as prisoners."

Not long after, in retaliation for the murder of a Pai headman by Americans, a group of Pai attacked some wagon trains, and closed the road between Prescott and Fort Mohave to all traffic. In response, the US Army declared all Indians in lands beyond east of the Colorado River (the great majority of traditional Yavapai territory) to be "hostile" and "subject to extermination".

On November 5, 1871, the ambush of the Wickenburg stage-the Wickenburg massacre in which a driver and five of seven passengers killed led to the relocation of the Yavapai from Prescott to San Carlos Reservation in February 1875.

In December 1872, Colonel George Crook used Apache scouts to find a cave in Salt River Canyon that was being used by Guwevkabaya to mount attacks on White settlers. On December 28, accompanied by 100 Pima scouts, Captain William Brown led 120 of Crook's men to a siege of the cave. 110 Kwevkepaya were trapped in the cave, when Brown ordered the soldiers to fire at the roof of the cave, causing rock fragments and lead shrapnel to rain down on the Guwevkabaya. Having nowhere else to go, the besieged gathered around the mouth of the cave, where soldiers (accompanied by Crook) pushed boulders onto them from above, killing 76 of the group. The survivors were taken to Camp Grant as prisoners. The Yavapai were so demoralized by this and other actions by Crook that they surrendered at Camp Verde (renamed Fort McDowell), on April 6, 1873. In 1925, a group of Yavapai from the Fort McDowell Reservation, along with a Maricopa County Sheriff, collected the bones from the cave, and interred them at the Fort McDowell cemetery.

In 1886, many Yavapai joined in campaigns by the US Army, as scouts, against Geronimo and other Chiricahua Apache.

After being relocated to the Camp Verde Reservation, on the Verde River near Camp Verde, the Yavapai there began to construct irrigation systems (including a five-mile (8 km) long ditch) that functioned well enough to reap sufficient harvests, making the tribe relatively self-sufficient. But contractors that worked with the government to supply the reservations were disappointed, and petitioned to have the reservation revoked. The government complied, and in March 1875, the government closed the reservation, and marched the residents to the San Carlos reservation. More than 100 Yavapai died during the winter trek.

By the early 1900s, Yavapai were drifting away from the San Carlos Reservation, and were requesting permission to live on the grounds of the original Camp Verde Reservation. In 1910, was set aside as the Camp Verde Indian Reservation, and in the following decade added in two parcels, which became the Middle Verde Indian Reservation. These two reservations were combined in 1937, to form the Camp Verde Yavapai-Apache tribe. Today, the reservation spans , in four separate locales. Tourism contributes greatly to the economy of the tribe, due largely to the presence of many preserved sites, including the Montezuma Castle National Monument. The Yavapai-Apache Nation is the amalgamation of two historically distinct Tribes both of whom occupied the Upper Verde prior to European invasion. The Tonto Apache, calling themselves "Dilzhe'e", utilized the lands to the north, east and south; while the "Wi:pukba"' or "Northeastern Yavapai" were using country to the north, the west and the south. It was the Upper Verde where they overlapped.

The Yavapai reservation in Prescott was established in 1935, originally consisting of just of land formerly occupied by the Fort Whipple Military Reserve. In 1956, an additional were added. Succeeding the tribe's first chief, Sam Jimulla, his wife Viola became the first female chieftess of a North American tribe. Today, the tribe consists of 159 official members. The population consist mainly of the Yavbe'/Yavapé Group of Yavapais.

The Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation is located within Maricopa County approximately 20 miles northeast of Phoenix. The reservation came into existence when Theodore Roosevelt had Fort McDowell declared a reservation in 1903, but by 1910, the Office of Indian Affairs was attempting to relocate the residents, to open up the area, and water rights to other interests. A delegation of Yavapai testified to a Congressional Committee against this, and won. Today, the tribal community consists of 900 members, 600 of whom live on the reservation and the remaining 300 who live off the reservation. The "Guwevkabaya" or "Southeastern Yavapai" on Fort McDowell Reservation call themselves "A'ba:ja" - ″The People” therefore some anthropologists and linguists believe, that the name "Apache" for the various Southern Athabascan peoples derives from the self-designation of the Yavapai. The population of Fort McDowell consists of the Guwevkabaya Yavapai.

Responding to growth in the Phoenix area, in the early 1970s Arizona officials proposed to build a dam at the point where the Verde and Salt Rivers meet. The dam would have flooded two-thirds of the reservation. In return, the members of the tribe (at the time consisting of 425 members) were offered homes and cash settlements. But in 1976, the tribe rejected the offer by a vote of 61%, claiming that the tribe would be effectively disbanded by the move. In 1981, after much petitioning of the US government, and a three-day march by approximately 100 Yavapai, the plan to build the dam was withdrawn.

The Yavapai language is one of three dialects of the Upland Yuman language, itself a member of the Pai branch of the Yuman language family.
The language includes three dialects, which have been referred to as Western, Northeastern and Southeastern, as well as Prescott, Verde Valley, and Ɖo:lkabaya.

Tonto leader (bilingual Kwevkepaya-Tonto-Apache or Kwevkepaya-Pinaleño-Apache leader)
Kwevkepaya leader
Wipukepa leader
Yavapé leader
Tolkepaya leader

In "Hell on Wheels" season 1, Eva tells Elam she was traded, for three blankets and a horse, to the tribe that tattooed her. In episode 8 ("Derailed"), Eva tells Lily the Yavapai hacked up and scalped Eva's parents, and raped her sister then bashed out her brains with rocks, but Eva had the pox and they wouldn't touch her. Instead, they traded her to some Mojave.

The Yavapai tribe has also been speculated to be the inspiration for a professional wrestling strap match in which two wrestlers are bound together at the wrist by 20 feet of leather straps. In the now infamous Yapapi [sic] Indian Strap Match, Hulk Hogan and "Nature Boy" Ric Flair battled for World Championship Wrestling in 2000.

The Yavapai feature heavily in the psychedelic/western album "Eyes Like the Sky" by Australian band King Gizzard & the Lizard Wizard. It tells of an Irish-American boy in the American West during the time of the Civil War who is kidnapped by a war band of Yavapai and raised as their own. He becomes a legendary warrior named for his stunning eyes.


0910037388



</doc>
<doc id="12031780" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12031780" title="Battle of Kostiuchnówka">
Battle of Kostiuchnówka

The Battle of Kostiuchnówka was a World War I battle that took place July 4–6, 1916, near the village of Kostiuchnówka (Kostyukhnivka) and the Styr River in the Volhynia region of modern Ukraine, then part of the Russian Empire. It was a major clash between the Russian Army and the Polish Legions (part of the Austro-Hungarian Army) during the opening phase of the Brusilov Offensive.

Polish forces, numbering 5,500–7,300, faced Russian forces numbering over half of the 46th Corps of 26,000. The Polish forces were eventually forced to retreat, but delayed the Russians long enough for the other Austro-Hungarian units in the area to retreat in an organized manner. Polish casualties were approximately 2,000 fatalities and wounded. The battle is considered one of the largest and most vicious of those involving the Polish Legions in World War I.

In World War I, the partitioners of Poland fought each other, with the German Empire and Austro-Hungarian Empire aligned against the Russian Empire. The Polish Legions in Austro-Hungary were created by Józef Piłsudski in order to exploit these divisions, serving as one of his primary tools for restoring Polish independence.

The Polish Legions first arrived in the vicinity of Kostiuchnówka during the advance of the Central Powers in the summer and autumn of 1915, taking Kostiuchnówka on September 27, 1915. That autumn they experienced heavy fighting, with each side trying to take control of the region; a less known battle of Kostiuchnówka took place from November 3 to 10; the Russians managed to make some advances, taking the Polish Hill, but were expelled by the Polish forces on September 10. Polish forces held Kostiuchnówka, and due to their successes in defending their positions, several landmarks in the Kostiuchnówka region became known as "Polish" (called such by Polish as well as by allied German-speaking troops): a key hill overlooking the area became the Polish Hill (Polish: "Polska Góra"), a nearby forest – the Polish Forest ("Polski Lasek"), a nearby bridge over the Garbach – the Polish Bridge ("Polski Mostek"), and the key fortified trench line – Piłsudski's Redoubt ("Reduta Piłsudskiego"). Polish soldiers built several large wooden camps; the larger of which was known as Legionowo (where the Polish HQ was located). During the preceding late autumn, winter and spring there were no major moves by either side, but this changed drastically with the launching of the Brusilov Offensive in June 1916. It would be a major Russian victory, and the greatest of Austro-Hungarian defeats.

Facing the major Russian offensive, the II Brigade of the Polish Legions was deployed out of Kostiuchnówka, at Gruziatyn and Hołzula. The I Brigade held the lines advancing down the Polish Hill, Kostiuchnówka village; the III Brigade, positioned to its left, held the lines near the Optowa village; the Piłsudski's Redoubt was the most advanced Polish position, just about facing head on the most advanced Russian redoubt, called the "Eagle's Nest". Further down the Polish Hill the Hungarian 128th Honvédség Brigade took positions opposite the Polish right flank, the Hungarian 11th Cavalry Division opposite the left flank. Two Polish fall-back lines were drawn beyond the first line of defense: one drawn through the Polish Forest and the Engineer's Forest, and the second one through the villages of Nowe Kukle, Nowy Jastków, the camp of Legionowo and Nowa Rarańcza. The Polish Legions at Kostiuchnówka numbered from 5,500 to 7,300 (6,500 infantry and 800 cavalry), with forty-nine machine guns, fifteen mortars and twenty-six artillery units. The Russian forces, composed of the most part of the 46th Corps (primarily the 110th and 77nd Infantry Division), numbered 23,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry and were backed up by a larger artillery force consisting of 120 units.

Starting on June 6, a major Russian push was directed against the 40 km line between Kołki and Kostiuchnówka, with the aim of taking the position and then advancing towards Kovel. With Polish legionnaires staying put and holding the ground, more Russian reinforcements were thrown in, while the battle of Kostiuchnówka had become one of the major struggles in the area during World War I. Polish forces launched a counterattack, pushing back the Russians – who had not expected such a bold move – on the night of June 8 and 9.

The major Russian push came on July 4, after a major artillery pre-emptive assault. The advancing Russian infantry, numbering around 10,000, faced about 1,000 Polish troops in the front lines (the rest were held in reserve), but the Russians were stopped by heavy machine gun fire and forced to retreat. The Hungarian forces at Polish Hill were pushed back, however, and the Russians advancing on the Poles' right flank, threatened to take the high ground in the area. A counterattack by the Poles was not successful; as the Hungarian units were retreating, the Polish forces sustained very heavy losses and had to fall back either to the remaining part of the first defense line or, in the area of Polish Hill, to the second line. Another Polish counterattack, launched during the night of July 4/5, was also beaten back. Throughout the day, the Russian offensive managed to push the Polish forces further back; although the Poles managed to temporarily retake Polish Hill, a lack of support from the Hungarian forces once again tipped the battle towards the Russians, and even German reinforcements – deployed after Piłsudski sent a report to the army's headquarters about the possibility of a Russian breakthrough – failed to turn the tide away. Eventually, on July 6, the Russian offensive forced the Central Powers' armies to retreat along the entire frontline; Polish forces were among the last to retreat, having sustained approximately 2,000 casualties during the battle.

Brusilov's offensive was stopped only in August 1916, with reinforcements from the Western Front. Despite being forced to retreat, the performance of the Polish forces impressed Austro-Hungarian and German commanders, and contributed to their decision to recreate some form of Polish statehood in order to boost the recruitment of Polish troops. Their limited concessions, however, did not satisfy Piłsudski; in the aftermath of the Oath Crisis he was arrested and the Legions disbanded.

The presence of Piłsudski, who would later become the dictator of Poland, during the battle, became a subject of several patriotic Polish paintings, including one by Leopold Gottlieb, then also a soldier of the Legions, as well as of another painting by Stefan Garwatowski. Wincenty Wodzinowski created a series of drawings and sketches on the dead and wounded from the battle. During the Second Polish Republic, several monuments and a mound were raised nearby to commemorate the battle. A 16 m mound with a stone obelisk and a museum with two additional obelisks were raised during the years 1928–1933; a military cemetery was also built. They fell into disrepair during the rule of the Soviet Union (which often purposefully tried to erase traces of Polish history – the mound was for example lowered by 10 m). In recent years restoration work has taken place through various Polish-Ukrainian projects, with notable projects carried out by Polish boy scouts.

The battle is considered one of the largest and most vicious of those involving the Polish Legions in World War I. Piłsudski in his order of July 11, 1916 wrote that "the heaviest of our current fights took place in the recent days."





</doc>
<doc id="12033060" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12033060" title="Ben Starosta">
Ben Starosta

Ben Mark Starosta (born 7 January 1987) is a footballer who last played for Nuneaton Town. Born in Sheffield, England he started his career at his hometown club Sheffield United, although he never broke through into the first team. He was loaned to a number of clubs, both in England and Poland, while at United before eventually being released in 2009. After an aborted spell at Darlington he spent a period at Dandenong Thunder in Australia on non-contract terms before signing for Miedź Legnica in 2011. Starosta then spent a year at United Football League side Global in the Philippines. He has also played for the Polish national U-20 team, qualifying as he holds a Polish passport through his family.

Starosta started his club career with Sheffield United and had a spell in early 2006 on work experience with non-league Tamworth. He signed a new two-year contract with Sheffield United in May 2007, before joining Brentford in a five-month loan deal in August 2007 after impressing in two pre-season friendlies. Starosta played 23 games in all competitions for Brentford but was sent off during his last game for the club, a Boxing Day fixture against Wycombe Wanderers. In January 2008, he signed for Bradford City on loan for the rest of the 2007–08 season. Starosta made his debut for Bradford on 26 January 2008 as a half-time substitute in a 1–1 draw away at Wrexham. He took Darren Williams' place at right back the following game and played in a total of 15 games for Bradford, sharing first team duties with Williams.

Starosta returned to Sheffield United at the end of the season, but he moved back to League Two when he joined Aldershot Town on a one-month loan deal for the start of the 2008–09 season, with a view to a permanent transfer. He made his Aldershot debut in Town's game against Accrington Stanley at the start of the season, and played four games during his loan spell. With a permanent deal with Aldershot not materialising, Starosta instead joined Polish side Lechia Gdańsk on a six-month loan deal in September 2008. He returned to Sheffield United in February 2009 having played eleven times for Gdańsk but was released at the end of the season as the Blades cut back their squad.

In the summer of 2009, Starosta was unveiled as one of ten new signings made by Colin Todd at League Two side Darlington following their spell in administration. With the club still in financial difficulty however, he left by mutual consent before the season even started as Darlington tried to cut the wage bill. Starosta then spent a spell with Conference North side Alfreton Town, before, seeking a new club, he took up an offer from Australian Victorian Premier League side Dandenong Thunder, where he played on non-contract terms for a period, but soon left citing the poor quality of football on offer. Starosta returned to the UK and signed a short-term deal with Frickley Athletic of the Northern Premier League in March 2011, but failed to make an appearance for the club.

In the summer of 2011 Starosta returned to Poland and signed a one-year deal for II liga side Miedź Legnica with the option of extending the deal for another two seasons. After a slow start he broke into the first team in August, appearing as a second-half substitute in a game against Bytovia Bytów. Establishing himself in the first team he played regularly through the season, making nineteen appearances as Miedź gained promotion to I liga. Miedź took up the option of extending his deal for him to remain with the club for the new season, however he subsequently left Legnica after the club cancelled his contract by mutual consent.

In January 2013 Starosta signed for UFL side Global in the Philippines, making his league debut for Global at the start of February, scoring in a 2–0 victory over Pachanga Diliman. Starosta was released by Global the following March, having played 26 games and scored five goals and being made captain of the club.

After leaving Global, Starosta rejoined his former Global manager Brian Reid, signing for Nuneaton Town in May 2014.

Starosta currently works as a coach at Northern Counties East Football League side Parkgate.

Starosta qualified to play for Poland through his grandfather who moved to England from Poland after the Second World War. He received his Polish passport in early 2007 and was called up to the Poland squad for the 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup. He started all four games, including the 1–0 defeat of Brazil on 30 June.



Having been born to a Polish family but brought up in England, Starosta speaks English but has learned Polish during his time in the country. As a young player his heroes were David Beckham and Kaká. Starosta cites his main hobby as playing golf and also enjoys singing to the point that his Miedź teammates suggested he enter the Polish version of "Must Be The Music".



</doc>
<doc id="12070507" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12070507" title="Siege of Lal Masjid">
Siege of Lal Masjid

The Siege of Lal Masjid (, code-named Operation Sunrise) was a confrontation in July 2007 between Islamic fundamentalist militants and the Government of Pakistan, led by President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz. The focal points of the operation were the Lal Masjid ("Red Mosque") and the Jamia Hafsa madrasah complex in Islamabad, Pakistan.

Since January 2006, Lal Masjid and the adjacent Jamia Hafsa madrasah had been operated by Islamic militants led by two brothers, Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid. This organisation advocated the imposition of Sharia (Islamic religious law) in Pakistan and openly called for the overthrow of the Pakistani government. Lal Masjid was in constant conflict with authorities in Islamabad for 18 months prior to the military operation. They engaged in violent demonstrations, destruction of property, kidnapping, arson and armed clashes with the authorities. After Lal Masjid militants set fire to the Ministry of Environment building and attacked the Army Rangers who guarded it, the military responded, and the siege of the Lal Masjid complex began.

The complex was besieged from 3 to 11 July 2007, while negotiations were attempted between the militants and the state's Shujaat Hussain and Ijaz-ul-Haq. Once negotiations failed, the complex was stormed and captured by the Pakistan Army's Special Service Group. The government reported that the operation resulted in 154 deaths, and 50 militants were captured (other estimates were higher). It also prompted pro-Taliban rebels along the Afghan border to nullify a 10-month-old peace agreement with the Pakistani Government. This event triggered the Third Waziristan War, which marked another surge in militancy and violence in Pakistan and has resulted in more than 3,000 casualties.

The Lal Masjid was founded by Maulana Qari Abdullah in 1965. In English, Lal Masjid translates to the "Red Mosque", and the name is derived from the red colour of the mosque's walls and interiors. Abdullah taught Islamic extremism and preached jihad during the Soviet–Afghan War. Since its founding, Lal Masjid was frequented by leaders of the Pakistani military and government. Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, the Army Chief of Staff who later became president after seizing power in a coup d'état in 1977, was a close associate of Abdullah's. The mosque is located near the headquarters of Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), and several staff members were known to go there for prayers.

After the Soviet–Afghan War ended in 1989, the mosque continued to function as a centre for Islamic extremist learning and housed several thousand male and female students in adjacent seminaries.

Maulana Qari Abdullah was assassinated at the mosque in 1998. On his death, his sons, Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid, assumed responsibility for the entire complex . The brothers admitted to having regular communication with many of the wanted leaders of al-Qaeda, including Osama bin Laden.

Jamia Hafsa was a madrassa for women located near Lal Masjid. It was the largest Islamic religious institution for women in the world, with more than 6,000 students. It was constructed by Maulana Qari Abdullah in 1992. After his assassination, supervision passed to his son Abdul Aziz. Students were taught general subjects, including mathematics and geography but were not tested on these subjects; the only exams were on religious subjects.

Following the 11 September 2001 attacks on the United States, Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf announced his support for the US-led War on Terror. This declaration sparked conflict with the Lal Masjid, whose leadership was openly pro-Taliban. Abdul Aziz and Abdul Rashid denied having any links to banned terrorist organisations but were vehemently opposed to the War on Terror and the conflict in Afghanistan. They openly condemned Musharraf and opposed Pakistani security forces, including the Pakistan Rangers and Islamabad Capital Territory police. The mosque became a source for speeches calling for the assassination of Musharraf. One of these speeches was delivered by Masood Azhar, whose Jaish-e-Mohammed group members were later involved in failed attempts to kill the president. In July 2005, Pakistani authorities attempted to raid the mosque in connection with their investigation into the July 7, 2005 London bombings, but the police were blocked by baton-wielding female students. After the raid, authorities apologised for the behaviour of the police.

During 2006 and the first half of 2007, students and mosque leaders continued to challenge the Pakistani government's authority by calling for Islamic law and to end co-operation with the United States. They launched an anti-vice campaign, kidnapping alleged prostitutes and burning films. Students at the Red Mosque's two affiliated seminaries launched a campaign for Shari'a, occupying a nearby children's library and embarking on vigilante raids through the capital to stop what they called "un-Islamic activities," such as DVD vendors, barber shops and a Chinese-run massage parlor that they accused of being a brothel.

Most students in the mosque were from the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa bordering Afghanistan.

A confrontation took place when the mosque launched a campaign against the demolition of mosques in Islamabad by the Capital Development Authority. After an illegally constructed mosque was destroyed, students of the seminaries launched an all-out campaign against the government. They blocked authorities from reaching the site and then occupied a nearby children's library building. This was carried out primarily by the female students. The students set up an around-the-clock vigil and promised a "fight to the death" when the government threatened to evict them. The situation was defused when the authorities opened negotiations. The government later reconstructed the demolished portions of the mosque compound. The Lal Masjid leadership demanded the reconstruction of six other demolished mosques in the capital city.

On 27 March 2007, female students from Jamia Hafsa kidnapped three women, who they accused of running a brothel, and seized two policemen. All of the women were released after supposedly confessing to running the brothel and were shown on the television wearing burqas. Also due in part to an intercession from the Chinese Ambassador, Luo Zhaohui. In an interview on the talk show "Capital Talk," Lal Masjid students claimed that the madam of the brothel had connections with influential government employees, specifically naming the Minister of Railways Shaikh Rasheed Ahmad. The neighbourhood police station allegedly had prior knowledge of or approved the kidnappings. On 6 April, Abdul Aziz established a sharia court in parallel with Pakistan's federal judicial system and pledged thousands of suicide attacks if the government attempted to close it.

Students continued to occupy the library and challenge governmental control by raiding a brothel. They also kidnapped ten Chinese nationals, as well as several law enforcement officials, women, and children. The approach taken by the Pakistani government in dealing with mosque issues led to accusations of leniency on the part of Musharraf, who felt he was too soft. After exchanging fire with Pakistani troops, students set fire to a Ministry of Environment building near Lal Masjid.

The Minister for Environment, Faisal Saleh Hayat, stated that he had requested security for the building, but authorities had failed to provide it. Contrary to claims made earlier, Hayat said the ministry was never ordered to vacate the premises before Pakistan Rangers deployed.

On 3 July 2007, a battle erupted between Pakistani security forces and students of Lal Masjid when Law enforcement agencies extended the barbwire around the Masjid precinct. Riot police fired tear gas to disperse the students.Fighting continued, leaving nine people dead and approximately 150 injured. Among the dead were four mosque students, a TV news channel cameraman, a businessman, and a pedestrian. Within minutes, security forces closed off the area, and the capital's hospitals declared an emergency. Sporadic clashes continued as Pakistan Army troops deployed into the area.

The next day, authorities announced an indefinite curfew in Sector G-6 of Islamabad, where Lal Masjid is located. The army received orders to shoot anyone leaving the mosque with weapons. The government offered Rs. 5,000 (equivalent to $50 USDs or £41 GBP), plus a free education, to anyone exiting the mosque unarmed. Women inside the mosque were also offered safe passage to their homes. Successive deadlines were extended, as mosque leaders allowed some students to surrender, requiring security forces to renegotiate extensions. Government authorities announced the first deadline for the occupants of Lal Masjid to surrender unconditionally as 15:30 Pakistan Standard Time (PST), and it was pushed back to 16:00, 18:00, 19:30 and then 21:30. The government said that as many as 600 armed militants remained inside the mosque.

Before dawn on 5 July, Pakistani troops set off a series of explosions around the mosque. Gunfire was exchanged throughout the day, but open clashes apparently stopped. Deadline extensions continued on 5 July, with the government planning to evacuate the mosque and Jamia Hafsa before the final assault. Interior Minister Aftab Ahmad Sherpao announced at a press conference that the government believed that between 300 and 400 students remained in the mosque, and only 50 to 60 were considered to be militants.

Following the fourth deadline, Abdul Aziz was captured trying to escape disguised as a woman wearing a burqa. Following the capture of this leader, about 800 male students and 400 female students of Jamia Hafsa surrendered to the authorities.

Abdul Aziz's younger brother, Ghazi Abdul Rashid, had been negotiating with a government mediator. He claimed that the remaining students were willing to leave the mosque and lay down their arms, provided the government would grant them amnesty and not fire on them. Government officials were sceptical that Abdul Rashid would honour this agreement. In a telephone interview from a live transmission of Geo TV, Ghazi Abdul Rashid denied all the charges against him and reiterated his innocence. He further negotiated with the government for his safe passage and a guarantee that no harm would come to his followers inside the mosque. He also received a promise that his ailing mother would receive medical care.

The siege continued on 6 July. Negotiation talks continued between the besieged Lal Masjid administration and government authorities, without resolution. Twenty-one additional students surrendered to authorities, and two students were killed in a shooting incident. The government decided to delay the assault, hoping for the safe evacuation of more students from the besieged mosque. President Pervez Musharraf issued an ultimatum on the evening of 7 July. The Pakistani army took over the operation and replaced the paramilitary troops deployed around the premises. A thirteen-year-old child escaped from the besieged mosque unharmed.

Pakistani commandos raided the outer perimeter of the compound, blasting holes through the walls of the mosque to allow trapped women and children to escape. The assaults began shortly after 1:00 am (20:00 GMT) on 7 July and were met with heavy armed resistance. SSG Commander Lt. Col. Haroon-ul-Islam, who had been leading the operation, was wounded on 6 July and died in the hospital two days later. However, the commandos succeeded, and the boundary wall of Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa collapsed. Abdul Rashid Ghazi said they would not surrender and that they had sufficient ammunition and rations to last a month.

On 9 July, a group representing Pakistani madrasahs, headed by Maulana Salimullah Khan, called for an immediate cessation of the Lal Masjid operation. Finland also temporarily closed its embassy in Islamabad on 9 July due to the deteriorating security situation and the proximity of the embassy to the mosque compound. By 10 July, the Pakistani government reported that 100 militants and between 300 and 400 women and children remained inside the mosque.

On Friday, 6 July, President General Musharraf left for the flood-affected areas of Balochistan. As the president's aircraft took off from the Islamabad airport, militants fired anti-aircraft weapons at it from the roof of a house in the Asghar Mall area of Rawalpindi. The militants' relationship with Lal Masjid remains unknown. Security forces recovered two anti-aircraft guns and a machine gun on the rooftop of a Rawalpindi high-rise, one mile (1.6 km) from the airport. The government asserted that shots were heard minutes after the president's aircraft took off. Analysts suggest that it may have been retaliation for ongoing operations against Lal Masjid and the government's continued efforts to combat terrorism and Talibanization in northern Waziristan.

Predator unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) flew over Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa on 8 and 9 July, capturing images of the deployment of people inside. Security forces had the images taken to study the claims of Ghazi Abdul Rashid regarding casualties and damage caused to Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa. The UAVs flew over Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa for more than an hour, from 2:40 to 4:00 am. Senior government officials and the Security Forces personnel examined the pictures and relayed the information directly to the command post on the ground. The UAV was given to Pakistan by the United States for use in the War on Terror. Strategic planning for the assault on the mosque was conducted based on information gathered by the drone. Pakistan deployed several security units to execute the attack on the mosque. These include the Army's 78th Paratrooper Brigade and 111th Infantry Brigade; its elite strike force, the Special Service Group (SSG) Division; the Ninth Wing Company of the Pakistan Army, the Rangers paramilitary force; and the Elite Police squad of the Punjab Police.

On the morning of 10 July, former Prime Minister Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain and Federal Religious Affairs Minister Muhammad Ijaz-ul-Haq declared that peace negotiations via loudspeaker and mobile phone had failed. Within minutes, the Special Service Group were issued orders to storm the mosque. Pakistan Army spokesman Waheed Arshad said troops began by attacking and breaching the mosque from the south and assaulted it from three directions at 4:00 am (23:00 GMT). The forces immediately came under gunfire from heavily armed militants hunkered down behind sandbagged positions on the roof and from holes in the walls of the mosque. The SSG quickly cleared the mosque's ground floor, amid explosions coming from the mosque. About 30 women and children ran toward the advancing SSG operators and managed to escape unharmed.

While the SSG secured the ground floor of the mosque, they continually received fire from the mosque's minarets. This slowed the operation's progress. On the mosque roof, militants had piled sandbags at the base of the minarets, which they now used as steps to shoot at troops below. After the minarets were taken, the SSG progressed deeper into the complex, and the militants threw gasoline bombs in an unsuccessful attempt to set fire to the mosque and stop the assault. Once the ground floor was secured, the SSG attempted to enter the Jamia Hafsa madrasah adjoining the mosque but were delayed by booby traps, which had to be disabled before they could continue into the complex.

The SSG entered the complex, which also served as Abdul Rasid Ghazi's living quarters, and engaged in a firefight in the main courtyard. Militants fired on them from makeshift bunkers beneath the stairwell. Army spokesman Arshad later stated that the militants must have been fortifying the bunkers for several months. Once the courtyard was cleared, the SSG entered the labyrinth of the Jamia Hafsa building. Militants inside were armed with guns and rockets, and some areas were booby-trapped. Some militants had bullet- and explosion-proof vests and other sophisticated weapons. The SSG suffered most of their casualties during this phase of the operation. In close-quarter combat, the SSG were attacked with smoke grenades, incendiary grenades, and fragmentation grenades. Twenty-nine of the thirty-three SSG commandos who were injured in the operation received injuries from fragmentation grenades. As the fight continued, the SSG came upon a room in which half a dozen militants were present. One of the militants detonated a suicide jacket, killing everyone in the room. It took several hours of intense fighting before the SSG gained control of Jamia Hafsa, with only the basement remaining to be secured.

Arshad said troops had secured 80 percent of the complex and were moving slowly, as the resistance was intense in the remaining areas. The standoff continued, as heavily armed militants had retreated into the basement using women and children as human shields, according to the Pakistan Army spokesman. The militants in the basement resisted with machine guns, shoulder-fired rockets, and Molotov cocktails. In a last interview with Geo TV during the operation, Abdul Rashid Ghazi, who was hunkered down in the basement, claimed that his mother had been wounded by gunfire and was quoted as saying, "The government is using full force. This is naked aggression... my murder is certain now." Ghazi also claimed that 30 rebels were still battling Pakistani troops, but they only had 14 AK-47s.

Militants continued to fire at the SSG commandos from ventilation grilles in the basement. During the firefight, Abdul Rashid Ghazi was shot in the leg and was asked to surrender. However, militants in the room fired back at the SSG, and Ghazi was killed in the crossfire. Other reports say that Ghazi came out of a bunker to surrender, only to be shot by his own forces. The fighting continued until all the personnel trapped in the basement either surrendered or were killed.

Behind an Army cordon, emergency workers waited for clearance to enter Lal Masjid. Female police officers were present to handle female survivors and casualties. Relatives of the militants inside the Lal Masjid were also outside the cordon. The Associated Press reported: "The siege has given the neighborhood the look of a war zone", with troops manning machine guns behind sandbagged posts and from the top of armoured vehicles.

On 11 July, officials reported that the Lal Masjid complex had been cleared of militants, and troops were combing the area for booby traps and explosives. The eight-day Lal Masjid operation was the longest ever conducted by the SSG.

According to Inter-Services Public Relations, weapons were recovered from the bullet-riddled Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa complexes, including RPG rockets, anti-tank and anti-personnel landmines, suicide bombing belts, three to five .22-caliber rifles, RPD, RPK and RPK-74 light machine guns, Dragunov Sniper Rifles, SKS rifles, AK-47s, pistols, night vision equipment, and more than 50,000 rounds of various calibre ammunition. Lesser sophisticated items and weaponry recovered from the complex included three crates of gasoline bombs prepared in green soft drink bottles, gas masks, recoilless rifles, two-way radios, large plastic buckets containing homemade bombs the size of tennis balls, as well as knives.

Intelligence agencies expressed shock at the highly sophisticated weapons that the militants in the Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa compound had, and began an investigation into where the equipment came from. Pakistan Army spokesman Waheed Arshad said that a suicide bomber had detonated himself in the mosque located at the opposite side of the complex to the seminary. Arshad also said a second suicide bomber had detonated himself in the white-domed mosque. In total, it took 36 hours to fully secure the complex and remove the booby traps.

Officials in Islamabad considered the operation a success, citing that they were able to subdue all the fighters inside the mosque—a group that allegedly included foreign terrorists—without a heavy civilian toll. "The number of casualties was much lower than it could have been," said Shaukat Aziz, Pakistan's prime minister. Of the 164 SSG Army commandos that participated in the siege and later assault of the mosque, 10 died and 33 were wounded.

The Inspector General of Police (IGP) reported that from 3 July until 11 July, 1,096 people, 628 men, 465 women, and 3 children left or were rescued from the complex. The IGP also confirmed that 102 people were killed during the operation: 91 militants, 10 SSG commandos, and 1 Ranger. This includes the sixteen dead on 10 July. A total of 248 people were injured, including 204 civilians, 41 army soldiers, and 3 Rangers. Seventy-five bodies were recovered from the premises after the operation. Securing Lal Masjid brought an end to nine days of high tension in Islamabad, normally a tranquil city that had been immune to the violence experienced in the tribal areas of Pakistan.

Army spokesman Arshad said that, during the operation, 85 people were rescued from the complex, of whom 56 were male. He also said 39 of those rescued were under the age of eighteen. "With militants in different rooms, firing from behind pillars, and then going into basements and clearing it, you can understand the difficulties," Arshad told journalists.

Nineteen bodies were burned beyond recognition, but none of them appeared to be women or children, according to Pakistani officials. An article in "The Nation", cited a grave digger at the cemetery where the bodies were being buried, who claimed there was the possibility that there may have been more than one body in each coffin. The article also stated that the government was digging more graves than previously established. The Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal, a coalition of hard-line religious parties, claimed that between 400 and 1,000 students had been killed, along with women and children. Spanish-language news channels Univision, Antena 3, and Telecinco claimed that the total number of deaths in the siege was greater than 286 and could be as high as 300.

Pakistani investigators probing links between Lal Masjid and terrorists have discovered the enrolment registers listing the students who studied at the seminary. The investigators believe the information, found in the Jamia Hafsa complex, will help clarify the number of people killed or missing in the operation. Officials believe the list of registered students matches the number of students evacuated or captured from the mosque and Jamia Hafsa.

The damage to Lal Masjid was extensive. The entrance hall was completely burned out, the ceiling scorched, and the red walls above the oval doorway blackened. However, the mosque itself sustained less damage than the Jamia Hafsa seminary. Bullet casings were found all over the mosque roof, and the inside of Lal Masjid was turned coal black from the militants trying to set the mosque on fire using gasoline bombs. Militants used the mosque's two white minarets as vantage points, resulting in damage to the minarets. One minaret was completely destroyed, and its speakers were hanging from their wires. The dome, however, was not damaged during the 36-hour battle. The director general of the Inter Services Public Relations said photographs of the bodies seem to indicate that there were foreigners among the dead.

In the Jamia Hafsa complex, damage was extensive, with thousands of bullet holes in the courtyard. The basement was blackened from rockets. The main buildings of the complex were structurally intact, but the boundary walls had been breached in several places. The building had bullet marks in its cement structure. The two courtyards inside the school were filled with shattered glass and spent rounds. Piles of the girls' bed rolls and stacks of books were piled against walls.

On 15 July, the Capital Development Authority was asked by the government to complete the repair and rehabilitation of Lal Masjid in 15 days, and on 27 July, the mosque was reopened to the public. However, the Jamia Hafsa complex was demolished, as it was illegally constructed and in danger of collapsing.

Pakistani intelligence officials said they found letters from Osama bin Laden's deputy, Ayman al-Zawahiri, after taking control of Lal Masjid. They were written to Abdul Rashid Ghazi and Abdul Aziz Ghazi, directing the brothers and militants to conduct an armed revolt. Government sources believe that as many as 18 foreign fighters from Uzbekistan, Egypt, and Afghanistan had arrived weeks before the final confrontation and established firing ranges to teach the students, including children, how to handle weapons properly. Diplomats were surprised by how quickly al-Zawahiri condemned the attack on the mosque and called on Pakistanis to rise up against Musharraf's government. Officials blamed the presence of foreign fighters for the breakdown of negotiations, as they seemed about to reach a deal to end the standoff peacefully. According to government sources and western diplomats, the Al-Qaeda fighters in the mosque sought martyrdom instead.

Al-Qaeda's second-in-command, al-Zawahiri, issued a videotape on 11 July 2007, calling for Pakistanis to join jihad in revenge for the attack by the Pakistan's Army on the mosque. Al-Zawahri's four-minute address was titled "The Aggression against Lal Masjid" and dedicated solely to the clash between the Lal Masjid militants and the Pakistan Army. The video was released by al-Qaeda's media wing, as-Sahab and subtitled in English.

Although many Pakistanis were silent about the operation against Lal Masjid, most agreed with the government's decision to use force to retake the complex. While hardliners have been able to stir up anger every time Musharraf moves against militants, most people have been tolerant and oppose the militants desire to impose their interpretation of Islamic law. Most residents of Islamabad agree that the raid restored local peace, despite fears of retaliation.

In a televised address to the nation, Musharraf declared that he was determined to eradicate extremism and terrorism in Pakistan. "Dawn" supported the government's actions against Lal Masjid but questioned "how the intelligence agencies failed to get wind of the goings-on in the Lal Masjid and the stockpiling of arms and ammunition in such large quantities."

The "Daily Times" also supported the government's position and added, "Let us be clear. No government can violate the universal principle of 'no negotiation with terrorists' and live to be praised." "The News" was more critical, stating, "Once 'Operation Silence' is over, the firing stops, the dust settles down and the bodies are counted, there are bound to be many questions raised. Why didn't the government take action earlier against the clerics because had that been the case so many lives would not have been lost? Why were the Lal Masjid elements allowed so much leeway that the complex became almost like a state within a state, complete with a moral policing force which acted with impunity enforcing a rigid interpretation of Islam on the city's residents? How did so many hardened militants, reportedly some foreigners among them, make their way inside the compound situated in the heart of Islamabad?".

"The Post" was worried about how the episode would affect Pakistan: "This is going to ratchet up religious sentiments, and could lead to increased polarization between the moderates and extremists in the country, the former including General Musharraf under the banner of 'enlightened moderation'." "The Islam" newspaper criticised the government, stating, "The government cannot absolve itself of the tragedy. If it wanted, the matter could have been resolved at the start. But this was not done and, for the first time in the history of Pakistan, our own security forces not only bombarded a mosque and religious seminary, but also brought in armored personnel carriers, tanks and helicopter gunships in numbers that made you wonder. This shows that all this activity was masterminded by some satanic minds. This incident is tragic, shameful and dangerous. How much it has harmed the country and the nation, and how worse an impact it will leave on the country on the future, can at this point only be imagined."

"Nawa-i-Waqt" wrote in its editorial, "The entire nation is drowned in shock and grief today. They are mourning the brute use of force. Now we need a comprehensive inquiry over the operation against the Red Mosque. The report should be made public so that the people can know the actual facts." The "Ausaf" daily countered, "The entire nation is grieving... only the USA wanted what happened and proof of that is that the storming operation was celebrated at the White House and Pentagon rather than at General Musharraf's HQ."

The "Pakistan Observer" praised the government: "The Government deserves credit for showing remarkable tolerance and patience and exhausted all possible avenues for peaceful settlement of the nerve-shattering crisis".

China backed Musharraf in his stand against Lal Masjid. The Chinese Minister of Public Security, Zhou Yongkang, referred explicitly to the Lal Masjid militants as terrorists and demanded that Pakistan act more forcefully to protect Chinese nationals working in the country.

The European Union President, José Manuel Barroso, issued a statement that it "supports the Government of Pakistan in the defense of the rule of law and the writ of the State against the threat posed by such armed radical groups in the context of the fight against extremism." The EU also praised the "restraint and moderation showed by the Pakistani authorities."

United States President George W. Bush gave his support to Musharraf as "a strong ally in the war against these extremists." State Department deputy spokesman Tom Casey noted that the militants had been given many warnings before the commandos moved on the Red Mosque. He said, "The government of Pakistan has proceeded in a responsible way. All governments have a responsibility to preserve order." Bryan D. Hunt, of the United States' consulate in Lahore, was quoted as saying that the American government supported the Pakistani government and that "the militants were given many warnings but instead of surrendering they decided to fight and challenge the writ of government." Hunt also said that the US fully supports Pakistan in their War on Terror and considers Pakistan "their closest ally in South Asia." Religious parties and figures criticised the support extended by the US consular official and demanded that the government expel him for interfering in Pakistan's internal affairs. A Pakistani Foreign Office spokesperson Tasneem Aslam characterised the US consulate official's statement as contrary to diplomatic norms, and open interference in the country's internal affairs. She said a protest would be lodged.

On 16 August 2007, acting on a "suo motu" notice, the Supreme Court of Pakistan took up the extrajudicial killings of the people at the Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa complex. Performance of the Islamabad administration attracted the reprimand of the court for its slow pace. The court was informed that 61 students were in custody, of whom 39 were on bailable offences. The Chief Justice of Pakistan ordered immediate release of 20 people considered innocent, as recommended by a joint investigation team. National Crisis Management Cell Director Javed Iqbal Cheema told the court that 28 DNA tests had not been confirmed. The Chief Justice also pointed out that Islamabad Deputy Commissioner Mohammad Ali had stated that 30 bodies remained unidentified.

Mohammed Ahsan Bhoon, president of the Lahore High Court Bar Association, said, "This issue could have been resolved through negotiations but General Musharraf intentionally spilled the blood of innocent people to please his foreign masters." Deputy Information Minister Tariq Azim said that the Lal Masjid assault had sent a strong message that the government "meant business." Musharraf vowed in a nationally televised address that he would "crush extremists throughout Pakistan and move against religious schools like those at the Lal Masjid and those that breed them."

According to journalist Deborah Scroggins, the storming of the masjid became a turning point for Pakistan. ... Many of the militant Pakistanis in Waziristan and on the border with Kashmir had had young relative in the shattered mosque, and they began attacking the army in revenge. This broke or at least badly damaged the "long standing alliance" between the Deobandi jihadis and the military.

The Lal Masjid siege gave hardliners in Pakistan a rallying point, as well as generating new martyrs (i.e. volunteers to commit suicide bombings) and prompting al-Qaeda, Jaish-e-Muhammad, Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, and the Taliban to launch retaliation attacks in Pakistan. In the next five months suicide bombers committed 56 attacks killing 2729 Pakistanis.

The first attack after the operation against the mosque was on 12 July 2007; two suicide attacks killed six people in northwest Pakistan. Another 28 soldiers were killed when a suicide attacker struck a military convoy in northwest Pakistan near the Afghan border on 14 July. Several terrorist attacks were carried out throughout Pakistan in July.

The bodies of seventy militants from the Lal Masjid operation were buried in a graveyard near Islamabad. To assist relatives in identifying and in claiming the bodies later, officials took photographs, fingerprints, and DNA samples from the bodies prior to their interment in temporary graves.

In October 2013, Musharraf was arrested, days after being bailed on other charges, for being personally responsible for ordering the siege. It came two weeks after a case was filed over his responsibility. In February 2016, a local courts judge issued non-bailable warrants for the arrest of Musharraf for his 'deliberate' absence from the proceedings of the murder case of Lal Masjid cleric Abdul Rashid Ghazi.

In 2015, a documentary film Among the Believers was released. It was filmed over a five-year period in which Aziz and his students were interviewed. The documentary portrayed the periods before, during and after the siege of the Lal Masjid.

On 6 July 2008, at 7:50 pm local time, a bomb exploded near Lal Masjid killing 18 policemen and a civilian. Pakistani officials claim that the bombing, which occurred on the first anniversary of the siege, was a revenge attack and the work of a 30-year-old suicide bomber.





</doc>
<doc id="12168706" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12168706" title="Manavi long-fingered bat">
Manavi long-fingered bat

The Manavi long-fingered bat ("Miniopterus manavi") is a bat in the genus "Miniopterus" that occurs in east-central Madagascar. First described in 1906, this species was later included in the mainland African "M. minor". A 1995 revision united populations of small "Miniopterus" from Madagascar and the Comoros as "M. manavi", but molecular and morphological studies in 2008 and 2009 showed that this concept of "M. manavi" in fact included five different species. "M. manavi" itself was restricted to a few locations in the eastern Central Highlands and populations in the Comoros and northern and western Madagascar were allocated to different species.

"Miniopterus manavi" is a small, blackish or reddish-brown "Miniopterus"; its forearm length is . The tragus (a projection in the outer ear) is narrow and ends in an angular tip. The uropatagium (tail membrane) is well-furred and the palate is flat.

"Miniopterus", a widespread genus of bats in Africa, southern Eurasia, and Australia, was first recorded from Madagascar by George Edward Dobson, who mentioned the larger "Miniopterus schreibersii" and the smaller "M. scotinus" (currently "M. natalensis") in his 1878 catalog of the bats in the British Museum. In 1906, Oldfield Thomas named the larger species "M. majori" and the smaller "M. manavi". He regarded "M. manavi" as close to the mainland African "M. minor", and in 1971, R.W. Hayman and J.E. Hill placed it as a subspecies of that species. In their 1995 "Faune de Madagascar" review of Malagasy bats, however, Randolph Peterson and colleagues again separated "M. manavi" as a species, with "M. manavi griveaudi" (currently "Miniopterus griveaudi") from Grande Comore as a subspecies. Peterson, who died before the review was completed, had originally divided "M. manavi" into several species occurring in different areas, but his collaborators decided conservatively to keep "M. manavi" as a single species, recommending reassessment of the status of those forms as new material would become available.

In the 2000s, molecular studies helped clarify the systematics of "Miniopterus". In 2007, Javier Juste and colleagues, using sequences of the mitochondrial cytochrome "b" gene, found that bats from Madagascar ("M. manavi"), Grande Comore ("M. manavi griveaudi") and São Tomé ("M. minor newtoni"; currently "Miniopterus newtoni") did not cluster together to the exclusion of other African "Miniopterus"; however, their samples of ""M. manavi"" were in fact misidentified "M. majori". The next year, Nicole Weyeneth and colleagues used cytochrome "b" and mitochondrial D-loop sequences to assess the relationships of Comoran "Miniopterus". They found two unrelated clades within Malagasy and Comoran samples of ""Miniopterus manavi"", neither of which was closely related to "M. newtoni" or to Tanzanian samples of "M. minor".

During 2009, Steven Goodman and colleagues published two papers that found a total of five genetically and morphologically distinct species within "Miniopterus manavi" as defined by Peterson and colleagues (1995), up to four of which can be found in a single locality. In order to determine the true identity of "M. manavi", Goodman and Claude Maminirina obtained bats near the type locality of "M. manavi" (the site where the original material was collected, from which the species was described) for inclusion in the analysis; they also sequenced one of Thomas's original specimens. Among the five species they identified, "M. griveaudi" occurs on Grande Comore and Anjouan and in northern and western Madagascar; "M. aelleni" occurs on Anjouan and in northern and western Madagascar; "M. brachytragos" is found in northern Madagascar only; "M. mahafaliensis" is confined to the southwestern part of the island; and "M. manavi" itself is known only from the eastern edge of the Central Highlands. These five species are not each other's closest relatives according to analyses of cytochrome "b" sequences and their similarities reflect convergent evolution. Cytochrome "b" suggested that the closest relative of "M. manavi" is the slightly larger "M. petersoni" from southeastern Madagascar. Two specimens of "M. manavi" differed by 1.3% in their cytochrome "b" sequences and by 2.5% from "M. petersoni".

"Miniopterus manavi" is a diminutive species with fur of medium length. The upperparts are blackish or reddish brown. Other small Malagasy "Miniopterus" are lighter. The ears mostly lack hair and end in a rounded tip. The tragus (a projection on the inner side of the outer ear) is thin for most of its length, ends in an angular tip, and has a flange at the medial side (towards the midline of the animal). The tragus is differently shaped in other species. The wings and uropatagium (tail membrane) are blackish and are attached to the upper leg at the same level, above the ankle. The uropatagium is densely haired above and more sparsely below, as in "M. mahafaliensis" and "M. brachytragos"; "M. griveaudi" and "M. aelleni" have more nearly naked uropatagia.

In the single specimen of true "M. manavi" that Goodman and colleagues could measure, total length is , tail length is , hindfoot length is , tragus length is , ear length is , and body mass is . The length of the forearm is known from four specimens; it ranges from , averaging .

In the skull, the rostrum (front part) is rounded. The central groove in the nasal depression is relatively narrow. The frontal bones are inflated and bear a prominent sagittal crest. Further back on the braincase, the lambdoid crest is poorly developed. The middle part of the palate is flat, not concave as in "M. brachytragos", "M. griveaudi", and "M. mahafaliensis". At the palate's back margin is a short, thick posterior palatal spine.

The currently known distribution of "M. manavi" extends around the eastern margin of the Central Highlands, from the vicinity of Ambositra in the north to Vinanitelo in the south, at above sea level. The 2008 IUCN Red List assesses the species as "Least Concern", citing its wide distribution, though it is sometimes hunted for food. However, the account predates the recognition of "M. aelleni", "M. brachytragos", "M. griveaudi", and "M. mahafaliensis" as separate species. Although some ecological data about "M. manavi" have been published, these need to be reevaluated with the recognition of numerous additional species within "M. manavi". Species of "Miniopterus" generally feed on insects, breed seasonally, and roost in large colonies in caves. The myobiid mite "Calcarmyobia comoresensis" has been recorded on "M. manavi".



</doc>
<doc id="12171204" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12171204" title="Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)">
Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)

"Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" is a song recorded by the American quartet Four Tops for their third studio album, "On Top" (1966). It was released in February 1966 as a 7" vinyl single through Motown records. It was written and produced by Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier, and Eddie Holland. A gospel rock track, its lyrics detail a relationship that has ended. It has since been regarded as one of Four Tops' most successful singles ever. It charted moderately well in both the United States and Canada, and became the group's fifth consecutive entry to chart within the top five of the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Four Tops has performed "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" on various occasions throughout their careers and have included it on several greatest hits albums, including on "The Four Tops Greatest Hits" (1967) and "The Ultimate Collection" (1997).

American musicians Barbra Streisand and Carol Lloyd also recorded covers of "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" and released them commercially in 1975 and 1979, respectively. Included on her seventeenth studio album, "Lazy Afternoon" (1975), Streisand's version was more of a disco song, as accomplished by producers Jeffrey Lesser and Rupert Holmes. Following the success of the song in a New York City club, Columbia Records decided to release the single which would later become a moderate success on two "Billboard" dance charts in that same year. Critically, it was highlighted on "Lazy Afternoon" as a standout track. Lloyd's version was recorded for her debut record "Score" in 1979; it received heavy airplay by disc jockeys and was positively received by "Billboard" critics.

"Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" was released as the lead single from the group's third studio album, "On Top" (1966), in February 1966. The album was a combination of "current hits" and "crossover material" to attract a larger audience for Four Tops. The song was written and produced by Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier, and Eddie Holland, who had collaborated with Four Tops on various occasions in the past. It is written in the key of C major with the quartet's vocals ranging from G to D. Set in a gospel rock tempo, lead singer Levi Stubbs begins stating, "All through this long and sleepless night / I hear my neighbors talking"; after losing the love of someone else, he claims that these people are "Saying that, out of my life, into another's arms / You'll soon be walking," before entering the chorus. The American female group the Andantes provide background vocals for the track.

Motown released "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" as a 7" vinyl single in February 1966. The standard edition commercial single features the B-side track "Just As Long As You Need Me". A promotional early version of the 7" single also exists, with both the stereo and mono versions of the song.

"Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" was favorably received by music critics. John Bush from AllMusic, in his album review of "On Top", called the track one of "their biggest and best hits of all time". According to Bill Dahl, author of "Motown: The Golden Years", 1966 was a successful year for Four Tops due to the success of "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" and their others singles "Loving You Is Sweeter Than Ever" and "Reach Out I'll Be There". At the time, the single was extremely popular in Boston, where it reached #37 on the "Top Sellers in Top Markets" chart in the aforementioned city.

In the United States, it entered the "Billboard" Hot 100 at number 86 on February 19, 1966. After climbing the chart in that country for several weeks, it reached its peak position at number 18 on March 26; overall, it spent nine consecutive weeks in the ranks of the "Billboard" Hot 100. It also entered the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart (then called simply the R&B chart) in the United States, where it peaked at number 5 and became the group's fifth consecutive top ten entry. On Canada's official singles chart, compiled by "RPM", the single debuted at number 66 for the week ending March 21, 1966. The following week on March 28, the single peaked at number 52.

Four Tops has included "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" on several of their greatest hits albums and compilation albums over the years. It was placed on their first compilation, "The Four Tops Greatest Hits", in 1967, followed by "The Four Tops Story 1964-72" (1973), "Anthology" (1974), "Greatest Hits" (1988), "The Ultimate Collection" (1997), and "The Definitive Collection" (2008). The group would also use the name of the track to title another album, called "Shake Me, Wake Me: 25 Greatest Hits 1964-1973" in 1998.

Additionally, the group has performed the song during various occasions throughout the years. More recently, they reunited on March 3, 2017 and performed various singles from their catalog at an event at the Warner Theatre in Torrington, Connecticut. Titled IMPACT 2017, both the Temptations and Four Tops sang during the annual live dance, opera, and gala, with the Four Tops performing "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" as the finale.


American vocalist Barbra Streisand recorded her own version of "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" for her seventeenth studio album, "Lazy Afternoon" (1975) in April 1975. Different from the original song, producers Jeffrey Lesser and Rupert Holmes gave the song a "disco treatment". Nicky Siano, a disc jockey, began playing the track at The Gallery nightclub in New York City in the fall of 1975. In a handwritten letter by Streisand for Siano, she wrote that the hype generated from playing her cover at the club prompted Columbia Records to release "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" as another single from "Lazy Afternoon".

In a 1979 "Billboard" article titled "Everyone's Jumping on Disco Bandwagon", written by columnist Paul Grein, he speculated that singers accustomed to the pop genre were beginning to "releas[e] disco records" and listed Streisand, Andy Williams, and Ethel Merman as a few examples. Following the release of the singer's disco-influenced "The Main Event/Fight" single in 1979, Grein listed both "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" and "Love Breakdown" as Streisand's previous attempts to create dance music.

Streisand released the single in 7" and 12" vinyl formats on November 12, 1975. The United States and Canada version features B-side track "Widescreen", which also appears on "Lazy Afternoon". The special edition "Columbia Disco Series" release was sent to dance clubs and features a stereo and mono version of "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)". A promotional release also took place that offered the short and long versions of the track, while the United Kingdom version (which was released on February 20, 1976) is similar to the United States/Canada one but contains the longer cut of the single instead of the album version.

Critics liked Streisand's version of the track. Christopher Nickens and Karen Swenson, authors of "The Films of Barbra Streisand", listed both "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" and "Moanin' Low" from "Lazy Afternoon" as two of the best songs from Streisand's entire career in 2000. Writer Will Hermes was also positive towards it, calling it a "surprisingly soulful cover". Derek Winnert, who wrote a biography on the singer in 1996, claimed that because of songs like "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" and album track "By the Way", the parent album was able to be appealing and thus a popular record. The author of "True Colours: A Spectrum of Filipino Gay and Lesbian Online Writings", Nelz Agustin, felt that Streisand's cover was nostalgic and brought him back to the days of his youth. The success of "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" allowed it to enter two of the dance charts compiled by "Billboard": it peaked at number 14 on the Dance Club Songs chart and number 10 on the now-defunct Disco Singles chart.




American singer Carol Lloyd also covered "Shake Me, Wake Me (When It's Over)" (although she removed the "(When It's Over)" part from the title) and released it in December 1979. It served as the second and final single from her debut studio album, "Score" (1979); both Casablanca Records and Earmarc Records handled the 7" commercial releases. It was previously used as the B-side for her debut single, "Score", in September 1979. 

On "Billboard"s Top Single Picks for the week of December 22, 1979, the editors listed Lloyd's version as a recommended track under the soul music category. In a review from the same publication, editor Barry Lederer called it the "one exceptional cut" on "Score". Classifying it as a disco recording, he also found Lloyd's extended version of "Shake Me, Wake Me" to "make th[e] already popular Streisand classic ever better". The standard edition version, released exclusively in the United States, contained the single and B-side track "Sundown to Sunrise" while the promotional DJ single featured the stereo and mono versions of "Shake Me, Wake Me". It peaked at number 89 on "Billboard"s Dance Club Songs chart on January 5, 1980.





</doc>
<doc id="12176784" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12176784" title="Danube crested newt">
Danube crested newt

The Danube crested newt or Danube newt ("Triturus dobrogicus") is a species of newt found in central and eastern Europe, along the basin of the Danube river and some of its tributaries and in the Dnieper delta. It has a smaller and more slender body than the other crested newts in genus "Triturus" but like these, males develop a conspicuous jagged seam on back and tail during breeding season.

For half of the year or longer, adults live in slow-flowing river margins, lakes, or ponds, where reproduction takes place. Males perform a courtship display, and females lay around 200 eggs individually onto leaves of aquatic plants. Larvae develop two to four months in the water before reaching metamorphosis. For the remainder of the year, the newts live in shady land habitats, usually forests. Although not yet considered threatened, Danube crested newt populations have declined significantly, the reason being mainly habitat loss. The species is protected by law in the European Union.

The Danube crested newt was described as a variety of the northern crested newt ("Triturus cristatus") by C. Kiritzescu in 1903. Later, it was considered a subspecies until genetic analysis supported its recognition as a separate species in the crested newt species complex. The northern crested newt is its likely sister species according to a molecular phylogenetic study based on mitochondrial DNA; analysis of nuclear DNA gives however some conflicting results regarding this sister relationship.

Separated populations from the Danube Delta and the Pannonian Basin (see "Distribution and habitats") were described as two subspecies, "T. dobrogicus dobrogicus" and "T. dobrogicus macrosoma", in 2000. Later genetic study, however, did not support the distinction of these two forms.

Measuring long in total, the Danube crested newt is the smallest crested newt species. It has a more slender, elongate body than the other species, well adapted to swimming, with a narrow head and relatively short limbs. This body shape has evolved through an increase in the number of rib-bearing vertebrae: there are 16–17 of them in "T. dobrogicus", the highest number among the crested newts.

The Danube crested newt's back and sides are dark brown with black spots and white stippling. The belly is orange to red (in other crested newts, it is usually yellow or orange–yellow), with small or medium-sized black blotches that have sharp edges. Like all crested newts, "T. dobrogicus" males develop a crest on their back and tail during breeding phase, which can be quite high and jagged and usually starts between the eyes and nostrils. Another feature of males at breeding season is a bluish-white stripe along the tail.

The Danube crested newt is found in three allopatric areas of distribution from central to eastern Europe:

In addition to the northern crested newt to the north, the Danube crested newt's range borders that of the Italian crested newt ("T. carnifex") in the west, and that of the Macedonian ("T. macedonicus") and Balkan ("T. ivanbureschi") crested newts in the south.

Compared to the other crested newt species, the Danube crested newt is more adapted to life along a river system and frequently occurs in flowing water and together with fish. Typical breeding sites are slow-flowing river margins, oxbow lakes, flooded marshland, larger ponds, or ditches, provided abundant underwater vegetation is available. During land phase, the newts live in deciduous forests or groves, bushlands, or meadows.

Danube crested newts have the longest aquatic phase in the genus "Triturus". Adults move to their breeding sites in February or March and usually stay there for six months; occasionally, they may even stay longer or return to the water in autumn. Males court females with a display of ritualised body movements. When they have gained the female's interest, they guide it over a spermatophore they deposit on the ground, which the female then takes up with her cloaca. The eggs are fertilised internally. As in other crested newts, a female lays around 200 eggs per season, which are folded individually into leaves of aquatic plants. Larvae develop over two to four months until they reach metamorphosis and leave the water.

Both in water and on land, the newts are largely nocturnal. In their aquatic habitats, they hide under vegetation, and on land, they use structures such as logs, rocks, or small animal burrows for cover. They feed mainly on different invertebrates, but in the water may also prey on tadpoles and smaller newts. Predators include herons and other birds, snakes such as the grass snake, and various carnivorous mammals.

The population of the Danube crested newt has declined significantly, and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its conservation status as "near threatened". The main threat is habitat destruction by humans, especially through drainage, damming, or pollution. Hybridisation with other crested newt species and a loss of breeding ponds because of decreasing spring rain in the southern range (possibly due to global warming) are also seen as threats. Like the other crested newts, "T. dobrogicus" is listed in the Berne Convention (appendix II) and the EU Habitats Directive (annexes II and IV), and capture, disturbance, killing, trade, and destruction of habitats are prohibited.




</doc>
<doc id="12220354" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12220354" title="Infamous (video game)">
Infamous (video game)

Infamous (stylized as inFAMOUS) is an action-adventure video game developed by Sucker Punch Productions and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for PlayStation 3. The game was released in May 2009. In "Infamous", the player controls the protagonist Cole MacGrath, a bike messenger caught in the center of an explosion that devastates several city blocks of the fictional Empire City. The explosion sends the city into chaos while Cole finds himself with new electricity-based super powers. Though the game's story follows Cole using his new abilities to restore some semblance of order to Empire City, the player is given several opportunities to use these powers for good or evil purposes in the game's Karma system. These choices ultimately affect character growth, the reaction of the City's populace towards Cole, and finer elements of gameplay and the story.

Sucker Punch developed "Infamous" as a change of pace from their earlier "Sly Cooper" series of stealth-based games, but using a similar comic book-inspired origin story to help the player become more connected with Cole. The game's pacing in the introduction of new super powers and ease of movement about the city by unconventional means were critical factors during development. The desolate urban atmosphere was inspired by comics such as "DMZ" and "". Amon Tobin was among the artists that helped to compile its soundtrack, which aimed to reflect the environment.

The game was well received by the gaming press. It was praised for many of its elements, including the implementation of Cole's powers and climbing ability, and the game's mission structure. Reviewers commented on the repetitive nature of combat and enemies, limitations of the Karma system, and technical aspects in the graphical display. "Infamous" was compared to and contrasted with "Prototype", a video game released the following month which had many elements similar to "Infamous". The game was offered by Sony as a free download as part of their 'Welcome Back' program, after the 2011 PlayStation Network outage. The game was followed by a sequel, "Infamous 2" in June 2011. 

"Infamous" is an action-adventure game set in an open world environment and played from a third-person perspective where the player controls Cole and primarily interacts with the world of Empire City through Cole's newly gained electricity-based powers; these are used for movement, offense and defense in combat, and either for better or worse in dealing with the citizens of Empire City. In order for Cole to use his powers, he must have stored electrical power, represented by a node meter on the player's heads up display (HUD). The player can recharge Cole by draining electricity from powered sources or from living beings; recharging also restores Cole's health, which is indicated by blood splattering onto the screen. The more damage that Cole takes, the more blood that covers the screen. When Cole's health is at a critical level, the screen will turn black and white, and if Cole takes a little bit more damage while the screen is black and white, a heartbeat will be heard and will get slower and slower as Cole takes more damage, until it is beating dangerously slow. At this point, further damage to Cole will kill him. If the player stays out of battle long enough, Cole's health will regenerate over time. The game features seventeen different electrical powers, ranging from simple bolts that do not consume Cole's energy to wide-field lightning storms that drain most of Cole's energy. The player can use such powers, giving the player options in certain situations. For example, the player may fire at a generator near foes to cause it to explode and cripple his opponents, then restrain them or fire at the body to kill the enemy.

Due to being vivified electricity, Cole is unable to use vehicles, take up weapons, or swim. Cole easily climbs buildings and other structures and can fall a great height without taking damage. Many powers are acquired over the course of the game; once acquired the player can use experience points, awarded for specific actions, stunts and missions, to increase the power's effectiveness. The growth of these powers is affected by Cole's current Karma level. Starting in a neutral position, it ranges from Guardian to Champion to Hero on the Good side, and from Thug to Outlaw to Infamous on the Evil side. Certain actions, such as stopping to help injured citizens or draining their health to restore Cole's, will affect the Karma level in either direction. Normal story missions may also alter the Karma level. During the game the player will encounter Karma Moments, when the action pauses and the player is told, through a monologue by Cole, of two actions that can be taken, always a good and bad option. For example, one scenario the player is presented with is to either pull a valve and get a spray of tar in his face (Good), or force a civilian to do it for him (Evil). There are also a number of paired Good/Evil side missions in the game; completing one will lock out the other mission but will reward the player with a large amount of Karma towards their selected Karma goal. Completion of these missions helps gain access to unique super powers based on the Karma level. The player is not locked into choosing either Karma path, and may opt to play towards one extreme and later switch to the other mid-game. Doing so will lock out any purchased power(s) in the original chosen Karma sector. In addition to altering Cole's appearance and certain aspects of the game's story, Karma also influences the behavior of the citizens of Empire City, they will come to help Cole in battle if his Karma is Good, but will turn on Cole and throw rocks at him if he has Bad Karma.

Empire City is built on three islands, and the player must work through main story missions on each island before being able to access the next one, though future missions may require the player to return to an earlier island. Each island is divided into a number of sectors, at the start of the game controlled by three different gangs, the Neon District being controlled by Sasha and her Reaper Gang, the Warren District being controlled by Alden and the Dust Men Gang, and the Historic District being controlled by Kessler and the First Sons. The player can undertake a side mission in each sector, once certain main story requirements have been met, to free that sector from gang control, reducing or eliminating the presence of the gang in that sector. Other side missions may also unlock medical stations where Cole will re-awaken should he die. Though Cole must travel on foot he eventually gains powers that allow him to grind along power cables and powered, elevated train rails and to hover for a short time. Scattered around the city are hundreds of 'Blast Shards' which Cole can collect to increase the amount of electricity he can store. There are 32 'Dead Drop' satellite transmitters that help to reveal more of the back-story in the game, all being narrated by John White, or being recordings of Kessler and his experiments.

"InFamous" is set in Empire City, a fictional metropolis based on New York City, consisting of the Neon District, where most of Empire City's businesses are concentrated, the Warren, a slum dependent on international shipping activity, and the Historic District, the location of the city government. Each district has an elevated train system and a separate power grid. The premise of the game is built around the partial destruction of the Historic District by a mysterious explosion, followed by a viral epidemic that forces federal authorities to seal the only bridge leading to the mainland. A rise in violent crime overwhelms the police, resulting in societal collapse.

The protagonist is Cole MacGrath (Jason Cottle), a courier who is accused of triggering the explosion, which leaves him with the ability to absorb and project electricity. His closest friend, Zeke Jedediah Dunbar (Caleb Moody), allows Cole to hide on his rooftop, despite his envy of the former's powers. Trish Dailey (October Moore), Cole's girlfriend, abandons him out of anger over the death of her sister Amy, while most of Empire City's residents view him as a terrorist. While attempting to escape the city with Zeke, Cole is contacted by FBI agent Moya Jones (Kimberli Colbourne), who offers to clear his name if he helps her find her husband, fellow agent John White (Phil LaMarr). White vanished while investigating a group known as the First Sons, who are believed to be responsible for orchestrating the explosion.

While working to restore order in the Neon District, Cole encounters Sasha (Jessica Straus), a former member of the First Sons, who like Cole is a "Conduit", an individual given powers by the First Sons. Using her ability to control the minds of others via a tar-like substance, she has formed a gang known as the Reapers. Meanwhile, the Warren has been overrun by the Dust Men, an army of homeless militants led by Alden Tate (also Jason Cottle), the original leader of the First Sons, who possesses telekinesis. Kessler (Sam A. Mowry), the true antagonist of the game, is a shadowy figure who controls the First Sons and who takes an obsessive interest in Cole and his powers.

While the basic story of "InFamous" remains unchanged whether the player opts for the "Good" or "Evil" karma path, there are some story elements that change depending on Cole's choices.

While making a delivery in the Historic District, Cole is instructed to open the package. In doing so, he activates a device known as the Ray Sphere, leveling several city blocks and nearly killing him. Rescued by Zeke and Trish, he teaches himself to control his emerging powers. After using them in public to fight off a Reaper attack, the locals turn against Cole after he is accused of triggering the explosion, forcing him into hiding. He and Zeke engineer an assault on the sealed bridge, only to be ambushed by government forces. Separated from his friend, Cole meets Moya, who persuades him to return and find John. With her help, Cole restores the district's power supply, earning the attention of Sasha, who lures him into her underground lair. Cole defeats her, but she is abducted by the Sons before he can make her talk. Trapped in the Warren, Cole assists what remains of the police in battling the Dust Men. Alden is arrested and imprisoned, but Zeke's incompetence in guarding him allows the Dust Men to free him and massacre most of the officers. With Alden planning to reactivate the Sphere, the two patch things up and confront him, with Zeke ending up in possession of the Sphere. Giving in to his temptations, Zeke deserts Cole and takes the Sphere to Kessler.

With Alden on a murderous rampage towards the Historic District, Cole defeats him once and for all in a bridge battle. Before jumping in the water, Alden reveals that Kessler exiled him from the First Sons. White, who turns out to be an NSA agent with no connection to Moya, reaches out to Cole and explains that the Ray Sphere is designed to consume bio-energy from thousands of lives and transfer it to a single user, making them a Conduit. During their search for the Sphere, Kessler publicly challenges Cole to stop a series of bombings across the district, ending with him being forced to choose between saving Trish or her colleagues. Regardless of which choice he makes, Cole fails to keep Trish from dying. Determined to punish Kessler, Cole tracks the Sphere to a remote pier, where he must decide whether to destroy it or use it to become even more powerful. Regardless, the Sphere releases the last of its energy, killing John before disappearing into a vortex.

Kessler then invites Cole to join him for a final fight in the same location where the game began. Displaying similar, if not superior, powers to the latter, Kessler comes close to killing him, only to be foiled by Zeke. Mortally wounded by a massive energy discharge, Kessler uses his last bit of strength to transmit a message into Cole's brain. In a final twist, Kessler is revealed to be Cole from the future of an alternate timeline. While raising a family with Trish, Future Cole failed to prevent the Beast, a malevolent entity, from destroying humanity. Despite their attempts to flee, the Beast tracked down and killed Trish and her children. Sending himself back in time Future Cole, adopting the name "Kessler", seized control of the First Sons, using their resources to prepare his past self for the future to come. Cole denounces Kessler's memory, but recognizes that his actions have given his life a new purpose.

Based on what rank Cole holds at the end of "InFamous", two endings are possible. If Cole defeats Kessler as a Hero, he restores peace to Empire City and is hailed as a savior. Nevertheless, his estrangement from Zeke and Moya, coupled with the responsibilities of heroism, lead him to realize that he will always be alone. If Cole is Infamous, he allows Empire City to slip further into chaos, and disregards Kessler's warning about the Beast, believing himself to be the strongest being to ever exist.

"Infamous" was developed by Sucker Punch Productions, with a team of 60 people working for about three years. Though they could have opted to request the necessary funds from Sony to increase the team size and finish the game in two years, producer Brian Fleming noted that Sucker Punch's iteration-based development approach worked better with a smaller team size.

"Infamous" came during the end of the development for "" as the team began to look towards their next game. After spending the last six years on the same stealth game genre with the "Sly Cooper" games, they wanted to make something that was more "brazen and loud." However, as fans of the "comic book" motif, they decided to develop it in the direction of a superhero game, working with the idea of an origin story that would allow the player to experience the growth of the character. Fleming stated that with the slower development time, they knew they needed to develop the game for the PlayStation 3 and that the work needed to complement their previous game, akin to how Shigeru Miyamoto's "The Legend of Zelda" series contrasted his earlier "Mario" series. They also sought a project that would allow them to become familiar with the new PlayStation 3 hardware but had enough commonalities to allow them to bring their previous work on the "Sly Cooper" series forward.

Director Nate Fox stated that much of the inspiration of the superhero story came from two DC Comics series, "DMZ" and "Batman: No Man's Land". Both center on a city after a large disaster. The series also inspired the crafting of the game's grim take on the superhero genre. Fox further stated that the film "Batman Begins" was an inspiration for the game. However, any correlation to DC Comics' "Static Shock" was unintentional. Fox considered his own personal involvement in the Seattle WTO riots of 1999 as influencing the reflection of "spending time in a lawless place" within the game. "Grand Theft Auto III" was also stated as an influence, in that the team could easily see themselves as superheroes in the open world of Liberty City; similarly, "Spider-Man 2" was used as a model to demonstrate what it would be like to move about the city and answer random requests for help alongside regular missions. They had toyed around with a version of the game that they compared to a superhero version of "Animal Crossing", and alongside superhero work, the hero would have an alter-ego of property developer to meet the citizens' more common needs, but dropped this and focused solely on superhero activities after about six months of work. The character of Cole was created to be a "kind of an everyman" so that players could then "get into the headspace of what it would be like to be a real human being who has been granted these exceptional abilities". The team also avoided giving Cole an alter-ego or outfitting him with a costume as it would not have reasonably fit in with the character or the game's story.

The story and cut scene animations were created in-house. The plot was originally written by Fox, who had also written most of the "Sly Cooper" stories, and reviewed by Fleming. As they continued to develop the game, they rewrote pieces of the story to reflect changes in the game, making sure that the story remained enjoyable. As the game became more complex, they brought in Bill Harms, a published comic book author, who had previously written for "Supreme Commander" and other video games. Harms assisted with the story and in-game dialog in addition to marketing materials. Fleming noted that the second half of the story underwent significant changes in the last nine months of development; for example, when voice actor Caleb Moody voiced the lines for Zeke, he ad libbed additional lines that the team found to be enjoyable, and they reworked the story to incorporate them. The cut scenes were created in a similar format to the comics that the game was influenced by, and used to further extend the atmosphere of the superhero motif. The cut scenes were created by taking 2D art created in Corel Painter and Adobe Photoshop and placing them into artificial 3D stages built in Adobe After Effects to create a pseudo-3D effect that allowed them to play with camera placement and effects, and addition of organic elements such as dust clouds and ink spots.

Darren Bridges, a developer for Sucker Punch, noted that they wanted to make "Infamous" about ""becoming" a modern-day superhero", stressing the word "becoming" as the key motivator to show the growth of Cole from a simple bike messenger to someone with god-like powers. This led to instilling a "sense of progress" and growth of the character in all aspects of the game including the story, the progression of the player's powers, and the variation and difficulty in the enemies that the player faced. The team initially brainstormed on what powers that the lead character had, but selected electricity-based powers for two primary reasons. First, the power translated well to a video game context, as it would be easy to conceptualize the aspects of electrical-based powers in terms of video game concepts such as ranged combat. Secondly, electrical-based powers could then be tied to the city that the player would explore, requiring the player to use the city's electricity as fuel, and thus developing a "real relationship with the city".

Initially, the game was more free-form, allowing players to purchase new powers at any point during the game, but the developers found it difficult to create a challenging game on that basis, particularly as they could not design missions calling for specific powers that the player may not have at that time. This evolved into the scheme of presenting new powers to the player over the course of the game, with the developers created guiding rules for which powers were ultimately included in the game and when: the power had to be useful and add something unique to the game, the player would need a chance to use that power immediately after they got it, and the power would need to be enjoyable to use. The team employed frequent reviews of when these powers were introduced to the player as other gameplay elements were added to the game. Not all powers were necessarily offensive; the "postcognition" power, allowing the player to see the psychic echo of a dead person of where they were before their death, was added as the team found there was an element of fun in tracking the echo through the crowded city. Some powers were cut from the game. One power, gained through the Evil karma path, was called "Minionize", and would have allowed Cole to control the minds of civilians and force them to join him in battle. Although the power was "decidedly evil and very fun to watch", the team felt it wasn't useful to the game, though they managed to retain a hint of it in one of the Evil side missions. Though the team had tested each of the core missions individually with the powers that the player would have based on the game's storyboard, they found that play-testers, who played the missions back-to-back, found the game lacked a variety of combat situations. The developers revisited all the combat scenarios from this feedback to alter the combat layouts as well as adding new enemies, a step that Bridges believes the game "benefited greatly" from. The ability to use Cole's electrical powers to ride along Empire City's elevated train rails was a last-minute addition during the last month of development based on a play-tester's suggestion.

Empire City was designed to marry with Cole's new-found superpowers. The city was built with a "crime ecosystem", where petty crimes or calls for help were always occurring outside of the main story, requiring the player to decide to stop to help or not to resolve them. A portion of the team was devoted to implementing the behavior of the citizens of the city and how that behavior would change as the state of the city altered due to the player's actions. Climbing buildings was considered to be an important aspect of the game, both as part of the superhero motif and because it was considered "fun to do", and Sucker Punch set out to make the whole city climbable. Many details of every building have been modeled to allow the player to climb the buildings, "down to the last window frame, lighting sconce and storefront", however, Fox noted that getting the climbing system "just right" was the most challenging aspect of development. One employee was dedicated to making sure the entire city was climbable. Fleming noted that during "Infamous's" development, both "Crackdown" and "Assassin's Creed", two games with alternative takes on the climbing aspect, were released; the team felt that each of the games' climbing systems had their own strengths and weaknesses. To reflect the nature of change of the city as the player interacts with it—either restoring power or taking it away—the developers created a "deferred shading" rendering engine that would render the effects of moving and damaged light sources.

The Karma system in the game came about as a result of the team wanting to include the "judicious use of power" within the game. Fox commented that they wanted to lead the player along a path of doing the harder tasks believing that these actions were the right things to do. However, without the contrast of "evil" tasks that were simpler to complete, there would be no means of motivating the player to be a "selfless hero". The team wanted to encourage players to think about the results of not only large decisions—Karma moments in the game where Cole thinks of which option to select—but also every moment-to-moment action, such as considering the presence of civilians in the area around a battle. They arranged for the first major use of Cole's powers to turn the city's inhabitants against him, to encourage players to consider both sides. In this mission, Cole is given the option to keep a drop-supply of food for himself or to give it to the people; they found that most players would give it to the people, but very shortly after this event, the population turns against Cole due to evidence linking him to the explosion, forcing the player to run or to attack them. Fox compared the Karma dichotomy to the differences in styles of Batman versus the Punisher; the former using precision attacks to avoid harming innocents while the latter would hurt anything in his path to complete his goal. To that end, they designed the powers in the game to reflect this nature; powers acquired with Good Karma would be more precise while Evil Karma powers were more destructive.

On December 10, 2010, the "Gigawatt Blade" which had previously been available only as a preorder incentive - was made available on the North American PlayStation Store as a free download. It was released in Europe on January 25, 2010. In the downloadable version of the game, they are packaged in. The Gigawatt Blade allows players to deal heavy amounts of damage with a melee attack. The shape and the color of the blade depends on your Karma, blue being good and red being evil (red and black if the Ray Sphere is activated). Once activated, you can use it on an enemy for one hit, usually killing them instantly. It has 3 upgrades that are available in the Powers Store in the game, that can be spent using XP, each upgrade increasing the damage dealt.

In March 2009, Sony Computer Entertainment America released a trailer titled "The Beauty of Powers", which was later released on the PlayStation Store. Early copies of "Infamous" included a multiplayer beta voucher for the then upcoming "". The beta started on June 3. Anyone who preordered "Infamous" from GameStop received an exclusive code for the Gigawatt Blades Power, and those who preordered from Amazon.com received a special Reaper costume for PlayStation Home, while those who downloaded the "Infamous" demo from the PlayStation Store and beat it received a Cole costume for PlayStation Home on June 18, 2009. Pre-orders from GameCrazy and Best Buy stores came with an early demo released on May 7. Redeem codes were sent via email to several Oceanic PlayStation Network users on May 14. The demo, which includes four missions, was made available to everyone else on 21 May. "Infamous" was released May 26, 2009 in the United States. It was released May 29, 2009 in Europe and on June 4, 2009 for Australia and New Zealand.

In July 2009, Sucker Punch Productions released an "Infamous" themed space in the PlayStation 3's online community-based service, PlayStation Home. This space is modeled after and called the "Abandoned Docks of Empire City", and includes a mini-game based on zapping Reapers with leaderboard tracking and clothing reward items, and a graffiti wall that allows players to create their own graffiti. The "Infamous" Home space is the first to broadcast media from the game's developer. Outso developed the "Infamous" Game Space for Sucker Punch Productions.

Two Sackboy outfits for "LittleBigPlanet", representing both the good and evil Cole, are available as an expansion pack for that game. Good and Evil version of Cole and Zeke appear as downloadable content for the multiplayer mode of "". Cole appears as a guest character for the PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 3 version of "Street Fighter X Tekken". Good and Evil Cole appear as playable characters in the PlayStation 3 title "PlayStation All-Stars Battle Royale".

"Infamous" – along with "Infamous 2" and "Infamous: Festival of Blood" – was released on August 28, 2012 as part of the "Infamous Collection" under Sony's line of PlayStation Collections for the PlayStation 3.

In 2012, Sony Computer Entertainment America released the "Infamous Collection" to be bundled with a 250 GB PlayStation 3, "", "", a PlayStation Plus 30-day free trial, and the entirety of the "Infamous 2" DLC.

The soundtrack is composed by the electronic musician Amon Tobin, composers James Dooley and Mel Wesson, and electric cellist Martin Tillman, under the direction of Sony's music manager, Jonathan Mayer. Tobin was specifically brought on board due to his recent trend of blurring the lines between music and sound design as exhibited in his then-recent album, "Foley Room". Instead of using traditional instruments, the team sought to use sounds that results from objects that would be found in an urban environment and using such objects in combination with other instruments used in non-traditional manners; for example, bungee cords were strung alongside a bass drum and strummed, and wire brushes were hit against a suspended tuba. The music was divided between Tobin, who worked on the in-game music, and Dooley who worked on the music for the cinematics; the two worked together to make sure common musical themes were present in both aspects. Tillman was brought in late to the process to add the cello sounds, but the group was so impressed with his work that they remixed already-completed pieces to incorporate his contribution further. Manchester music group, Working for a Nuclear Free City were commissioned by Sony to produce a song for the game. The song was penned "Silent Melody" and was used in one of the game's promotional trailers. The soundtrack was released for digital download from the iTunes Store in May 2009.

The game was overall well received by game critics. Greg Miller of IGN considered the title to be "one of the best PlayStation 3 games to date". Core to the game's success, according to reviewers, were the basic mechanics of the game. Giant Bomb's Brad Shoemaker considered that Sucker Punch had "nailed the basic gameplay elements", tying all the various aspects of the game together. The mixture of Cole's powers with the Karma elements of the game were also praised. The powers and Karma system were seen to bring difficult choices to how the player approach battles. Both sides of the Karma system were considered to be fun to play. The mission structure was considered a strong asset of the game. According to X-Play's Matt Kiel, the missions forced the player to consider the full extent of Cole's powers through their difficulty but provided "generous" checkpoints to prevent too much frustration with the game. Reviewers cited the variation in side missions and how they related to the main story as positive aspects of the game.

The presentation of Empire City was also considered to be a significant factor of the success of the game. The climbing and grabbing aspect was considered well done and avoided a "frustration-fest" that other games with precision jumping generally bring about, according to Miller. However, some reviewers noted that Cole's climbing ability was too touchy, with the character grabbing onto ledges too greedily, making it difficult to fine-tune jumps. In combination with Cole's other powers, Miller cited the game as having the "most original city-traversal mechanics" for an open-world game. The behavior of the city's population and how that was affected by the player's choice in Karma was also seen as a positive, and as a constant reminder of the game's setting. The game's story, particularly in the second half of the game, was considered to be strong, enhanced by presentation of the cut-scenes. However, the quality of these scenes was seen to negatively highlight the poor animation used for in-game generated cut-scenes and the quality of the voice work; Miller considered Cole's voice to be too gravelly for the character.

The initial hours of the game, before the player started to acquire some of the more potent powers, were considered to be difficult and may be off-putting to some. Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer noted the remainder of the game continues to have some difficult sections, such as sections where the player must defend a moving target against a large number of foes, and considered these to be "repetitive and overlong". Bramwell further commented that the electrical powers in the game are simply electricity-based reimaginings of standard video game weapon archetypes, such as shotguns and sniper rifles, and, with this awareness, leaves the difficulty of the game up to the enemy placement during encounters. The game is also considered to be rough around the edges in technical execution, with the lack of anti-aliasing and occasional "pop-in" rendering, as well as drops in frame rates when there was a significant amount of action on the screen.

"Infamous" was released a few weeks before Radical Entertainment's "Prototype", a game with many similar concepts including a character finding himself with super powers, a large open-world environment that can be traveled by climbing up buildings and gliding about the city, and several other comparisons. This led many game critics to compare and contrast the games. In his sarcastic Zero Punctuation review of "Prototype", Ben "Yahtzee" Croshaw (who had initially praised "Infamous" as "huge, creative and fun,") compared the two games point for point, and determined that he could not tell which was the better game, and challenged the respective studios to "produce the best image of the rival game's main character wearing a women's bra" as a tiebreaker. To his surprise, both development teams rose to the challenge, producing said images, and forcing Croshaw to call it a near-tie, edging out in favor of "Infamous", though still noted that, like their games, both images created independently were nearly equal in the assets that they included. This rivalry highlighted the advantages and disadvantages of exclusivity over a multiplatform release. Gaming analysts Jesse Divnich had this to say "Due to near identical game play and quality scores, the Infamous vs. Prototype case study presents interesting data to publishers when considering the sales bump a title could receive by choosing exclusivity over a multiplatform release."

"Infamous" was released at the end of May, and the game sold 175,900 copies in the United States on its opening week, recorded in May 2009 sales according to the NPD Group, and sold 192,700 copies in the United States over the month of June 2009, the 10th highest-selling game that month. In June 2010, Game Informer stated "Infamous" sold nearly two million copies. IGN awarded "Infamous" Best Story, and Game of the Year and Best Acting at the 2009 Golden Game Awards. "Infamous" was also nominated for four other Golden Game Awards, including Best PlayStation 3 Game, Best Graphics, Best Independent Game, and Studio of the Year.

On September 4, 2010, "Infamous" was ranked fifth in "The Top 25 PlayStation 3 Games" of IGN, stating that "when "Infamous" was released on PlayStation 3 in the spring of 2009, it quickly became clear that this was unlike any sandbox game anyone had ever played".



</doc>
<doc id="12242809" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12242809" title="Cherry Pop">
Cherry Pop

"Cherry Pop" is a song recorded by Romanian recording artist Alexandra Stan for her second studio album "Unlocked" (2014). It was made available for digital download on 28 May 2015 through Roton as the record's second single. The track was written by the singer, Lukas Hällgren and Erik Lidbom, while production was handled by the latter two. "Cherry pop" was recorded in Bucharest, Romania at the Fonogram Studios, with additional engineering being done at Lidbom's Hitfire Production.

Musically, "Cherry Pop" is of the J-pop genre, but is also influenced by eurodance and house music, and has a dubstep breakdown. An accompanying music video for the track was uploaded on 28 May 2015 on Stan's YouTube channel; Khaled Mokhtar was both the clip's director and director of photography. It was shot in Buftea, Romania and portrays Stan and her background dancers performing choreography created by performer Emil Rengle. The song reached number 64 on the Japan Hot 100 and became the most-sought ringtone on the largest Japanese profile site, Recochoku.
"Cherry Pop" was written by Stan herself, Lukas Hällgren and Erik Lidbom, while production was handled by both Hällgren and Lidbom. It was recorded at the Fonogram Studios in Bucharest, Romania and was additionally mixed and engineered at Lidbom's Hitfire Production in Uppsala, Sweden. Further's work on the track was done during FonoCamp2013, the first Romanian international songwriting camp held in Azuga. Fellow Romanian and international singers were also present at the two-weeks event, such as Delia Matache, Mohombi, Smiley and Deepcentral.

Stan described "Cherry Pop" as a J-pop song, noting that while she had not worked with the genre "[it] fits my style", as she finds J-pop music "very energetic, it's got such a positive vibe to it." She also noticed influences to eurodance. An administrator of IasiFun commended the recording as being influenced by house, while also describing the song's instrumentation as "electric" and "vibrant". Anthony Easton, a writer for The Singles Jukebox, described the song as a "popluxe", while Ian Mew compared it to "Bubble Pop!" by South Korean singer Hyuna. According to Popdust, "Cherry Pop" uses dubstep for its breakdown. The main idea for the song was based on Stan's first kiss which, according to her, "tasted like candy".

"Cherry Pop" received generally mixed reviews from music critics upon release. The Singles Jukebox gave the song an overall rating of 5/10, with one of the writers, Andy Hutchins, confessed that "a better title for the song might have been 'Dr Pepper'". Website Popdust described the song as "outdated", but at the same time catchy and funny. Hitfire praised the song's refrain as being "earwhormy" and "trashy". They went on saying that "Cherry Pop" "doesn't reach the standards like of her previously launched songs, 'Mr. Saxobeat', 'Get Back (ASAP)' and 'Lemonade'". Music website Pop Shock described the single as a "grower track", while Robin Catling of Everything Express criticized "Cherry Pop" for being "irritating". He went on saying that "the verse let down by an horrific chorus and a truly nasty backing track". Website Addictivoz praised overall her album "Unlocked", mentioning also that the song is "ironic".

According to the biggest Japanese profile site, Recochoku, "Cherry Pop" became the most sought ringtone on their website within two hours. The news that "Cherry Pop" achieved so much success in Japan came to Stan when she was on tour in Turkey. There, the organizers of her show displayed the sentence "Congratulations, Alexandra Stan, you're number 1!" on the main screen of the club. The song entered the Japan Hot 100 at number 64 on 5 July 2014. It subsequently left the chart after just one week. "Cherry Pop" also peaked at number 82 on the native Airplay 100 chart, and reached number two on the Turkish Number One Top 20 compiled on 6 September 2014.

An accompanying music video for "Cherry Pop" was uploaded onto Stan's YouTube channel on 28 May 2014, where it has since amassed a total of 5 million views. The clip was shot by Khaled Mokhtar in Buftea, Romania in a set built specially for this project. The accompanying choreography was choreographed by Romanian performer Emil Rengle and the eight "shiny and glam" different outfits used for the video were designed by Andra Moga. Particularly, Stan described the video as incorporating "both a futuristic and a retro point of view".

The video opens with Stan and some of her male back-up dancers being presented in a dark white room. Subsequently, the room becomes enlightened and Stan is seen wearing transparent sunglasses, a white sweatband and a silver jacket. Following this, she retrieves a tennis racket from one of her background dancers and holds it in front of her face before returning the racket to a nearby dancer. Next, Stan performs the pre-refrain of the song, while two female performers clutch a hair dryer in their hands. For the refrain, she and ten other female background dancers are performing synchronized dances, with them having wigs on, and dressing white clothing and red accessories. Following this, Stan is presented standing on a yellow plate which is kept in the air by two threads. She wears a silver leotard and a multicolored wig. Next, Stan is shown walking into a tennis field, whereon she plays a tennis match against herself. For the breakdown of "Cherry Pop", the video gets introduced into a dark-lighted room. There, her previously shown male background dancers are presented; the video continues with Stan dancing accompanied by her dancers. The clip finally ends with a pink tennis ball dropping out of the ceiling, while the screen becomes black.

On 12 December 2014, Stan performed both "Cherry Pop" and "Vanilla Chocolat" on an episode of "Vocea României". Shortly after her performance, juror expressed how he was very disappointed by Stan's act, as she did not provide live vocals. In an interview with "Cancan", Stan confessed that "[her] conditions of appearance at Vocea României were previously discussed with the producers of the show, so no one should have been surprised about [her] performing playback". "Cherry Pop" was included on the track list of her Unlocked Tour (2014) and her Cherry Pop Summer Tour (2014).



Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Unlocked" and "The Collection".
Visual credits
Recording and vocal credits

Technical and songwriting credits


</doc>
<doc id="12261806" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12261806" title="1994 Giro d'Italia">
1994 Giro d'Italia

The 1994 Giro d'Italia was the 77th edition of the Giro d'Italia, one of cycling's Grand Tours. The Giro started off in Bologna on 22 May with a short stage. The race came to a close on 12 June with a flat stage that stretched from Turin to Milan. Seventeen teams entered the race, which was won by Evgeni Berzin of the team. Second and third respectively were the Italian Marco Pantani and the Spanish rider, Miguel Indurain.

Berzin first gained the race lead after the fourth stage where he attacked on the final climb to win the day. The race's overall classification was first headed by Endrio Leoni who won the Giro's opening road stage. However, Leoni lost the lead later that day during the afternoon individual time trial to Armand de Las Cuevas. De Las Cuevas held the lead for a single stage before losing it to Moreno Argentin who won the race's second stage. Argentin held the general classification lead for two stages, before Berzin took it after stage 4. After gaining the lead, Berzin began to build upon his advantage after winning the stage 8 and 18 individual time trials and maintaining good form throughout the mountains.

Berzin became the first Russian to win the Giro d'Italia. Berzin also won the young rider classification for the best rider aged 25 or under in the general classification. In the race's other classifications, Swiss rider Pascal Richard won the mountains classification, and Djamolidine Abdoujaparov of was the winner of the points and intergiro classifications. finished as the winners of the team classification, which ranked each of the seventeen teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time. finished as the winners of the team points classification, where the teams' riders are awarded points for placing within the top twenty in each stage.

A total of 18 teams were invited to participate in the 1994 Giro d'Italia, of which 17 participated. Each team sent a squad of nine riders, so the Giro began with a peloton of 153 cyclists. The presentation of the teams – where each team's roster and manager were introduced in front the media and local dignitaries – took place on 22 May, in the courtyard of the Bologna. Of the riders that started this edition of the Giro d'Italia, a total of 99 riders made it to the finish in Milan.

The teams entering the race were:

The starting peloton included 1993 winner, Miguel Indurain, who came into the race having only raced twenty days during the season according to author Bill McGann. In addition, there were reports surfacing before the race that Indurain's knee was troubling him. The race did not feature Tony Rominger, who elected to ride the Vuelta a España instead. "El País" writer Carlos Arribas felt that Evgeni Berzin had a strong spring with his victory in Liège–Bastogne–Liège and second-place finish in the Tour of the Basque Country. Arribas felt that Russian Pavel Tonkov, who had won the young rider classification the previous two years, would challenge for the victory as his normal team leader, Maurizio Fondriest, was absent from the race due to injury.

"Avui"'s Adrian R. Huber believed that Djamolidine Abdoujaparov, Adriano Baffi, and Fabio Baldato had a great chance to win a stage in the race. Notable sprinter Mario Cipollini did not participate in the race as he was still recovering from injuries sustained in the second stage at the Vuelta a España.

The route for the 1994 Giro d'Italia was unveiled by race director Carmine Castellano on 13 November 13, 1993, in Milan. The race route was leaked to the press before Castellano held the official presentation. It contained three time trial events, all of which were individual. There were ten stages containing high mountains, of which three had summit finishes: stage 4, to Campitello Matese; stage 20, to Les Deux Alpes; and stage 21, to Sestriere. Another stage with a mountain-top finish was stage 18, which consisted of a climbing time trial to the summit of the Passo dello Bocco. The organizers chose to include no rest days. When compared to the previous year's race, the race was longer, contained one less rest day, and one more stage. The race was televised in Italy by RAI TV.

There were five stages that began or ended outside of Italy. Stage 12 ended in the Slovenian city Kranj and served as the start for the race's thirteenth stage. Stage 13 ended at Lienz in Austria, and the fourteenth began there. The Giro's mountainous stage 20 ended on the slopes of Les Deux Alpes, and the penultimate stage began on the mountain the next day.

This edition of the Giro began with a split stage, with the morning leg consisting of a flat route and the afternoon part being a flat individual time trial. Italian Endrio Leoni won the morning stage by means of a sprint finish where the speeds were so high the peloton split in the final kilometer. Armand de Las Cuevas won the afternoon time trial by two seconds over Evgeni Berzin and in the process took the overall lead away from Leoni. Stage two featured an uphill finish into the city of Osimo. Moreno Argentin attacked close to the line and was able to distance himself from the rest of the peloton and win the stage, while also taking the lead of the race. Gianni Bugno failed several times to get away from the peloton before finally breaking free on the climb into Loreto Amprutino to win the third stage.

Stage 4 featured the race's first summit finish, with a final climb to the top of Campitello Matese. While on the climb, Evgeni Berzin attacked and made his way up to the top in first place. Due to his efforts, Berzin gained the overall lead of the race. The next two stages, 5 and 6, both came down to sprint finishes that were won by Endrio Leoni and Marco Saligari, respectively. The race's seventh stage saw the Spaniard Laudelino Cubino outsprint his fellow breakaway members for the stage victory. Stage 8 was a individual time trial that stretched from Grosseto to Follonica. The race leader Evgeni Berzin dominated the time trial as he won the stage by over a minute than the second-place finisher, which also allowed him to extend his lead in the general classification.

The next three stages of the race were all primarily flat, had no real impact on the overall standings, and all concluded with a bunch sprint. Ján Svorada won stage nine and then stage eleven after dodging a crash that marred the stage's finish. Djamolidine Abdoujaparov out-sprinted the rest of the field to win the race's tenth stage. The Giro's twelfth stage featured a few categorized climbs as the race made its way into Slovenia for the stage's finish in Kranj. Despite the climbs, the stage ended with a field sprint that was won by Andrea Ferrigato. Italian Michele Bartoli won the race's undulating thirteenth stage by being a part of the stage's initial breakaway and then attacking later on and soloing to the stage's conclusion in Lienz, Austria.

As the Giro left Austria, the race began to enter the Dolomites during stage fourteen. The eventual stage winner Marco Pantani was in a chasing group on the final climb of the stage, the Passo di Monte Giovo. He attacked, bridged the gap to the leading group, and left them behind to claim his first professional victory of his career. The next stage saw Pantani win again after he rode away from the attack group on the last climb of the Valico di Santa Cristina and he then soloed to the finish in Stradella. Pantani's efforts on the day moved him up to second overall in the race. The race's sixteenth stage took a break from the mountains with the stage being primarily fled, which ultimately led to the sprint finish that was won by Italian Maximilian Sciandri. Ján Svorada won the next day's stage after attacking from the breakaway group in the closing seconds.
The Giro's eighteenth stage was a individual time trial that stretched from Chiavari to the summit finish on the Passo del Bocco. The race leader Evgeni Berzin won the stage by twenty seconds over Miguel Indurain. Stage 19 saw the day of racing come down to a sprint finish that was won by Massimo Ghirotto. The twentieth stage saw the Giro race through the Alps and up to the summit of Les Deux Alpes for the stage finish. The lead group up Les Deux Alpes contained the likes of Evgeni Berzin, Marco Pantani, and Miguel Indurain who had attacked each other multiple times but to no avail. The trio was later joined by Vladimir Poulnikov and Nelson Rodriguez who both eventually left them to go on for the stage win. Poulkinov edged out Rodriguez to the stage win atop the mountain. The penultimate stage of the Giro saw a summit finish atop the Sestriere. The stage saw snow and chilling temperatures which led to the general classification contenders sticking together, while Pascal Richard went on to win the summit finish and solidify his lead atop the mountains classification. The Giro's final stage came down to a sprint finish that was won by Stefano Zanini as Evgeni Berzin won the Giro d'Italia.

Success in stages was limited to eleven of the competing teams, six of which achieved multiple stage victories, while four individual riders won multiple stages. The riders that won more than once were Endrio Leoni in stages 1a and 5, Evgeni Berzin in stages 4, 8, and 18, Ján Svorada in stages 9, 11, and 17, and Marco Pantani in stages 14 and 15. Jolly Componibili-Cage won two stages with Leoni. Gewiss-Ballan won multiple stages, with Moreno Argentin in stage 2 and three stages with Berzin. won two stages, with Gianni Bugno in stage 3 and Djamolidine Abdoujaparov in stage 10. GB-MG Maglificio won three stages, with Marco Saligari in stage 6, Maximilian Sciandri in stage 16, and Pascal Richard in stage 21. won three stages with Ján Svorada. ZG Mobili-Selle Italia won two stages, with Andrea Ferrigato in stage 12 and Massimo Ghirotto in stage 19. also won multiple stages, with Marco Pantani in winning two stages and Vladimir Poulnikov in stage 20.

Castorama, , , and each won one stage apiece. Castorama rider Armand de Las Cuevas won stage 1b individual time trial, Kelme-Avianca-Gios's Laudelino Cubino won stage 7, Mercatone Uno-Medeghini rider Michele Bartoli won stage 13, and Navigare-Blue Storm's Stefano Zanini stage 22 by means of a sprint finish.

Despite not testing positive during the race or season, the Gewiss-Ballan team has since been speculated to have executed a systematic doping program that utilized EPO throughout the 1994 season. The team achieved several victories in stage races and one-day races during the year, including a sweep of the podium at La Flèche Wallonne weeks before the start of the Giro. Team doctor Michele Ferrari was banned for life from sports in 2012 by United States Anti-Doping Agency for distribution of performance-enhancing drugs to several of his clients.

Five different jerseys were worn during the 1994 Giro d'Italia. The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider, and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass-start stages – wore a pink jersey. The time bonuses for the 1988 Giro were thirty seconds for first, twenty-five for second, and decreasing by five seconds each place until five seconds for sixth place on the stage. This classification is the most important of the race, and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro.

For the points classification, which awarded a purple (or cyclamen) jersey to its leader, cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints. The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader. In this ranking, points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists. Each climb was ranked as either first, second or third category, with more points available for higher category climbs. The "Cima Coppi", the race's highest point of elevation, awarded more points than the other first category climbs. "The Cima Coppi" for this Giro was the Passo dello Stelvio. The first rider to cross the Stelvio was Italian Franco Vona. The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification, a ranking decided the same way as the general classification, but only riders born after 1 January 1970 were eligible for it. The intergiro classification was marked by a blue jersey. The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification, in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped. As the race goes on, their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey. Although no jersey was awarded, there was also one classification for the teams, in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time.

The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run.



</doc>
<doc id="12262150" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12262150" title="Carli Lloyd">
Carli Lloyd

Carli Anne Lloyd (born July 16, 1982) is an American soccer player. She is a two-time Olympic gold medalist (2008 and 2012), 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup champion, two-time FIFA Player of the Year (2015 and 2016), and a three-time Olympian (2008, 2012, 2016). She currently plays for Sky Blue FC in the National Women's Soccer League and the United States women's national soccer team as a midfielder. Lloyd scored the gold medal-winning goals in the finals of the 2008 Summer Olympics and the 2012 Summer Olympics. She captained the United States to victory in the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup as well as appeared in the 2007 and 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup.

During the United States' 5–2 win over Japan in the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup Final, Lloyd became the first person ever to score three goals in a FIFA Women's World Cup final, and the second soccer player in history to score a hat trick in any senior FIFA World Cup Final, after Geoff Hurst. Lloyd scored three goals in the first 16 minutes of the final, with the first two occurring in the first five minutes of the game and within three minutes of each other. She received the Golden Ball Trophy as the best player of the tournament and earned the Silver Boot for her six goals and one assist during the tournament.

Lloyd has made over 260 appearances for the U.S. national team and she has scored 105 goals. She previously played for the Chicago Red Stars, Sky Blue FC, and Atlanta Beat in Women's Professional Soccer (WPS). In 2013, she was allocated to the Western New York Flash for the inaugural season of the NWSL and helped her team win the regular season championship. After two seasons with the Flash, she was traded to Houston Dash prior to the 2015 season. Her memoir, "When Nobody was Watching" was published in September 2016.

Born to Stephen and Pamela Lloyd, Carli was raised in Delran Township, a small community located in South Jersey about 20 minutes northeast of Philadelphia. Lloyd began playing soccer at age five. Of her exposure to soccer at a young age, Lloyd's mother, Pamela said, "At that age, it was coed, and Carli was hanging with the boys. She always loved it and showed a lot of ability from an early age, but she also has always worked hard." Lloyd has a brother named Stephen, and a sister, Ashley. Lloyd attended the opening U.S. match of the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup, which inspired her to play for the national team.

Lloyd attended Delran High School from 1997 to 2000 where she played soccer under the tutelage of the late Rudy "The Red Baron" Klobach. As a high school athlete, she was known for her exceptional ball control and skill at distributing the ball from the midfield. During her senior year, she scored 26 goals and served eight assists while captaining her team to an 18–3 record. The Philadelphia Inquirer twice-named her Girls' High School Player of the Year in 1999 and 2000. She was named to the Star-Ledger All-State First Team twice and received 1999 and 2000 Parade All-American honors. In 2000, she was named the Courier Post Player of the Year and the South Jersey Soccer Coaches Association (SJSCA) Midfielder of the Year.

Lloyd attended Rutgers University from 2001 to 2004 and played for the Scarlet Knights women's soccer team under head coach Glenn Crooks. She was named First-Team All-Big East for four straight years – the first athlete at Rutgers to do so. She ended her collegiate career as the school's all-time leader in points (117), goals (50), and shots.

During her freshman season, Lloyd started every match and was the team's leading scorer with 15 goals for a total of 37 points. She was named to Soccer America's All-Freshman Team and was the first Rutgers player to earn Big East Rookie of the Year honors. As a sophomore, she was the team's leading scorer for the second consecutive season with 12 goals and seven assists for 31 points. The same year Lloyd was a finalist for the Hermann Trophy, widely considered the highest accolade for collegiate soccer players. During her third season with the Scarlet Knights, she scored 13 goals and served 2 assists for a total of 28 points and was named a Big East Academic All-Star. As a senior, she was a starter for 18 of the 20 games she played, scored 10 goals and served one assist. Lloyd was named the 2004 Big East Midfielder of the Year.

In 2013, Lloyd was inducted into the Rutgers Hall of Distinguished Alumni.

While still in high school, Lloyd played for W-League teams Central Jersey Splash in 1999, New Brunswick Power in 2000, and South Jersey Banshees in 2001. In the summer prior to her senior year at Rutgers, Lloyd played for the New Jersey Wildcats in 2004 with teammates Kelly Smith, Manya Makoski, Tobin Heath, and Heather O'Reilly. She made only one appearance for the club.

With the return of a top-flight women's professional soccer league to the United States via Women's Professional Soccer, Lloyd's playing rights were allocated to the Chicago Red Stars in 2008. During the league's inaugural season, she started in 14 of her 16 appearances for Chicago playing a total of 1,313 minutes on the pitch. She scored two goals: one in the 23rd minute of her team's 4–0 win over the Boston Breakers on April 25; and the other during the 24th minute of a 3–1 defeat of the Los Angeles Sol on August 2. The Red Stars finished sixth on the season with a record.

Following the conclusion of the season, Lloyd was declared a free agent and subsequently signed with her home state club and 2009 WPS champions, Sky Blue FC, for the 2010 season. In April 2010, during a match against her former team, Chicago Red Stars, Lloyd slipped and broke her ankle. The injury kept her off the pitch for most of the season although she did return for two games in September.

In December 2010, Lloyd signed with expansion team Atlanta Beat for the 2011 season. Of her signing, Beat head coach James Galanis said, "She is a fantastic midfielder and someone who is fully focused on the game. I have known her from her college days, and I have had the opportunity to train her and improve her game individually. She has made a lot of sacrifices off the field to reach her dreams, and she is going to bring a lot of professionalism to the team." Lloyd scored two goals in her ten appearances for the Beat. She scored the team's lone goal in a 4–1 defeat by the Boston Breakers on April 9. Her second goal on the season was an equalizer during the 70th minute of a 2–2 draw against the Western New York Flash. The Beat finished their first season in last place with a record.

On January 11, 2013, Lloyd joined the Western New York Flash in the new National Women's Soccer League as part of the NWSL Player Allocation. After recovering from a shoulder injury suffered earlier in the year, Lloyd made her debut for the Flash on May 12, 2013 during the team's 2–1 defeat of FC Kansas City. She scored her first goal in a match against her former club, Sky Blue FC, helping the Flash win 3–0. During a match against the Washington Spirit on June 28, Lloyd scored a hat trick leading the Flash to a 4–0 win. She was subsequently named NWSL Player of the Week for her performance.

Lloyd finished the 2013 season with 10 goals, the third most goals scored on the season. The Flash finished first during the regular season with a record and advanced to the playoffs. During the Flash's semi-final match against Sky Blue FC, Lloyd scored both of the Flash's game-winning goals: one in the 33rd minute and the second coming during stoppage time. Her two goals resulted in a 2–0 win that advanced the Flash to the championship final against the Portland Thorns FC. The Flash were defeated 2–0 during the final.

On October 16, 2014, Lloyd was traded to the Houston Dash in exchange for Becky Edwards, Whitney Engen and a third-round pick in the 2016 NWSL College Draft.

In February 2017, Lloyd joined Manchester City on loan, for the FA WSL Spring Series. While Lloyd was at Manchester City, they finished second in the WSL Spring Series, and won the 2016–17 FA Women's Cup, with the player scoring in the final. Lloyd's final appearance for City came on 21 May, when she was sent off for elbowing Yeovil Town's Annie Heatherson in the face. The three match ban she received for violent conduct ran for the remainder of her loan stay.

On January 18, 2018, Lloyd was traded to the Sky Blue FC along with Janine Beckie by the Dash in a three-team trade with the Chicago Red Stars and Sky Blue FC. Lloyd scored 4 goals in 18 appearances for Sky Blue in 2018. She scored the only goal in a 1-0 win over the Orlando Pride on the last day of the 2018 NWSL season. It was Sky Blue's first and only win of the season. She was named the 2018 NWSL Second XI.

Lloyd represented the United States at the under-21 level before making the jump to the senior team at the age of 23. As a member of the under-21 team, she played at the Nordic Cup four times winning consecutive titles from 2002 to 2005 in Finland, Denmark, Iceland, and Sweden respectively. During the first round of the 2003 Nordic Cup, she served the assist in the U.S.' 1–0 win against Denmark. At the 2004 Nordic Cup, she scored two goals and served one assist while starting in every match. The following year at the 2005 Nordic Cup, she scored three times including one goal during the championship match against Norway.

Lloyd made her first appearance for the United States women's national soccer team on July 10, 2005, against Ukraine. She scored her first international goal on October 1, 2006 against Taiwan. At the 2006 Four Nations Tournament, Lloyd won a third cap. Her first two starts of her international career came at the 2006 Algarve Cup, starting the group game against Denmark and in the final against Germany. She played in 19 games, starting 13, and scored one goal.

After scoring once in her first 24 matches with the national team, Lloyd scored four goals at the 2007 Algarve Cup. As the tournament's top scorer, she was awarded Most Valuable Player tournament honors. Lloyd logged her first brace for the national team during a 6–1 win against New Zealand.

The same year, Lloyd played in her first FIFA Women's World Cup tournament. Heading into the tournament, the national team had not conceded a game in regulation time in nearly three years and was considered a favorite to win the tournament in China. During their first match of the tournament, the U.S. tied North Korea 2–2. The team faced Sweden in their next match on September 14 and won 2–0 with two goals from Abby Wambach. The U.S. finished group play with a 1–0 win over Nigeria women's national football team on September 18.

During the quarterfinal match against England on September 22, the U.S. won 3–0. All three goals were scored within 12 minutes. The U.S. faced Brazil in the semi-final in what would become a controversial and game-changing match for the team. Coach Greg Ryan decided to bench starting goalkeeper, Hope Solo, and instead started Brianna Scurry, a veteran goalkeeper who had started in three World Cups and two Olympics, but who had started very few matches since the 2004 Olympics. The U.S. was defeated 4–0 by Brazil. The loss relegated them to a final match against Norway, which they won 4–1, to secure third place standing at the tournament. Lloyd started three of the five games in which she played at the tournament.

Throughout 2007, Lloyd started 13 of the 23 matches in which she played. She ranked third on the team in scoring with nine goals and three assists.

During the championship match of the CONCACAF Women's Olympic Qualifying Tournament, Lloyd scored the U.S.' only goal during stoppage time on a free-kick. The U.S. eventually defeated Canada 6–5 in penalty kicks. She scored two goals during the 2008 Olympics: the game-winning goal in the team's 1–0 defeat of Japan during the tournament's group stage and another game-winning goal in overtime against Brazil during the final helping the U.S. win gold.

Lloyd was named the 2008 U.S. Soccer Athlete of the Year along with Tim Howard. She was on the starting lineup in all 35 games in which she played in 2008, tying for the team lead in matches started during the year. Her 2,781 minutes on the pitch for the U.S. ranked third on the team in minutes played. Her nine goals and nine assists resulted in her best scoring year yet on the national team.

In 2009, the U.S. national team competed in eight games, of which Lloyd was on the starting lineup in five. At the 2010 Algarve Cup, Lloyd scored the game-opening goal in the final helping the U.S. clinch the championship title after defeating Germany 3–2.

Although she suffered a broken ankle in the fourth game of the 2010 WPS Season while playing for Sky Blue FC, she played in 15 matches for the United States in 2010, starting 14. Lloyd started all five games at the 2010 CONCACAF Women's World Cup Qualifying Tournament, scoring two goals, including the United States' lone goal during the championship match. She ended the tournament with five assists and was named the Player of the Match three times during the tournament. After the U.S. finished third at the tournament, they traveled to Italy to vie for a place at the 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup in the UEFA-CONCACAF play-off against Italy. Playing every minute of the series, Lloyd scored three goals with five assists during the series. She earned her 100th career cap during the second leg of the series.

2011 saw the U.S. team making preparations for the 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup and training starting with the Four Nations Tournament. Lloyd scored the lone goal for the U.S. in the opening match loss to Sweden. In the championship match, the U.S. defeated Canada 2–0 with Lloyd scoring the first goal and being named Player of the Match.

At the 2011 Algarve Cup, Lloyd scored three goals including the first goal in the championship match; subsequently named best goal for the tournament. She was named player of the match for the 2nd time in the tournament. The team won the cup, making it their eighth title win.

At the 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup, Lloyd scored the final goal in a 3–0 win against Colombia for her first World Cup goal. Throughout the tournament, she tallied an assist, a goal, and one successful penalty kick in the shootout against Brazil to send the U.S. to the semi-finals vs. France. In the World Cup final, after finishing the game tied 2–2 the U.S. went on to penalty kicks with Japan. Along with two teammates who failed to convert their penalty kicks, Lloyd mishit the ball over the crossbar. The U.S. won the silver medal at the tournament.

The national team opened 2012 with the Olympic Qualifiers in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. The U.S. was placed in Group B with the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, and Mexico. In the first match, the United States routed the Dominican Republic by a score of 14–0 with Lloyd tallying one goal and one assist. In the second match, the U.S. again defeated Guatemala 13–0 with Lloyd again finding the back of the net and providing an assist.

The game to win the group and thus play the second place team from Group A occurred between the U.S. and Mexico. The U.S. was previously defeated 2–1 by Mexico during the 2010 CONCACAF Women's Gold Cup. This time, the U.S. beat Mexico 4–0 with Lloyd netting her first career hat trick. She was subsequently named player of the match.
In the semi-final, the U.S. faced Costa Rica. During the second half, the U.S. scored two goals, the second coming from Lloyd. The U.S. beat Costa Rica 3–0 with Lloyd named player of the match for the second game in a row. During the final match against Canada, the U.S. defeated Canada at home 4–0 to move on to the Olympics as the CONCACAF champions. Lloyd finished the tournament with six goals and three assists and tied for the team lead in goals scored.

At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, Lloyd scored the go-ahead goal in the 56th minute of the team's opening match against France, to boost the U.S. to a 3–2 lead; the match ended with a final score of 4–2. She scored her second goal of the tournament against Colombia during the group stage.

During the Olympic gold medal match against Japan, played at London's Wembley Stadium, Lloyd scored both American goals in the team's 2–1 victory. Her four goals in the tournament tied for the second highest on the U.S. squad. She is the only player (of either gender) in history to score the game-winning goal in two separate Olympic gold medal matches; her first occurred during the Beijing 2008 final against Brazil.

After scoring her 46th international goal in the 13th minute of a friendly against New Zealand in October 2013, Lloyd became the highest-scoring midfielder in the team's history, passing Julie Foudy, who finished her career with 45 goals.

In April 2015, Lloyd was named by head coach Jill Ellis to the 23-player roster for the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup in Canada. Lloyd captained the team during four of the team's matches, including the quarterfinal against China, semi-final against Germany and final against Japan and scored six goals during the tournament, finishing the tournament on a four-game goalscoring streak that spanned the knockout stage and that culminated in a hat trick in the game's opening 16 minutes during the final against Japan. The last goal was hailed by Reuters as "one of the most remarkable goals ever witnessed in a Women's World Cup", and featured Lloyd catching Japanese goalkeeper Ayumi Kaihori off her line and chipping her virtually from the halfway line.

For her efforts in leading the United States to a record third World Cup title, and first since 1999, she won the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament. While Lloyd's six goals were enough to match Celia Sasic as the tournament's top scorer, Sasic won the Golden Boot for playing fewer minutes and Lloyd was awarded the Silver Boot. Lloyd also became the first woman to score a hat trick in a World Cup final and the first player, male or female, to do so since Geoff Hurst did so for England against West Germany in the 1966 final at Wembley. Furthermore, her third goal earned her a nomination for the Puskás Award, FIFA's annual award for Goal of the Year.


 United States


Although she was initially criticised for being inconsistent at the beginning of career, and for losing possession too easily, Lloyd later developed into one of the best players in the world, and is highly regarded in particular for her outstanding determination, mental strength, and work-ethic. A tenacious, energetic, and hard-working player, she also is known for her control, technique, and passing accuracy, and is capable of aiding her team both defensively and offensively, due to her stamina, strength, and tackling, as well as her ability to get into good attacking positions, and either score goals or create chances for teammates. These abilities, coupled with her tactical versatility, enable her to be deployed in several midfield positions; although she began her career in the centre, as a defensive midfielder, she is most comfortable when moved to a more advanced role, as an attacking midfielder behind the forwards. Lloyd has also earned a reputation as a "clutch player", due to her tendency to score decisive goals; a powerful striker of the ball, she is capable of scoring from any position on the pitch, and can finish well both with her head and with her feet inside the area.

Lloyd lives with her husband, Brian Hollins, in Mount Laurel, New Jersey. She married him on November 4, 2016 in Puerto Morelos, Mexico. She has done philanthropic work for Habitat for Humanity.

Lloyd currently has had a endorsement deal with Nike for several years. In 2011, she was the focus of a promotional feature for the sports company entitled, "Pressure Makes Us: Carli Lloyd". Following the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup, Lloyd starred in a commercial for Xfinity and signed an endorsement deal with Visa. In August 2015, she co-starred in a Nike commercial called "Snow Day" also featuring Rob Gronkowski and teammate Sydney Leroux. In April 2016, she was named brand ambassador for Lifeway and appeared in a television commercial for Heinekin the same year. She has a partnership with Whole Foods Market and appeared in a television commercial for United Airlines. In June 2016, she joined Michael Phelps in partnership deals with Krave Jerky. She also has endorsement deals with Beats by Dre, Kind, and NJM Insurance.

Lloyd has been featured in "Glamour", "Shape", and "Sports Illustrated" magazines. She was on the covers of Howler Magazine and Sports Illustrated. In 2012, she appeared in an ESPN feature called "Title IX is Mine: USWNT". Lloyd has made appearances on numerous television shows including: "Good Morning America", "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart", "Live with Kelly and Michael", "The Today Show", "Late Night with Seth Meyers", "Late Late Show with James Corden".

Lloyd was featured along with her national teammates in the EA Sports' FIFA video game series in "FIFA 16", the first time women players were included in the game. In September 2015, she was ranked by EA Sports as the No. 1 women's player in the game.

Following the United States' win at the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup, Lloyd and her teammates became the first women's sports team to be honored with a ticker tape parade in New York City. Each player received a key to the city from Mayor Bill de Blasio. In October of the same year, the team was honored by President Barack Obama at the White House.




</doc>
<doc id="12370110" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12370110" title="1971 Iraq poison grain disaster">
1971 Iraq poison grain disaster

The 1971 Iraq poison grain disaster was a mass methylmercury poisoning incident that began in late 1971. Grain treated with a methylmercury fungicide and never intended for human consumption was imported into Iraq as seed grain from Mexico and the United States. Due to a number of factors, including foreign-language labelling and late distribution within the growing cycle, this toxic grain was consumed as food by Iraqi residents in rural areas. People suffered from paresthesia (numbness of skin), ataxia (lack of coordination of muscle movements) and vision loss, symptoms similar to those seen when Minamata disease affected Japan. The recorded death toll was 459 people, but figures at least ten times greater have been suggested. The 1971 poisoning was the largest mercury poisoning disaster when it occurred, with cases peaking in January and February 1972 and stopping by the end of March.

Reports after the disaster recommended tighter regulation, better labelling and handling of mercury-treated grain, and wider involvement of the World Health Organization in monitoring and preventing poisoning incidents. Investigation confirmed the particular danger posed to fetuses and young children.

The properties of mercury make it an effective fungicide. Methylmercury had been banned in Sweden in 1966, the first country to do so, and the United Kingdom followed in 1971. Previous mercury-poisoning incidents had occurred in Iraq in 1956 and 1960. In 1956, there had been around 200 cases, and 70 deaths; in 1960 there had been 1000 cases and 200 deaths, in both cases due to ethylmercury compounds. Among the recommendations made after the 1960 incident had been to colour any toxic grain for easy identification. Before the 1971 incident, around 200–300 cases of methylmercury poisoning had been reported worldwide. Drought had reduced harvests in 1969, affecting 500,000 people, and in 1970. Saddam Hussein, as the government's no. 2 behind Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr, decided to import mercury-coated seed grain for the late 1971 planting season. Hussein himself may have worked in the Department of Agriculture in the aftermath of the 1960 incident.

Some of grain (73,201 tonnes of wheat grain and 22,262 tonnes of barley), coloured a pink-orange hue, were shipped to Iraq from the United States and Mexico. The wheat arrived in Basra on SS "Trade Carrier" between 16 September and 15 October, barley between 22 October and 24 November 1971. Iraq's government chose Mexipak, a high-yield wheat seed developed in Mexico by Norman Borlaug. The seeds contained an average of 7.9 μg/g of mercury, with some samples containing up to nearly twice that. The decision to use mercury-coated grain has been reported as made by the Iraqi government, rather than the supplier, Cargill. The three Northern governorates of Ninawa, Kirkuk and Erbil together received more than half the shipments. Contributing factors to the epidemic included the fact that distribution started late, and much grain arrived after the October–November planting season.

Farmers holding grain ingested it instead, since their own planting had been completed. Distribution was hurried and open, with grain being distributed free of charge or with payment in kind. Some farmers sold their own grain lest this new grain devalue what they had. This left them dependent on tainted grain for the winter. Many Iraqis were either unaware of the significant health risk posed, or chose to ignore the warnings. Initially, farmers were to certify with a thumbprint or signature that they understood the grain was poison, but according to some sources, distributors did not ask for such an indication. Warnings on the sacks were in Spanish and English, not at all understood, or included the black-and-white skull and crossbones design, which meant nothing to Iraqis. The long latent period may have granted farmers a false sense of security, when animals fed the grain appeared to be fine. The red dye washed off the grain; the mercury did not. Hence, washing may have given only the appearance of removing the poison.

Mercury was ingested through the consumption of homemade bread, meat and other animal products obtained from livestock given treated barley, vegetation grown from soil contaminated with mercury, game birds that had fed on the grain and fish caught in rivers, canals, and lakes into which treated grain had been dumped by the farmers. Ground seed dust inhalation was a contributing factor in farmers during sowing and grinding. Consumption of ground flour through homemade bread is thought to have been the major cause, since no cases were reported in urban areas, where government flour supplies were commercially regulated.

The effect of mercury took some time – the latent period between ingestion and the first symptoms (typically paresthesia – numbness in the extremities) was between 16 and 38 days. Paresthesia was the predominant symptom in less serious cases. Worse cases included ataxia (typically loss of balance), blindness or reduced vision, and death resulting from central nervous system failure. Anywhere between 20 and 40 mg of mercury has been suggested as sufficient for paresthesia (between 0.5 and 0.8 mg/kg of body weight). On average, individuals affected consumed 20 kg or so of bread; the 73,000 tonnes provided would have been sufficient for over 3 million cases.

The hospital in Kirkuk received large numbers of patients with symptoms that doctors recognised from the 1960 outbreak. The first case of alkylmercury poisoning was admitted to hospital on 21 December. By 26 December, the hospital had issued a specific warning to the government. By January 1972, the government had started to strongly warn the populace about eating the grain, although dispatches did not mention the large numbers already ill. The Iraqi Army soon ordered disposal of the grain and eventually declared the death penalty for anyone found selling it. Farmers dumped their supplies wherever possible, and it soon got into the water supply (particularly the River Tigris), causing further problems. The government issued a news blackout and released little information about the outbreak.

The World Health Organization assisted the Iraqi government through the supply of drugs, analytical equipment and expertise. Many new treatments were tried, since existing methods for heavy metal poisoning were not particularly effective. Dimercaprol was administered to several patients, but caused rapid deterioration of their condition. It was ruled out as a treatment for this sort of poisoning following the outbreak. Polythiol resins, penicillamine and dimercaprol sulfonate all helped, but are believed to have been largely insignificant in overall recovery and outcomes. Dialysis was tested on a few patients late in the treatment period, but they showed no clinical improvement. The result of all treatments was varied, with some patients' blood mercury level being dramatically reduced, but a negligible effect in others. All patients received periods of treatment interspersed with lay periods; continuous treatment was suggested in future cases. Later treatment was less effective in reducing blood toxicity.

6,530 patients were admitted to hospitals with poisoning, and 459 deaths reported. Cases reached a peak of hundreds per day in January, and had largely subsided by the beginning of March. The last admittance was on 27 March; admissions represented every age and gender stratum, although those under the age of ten represented a third of admitted cases. This number is "certainly an underestimate", because of the availability of hospital treatment, hospital overcrowding and lack of faith in treatment. In the most severely affected areas, prevalence was 28% and mortality was 21% of the cases. Some Iraqi doctors believe both the number of cases and fatalities are at least ten times too low, with perhaps 100,000 cases of brain damage. One suggested reason for the vast discrepancy between reported and estimated numbers of deaths is the Iraqi custom, common to large parts of the Middle East, for a person to die at home when possible. Home deaths would not have been recorded.

A large number of patients with minor symptoms recovered completely; those with more serious symptoms improved. This was in contrast to expected outcomes, largely based on analysis of Minamata disease in Japan. In boys with mercury levels below clinical poisoning, a reduction in school performance was noted, although this correlation could not be confirmed. In infants, the mercury poisoning caused central nervous system damage. Relatively low doses caused slower development in children, and abnormal reflexes. Different treatments for mercury poisoning have since been developed, and "quiet baby syndrome", characterised by a baby who never cries, is now a recognised symptom of methylmercury-induced brain damage. Ongoing recommendations of the food regulation authorities have focused on consumption by pregnant women and infant children, noting the particular susceptibility of fetuses and infants to methylmercury poisoning. Data from Iraq have confirmed that methylmercury can pass to a child "in utero", and mercury levels were equal to or higher in the newborn child than in the mother.

In 1974, a joint Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and World Health Organization (WHO) meeting made several recommendations to prevent a similar outbreak. These included stressing the importance of labelling bags in the local language and with locally understood warning symbols. The possibility of an additive creating a strong bitter taste was studied. The meeting urged governments to strictly regulate methyl- and ethylmercury use in their respective countries, including limiting use to where no other reasonable alternative was available. It also recommended the involvement of the FAO and WHO in assisting national governments in regulation and enforcement, and the setting up of national poison control centres. Over 9–13 November, a Conference on Intoxication due to Alkylmercury-Treated Seed was held in Baghdad. It supported the recommendations of the FAO/WHO report and further suggested that local and national media should publicise outbreaks, including size and symptoms; it considered the distribution of this information crucial. It also laid out a general plan as to the collection of relevant information from the field and potential analysis for further investigation. It called on national governments to make use of WHO involvement whenever feasible, and absolved world governments in clear terms, saying that "No country should ever feel that any blame will attach to it for allowing an outbreak to occur".

Iraq now has the highest incidence of Parkinson's in the world. Parkinson's symptoms are very similar to mercury poisoning symptoms. Mercury that enters the brain has a half-life of 27.5 years, and chelators are not able to remove it.



</doc>
<doc id="12418617" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12418617" title="Congo serpent eagle">
Congo serpent eagle

The Congo serpent eagle ("Circaetus spectabilis") is a species of bird of prey in the family Accipitridae, and is sometimes placed in the monotypic genus Dryotriorchis by some taxonomic authorities. This species is found in western and central Africa, with its range stretching from Sierra Leone south to Angola and west to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It occurs in upper and lower Guinean forests, which are dense rainforests. This serpent eagle specializes in hunting in these forests’ dark understories. It has two subspecies, the nominate subspecies "Dryotriorchis spectabilis spectabilis" and "Dryotriorchis spectabilis batesi". Though monotypic, it appears to be very closely related to "Circaetus". This hawk is a medium-sized bird with distinctive short, rounded wings and a long, rounded tail. It is varying shades of brown on its back and has a slight crest. Its breast is white with variable amounts of a rufous wash and, in the nominate subspecies, is covered in round, blackish spots. The subspecies "D. s. batesi" only has these dots on its flanks. The Congo serpent eagle closely resembles Cassin's hawk-eagle, and some ornithologists believe that this likeness is a rare example of avian mimicry. It is a very vocal raptor, and often is one of the most heard species in its habitat.

This serpent eagle feeds on snakes, chameleons, and toads, and hunts these species by dropping onto them from a perch in the understory. Its excellent eyesight enables it to hunt in the dark forest. Very little is known about its breeding habits, though it is suspected to breed from June to December. The Congo serpent eagle is listed as a species of Least Concern due to its large range and population. This species has been kept as a pet.

The Congo serpent eagle was first described in 1863 by Hermann Schlegel as "Astur spectabilis" from a specimen collected near Elmina, Ghana. Schlegel published his description in "Nederlandsch Tijdschrift voor De Dierkunde" and placed this species within the goshawks. In 1874 George Ernest Shelley, who had access to more specimens, realized that this bird wasn't a goshawk and moved the species into its own monotypic genus, "Dryotriorchis". "Dryotriorchis" is a distinct genus due to its short wings, long tail, short crest, and oval nostrils. The word "Dryo-" is from the Greek for "oak" and "triorchis" from the Greek for "hawk", specifically a kind of hawk thought to have three testicles. It is believed that the genus is more closely related to "Circaetus" than "Terathopius", and it is possibly a link between these and the Asian genus "Spilornis". The syrinx morphology is distinctly like those of accipiter hawks but shows similarities to features found in "Nisaetus". Two subspecies are known: the nominate subspecies "Dryotriorchis spectabilis spectabilis" and "D. s. batesi". "D. s. batesi" was originally described as a separate species, "Dryotriorchis batesi", by Richard Bowdler Sharpe in 1904 due to its unspotted breast. Sharpe named the subspecies in honor of G. L. Bates, who shipped him specimens from Cameroon. This species is also known as the West African Serpent eagle and the African Serpent-eagle.

The Congo serpent eagle is superficially similar in plumage and size to Cassin's hawk-eagle, which has an overlapping range with the serpent eagle. It has been suggested that the Congo serpent eagle evolved to mimic the Cassin's hawk-eagle, which could give the serpent eagle several advantages, possibly including the ability to trick its reptilian prey into not fleeing, lowering its own predation, and/or minimizing mobbing by birds through its resemblance to a predator of birds. "D. s. spectabilis" more closely resembles the immature Cassin's hawk-eagle, while "D. s. batesi" resembles the adult. This is one of very few suspected examples of avian mimicry.

This hawk is a medium-sized, slender species with short, rounded wings and a long, rounded tail. It is long, with the tail contributing . The wingspan is across. The adult of the nominate subspecies, "Dryotriorchis spectabilis spectabilis", has a blackish-brown crown and upper neck while the sides of the neck and a broad collar are a dark rufous-brown. The feathers on the top of the head are slightly pointed, giving this species a hint of a crest. The remaining upperparts are a dark chocolate brown. The cheeks are light brown while the throat is buffy white with streaks. The eyes are large and dark brown or grey in females and yellow in males while the beak is short but deep. It also has a black median streak. The bird's underparts are white with variable amounts of rufous wash and a number of large, round blackish spots. The serpent eagle's thighs are barred sepia-brown and white, while the undertail is white. The underwing is largely white with some black spots and brown coloration. The tail is light brown, with five to six broad black bars. The claws are short and sharp, while the legs are yellow. Sexes are similar, though the female averages about three percent larger than the male. Immatures have a white crown and mantle, while the upper back has rounded brown or black spots that vanish as the bird ages. The wings and tail are greyish-brown and paler than those of the adults and are more darkly barred.

"D. s. batesi" is similar to the nominate subspecies, but is browner and paler on the back while the spots on "D. s. spectabilis"'s chest only appear on this subspecies' flanks. The immature does possess a spotted chest, with the spots vanishing as the bird ages.

This is a very vocal raptor and is one of the most frequently heard birds of prey in its range. It makes a cat-like meowing sound as well as a low, mournful, nasal "cow-cow-cow" at intervals over extended periods of time. When heard over a large distance, some ornithologists have compared its call to that of a turaco.

The Congo serpent eagle lives in southern Sierra Leone and Guinea, Liberia, and southern Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana. It is also found in southern Nigeria and the Central African Republic south through northern and eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in the east and through Gabon into the northern Republic of the Congo in the west with an isolated population in northern Angola. "D. s. spectabilis" is found in upper Guinean forests from Liberia to northern Cameroon, while "D. s. batesi" is found in lower Guinean forests from southern Cameroon through Gabon and western Uganda. Its range covers . The species lives in dense primary forest below in elevation in the dark understory. As it is adapted for dense forest, it is not well-adapted for secondary forests and plantations. The Congo serpent eagle does not migrate, though it is unknown if it is locally nomadic.

Little is known about this species' behavior. The Congo serpent eagle lives in the understory of its habitat and occasionally perches on lower boughs in tall trees. It lives either alone or in pairs. This species is known to hunt snakes, lizards, especially chameleons, toads, and potentially small mammals. It hunts by dropping to the ground from its perch in the understory, where it may strike its prey repeatedly with its feet; this serpent eagle may also grab prey from the foliage while hunting. Its large eyes enable this species to hunt in low light, though it is diurnal. Studies on the species' eyes have shown that they have about two times the visual resolution of a human's. It may breed from October to December in Gabon and from June to November in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Currently, the Congo serpent eagle's population is dwindling due to deforestation. However, it is listed as a species of Least Concern due to its large population of over 10,000 adults and large range of . This species has been kept as a pet and in the 1970s was available from some pet shops. The Congo serpent eagle has been depicted on postage stamps from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Tanzania.




</doc>
<doc id="12435555" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12435555" title="Interstate 80 in Utah">
Interstate 80 in Utah

Interstate 80 (I-80) is a part of the Interstate Highway System that runs from San Francisco, California, to Teaneck, New Jersey. The portion of the highway in the U.S. state of Utah is , through the northern part of the state. From west to east, I-80 crosses the state line from Nevada in Tooele County and traverses the Bonneville Salt Flatswhich are a part of the larger Great Salt Lake Desert. It continues alongside the Wendover Cut-offthe corridor of the former Victory HighwayU.S. Route 40 (US-40) and the Western Pacific Railroad Feather River Route. After passing the Oquirrh Mountains, I-80 enters the Salt Lake Valley and Salt Lake County. A short portion of the freeway is concurrent with I-15 through Downtown Salt Lake City. At the Spaghetti Bowl, I-80 turns east again into the mouth of Parley's Canyon and Summit County, travels through the mountain range and intersects the eastern end of I-84 near Echo Reservoir before turning northeast towards the Wyoming border near Evanston. I-80 was built along the corridor of the Lincoln Highway and the Mormon Trail through the Wasatch Range. The easternmost section also follows the historical routes of the First Transcontinental Railroad and US-30S.

Construction of the controlled-access highway began in the 1950s, and by the late 1970s most of the freeway across the state of Utah had been completed. The section of I-80 between Utah State Route 68 (SR-68, Redwood Road) and the Salt Lake City International Airport was the last piece of the nearly freeway to be completed. It was opened on August 22, 1986, and was about from the site of another cross-country milestone in Utah, the driving of the Golden Spike of the First Transcontinental Railroad at Promontory Summit. Average daily traffic volumes in 2012 ranged between 6,765 vehicles using the freeway at SR-58 and 121,205 vehicles using the freeway at the Spaghetti Bowl in Downtown Salt Lake City. Throughout the state, the highway is also known as the Purple Heart Trail.

Out of the eleven states which I-80 passes through, the segment in Utah is the fourth shortest. The longest stretch of I-80 in a single state is the segment in Nebraska. As part of the Interstate Highway System, the entire route is listed on the National Highway System, a system of roads that are important to the nation's economy, defense, and mobility.

Every year, the Utah Department of Transportation (UDOT) conducts a series of surveys on its highways to measure traffic volumes. This measure is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic (AADT), a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year. In 2012, UDOT calculated that as few as 6,765 vehicles traveled I-80 at the interchange with SR-58 in Wendover, and as many as 121,205 vehicles used the highway at the Spaghetti Bowl in downtown Salt Lake City. Between seven and 58 percent of the traffic recorded consisted of trucks. These counts are for the portion of the freeway in Utah.

The freeway enters Utah from Nevada in the city of Wendover on the edge of the Bonneville Salt Flats. The cities of West Wendover, Nevada and Wendover are accessible by I-80's only business loop in Utah, whose interchange is just south of Danger Cave. The highway closely follows the historical routes of the Wendover Cutoff, the Victory Highway, and of the ex-Western Pacific Railroad's Feather River Route (now part of the Union Pacific Railroad Central Corridor) across the salt flats and the larger Great Salt Lake Desert. Bonneville Speedway, home to many land speed records, is accessible from I-80. In the middle of the salt flats is a concrete sculpture, , which stands just off the westbound carriageway of I-80, east of Wendover.

Bounded on each sides by military training grounds, the I-80 corridor is overflown by commercial airliners traveling west from Salt Lake City International Airport. The freeway veers north around the Cedar Mountains in a small gap between them and the Lakeside Mountains. Further east, the highway passes the Stansbury Mountains, which are located in the Wasatch-Cache National Forest. After the mountain ranges, the freeway arrives at the southern shore of the Great Salt Lake and closely follows the shore towards the western suburbs of Salt Lake City. However, the historical routes from which the route of I-80 was derived were routed further from the lake, passing through the towns of Grantsville and Tooele; these communities are now served by SR-138 and SR-36 respectively. After an interchange with SR-36 at Stansbury Park, the highway crosses a bottleneck between the Oquirrh Mountains and the Great Salt Lake.

While traversing the neck, views can be had from I-80 of the Lake and Antelope Island. After passing the neck, the road forks, with I-80 proceeding towards the north end of Salt Lake City and SR-201 proceeding towards the south end. Historically, this intersection was the separation of US-40 and US-50. After the intersection, the freeway corridor is again bottlenecked with the Great Salt Lake to the north and the Kennecott Copper smelter and tailings pond to the south. The Kennecott's Bingham Canyon Mine, which was once considered to be the largest open-pit copper mine, can be seen in the distance. The Kennecott Smokestack is one of the tallest freestanding structures in the United States. Along this portion, the freeway passes the historical site of the Saltair Resort.
The freeway enters the Salt Lake Valley on the former alignment of North Temple Street until it passes the Salt Lake City International Airport, where the freeway veers slightly south and leaves the North Temple Street corridor which leads to Temple Square in downtown Salt Lake City. The Green Line of the Utah Transit Authority (UTA) TRAX system briefly parallels I-80 before traveling down the center of North Temple Street. I-80 becomes concurrent with I-15 after interchanges with SR-58 and 600 South and continues south for about , passing along the western and southern edges of downtown Salt Lake City. The southern interchange with I-15, which also includes SR-201 (21st South Freeway) and marks the end of the concurrency, is known as the Spaghetti Bowl. In the southwestern corner of the Spaghetti Bowl is another portion of the UTA TRAX Green Line as it travels towards West Valley City. After separating from I-15, the freeway continues easterly through South Salt Lake, loosely following an alignment just south of 2100 South and the UTA S Line streetcar through the Sugar House neighborhood and past Sugar House Parkonce the home of the Sugar House Prison towards the clockwise terminus of the I-215 270° belt route around Salt Lake. It continues through Parley's Canyon, where the freeway joins the historical route of the Lincoln Highway. Between the mouth of the canyon and the Summit county line, the route re-enters the Wasatch National Forest.

Parley's Canyon carries I-80 up the western slope of the Wasatch Front as a six-lane freeway, cresting the mountains at an elevation of at Parley's Summit. Both the canyon and summit were named for Parley P. Pratt, an early settler to the Salt Lake Valley and an early Mormon leader who was asked to survey a new route across the mountains to replace the route through Emigration Canyon. Between 1848 and 1851, Pratt surveyed, completed, and operated the Golden Pass toll road through the canyon that today bears his name. Pratt had unsuccessfully solicited for $800 (equivalent to $ in ) to build the road, and sold it for $1,500 (equivalent to $ in ). On and off ramps for the Wyoming port-of-entry are located just within Utah. In January 2014, UDOT introduced variable speed limits to I-80 in Parley's Canyon, allowing a speed limit between up to the normal depending on weather or traffic conditions.

Beyond Parley's summit lies Park City, a mining town today better known for its many ski resorts. The Historic Union Pacific Rail Trail State Park travels in the median between carriageways of I-80 before paralleling the highway until the southern end of Echo Reservoir. The freeway turns north upon reaching the Rockport Reservoir at Wanship following the tributaries of the Weber River toward Echo Reservoir and dam. Upon reaching Echo Canyon and the junction with the eastern terminus of the western section of I-84, the freeway follows the canyon east until it reaches the Wyoming state line near Evanston. I-80 forms the northeastern border between Rich and Summit Counties.

The portion through Echo Canyon follows the historical routes of the Mormon Trail, US-30S, and the First Transcontinental Railroad. A rest area in the canyon just east of the junction with I-84 features signs pointing out features that were obstacles for both the Mormon pioneers and the railroad construction workers, including Pulpit Rock, which was partially demolished when the I-80 was built through the canyon.

I-80 follows the routes of two major auto trails through the state. In western Utah, I-80 follows the historical route of the Victory Highway from Wendover at the Nevada state line to the junction of US-40 near Park City. Throughout Utah, I-80 is signed as the modern route of the Lincoln Highwayexcept through Salt Lake City, where the Lincoln Highway is routed along State Route 201 and Parley's Way. The route of the Lincoln Highway across Utah was generally derived from the route of the Pony Express and the Central Overland Route. However, much of the original route of the Lincoln Highway west of Salt Lake City is inaccessible. The original route of the Lincoln Highway proceeded southwest from Tooele towards Ely, Nevada. This area is now used for military bases, such as the Dugway Proving Ground and Tooele Army Depot. The area was closed to the public when these bases were established. I-80 and US-93 are the modern signing of the Lincoln Highway between those two cities. East of Salt Lake City, I-80 closely parallels the original route of the Lincoln Highway.

In 1926, much of the route covered by I-80, including Pratt's former toll road from the Nevada state line into Salt Lake City, was signed as US-40 then as US-30 to the Wyoming state line. It was also part of the Victory Highway west of Salt Lake and the Lincoln Highway east of Salt Lake at this time. Most of the route had been improved but some stretches of graded road remained. In 1937, parts of the route near Wanship were numbered US-530. In 1950, the highway near Echo was designated US-30S and US-189. By 1959, US-50 Alternate was also routed along the western portion of I-80.

The first Utah State Route to have the number 80 is now known as SR-92, which was originally numbered SR-80 until the 1977 renumbering of Utah State highways. Previously, the freeway's legislative designation was SR-2.

Passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 formed the Interstate Highway System, and the I-80 number was first designated to a then-unconstructed controlled-access highway across the state by 1957. I-80 was constructed in segments, starting in the late 1950s. By the late 1970s, the Utah portion of I-80except for a gap on the western edge of Salt Lake Citywas largely complete. A section between Redwood Road and Salt Lake City International Airport holds the distinction of being the final link of the transcontinental freeway to be completed. As an Interstate Highway, design specifications require a controlled-access highway with no at-grade intersections. This section was dedicated on August 22, 1986, and was the last to be completed to Interstate Highway specifications along the almost route of I-80 between San Francisco, California and Teaneck, New Jersey. The section was completed close to the thirtieth anniversary of the Interstate Highway System, which was noted at the dedication and considered to be a milestone in the history of highway construction in the United States. It was also noted at the dedication that this was only south of Promontory Summit, where the golden spike of the United States First Transcontinental Railroad was laid.
The original designation of I-84, which begins at an interchange with I-80 in Echo, was I-80N. This designation was changed to I-84 in 1977 by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials despite objections from the Washington State Department of Transportation and the Idaho Transportation Department, and with the support of UDOT and the Oregon Department of Transportation. The legislative designation for this highway was SR-3 until the 1977 renumbering.

Rebuilding of the first portions of I-80 began in October 1990 with a stretch near Redwood Road in Salt Lake City. By 1991, UDOT estimated that the reconstruction of all federally funded highways in the state would cost up to $4.3 billion (equivalent to $ in ). The Spaghetti Bowl interchange was first proposed in 1996 to accommodate traffic for the 2002 Winter Olympics being held in the city. Most of the Spaghetti Bowl was open by November 2000; the remainder opened in early 2001. In 2002, the Utah State Legislature named the highway the Purple Heart trail, in honor of wounded war veterans. Additional reconstruction workwhich involved replacing most of the bridges along the route, resurfacing and installation of sound barrierswas done on I-80 between the Spaghetti Bowl and Parley's Canyon in 2007 and 2008.



</doc>
<doc id="12440593" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12440593" title="Mark Roberts (footballer, born 1983)">
Mark Roberts (footballer, born 1983)

Mark Alan Roberts (born 16 October 1983) is an English footballer who plays as a defender for Northern Premier League Premier Division club Warrington Town.

Roberts started his career at Crewe Alexandra at the age of 11, and progressed through the youth ranks at the club; signing a professional contract with The Railwaymen at the age of 19. He played a total of six times during his seven years on the club's books, and was sent out on loan six times during his spell at the club. Following a loan spell at his hometown club, Northwich Victoria, he joined the club on a permanent basis in 2007. Roberts played 20 games for the Cheshire club during the second half of the 2006–07 season, before returning to the Football League with Accrington Stanley in summer 2007. He played 37 games for the club, before being loaned out to his former club, Northwich Victoria, a move which was later made permanent.

During the 2008–09 season, Roberts joined Stevenage on an initial one-month loan deal, before signing permanently in January 2009 for an undisclosed fee. He was made team captain ahead of the 2009–10 season, a campaign in which Roberts would help lead the side to the Football League for the first time in the club's history. The following season, Roberts helped guide the club to back-to-back promotions following their sixth-place finish and subsequent League Two play-off victory in May 2011. He has also spent two spells as caretaker manager of the club, once in January 2012 and again in March 2013. 

After a successful four-and-a-half-year spell at Stevenage, Roberts joined Fleetwood Town on a free transfer in July 2013. He captained Fleetwood to promotion via the play-offs during his first season with the club. After two seasons at Fleetwood, Roberts joined League Two side Cambridge United in May 2015, where he spent two seasons. He subsequently spent the 2017–18 season at fellow League Two club Forest Green Rovers, before signing for Warrington Town of the Northern Premier League in August 2018.

Born in Northwich, Cheshire, Roberts started his career at Crewe Alexandra at the age of 11. After progressing through the youth ranks he signed a professional contract with the club on 6 July 2003 at the age of 19. He joined Vauxhall Motors of the Northern Premier League Premier Division on loan and made his debut in a 3–2 win at home to Southport on 31 January 2004. His first goal came in a 2–0 home win over Alfreton Town on 6 March 2004, and finished the loan with 19 appearances, scoring three goals, before the end of the 2003–04 season. Roberts impressed for Crewe in several pre-season friendlies before the 2004–05 season, and played his first full 90 minutes for the club in Crewe's 2–1 friendly win against Everton. Roberts' pre-season performances led to Crewe assistant manager, Neil Baker, saying "Mark's a player that I felt could bridge the gap, having worked with him more than the other coaches. The way he coped should give him the belief to go on now." He subsequently made his Crewe debut in September 2004, starting in a League Cup match against Sunderland, a game that Crewe won 4–2 in a penalty shoot-out after playing out a 3–3 draw after extra time. Shortly after, he made his league debut for Crewe in a 1–0 defeat at Preston North End, and went on to make five more appearances for Dario Gradi's side before his run was curtailed by injury.<ref name="Crewe Alexandra 2004/2005 player appearances"></ref>

After struggling to establish himself at Crewe Alexandra, Roberts spent time on loan with Merseyside based outfit Southport. Roberts made his Southport debut just three days after signing for the club, playing the whole match in a 4–0 away defeat to Accrington Stanley. He featured in a total of six games for Southport, before then opting to join Chester City on a one-month loan deal. Roberts only started one game for Chester in a 5–0 defeat at Carlisle United, and did not feature again for the Cheshire side subsequent to this match.<ref name="Chester City 2005/2006 player appearances"></ref> After his unsuccessful loan spell at Chester, Roberts was loaned out to Southport for a second time in March 2006, making his second debut for the club in a 2–1 win away to Forest Green Rovers, in which he was sent off in the 88th minute for two bookable offences. He returned to first team action in Southport's 1–1 draw against Altrincham, before playing the whole match in a 2–0 victory against Accrington Stanley at Haig Avenue. He played 12 times during his second loan spell at the club, playing his final game in Southport's 1–0 home loss against Aldershot Town in April 2006.<ref name="Southport 2005/2006 player appearances"></ref> Despite still being on the books at Crewe, Roberts had not made a first team appearance for the club since 2004 and was again loaned out ahead of the 2006–07 season, this time to Yorkshire-based Conference National side Halifax Town. He played his first game for Halifax in the club's first game of the 2006–07 campaign, starting in a 2–0 away defeat to Oxford United. He scored his first goal for Halifax in a 2–1 victory over Cambridge United, the first goal of the game. Roberts featured in a total of thirteen games for the Halifax, scoring once, before ending his loan spell at the club.

Shortly after, Roberts joined his hometown club Northwich Victoria on another loan deal. He made his debut for Northwich in a 3–1 away win at St Albans City at Clarence Park, and after playing in three games for the Conference National side, signed for the club on a permanent basis. He featured regularly during the second half of the 2006–07 season, which witnessed an up-turn in form for Northwich.<ref name="Northwich 2006/2007 results and fixtures"></ref> As a result, Roberts returned to the Football League with Accrington Stanley in July 2007, joining the club for a fee set by a tribunal. Roberts started the first 30 games for the League Two side, whilst featuring in a further three as a substitute.<ref name="Accrington Stanley 2007/2008 player appearances"></ref> However, he returned to Northwich Victoria on loan in March 2008. He helped Northwich to Conference Premier survival towards the end of the season, scoring his only goal in a crucial match against fellow relegation candidates Stafford Rangers, and played a total of nine times during the loan spell.<ref name="Northwich Victoria 2007/2008 player appearances"></ref> Despite making a further brief appearance for Accrington towards the end of the season, Roberts re-joined Northwich on a permanent deal after his loan spell. During the 2008–09 season, Roberts continued to play regularly in the centre of Northwich's defence, scoring once in a 3–2 home defeat against Weymouth in September 2008. He made a total of twenty appearances for Northwich during the first half of the season.<ref name="Northwich Victoria 2008/2009 player appearances"></ref>

In November 2008, Roberts started for Northwich in a 1–1 draw at Broadhall Way in a match between Northwich and Stevenage, he subsequently joined the Hertfordshire side on loan a week after the match. The deal was made permanent on 1 January 2009, after impressing Graham Westley during his one-month loan spell. He scored his first Stevenage goal in a 2–0 FA Trophy win away to Farnborough, as well as scoring his second goal for the club in Stevenage's 4–0 win against Forest Green Rovers. He scored his first league goal for the club in a 2–1 victory away to Altrincham, scoring a stoppage time goal to ensure Stevenage left Moss Lane with three points. Roberts followed this up with another goal in Stevenage's next away fixture, heading in the only goal of the game to give Stevenage a 1–0 win at Northwich Victoria, his former employers. He was sent off in the club's 2–1 home win against Cambridge United in April 2009, and continued to play regularly as Stevenage made the play-offs as a result of finishing in the final play-off place. He scored in the semi-final first leg against Cambridge United, heading in Steve Morison's ball across goal, but could not prevent Stevenage from losing 4–3 on aggregate over two legs. Roberts was awarded 'Supporters Player of the Year' at the end of the season despite only joining the club in late November 2008. He also started in all seven of the club's successful FA Trophy campaign during that season, scoring twice in the process and playing in the side's 2–0 win against York City in the Final. In May 2009, it was announced that Roberts would be team captain for the 2009–10 season. On Roberts' appointment as captain, Stevenage manager Graham Westley said "Roberts is a natural leader who leads in the best way – by example. He is the obvious choice."
Roberts formed a formidable centre-back pairing with Jon Ashton the following season as the team started putting a decent run of form together during late August and throughout September 2009; with the defence being particularly tight.<ref name="Stevenage 2009/2010 results and fixtures"></ref> He scored his first goal of the 2009–10 season on his 50th appearance for the club, giving Stevenage the lead in a 3–1 victory over Salisbury City in October 2009.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2009/2010"></ref><ref name="Stevenage 2009/2010 player appearances"></ref> A month later, he doubled his goal tally, scoring the second goal in Stevenage's 2–0 victory against Chester City,<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2009/2010"></ref> before notching his third goal of the season in a 6–0 win over Vauxhall Motors in the FA Trophy. Roberts' fourth goal of the campaign came during another 6–0 win, this time at Eastbourne Borough, side-footing the ball into the net from a well-worked free-kick.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2009/2010"></ref> He scored his fifth goal of the season in a 3–0 win over AFC Wimbledon at Kingsmeadow, sliding the ball into the net from close range.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2009/2010"></ref> Roberts led the side out in their 2–0 win against Kidderminster Harriers at Aggborough in April 2010; the game that ultimately secured promotion to the Football League for the first time in the club's history, winning the league with two games to spare. Roberts played a total of 49 times during the season, scoring five times from defence. He was also named as the Conference Premier Player of the Month for April 2010. Stevenage had the best defensive record in the league, conceding just 24 goals in 46 league matches, as well as ending the season having not conceded in their last six games; and conceding just two goals in their last 15 league matches.<ref name="2009/10 – Stevenage"></ref> In May 2010, Roberts signed a new two-year contract with Stevenage. On signing the new deal, Roberts said "there was never any doubt that I wanted to stay here, I love the club and love the fans. It will be a privilege to lead the team in the Football League". At the Football Conference's Annual Presentation Dinner, he was named in the Team of the Year, alongside fellow Stevenage defenders Ronnie Henry and Scott Laird.
Roberts captained the side in the club's first ever Football League fixture at the beginning of the 2010–11 season, playing the whole game in a 2–2 home draw with Macclesfield Town. He scored his first goal of the 2010–11 season in Stevenage's 3–0 away win at local rivals Barnet in November 2010. His second goal of the season came in the reverse fixture against Barnet in January 2011, this time scoring the fourth in a 4–2 win at Broadhall Way, as well as netting in a 4–0 win against Cheltenham Town on 26 February. A week later, Roberts was given a straight red card for bringing down Torquay United striker Chris Zebroski when he had rounded the goalkeeper, a match that Torquay would go on to win 2–0. He scored twice against Macclesfield Town on 26 March 2011, taking his goal tally for the 2010–11 campaign to five goals. Roberts scored his sixth goal of the season, his highest seasonal goal tally during his three years at Stevenage, in the club's 2–2 draw at Stockport County on 9 April 2011. The goal, a half-volley at the back post, gave Stevenage a brief lead in the match just after half-time. Stevenage faced one of Roberts' former employers, Accrington Stanley, in the 2010–11 League Two play-off semi-finals as a result of the club's sixth-place finish. Roberts played in both games, which Stevenage won by a 3–0 aggregate scoreline. He led the side out at Old Trafford for the final against Torquay United on 28 May 2011, playing the whole match as Stevenage went on to win 1–0. This meant that Roberts had captained the side to back-to-back promotions, earning a place in League One for the first time in their history. Stevenage also had the best defensive record in League Two during the 2010–11 campaign, conceding 45 goals. The campaign was also notable for Stevenage's FA Cup run into the Fourth Round, with Roberts playing in all five matches,<ref name="Stevenage 2010/2011 player appearances"></ref> including the club's 3–1 home victory over Premier League opposition in the form of Newcastle United. Roberts made 52 appearances in all competitions throughout the season, scoring six times.<ref name="Stevenage 2010/2011 player appearances"></ref>

Roberts captained the side in their first ever League One fixture to start the 2011–12 season, a 0–0 draw against Exeter City on 6 August. He signed a two-year contract extension with the club on 26 August 2011. Two weeks later, he scored his first competitive goal of the 2011–12 campaign in Stevenage's 1–1 away draw against Oldham Athletic on 10 September. Roberts' goal came in the fourth minute of the match, heading in Michael Bostwick's shot to give Stevenage the lead. His second goal of the campaign came in the club's exit from the Football League Trophy on 4 October, with Roberts scoring a 20-yard volley in injury-time to take the game to penalties, which Stevenage subsequently lost 4–3. He described the volley as "easily the best goal of his career". Roberts scored once again, on 29 October, in a 2–1 away victory against Bury. The goal was a "glancing header" from Joel Byrom's cross to double Stevenage's advantage in the match with fifteen minutes remaining. A week later, he scored his fourth goal of the season in the club's 2–1 home win over Sheffield United, turning in the six-yard box before lashing a shot into the roof of the net to give Stevenage a first-half lead. Roberts' fifth goal of the campaign came in Stevenage's last home game of 2011, scoring with a header from Robin Shroot's cross to give ten-man Stevenage a two-goal lead in an eventual 2–1 home victory against Tranmere Rovers. Following Graham Westley's departure to Preston North End on 13 January 2012, Roberts was made player-manager for Stevenage's away trip to Rochdale, with the club securing a 5–1 victory at Spotland on 14 January. He remained in-charge of the team for two further matches, a 1–1 draw at Scunthorpe United, and a 4–2 home victory against Milton Keynes Dons, until the appointment of manager Gary Smith allowed Roberts to concentrate on the playing side of the game. Under Roberts' guidance, Stevenage secured seven points out of a possible nine. He scored in successive games towards the latter stages of the season; a late equaliser against Preston North End, as well as netting the fifth goal in the club's 6–0 away win against Yeovil Town on 14 April 2012. Roberts played every minute of all 56 of Stevenage's games during the campaign, scoring seven goals from defence, with the club narrowly losing out in the play-off semi-finals. Stevenage also made it to the Fifth Round of the FA Cup, the furthest the club had reached in the competition; with Roberts playing in all six cup matches, including two matches against Tottenham Hotspur as the club took the Premier League side to a replay.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2011/2012 "></ref> He was also named as Stevenage's Player of the Year at the end of the season, becoming only the third player to win the award twice.

In the summer of 2012, Stevenage announced that they had rejected several bids for Roberts, along with defensive partner Jon Ashton, from fellow League One side Doncaster Rovers. Despite the strong transfer speculation over the summer, he captained the side in Stevenage's first game of the 2012–13 season, scoring the third goal in a 3–1 win over AFC Wimbledon in the League Cup. Shortly after the game, Stevenage released a statement announcing they would not be selling Roberts during the season. His second goal of the campaign came in another cup competition, scoring from close range to briefly restore parity in a 3–2 defeat away to Dagenham & Redbridge in the Football League Trophy in September 2012. Roberts scored his first league goal of the season in Stevenage's 4–1 loss to Sheffield United at Bramall Lane, scoring an equaliser just before half-time, heading in Filipe Morais's corner. In February 2013, Roberts was one of three players shortlisted by the Football League for the Player in the Community award as a result of his work in the local community over the past few years. The club stated – "we are extremely proud that Mark has been shortlisted for this award, he is a credit to the football club and his day to day work and support of the community scheme and the club's community work is due worthy recognition". Following the departure of manager Gary Smith in March 2013, Roberts was once again placed in temporary charge while the club searched for a new manager. Just four days later, he took charge of Stevenage's televised away trip to promotion-chasing Tranmere Rovers, which ended in a 3–1 defeat. In Stevenage's next match, on 29 March 2013, Roberts scored a first-half header in a 1–1 away draw with Crawley Town, briefly giving Stevenage the lead despite them having to play with ten men for most of the match following Miguel Comminges' early dismissal. In what was his last match in caretaker charge, Roberts stated he was "proud of the phenomenal performance", and that "the attitude, the way the lads reacted to the adversity we faced was probably something I haven't seen all season, to that level anyway". A day later, Graham Westley was re-appointed as Stevenage manager, who brought Roberts to the club in 2008, and as a result Roberts was again able to concentrate solely on the playing side of his game. He played 48 times during the season, scoring four goals.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2012/2013"></ref> During his successful four-and-a-half-year spell at Stevenage, Roberts made 239 appearances in all competitions, an appearance record that places him sixth on the club's all-time appearance list, and scored 27 goals.

Following the expiry of his contract at Stevenage, rejecting the club's offer of a new contract, Roberts signed for League Two side Fleetwood Town on a free transfer. On joining Fleetwood, Roberts stated – "I was massively impressed with this club from the first moment. Joining Fleetwood is an exciting prospect and I jumped at the chance after seeing the plans and hearing the chairman's vision". Shortly before the start of the 2013–14 season, Roberts was named as Fleetwood's new captain, stating it was a "massive honour to be named as club captain for the season". He scored just six minutes into his Fleetwood debut, also the first League Two goal of the new campaign, courtesy of a powerful header in a 3–1 home victory over Dagenham & Redbridge. Roberts was almost ever-present during the campaign and, similarly to his time at Stevenage, he also chipped in with a number of goals from central defence.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2013/2014"></ref> He scored the winner in a 2–1 away victory at Rochdale on 14 December 2013, netting from close range after Nathan Pond's header had rebounded off the post and fallen into Roberts' path. He also scored in a 3–1 win over Bristol Rovers in March 2014, heading in a Josh Morris corner to double Fleetwood's lead. As a result of Fleetwood's fourth place finish in League Two, the club competed in the League Two play-offs.<ref name="League Two table – 2013/2014 Season"></ref> Roberts played in all three matches, with the team keeping three consecutive clean sheets, as Fleetwood won promotion to League One for the first time in the club's history after a 1–0 victory over Burton Albion at Wembley Stadium in the final. Roberts made 45 appearances in all competitions during his first season with the club, scoring three goals.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2013/2014"></ref>

He remained at Fleetwood for the club's first ever League One campaign, although started the season playing a largely peripheral role, featuring in just one match in the opening two months of the season.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2014/2015"></ref> Roberts made his first league appearance of the season on 4 October 2014, playing the whole match as Fleetwood secured a 1–0 win over Port Vale at Highbury Stadium. Despite being part of the defence that kept Fleetwood's second clean sheet of the season, Roberts featured just once further until mid November.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2014/2015"></ref> After playing the whole 90 minutes in a 1–0 away win at Yeovil Town, he was a regular starter for the remainder of the season.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2014/2015"></ref> Similarly to a year earlier, he scored in an away win at Rochdale, this time heading in Stephen Dobbie's free-kick in a 2–0 win on 28 December 2014. Roberts scored his second goal of the season when he headed in a late equaliser as Fleetwood drew 1–1 with Peterborough United in February 2015. On the final day of the regular season, he scored Fleetwood's second goal in the club's 2–1 win over Port Vale on 3 May 2015, with Roberts tapping the ball in from a yard out after David Ball centred Josh Morris' cross. The game proved to be Roberts' final game for Fleetwood, as the club consolidated their place in League One courtesy of a tenth placed finish.<ref name="League One table – 2014/2015 Season"></ref> He made 72 appearances for Fleetwood in all competitions over his two years with the club, scoring six times. Roberts was released by Fleetwood upon the expiry of his contract in May 2015, one of 14 first-team players to be released, with Fleetwood manager Graham Alexander stating the club's "drive had shifted to focus on youth development".

Roberts joined League Two side Cambridge United on 25 May 2015, signing a two-year deal. He was named as the club's captain, a position he had previously held at both Stevenage and Fleetwood Town. Roberts made his debut for Cambridge on the opening day of the 2015–16 season, playing the full 90 minutes as Cambridge comfortably defeated Newport County 3–0 at the Abbey Stadium. He scored his first goal for the club in a 2–2 draw at York City on 3 October 2015, netting from close range as Cambridge fought back from two goals down to earn a point. A week later, Roberts was sent-off for violent conduct in Cambridge's 3–1 home defeat to Portsmouth. He was a regular starter for Cambridge up until the end of January 2016, when he was dropped ahead of an away match at Leyton Orient. He was subsequently replaced as captain by Luke Berry, with manager Shaun Derry stating "I've spoken to Mark and he's accepted it as a man. He'll respond in the right way because he's a leader of men". Roberts spent most of the remainder of the campaign as an unused substitute, although did feature more towards the end of the season, returning to score in a 7–0 win over Morecambe on 19 April 2016. He made 34 appearances for Cambridge in his first season with the club, scoring twice.<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2015/2016"></ref>

Roberts stayed at Cambridge for the 2016–17 season, with the campaign following a similar pattern to the previous year as he was in and out of the starting line-up. He made his first start a month into the new season, helping Cambridge win their first game of the season as they won 2–1 away at Newport County on 24 September 2016. Three days later, he scored the only goal of the game when he turned the ball home from close range after 65 minutes in a 1–0 victory against Yeovil Town. The win moved Cambridge off the bottom of the table. Roberts' return to the first-team coincided with an upturn in form for the Cambridgeshire side and he remained a permanent fixture in the centre of defence for the following five months of the season. He scored his second goal of the season courtesy of a 92nd minute equaliser in an eventual 4–2 extra-time FA Cup win at Dover Athletic on 17 November 2016, with Roberts playing all four FA Cup games as Cambridge would progress to the Third Round and face Leeds United live on BBC. His third and final goal of the campaign was a notable 93rd minute winner in a 3–2 win over Newport County in February 2017, scoring from a rebound in a game Cambridge had trailed by two goals. Roberts did not make an appearance beyond March 2017, and played 31 games in total during the season, scoring three times. At the end of the season, in May 2017, Cambridge announced their released and retained list, stating that Roberts had been placed on the transfer-list with a year remaining on his contract.<ref name="Cambridge United announce retain/released list"></ref>

Having made no appearances for Cambridge in the opening weeks of the 2017–18 campaign, Roberts' contract with the club was cancelled by mutual consent on 24 August 2017. On the same day, he signed for League Two side Forest Green Rovers on a one-year deal. He made his Forest Green debut two days after signing, playing the whole match in a 5–1 away defeat to Colchester United. Despite initially being a regular in the centre of defence for Forest Green, Roberts found himself out of the first-team picture from the start of 2018,<ref name="Games played by Mark Roberts in 2017/2018"></ref> his last appearance for the club coming in a 2–0 defeat to Yeovil Town in the Football League Trophy on 9 January 2018. Having not made an appearance for four months, Roberts left Forest Green upon the expiry of his one-year deal in May 2018. He made 20 appearances during his brief stay with the club.

Roberts joined Northern Premier League Premier Division club Warrington Town on a free transfer ahead of the 2018–19 season.<ref name="A closer look at Warrington Town's squad for the 2018/19 season"></ref> He made his Warrington debut in the club's opening league match of the campaign, a 2–0 home defeat to Farsley Celtic. Roberts was subsequently named as club captain ahead of Warrington's next fixture away at Lancaster City, in what turned out to be their first win of the season. 

Roberts was born and raised in Northwich, Cheshire. Roberts studied professional sports writing and broadcasting at Staffordshire University, graduating in 2012. He continued his studies after graduating from university, gaining two further football-based business qualifications at the Sports Business Institute. Roberts has stated he has a keen interest in "what goes on behind the scenes" in football, particularity at boardroom level, gaining his ACGP accreditation after enrolling himself in a corporate governance programme. He is studying for a Master of Business Administration degree at the University of Salford, with the degree focussed on CEOs in sport.

He supports Manchester United, and was a season ticket holder at Old Trafford, where he sat in the Stretford End.

Stevenage

Fleetwood Town

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="12451132" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12451132" title="White-crowned forktail">
White-crowned forktail

The white-crowned forktail ("Enicurus leschenaulti") is a species of forktail in the family Muscicapidae. Scientifically described in 1818, it has six subspecies, each occupying a different geographic range. The largest of the forktails, "Enicurus leschenaulti", is between long. It has a black throat and breast, black mantle, and largely black wings. The rump and lower back are white, and the bird has a prominent white crown, from which it gets its name. As with other forktails, the tail is long, deeply forked, and banded in black and white. A variety of whistling and clicking calls have been described. Slight morphological differences have been observed between subspecies.

A shy bird, the white-crowned forktail stays near water, and forages on the edges of rivers and streams for invertebrates. Its breeding season is between March and September, and possibly extends till October. Its nests are also built near the water, and are constructed of plant material. The eggs are between two and five in number, though there is latitudinal variation. Multiple broods in a year have been observed in China. The white-crowned forktail is found in China, Southeast Asia and also in northeastern parts of the Indian subcontinent. Its natural habitats are subtropical or tropical moist lowland forests and subtropical or tropical moist montane forests. Its elevational range varies across its range, from a minimum of above sea level to a maximum of . It is categorized as a species of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

The white-crowned forktail was scientifically described in 1818 by French ornithologist Louis Jean Pierre Vieillot. The specimen described came from Java. It is closely related to the Bornean forktail ("Enicurus borneensis") which replaces it in mountain areas of Borneo. Six subspecies have been described. "E. l. indicus" is found from Sikkim to Myanmar, the Chinese province of Yunnan, northern Thailand, and Vietnam. "E. l. sinensis" is found in southern and eastern China, including in the regions of Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan, Zhejiang, and Guangdong. "E. l. frontalis" is seen in the southern and central parts of the Malay Peninsula, on the islands of Nias and Sumatra, and in the lowland regions of Borneo. "E. l. chaseni" is found only on Batu island. "E. l. leschenaulti" is found in Java and on the island of Bali. "E. l. borneensis" is found in the highland regions of Borneo.

The two sub-species found in Borneo, which have different elevational ranges, are genetically relatively distant. The upland subspecies "E. l. borneensis" may be a separate species, but is morphologically not very distinct from the other subspecies of "E. leschenaulti". Birds of the "borneensis" subspecies appeared to breed between mountaintops, but not with individuals of the subspecies "frontalis" in the valleys in between. The species was found to be more distantly related to the slaty-backed forktail and the little forktail than to other forktail species. The precise geographic delineation between "E. l. borneensis" and "E. l. frontalis" is not known.

The white-crowned forktail is the largest of the forktails. Between long, the white-crowned forktail typically weighs between , though specimens weighing up to have been reported. It has black feathering on its throat extending down to its breast, as well as a black face and scapulars. The crown and forehead have a prominent white patch, sometimes visible as a slight crest, from which the bird gets its name. The belly of the bird is white, and is sharply delineated from the throat and face. The lower back and rump of the bird are white. The tail of the species is long and evenly graduated, with a deep fork. It has white tips, and the outer feathers are white. It also has three narrower white bands created by the tips of shorter tail feathers. The wings of this species are largely black with a prominent white band across the greater coverts. Juveniles of the species have brownish black upperparts, breast, and throat, brown flanks, and brown mottling on the belly. They also lack the prominent white crown. The bill of the species is black, while the feet are pinkish in color.

Its mantle is completely black, a feature used to distinguish the species from the spotted forktail, which has a speckled mantle, and from the slaty-backed forktail, which has a slate-grey mantle. It is distinguished from the black-backed forktail by its longer tail and larger size. The Indian subspecies "E. l. indicus" has a bill slightly longer than the nominate subspecies "E. l. leschenaulti", while the bill of the Chinese subspecies "E. l. sinensis" is slightly shorter than that of the nominate. The subspecies "frontalis" is somewhat smaller than the others, and the extent of white on its crown is smaller: "E. l. borneensis" is similar to "frontalis" but has a longer tail. "E. l. chaseni" is larger than birds from the rest of Sumatra, and also has a longer tail.

Multiple calls have been observed. The alarm call and contact calls are high-pitched, ringing lengthy whistles, described as "tseee, tseee" or "zweeet": these calls are repeated multiple times, with pauses in between. The alarm call is harsher and more emphatic, described as "scree" or "scree chit chit". Males use a long and complex whistled song when displaying or exhibiting territorial behavior; this often consists of a long whistle that fades away, followed by shorter whistles, clicking or chacking noises, or bell-like sounds. The call of the "borneensis" subspecies is slightly different from the others.

The habitat of the white-crowned forktail is subtropical or tropical regions in moist lowland forests and moist broadleaf montane forests. As is the case with other forktail species, the white-crowned forktail frequents fast-flowing rivers, waterfalls, and streams within the forests, though it may move to slower moving water sources in the winter. Its elevational range has been observed to vary seasonally, and in the northeastern regions of the Indian subcontinent, it is likely to migrate seasonally; all records from Bangladesh are from winter months. It also frequents damp areas and pools within the forest, including animal wallows, swampy areas, and water ditches. It may be found along slower-moving rivers and streams in the lowland regions of its distribution. It prefers areas screened by dense vegetation. On the island of Borneo the white-crowned forktail is sometimes found in drier areas, including along tracks and ridges in the forest, and in heathland.

The white-crowned forktail has a wide geographic distribution across south and south-east Asia, including in parts of India, Bangladesh, China, Myanmar, Bhutan, Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei. The elevational range of the species varies across its geographic distribution. In the Eastern Himalayas the species is generally found below above sea level, though occasionally found till , and exceptionally at in the state of Arunachal Pradesh. In Sumatra and Borneo it is generally seen up to an elevation of . The subspecies "borneensis" is found at , but occasionally as low as . It is common through most of its range but uncommon in the Himalayas. In the Chinese portion of its range, it is reported to be the most common forktail. Though the population of the species is not precisely known, it is thought to be greater than 10,000 individuals, and is estimated to be stable. It is categorized as a species of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

As with other forktails, the white-crowned forktail keeps close to water. It has been observed to frequently wag its tail. It forages along the edges of streams and in the water, primarily for insects, such as black beetles, water crickets, springtails, and caterpillars. Described as a shy bird, it flies close to the ground, usually calling as it does. It is thought to shift its elevational range slightly with the time of year.

The white-crowned forktail breeds between the months of March and September, and possibly till October. The breeding period varies slightly across its range. Eggs have been recorded as early as March in Borneo, and on one occasion a parent with a fledgling was recorded in February. The nest is constructed of moss, plants, leaves, and wood fibre, and is in the shape of a large cup. It is usually located near or over the water, and occasionally in forest gullies nearby. It is usually placed in a hole in a bank or cliff, or among tree roots, and has been observed to have been constructed behind waterfalls, with the birds flying through the water to reach their nest. The location of the nest is always damp.

The species usually lays between two and five eggs, which are creamy, pinkish, or greyish white, and covered in speckles of red-brown, salmon, and lilac. Birds in southern China have been observed to have two broods in a year, a pattern which may hold true elsewhere. The number of eggs in a brood varies with latitude, with individuals in China regularly being recorded laying four to five eggs. The nests of the species have been observed in Myanmar to be parasitized by the Drongo cuckoo.



</doc>
<doc id="12451157" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12451157" title="Slaty-backed forktail">
Slaty-backed forktail

The slaty-backed forktail ("Enicurus schistaceus") is a species of forktail in the family Muscicapidae. A slim, medium-sized forktail, it is distinguished from similar species by its slate grey forehead, crown, and mantle. It has a long and deeply forked tail banded in black and white, a white rump, and a white bar across its primary feathers; the rest of the plumage is predominantly white. The sexes look alike. The bird frequents the edges of fast-flowing streams and rivers, where it hunts small invertebrates by hopping among rocks or flying out over the water. It breeds between February and July, laying 3–4 pinkish, bluish, or white eggs; both sexes incubate the eggs.

The slaty-backed forktail is found near streams and rivers in tropical and subtropical regions, occasionally straying further from flowing water to the edges of roads and trails. Generally a solitary bird, it may occasionally be found in pairs, or in family groups in the breeding season. One of its calls has been described as similar to that of the Blyth's kingfisher, for which it has been mistaken. The forktail is found in the central and eastern Himalayas, the Indian Sub-continent, southern China and continental Southeast Asia. Its wide distribution and apparently stable population have led to it being classified as a species of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

The slaty-backed forktail was described scientifically in 1836 by British naturalist Brian H. Hodgson. It was originally placed in a new subgenus "Enicurus" in the genus "Motacilla", which contains the wagtails. The specimen used to describe the species came from Nepal. The species name is the Latin adjective "schistaceus" "slaty-grey". The slaty-backed forktail is currently placed within the family Muscicapidae, which includes Old World flycatchers and chats. A genetic study found that the slaty-backed forktail and the little forktail were genetically more distinct from the white-crowned forktail than were other forktail species.

The slaty-backed forktail is a slim, medium-sized forktail between long, and weighs between . It is coloured slate-grey, black, and white. The bill is black, while the feet of the bird are a pale pinkish or greyish colour. The iris has been described as dark brown, though it has been recorded as black in certain specimens. It has a black throat and a narrow white stripe across its face till just behind the eyes, sometimes describe as a white mask. The white stripe sometimes includes a white eye ring, which may be either complete or partial. Its ear coverts, chin, and face are also black. The forehead, crown, sides of the neck, and the scapulars are slate grey. It has black wing-coverts, a white patch at the base of the primaries, wide white bars on otherwise black wings, and also a large white patch on its rump and lower back. The bases of the flight feathers are white, which is occasionally visible as a little additional bar on the wing. The tail of the bird is long and evenly graduated, with a deep fork. The tail is largely black except for a white tip. It also has three white bands along its length, formed by the white tips of shorter tail feathers.

The juvenile of the species lacks a white forehead, is brown above, and has dark scales on its breast. The tail of the juvenile is shorter than that of the adult: juveniles also have greyish or yellowish lores, and greyish or white chin and throat. The flanks are a dull grey-brown. It is not sexually dimorphic. Some specimens have been observed to have white tips to their primaries. This feature has been hypothesized to be the result of aging or of wear and tear, and has been observed throughout the distribution of the species. It is known not to be sex-related. Though very similar to the black-backed forktail "Enicurus immaculatus", it is distinguished by its slate-grey mantle and crown, from which it gets its name. It also has a slightly larger bill than the black-backed forktail, and slightly less white on its forehead.

One of the slaty-backed forktail's calls has been described as a "high, thin, sharp, metallic screech, <nowiki>'</nowiki>"'teenk"<nowiki>'</nowiki>", similar to that made by a small kingfisher; in particular, it has been mistaken for the call of the Blyth's kingfisher "Alcedo hercules". Another call is described as a mellow ""cheet"". It also produces a repeated, harsh screeching call when alarmed.

The slaty-backed forktail is found near fast-flowing water bodies in tropical and sub-tropical montane broadleaf forests, as well as near cultivated areas. These include rocky streams and rivers, including broad rivers and valleys in plains areas. A 2000 paper studying birds in northwest India and Nepal found that the incidence of slaty-backed forktails decreased with altitude. The study also found that the slaty-backed forktail had a preference for streams that were bordered by dense and complex vegetation, and had firm and stable banks of earth. They also preferred streams with finer grained sand on the bottom, and with "pool–riffle sequences." More rarely the bird is seen in secluded areas of the forest, and on the sides of roads or trails near the water. In winter months it has been observed to move from the mountains into foothills and plains areas.

The species is found in the central and eastern Himalayas, from the Indian state of Uttarakhand in the west to Myanmar in the East, including Nepal, and Bhutan. It is a vagrant in Bangladesh. It is also found in southern China, in southeast Tibet, and in the provinces of Sichuan, Yunnan, Guizhou, Fujian and Zhejiang, and possibly in Hainan. Its range in South-East Asia includes Thailand, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, peninsular Malaysia, and Hong Kong. In Hong Kong, it is only an occasional winter visitor or highly uncommon resident. Its distribution in southeast Asia is discontinuous. The elevational range of the slaty-backed forktail varies geographically. It has been estimated as 300-1600m above sea level in northern India, 900–1675 in Nepal, 400–1800 in southern China and the adjacent areas of Thailand, above 500m in Cambodia, above 800m in Malaysia, and 800-2200m in Bhutan. In the winter, it has been recorded as low as 200m above sea level.

The range of the species has not been precisely determined, but is known to be very large. The population is thought to be stable, and though its size is not precisely known, it is thought to be greater than 10,000 individuals. It is categorized as a species of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. It is common in the parts of its range that occur in China, Nepal, and South-East Asia.

The slaty-backed forktail breeds between February and July; the breeding period does not appear to vary across its range. It builds a nest with materials including bryophytes, leaves, and grass. The shape of the nest can be a cup or part of a dome, depending on where it is built. It frequently has an outer layer of mud. The nest may be constructed in holes in the ground or in the trunks of trees, between the roots of trees, in hollows of dead trees, and sometimes within crevices in rocks. The bird lays three to four eggs that vary from pure white to pinkish white to bluish white, with lavender or reddish brown spots. The spots are more common on the larger end of the egg. Both sexes incubate the eggs. The species is thought to have two or three broods in a year.

The species feeds on small invertebrates found in or around the water, including larvae and crustaceans. It forages at the edge of the water, and is described as "moving restlessly". It forages on and among rocks at the edges of the water as well as in mid-stream; it will occasionally enter the water as well. Though it generally forages by hopping in an agile manner among rocks, it also makes brief forays above the water to snatch food items from the surface. Its flight is described as similar to that of a large wagtail; quick and direct, and slightly undulating. It is seen mostly near the water; usually solitary, it is occasionally observed in pairs, and is described as a shy bird. It constantly bobs its tail, and when disturbed it may raise and open its tail with a quick scissor-like movement. In the breeding season is occasionally in small family groups, while in winter it is most often solitary. However, many birds may forage in a favored section of a stream: 15 birds have been observed along a single stretch of the river in Bhutan.

In the South-East Asian parts of its range the bird is sedentary, while in the Himalayas it is observed to move over an elevational gradient. A 1998 study found that the species moved locally in response to rising water levels in the monsoon season.



</doc>
<doc id="12462044" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12462044" title="Melampitta">
Melampitta

The melampittas are a family, Melampittidae, of New Guinean birds containing two enigmatic species. The two species are found in two genera, the greater melampitta in the genus "Megalampitta" and the lesser melampitta in the genus "Melampitta". They are little studied and before being established as a family in 2014 their taxonomic relationships with other birds were uncertain, being considered at one time related variously to the pittas, Old World babblers and birds-of-paradise.

These are small to medium sized birds with black plumage, strong legs and short, rounded wings. Mostly terrestrial, they live in montane forest. The greater melampitta has more specific habitat needs, roosting and nesting in limestone sinkholes. Insects and small vertebrates are taken from the forest leaf litter. Little is known about their breeding behaviour, with only the nests of the lesser melampitta having been seen by scientists. Both species are considered to be safe from extinction.

The taxonomic placement of the melampittas was the source of long-standing confusion. Based on their superficial resemblance to the suboscine pittas (plump bodies, short tails and long legs), Hermann Schlegel placed the lesser melampitta within that family when he described that species in 1871. The name melampitta is derived from the Ancient Greek "melas-" for "black" with the genus name ""Pitta"". As Ernst Mayr demonstrated that the structure of the syrinx was that of an oscine bird the genus was later moved to the Old World babblers (an infamous "taxonomic dustbin"), then to Orthonychidae (where some authorities still retain them) and then to the jewel-babblers and whipbirds (the treatment used by the 2007 "Handbook of the Birds of the World").

Based on the analysis of DNA–DNA hybridization data the genus was placed with the Paradisaeidae birds of paradise by Sibley and Ahlquist. Frith and Frith felt these conclusions were not supported by aspects of the behaviour and biology (although they argued it may have been related to the recently split Cnemophilidae birds of paradise). More recent studies have refuted the relationship with the whipbirds and jewel-babblers, and instead consistently shown a relationship as the sister taxa to a group of families including the drongos, fantails, monarch flycatchers, Corcoracidae (the white-winged chough and apostlebird of Australia) and the birds of paradise again. The fact that the melampittas do not closely resemble these families (except the Corcoracidae and to a lesser extent the birds of paradise) may be due to adaptations to terrestrial living, compared to the other families which are mostly arboreal. Given the distinctiveness of the two melampittas it was suggested that the genus be placed its own family, and a new family, Melampittidae, was formally erected in 2014 by Richard Schodde and Leslie Christidis.

Most researchers also accepted that the both species are congeneric (are both in the same genus), although the two species do have a number of differences, particularly morphologically. After further research in 2014 Schodde and Christidis moved the greater melampitta into its own genus "Megalampitta". Although the name was created to invoke the Greek "mega" for large and "Melampitta" for the genus, the authors of the paper stated that it was a random collection of letters. It is possible that the two species may be separated into two families in the future. The lesser melampitta was once thought to have three subspecies, but these were distinguished by slight differences in measurements that were probably clinal, so both it and greater melampitta are now treated as being monotypic.

The melampittas are birds of the New Guinean rainforest and are generally montane species as well, with the range of the lesser melampitta reaching as high as , with a usual range of around . The greater melampitta is restricted to areas of rugged limestone karst with sinkholes that it apparently roosts and even nests in. In the Kumawa Mountains Jared Diamond found that that species inhabited a range of . Both species have a discontinuous distribution across New Guinea, and the greater melampitta is generally a rare bird that is seldom encountered, although this may because it lives in rarely-visited areas.

The two melampittas are pitta-like birds that have entirely black plumage and strong long legs and large strong feet. The wings are short and rounded, and the primary feathers are uniquely recurved and emarginated. The feathers of the forecrown are erectile. The lesser melampitta is around long and weighs around , whereas the greater melampitta is larger and considerably heavier at around in length and weighs . The bill of the greater melampitta is also larger than that of the lesser melampitta, which is hooked. There is some variation in the family in the tails. The greater melampitta has specially strengthened remiges and retriges, which are often worn, a possible adaptation to its habit of roosting in limestone sinkholes. Those sinkholes are too deep and narrow to fly directly out and the tail may be used to help cling to the side of the hole as it exits, in the fashion of a woodpecker. The tail of that species is long, whereas the tail of the lesser melampitta is short; in both species end of the tail is rounded. Both species move around on the ground by hopping.

The plumage of both sexes in both species are almost identical, with the only difference being iris colour in the lesser melampitta, the male having a red iris and the female a brown one. The plumage of juvenile lesser melampittas is the same as adults except they are brown on the lower body. Several researchers have noted that the plumage of juvenile greater melampittas resembles that of the hooded pitohui. Hooded pitohuis are unusual for birds in having a toxin, homobatrachotoxin, in their feathers and skin which can cause convulsions and death if consumed. The resemblance is probably an example of Batesian mimicry as the greater melampitta is not itself poisonous.

The calls of the two species are not similar. The call of the greater melampitta is a double or triple note, which is slurred and repeated monotonously, and is reminiscent of the black pitohui. The call of the lesser melampitta are either harsh buzzy notes or chirped whistles, both of which are repeated at intervals.

The greater melampitta is reported to be very shy and wary, but also inquisitive and may approach people sitting quietly to investigate. It is usually revealed by its calls, and can be very difficult to locate if it is not calling.

The melampittas are insectivores, although in the case of the greater melampitta, this statement is inference as their diet isn't described. All that is known is that it sticks to the ground and understory. The lesser melampitta feeds on insects as well as worms, snails, small frogs and even small fruit. It forages on the ground, probing through leaves by flipping them with its bill.

The breeding behaviour of the melampittas is only known in any detail for the lesser melampitta. All that is known of the breeding of the greater melampitta are reports from local people that it creates nests that are baskets of vines suspended in the limestone sinkholes that it roosts in. There is also some evidence that it may be territorial. The lesser melampitta is known to start nesting in the dry season and continue into the beginning of the wet. The nest is a closed dome shape constructed out of live green moss. The nest that has been described was found from the ground on the side of a tree fern, with nesting material woven into the bark and attached to dead fronds of the tree fern to secure it. The female lays a single chalky white and slightly speckled egg, which measures , and undertakes all the incubation duties. The incubation is quite long for a small passerine, lasting around 27 days, during which the male will feed the female. Both sexes feed the single chick, which is hatched covered in downy feathers. Unlike their relatives in the birds of paradise family, which feed their chicks by regurgitation, the parents feed the chick whole food that has not been swallowed. The chick takes up to 35 days to fledge, a long time for passerines.

Neither species of melampitta is believed to be threatened with extinction. The greater melampitta is not generally common across New Guinea, but appears to be relatively common in its preferred habitat type when that habitat is studied. The lesser melampitta is less restricted in its habitat requirements and is common over a large area. Because of this, and the fact that their habitat is not considered to be threatened and their populations are considered to be stable, both species are listed as least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.


</doc>
<doc id="12462236" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12462236" title="Black catbird">
Black catbird

The black catbird ("Melanoptila glabrirostris") is a songbird species in the monotypic genus Melanoptila, part of the family Mimidae. At in length and in mass, it is the smallest of the mimids. Sexes appear similar, with glossy black plumage, black legs and bill, and dark brownish eyes. The species is endemic to the Yucatán Peninsula, and is found as far south as Campeche, northern Guatemala and northern Belize. Although there are historical records from Honduras and the US state of Texas, the species is not now known to occur in either location. It is found at low elevations in semi-arid to humid habitats ranging from shrubland and abandoned farmland to woodland with thick understory, and is primarily sedentary.

Although it is a mimid, the black catbird is not known to imitate any other species. Its song is a mix of harsh notes and clear flute-like whistles, with the phrases repeated. It builds a cup nest in low bushes or trees, and lays two bluish eggs. It is threatened by habitat loss, and has been assessed as near threatened by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature.

When Philip Sclater first described the black catbird in 1858, from a specimen collected in Omoa Honduras, he assigned it to the monotypic genus "Melanoptila", which he created at the same time. At least one subsequent ornithologist assigned the species to the genus "Turdus", believing it to be a thrush, but most agreed with Sclater's assessment. DNA studies have since shown that it is most closely related to various endemic Antillean mimids and the gray catbird, and it is sometimes included with the latter species in the genus "Dumetella". Although some taxonomists place the birds from Mexico's Cozumel Island in a separate subspecies ("M. g. cozumelana"), most authorities do not feel that such distinction is warranted and the species is generally regarded as monotypic throughout its range.

The genus name "Melanoptila" is a compound word created from two Greek words: "melas", meaning "black" and "ptilon", meaning "plumage". This and the "black" of the bird's common name are a straightforward reference to its general appearance. The species name "glabrirostris" is a combination of two Latin words: "glaber", meaning "smooth or hairless" and "rostrum", meaning "beak". This is a reference to the very small rictal bristles which surround the black catbird's beak, in marked comparison to the prominent bristles found on the gray catbird.

At in length and in mass, the black catbird is the smallest of the mimids. It has short, rounded wings and a relatively long tail. The sexes are similar in appearance, though the male tends to be heavier. The plumage is glossy black with a purplish sheen overall, though the rectrices and primary and secondary coverts have a greenish sheen and the remiges are a duller blackish-brown color showing reduced sheen. The female is less glossy than the male, and juveniles are brownish-gray with mottling below. The legs are black. The bill, which is black and shorter than the head, has a generally straight culmen, decurved toward the tip. The iris is a dark reddish color in adults and gray in juveniles.

Although the black catbird is unlikely to be mistaken for any other mimid species, there are several other black birds — including the melodious blackbird, the bronzed cowbird and the giant cowbird — that occur within the same range and might conceivably cause confusion. All are birds of more open habitats. The melodious blackbird is larger and longer tailed; it has dark eyes and a stocky bill with an evenly curved culmen. The bronzed cowbird is thicker necked than is the catbird and has a bronzy, rather than purplish or greenish gloss to its plumage; its eye is bright red rather than dark red. The giant cowbird is considerably larger, and is relatively longer tailed and thicker necked than is the catbird.

The black catbird is endemic to the Yucatán Peninsula. It occurs as far south as the Mexican state of Campeche, northern Guatemala and northern Belize, and is found on the offshore islands of Cozumel, Isla Mujeres, Ambergris Caye, Caye Caulker, Lighthouse Reef and Glover's Reef. Although the type specimen of the bird was apparently collected in northwestern Honduras in 1855 or 1856, it has not been recorded in that country since, and must have been rare if it was ever there. Some authors feel that the specimen might have been mislabeled, and have come instead from northwestern "British Honduras" as Belize was then called. There is also a single specimen of a black catbird collected from Brownsville, Texas in 1892. Although obtained by a reportedly reputable collector, and accepted by the Texas State Records Committee, the origin of this specimen is a source of some controversy, and it has not been accepted by the American Birding Association or the American Ornithologists' Union.

The species is found at low elevations in semi-arid to humid areas in habitats ranging from scrubland and abandoned farmland to wood edge. It prefers areas with dense thickets, scrub or understory, and is uncommon in taller forest where the vegetation beneath the canopy is more open. Although it is largely sedentary, there may be some localized seasonal movements away from the drier northern parts of the Yucatán Peninsula in late summer to early winter.

Unlike many of its fellow mimids, the black catbird is not known to imitate any other species. Its song consists of repeated phrases of notes ranging from harsh and scratchy to warbled and flute-like, often interspersed with metallic clicking buzzes. It often sings from exposed perches. It has a variety of calls, including some which are quite similar to those of the gray catbird; these are variously described as a harsh "rriah", a nasal "chrrh" and a grating "tcheeu".

Although no specific studies have been done on the black catbird's feeding ecology, it is thought to be an omnivore, like its close relatives are. It is known to eat the fruits of "Bursera simaruba" and "Ficus cotinifolia", two deciduous trees found in the Neotropics.

Little is known about the breeding biology of the black catbird. Its breeding season appears to run from spring through summer; nest building was observed in Belize in early May, and small young were found in a nest in Mexico in mid-August. The nest, an open cup of twigs lined with rootlets and other fine material, is placed low in a dense bush or small tree. The female lays two greenish-blue eggs. However, details of nest-building, incubation times, parental care, fledging periods and number of broods are unknown.

The range of the black catbird is small and dwindling further due to habitat loss. In 2008, the world population was estimated to be less than 50,000 and decreasing. Due to the speed of its decline, which is reported to have been "precipitous" on Caye Caulker between 2003 and 2008, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature has assessed the species as near threatened. The late 20th century arrival of the shiny cowbird, a brood parasite, into the Yucatán may cause problems for the black catbird as (based on past host choices) the catbird may become a target of the cowbird.




</doc>
<doc id="12493539" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12493539" title="Jeffrey Pollack">
Jeffrey Pollack

Jeffrey Pollack (born circa 1965) is a sports business consultant and former Commissioner of the World Series of Poker. He was educated at Northwestern University, The Graduate School of Political Management and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Pollack later attended the six-week Advanced Management Program at Harvard University. After a brief career in politics, Pollack moved into the industry of sports business where he’s held executive roles with the NBA, NASCAR, and the World Series of Poker (WSOP).

Pollack was listed on the first of "Sports Business Journal's" "40 Under 40" and twice to The Sporting News 100. He has also won two Emmy Awards. Pollack is married, and resides in both Los Angeles and Las Vegas. His half-brother is Gary Bettman, the Commissioner of the National Hockey League.

In 2011, Pollack launched Federated Sports+Gaming (FS+G) and the Epic Poker League, where he served as Executive Chairman. Within a year, FS+G had filed bankruptcy.

In early 2015, Pollack was hired as special advisor to the San Diego Chargers.

On January 22, 2019 Pollack was named as the President & Chief Operating Officer of the XFL, coming from his previous role as the Chief Marketing & Strategy Officer and Special Advisor of the San Diego Chargers.

Pollack received his undergraduate degree in journalism from Northwestern University, in addition to two master's degrees. The first master's was from The Graduate School of Political Management and his second was in sports management from the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Pollack subsequently attended the six-week Advanced Management Program at Harvard University.

Initially, Pollack’s career led into politics. A summer internship with the American Jewish Congress prompted a one-year role with the AJC. He worked as a lobbyist on legislation that would permit religious headwear for active military personal in noncombat settings. Pollack then relocated to Los Angeles to work for Winner & Associates, a leading political public relations firm. He was assigned to consult the Major Baseball League during the labor strife in the early-1990s. The inception of Pollack’s career in sports business occurred in 1992 when he realized—while flying from LA to New York—that there was a niche to fill in the industry.

In February 1994, at the age of 29, Pollack founded "The Sports Business Daily". It was the first daily trade publication for the sports industry. Pollack modelled the concept for the Sports Business Daily on the political daily "The Hotline". Its primary goal was to “cover the coverage,” or aggregate and organize daily news that was related to business of sports Doug Bailey, "The Hotline's" founder, was Jeffrey Pollack's partner in this venture. Pollack later noted that Bailey’s influence was “absolutely critical” to the initial success of The Daily. "The Sports Business Daily" originally occupied 3 rooms in the same building and initially hired "The Hotline's" Stephen Bilafer as the Editor-in-Chief. Fellow editor Chuck Todd followed Bilafer in the move from "The Hotline" to "The Daily". Bilafer would go on to note that it would have been a “deal breaker” had Todd not been permitted to join him at the SBD. After assembling a small editorial, marketing and sales team, "The Sports Business Daily" launched on September 12, 1994 amidst the “perfect storm of business and sports stories.” With Pollack as its president and publisher, "The Sports Business Daily" garnered a strong reputation among to decision-makers in the industry. When the time "The Sports Business Daily" was sold in 1996, it was a "recognized leader in sports industry news and is relied upon by top sports, entertainment, financial, and media executives worldwide." At the time of the sale, "The Sports Business Daily" provided the content for ESPN's SportsZone "Industry Insider."

Pollack's career with the NBA began when he was hired as a communications consultant for the NBA during its collective bargaining arrangement. Pollack consulted with NBA commissioner David Stern and helped design the relaunch strategy after the NBA lockout in the 1998–99 season. As a result of these activities, Pollack was hired as the Vice President of Marketing & Corporate Communications for the NBA. He remained with the league until 2000.

After a brief stint with a sports website, which Pollack once termed his “reverse MBA,” he was hired as the Managing Director of Broadcasting and New Media for NASCAR Digital Entertainment. NASCAR had recently consolidated its media rights and the brand reoriented the way it presented itself to consumer product and global media companies. Pollack helped develop NASCAR's television partnerships with Fox, FX, NBC and TNT and it was under his guidance that NASCAR grew into a major sporting event. At the time, it rose to the “second-most-watched sports franchise on cable TV, behind football." Pollack also encouraged NASCAR to use advanced media and technologies. One of his central innovations was to create an immersive experience for viewers at home. He helped developed the cable TV program, NASCAR iN Car, which involved mounting cameras that could capture the race from inside the cars.[15] Pollack won two Emmy Awards, as a result: the Primetime Emmy for Outstanding Achievement in Interactive Television Programming and a Sports Emmy for Outstanding Innovative Technical Achievement. He was also the first to receive the Billboard Digital Entertainment Award for the best interactive television programming.

In 2005, Harrah's Casino hired Pollack as its Vice President of Marketing. While he was officially responsible for Harrah’s sports ventures, which included boxing and motor sports, Pollack stated that, "My top priority is to grow the popularity of the World Series of Poker … It is already the No. 1 brand in poker, but we're going to make it even stronger through world-class media partnerships, strategic marketing alliances and superior customer service." By most accounts, he succeeded doing just this. Pollack introduced a range of changes into the WSOP’s media relations, player relations, tournament structure and schedule, and expanded into international markets.

His first responsibility with Harrah's was the 2005 World Series of Poker. Poker players' first impression of him centered on the 2005 Tournament of Champions (ToC). The ToC was hyped as a $2.5 million freeroll for which players had to qualify. In 2005, the ToC was sponsored by Pepsi, who was about to start an advertising campaign involving Doyle Brunson, Johnny Chan, and Phil Hellmuth. Pepsi insisted that its three spokesmen take part in the ToC and the WSOP consented. The other players objected that three corporate exemptions were granted at the last moment. Pollack was heavily criticized, but addressed the criticism head on and ensured that a similar misstep would never occur.

On January 13, 2006 he was promoted to Commissioner of the WSOP. One of his first actions as the commissioner was to work towards avoiding the criticism of the ToC. Pollack started meeting with a group of professional poker players in a monthly council. While the council did not have formal decision-making authority, Pollack stated in 2009 that “we haven’t made a meaningful decision about event schedules, structures, rules, et cetera, since 2006 without the input of the Players Advisory Council.”

Pollack believed that the success of the WSOP was not determined based upon the number of participants every year, but rather upon the players' experiences. For example, in 2007 the WSOP flattened its award structure. The cash awards were distributed more evenly so that people who went out earlier earned more money, while those who made it to the final table won less.

In an effort to reduce complaints about marked cards, the WSOP entered into a partnership with United States Playing Card Company (USPC). USPC introduced a new "Poker Peek" cards as the official card of the WSOP. New decks were introduced every day at every table. In 2006, Copag provided playing cards that became creased as the events endured, resulting in cards that were essentially marked.

The training of WSOP dealers was also heavily criticized in past tournaments. In an effort to forestall this criticism, the WSOP began intensive training for dealers as early as March 2007 for over 300 dealers. The training included staff and supervisory training. Part of the reason for this additional training was to prevent a repeat of the "extra chips" that materialized during 2006's main event. During the 2006 main event, the tournament finished with more chips than normal chip upgrading would have led to. Another effort to reduce that risk was the introduction of special chips exclusively for the main event.

In 2008, Pollack revised the tournament’s schedule and introduced a four-month break after the finalists had been determined in July. The hiatus was intended to help build suspense and allow the finalists to promote themselves as “poker ambassadors” before play resumed in November. The final two days of play were edited down to a two-hour show and broadcast on ESPN. The resulting finalists were given the nickname "The November Nine."

Pollack also led the tournament’s international expansion with WSOP Europe. The first tournament was held in London and hosted by London Clubs International at three casinos: the Fifty, Leicester Square and the Sportsman. Pollack insisted, “The World Series of Poker Europe will have a unique identity, style and flair, but will remain true to the 38-year tradition and heritage of the WSOP.” The WSOPE remained in England from 2007-2010, was hosted in France from 2010-2013 and is expected to be hosted in Berlin in 2015.

Pollack is known for his aggressive marketing. He’s noted on several occasions that he’s taken the strategies of the major sports brands, i.e. NASCAR, the NBA, and the NFL, and extracted the best practices to grow the WSOP. He has asserted, moreover, that “[s]ports marketing fundamentally is about the selling of hope. Fans have the hope of their favorite team trading for the right player, drafting the right player, winning a game, winning the season, winning the world championship.” And furthermore that, “[t]he World Series of Poker offers a brand of hope that is infinitely more accessible” insofar as anyone can enter the tournament and have a chance to play at the final table.

After becoming the Commissioner of the WSOP, he negotiated partnerships with ESPN, Sirius radio, Glu Mobile, Bluff Media, AOL, and Betfair. He also arranged sponsorships with Miller Brewing Company, Planters and Hershey’s. In 2006, Card Player Media provided hand-by-hand reporting, streamed player interviews, gave player recaps and displayed real-time chip count on its website. Once Pollack was asked if professional poker players would start wearing uniforms covered with ads, similar to NASCAR. He responded, "That is not out of the realm of possibility. As long as they stick to the guidelines, players will be allowed to seek endorsement deals and advertise as they wish."

Pollack believed that the strength in the WSOP lies in its tradition and legacy. He wanted to do more to honor the WSOP's past champions, "I want to bring our past, our history, and our DNA along for the ride."

Pollack was generally received well by the players, although he did have dissenters. Daniel Negreanu was impressed with his first meeting with Pollack, noting that professional poker is "a unique situation, as with the NBA players are being paid, while the poker players actually put up their own money." However, by 2012, Negreanu had changed his opinion of Pollack, crediting WSOP Vice President Ty Stewart and others for the event's growth and popularity.

On the other hand, Pollack’s emphasis on the player’s experience along with his effectiveness in growing the WSOP cast him in a good light. This can be seen most clearly through the extent of support he received when he announced his resignation as commissioner. One commentator declared, “the news hit the poker world … like a ton of bricks,” and that his tenure in the role “may be unmatched.” Well-known players like Phil Hellmuth, Peter Eastgate and Barry Goldstein expressed their esteem for Pollack.

On November 13, 2009, Pollack announced on his Twitter feed that he was resigning as Commissioner. In a separate statement, he commented, “Everything I set out to accomplish in 2005, I think I have accomplished. The World Series of Poker is bigger than ever before. The brand is in a strong position and the player experience is better than it's ever been.” Pollock did not elaborate on any subsequent career opportunities, but said, "I'm going to take a moment to pause and reflect, then will think things through and make some decisions,"

In January 2011, Pollack and Annie Duke announced the launch of Federated Sports+Gaming (FS+G), the parent company for the Epic Poker League. Duke served as the league’s commissioner. The EPL was designed to showcase the best players in the world and elevate them to the status of leading figures akin to icons in other sports. There was to be 200 players admitted and ranked by a system “driven by mathematics and proven historic achievement.” Pollack stated, “I’ve long believed that the top professional poker players create enormous value for the industry and are skilled in a way that is worthy of star treatment,” and moreover that, “[o]ur new league will celebrate poker professionals like never before and provide a tournament experience at the Palms that is first-class at every turn.” The first season of the EPL was slated to include four “rake-free” $20,000 Main Events, in addition to a $1 million Championship Event. The EPL had negotiated 20 hours of television programming. Seven of which were to be aired on CBS and the remaining 13 on Discovery Communications’ Velocity network.

From early on, industry insiders questioned the company's business model. By February 2012, after only holding three events, FS+G had filed bankruptcy, generating just over $38,000 in revenue and accumulating up to $7 million in debt.

In early 2015, the San Diego Chargers hired Pollack as a special advisor to the team’s Chair and President Dean Spanos. Pollack will serve to consult the team on both future revenue growth and the development of a new stadium. Pollock aided Chargers Special Council Mark Fabiani in the hiring and identifying of Manica, the architects tasked with designing a stadium in Carson, California.


</doc>
<doc id="12498738" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12498738" title="Artabanes">
Artabanes

Artabanes (, Armenian: "Artawan", from Parthian "Artawân", "fl." 538–554) was an East Roman (Byzantine) general of Armenian origin who served under Justinian I (r. 527–565). Initially a rebel against Byzantine authority, he fled to the Sassanid Persians but soon returned to Byzantine allegiance. He served in Africa, where he won great fame by killing the rebel general Guntharic and restoring the province to imperial allegiance. He became engaged to Justinian's niece Praejecta, but did not eventually marry her due to the opposition of the Empress Theodora. Recalled to Constantinople, he became involved in a failed conspiracy against Justinian in 548/549, but was not severely punished after its revelation. He was soon pardoned and sent to Italy to fight in the Gothic War, where he participated in the decisive Byzantine victory at Casilinum.

Artabanes was a descendant of the royal Armenian Arsacid line, a branch of which at the time was recognized as autonomous local princes in the eastern fringes of the Eastern Roman Empire. His father was named John, and he had a brother also named John.

In 538/539, Artabanes, at the time apparently still a young man, took part in the Armenian conspiracy against Acacius, the proconsul of First Armenia, whose heavy taxes and cruel behaviour was greatly resented. Artabanes himself killed Acacius. Shortly after, in a skirmish between the rebels and the Byzantine army at Oenochalacon, Artabanes may have killed the Byzantine general Sittas, sent by Justinian to quell the rebellion (Procopius supplies two accounts, one attributing Sittas's death to Artabanes and another to an otherwise unknown Armenian named Solomon). Artabanes's father tried to negotiate a settlement with Sittas' successor, Bouzes, but was murdered by the latter. This act forced Artabanes and his followers to seek the aid of the Sassanid Persian ruler, Khosrau I (r. 531–579). Crossing over to Persian territory, over the next few years Artabanes and those who followed him took part in Khosrau's campaigns against the Byzantines.

At some time around 544, perhaps as early as 542, Artabanes, his brother John and several other Armenians deserted back to the Byzantines.
Along with his brother, Artabanes was placed in command of a small Armenian contingent and sent to Africa in spring 545 under the senator Areobindus. There, the Byzantines were engaged in a protracted war with the rebellious Moorish tribes. Shortly after their arrival, John died in battle at Sicca Veneria with the rebel forces of the renegade Stotzas. Artabanes and his men remained loyal to Areobindus during the rebellion of the "dux Numidiae" Guntharic in late 545. Guntharic, allied with the Moorish chieftain Antalas, marched on Carthage and seized the city gates. At the urging of Artabanes and others, Areobindus decided to confront the rebel. The two armies appeared evenly matched, until Areobindus took fright and fled to a monastery seeking sanctuary. Thereupon the troops loyal to him also fled, and the city fell to Guntharic.

Areobindus was murdered by Guntharic, but Artabanes secured guarantees of his safety and pledged himself to Guntharic's service. In secret, however, he began planning to overthrow him. Soon after, Artabanes was entrusted, alongside John and Ulitheus, with an expedition against Antalas's Moors. He marched south, along with an allied Moorish contingent under Cutzinas. Antalas's men fled before him, but Artabanes did not pursue them and turned back. According to Procopius, he considered leading his men to join the loyalist imperial garrison that held out at Hadrumetum under Marcentius, but decided to return to Carthage and go on with his plan to assassinate Guntharic. Artabanes kept his plan in absolute secrecy for a long time, confiding only with his two closest Armenian friends: even his Armenian unit of hand-picked and completely loyal veteran soldiers was not aware of it until the very last moment. Such a perfect concealment was achieved, not least thanks to the fact that during both planning and implementation stages of this assassination the communication between the exclusively Armenian conspirators was in their mother tongue, an incomprehensible language for other ethnic elements of the imperial army in Africa.

Upon his return to Carthage, he justified his decision to turn back by insisting that the entire army was needed to quell the insurgents, and urged Guntharic to set forth himself. At the same time, he conspired with his nephew, Gregory, and a few other of his Armenian bodyguards to murder the usurper (although Corippus suggests that it was the praetorian prefect Athanasius who was the real mastermind of the plot). On the eve of the army's departure in early May, Guntharic hosted a great banquet, and invited Artabanes and Athanasius to share the same couch, a mark of honour. Suddenly, during the banquet, Artabanes' Armenians fell upon Guntharic's bodyguards, while Artabanes himself allegedly landed the killing blow on Guntharic.

This deed won him great honour and fame: Praejecta, the widow of Areobindus and niece of Justinian, whom Guntharic was planning to marry, gave him a rich reward, while the emperor confirmed him as "magister militum" of Africa. Despite being already married to a relative of his, Artabanes eventually became engaged with Praejecta. He sent her back to Constantinople and himself asked from Justinian to be recalled from Africa, so that they could marry.

Soon afterwards, Artabanes was indeed recalled to Constantinople, replaced in Africa by John Troglita. He received numerous honours from Justinian, and was named "magister militum praesentalis", "comes foederatorum" and honorary consul. Despite these and his great popularity however, he was unable to achieve his ambition of marrying Praejecta: his wife came to the imperial capital and presented her case to the Empress Theodora. The Empress compelled Artabanes to retain his wife, and not until after Theodora's death in 548 was the Armenian general able to divorce himself. By then, however, Praejecta had already been remarried.

Irritated over this affair, shortly after Theodora's death (late 548/early 549) he became involved in the so-called "Armenian Plot" or "Conspiracy of Artabanes". The real instigator, however, was a relative of his, named Arsaces, who proposed to assassinate Justinian, and elevate Justinian's cousin Germanus on the throne instead. The conspirators thought Germanus amenable to their plans, since he had been dissatisfied with Justinian's meddling in the settling of the will of his recently deceased brother Boraides, which had initially named Germanus as the major beneficiary as opposed to the former's sole daughter. The conspirators approached Germanus's son Justin first, and revealed to him the plot. Immediately, he informed his father, and he in turn informed the "comes excubitorum" Marcellus. In order to find out more of their intentions, Germanus met the conspirators in person, while a trusted aide of Marcellus was concealed nearby and listened in. Although Marcellus hesitated to inform Justinian without further proof, eventually he revealed the conspiracy to the emperor. Justinian ordered the conspirators imprisoned and questioned, but they were otherwise treated remarkably leniently. Artabanes was stripped of his offices and confined to the palace under guard, but was soon pardoned.

In 550, Artabanes was appointed "magister militum per Thracias" and sent to replace the aged senator Liberius in command of an expedition under way against Sicily, which had recently been overrun by the Ostrogoth king Totila. Artabanes failed to catch up with the expedition before it sailed for Sicily, and his own fleet was driven back and scattered by severe storms in the Ionian Sea. Eventually he arrived in Sicily and took command of the Byzantine forces there. He besieged the Gothic garrisons left behind by Totila after he left the island and soon forced them to surrender. Over the next two years, he remained in Sicily. According to Procopius, the inhabitants of the mainland city of Croton, which was being besieged by the Goths, repeatedly sent to him for help, but he did nothing.

In 553, he crossed over into mainland Italy, where he joined the army of Narses as one of its generals. Facing the Frankish invasion in the summer of 553, Narses ordered Artabanes and other generals to occupy the passes of the Apennines and harass the enemy advance; after a Byzantine contingent was defeated at Parma, however, the other Byzantine generals withdrew to Faventia, until an envoy from Narses persuaded them to move up to the area of Parma again. In 554, Artabanes was stationed at Pisaurum with Byzantine and Hunnic troops. At Fanum, he ambushed and defeated the advance guard of the Frankish army of Leutharis, which was returning from a plundering expedition into southern Italy and heading back to Gaul. Most of the Franks fell, and in the confusion, the many captives escaped, taking much of the Franks' booty with them. Artabanes did not engage the main body of Leutharis' army however, since it far outnumbered his own force. He then marched south and joined Narses's main force, accompanying him in his campaign against the remaining Frankish army under Butilinus. At the decisive Byzantine victory in the Battle of Casilinum, along with Valerian, he commanded the cavalry in the Byzantine left flank. They were concealed in the woods, as part of Narses's stratagem to attack the Franks in the rear and encircle them. Nothing further is known of him after that.



</doc>
<doc id="12502446" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12502446" title="Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II">
Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II

The Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II is a single-seat, twin turbofan engine, straight wing jet aircraft developed by Fairchild-Republic for the United States Air Force (USAF). It is commonly referred to by the nicknames "Warthog" or "Hog", although the A-10's official name comes from the Republic P-47 Thunderbolt, a World War II fighter-bomber effective at attacking ground targets. The A-10 was designed for close air support (CAS) of friendly ground troops, attacking armored vehicles and tanks, and providing quick-action support against enemy ground forces. It entered service in 1976 and is the only production-built aircraft that has served in the USAF that was designed solely for CAS. Its secondary mission is to provide forward air controller – airborne (FAC-A) support, by directing other aircraft in attacks on ground targets. Aircraft used primarily in this role are designated OA-10.

The A-10 was intended to improve on the performance of the A-1 Skyraider and its lesser firepower. The A-10 was designed around the 30 mm GAU-8 Avenger rotary cannon. Its airframe was designed for durability, with measures such as of titanium armor to protect the cockpit and aircraft systems, enabling it to absorb a significant amount of damage and continue flying. Its short takeoff and landing capability permits operation from airstrips close to the front lines, and its simple design enables maintenance with minimal facilities. The A-10 served in the Gulf War (Operation Desert Storm), the American led intervention against Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, where the A-10 distinguished itself. The A-10 also participated in other conflicts such as in Grenada, the Balkans, Afghanistan, Iraq, and against Islamic State in the Middle East.

The A-10A single-seat variant was the only version produced, though one pre-production airframe was modified into the YA-10B twin-seat prototype to test an all-weather night capable version. In 2005, a program was started to upgrade remaining A-10A aircraft to the A-10C configuration, with modern avionics for use with precision weaponry. The U.S. Air Force had stated the F-35 would replace the A-10 as it entered service, but this remains highly contentious within the USAF and in political circles. With a variety of upgrades and wing replacements, the A-10's service life can be extended to 2040; the service has no planned retirement date as of June 2017.

Post-World War II development of conventionally armed attack aircraft in the United States had stagnated. Design efforts for tactical aircraft focused on the delivery of nuclear weapons using high-speed designs like the F-101 Voodoo and F-105 Thunderchief. Designs concentrating on conventional weapons had been largely ignored, leaving their entry into the Vietnam War led by the Korean War-era Douglas A-1 Skyraider. While a capable aircraft for its era, with a relatively large payload and long loiter times, the propeller-driven design was also relatively slow and vulnerable to ground fire. The U.S. Air Force and Marine Corps lost 266 A-1s in action in Vietnam, largely from small arms fire. The A-1 Skyraider also had poor firepower.

The lack of modern conventional attack capability prompted calls for a specialized attack aircraft. On 7 June 1961, Secretary of Defense McNamara ordered the USAF to develop two tactical aircraft, one for the long-range strike and interdictor role, and the other focusing on the fighter-bomber mission. The former became the Tactical Fighter Experimental, or TFX, which emerged as the F-111, while the second was filled by a version of the U.S. Navy's F-4 Phantom II. While the Phantom went on to be one of the most successful fighter designs of the 1960s, and proved to be a capable fighter-bomber, its lack of loiter time was a major problem, and to a lesser extent, its poor low-speed performance. It was also expensive to buy and operate, with a flyaway cost of $2 million in FY1965 ($ million today), and operational costs over $900 per hour ($ per hour today).

After a broad review of its tactical force structure, the U.S. Air Force decided to adopt a low-cost aircraft to supplement the F-4 and F-111. It first focused on the Northrop F-5, which had air-to-air capability. A 1965 cost-effectiveness study shifted the focus from the F-5 to the less expensive LTV A-7D, and a contract was awarded. However, this aircraft doubled in cost with demands for an upgraded engine and new avionics.

During this period, the United States Army had been introducing the UH-1 Iroquois into service. First used in its intended role as a transport, it was soon modified in the field to carry more machine guns in what became known as the helicopter gunship role. This proved effective against the lightly armed enemy, and new gun and rocket pods were added. Soon the AH-1 Cobra was introduced. This was an attack helicopter armed with long-range BGM-71 TOW missiles able to destroy tanks from outside the range of defensive fire. The helicopter was effective, and prompted the U.S. military to change its defensive strategy in Europe by blunting any Warsaw Pact advance with anti-tank helicopters instead of the tactical nuclear weapons that had been the basis for NATO's battle plans since the 1950s.

The Cobra was a quickly made helicopter based on the UH-1 Iroquois, though, and in the late 1960s the U.S. Army was designing the Lockheed AH-56 Cheyenne, a much more capable attack aircraft with greater speed. These developments worried the USAF, which saw the anti-tank helicopter overtaking its nuclear-armed tactical aircraft as the primary anti-armor force in Europe. A 1966 Air Force study of existing close air support (CAS) capabilities revealed gaps in the escort and fire suppression roles, which the Cheyenne could fill. The study concluded that the service should acquire a simple, inexpensive, dedicated CAS aircraft at least as capable as the A-1, and that it should develop doctrine, tactics, and procedures for such aircraft to accomplish the missions for which the attack helicopters were provided.

On 8 September 1966, General John P. McConnell, Chief of Staff of the USAF, ordered that a specialized CAS aircraft be designed, developed, and obtained. On 22 December, a Requirements Action Directive was issued for the A-X CAS airplane, and the Attack Experimental (A-X) program office was formed. On 6 March 1967, the Air Force released a request for information to 21 defense contractors for the A-X. The objective was to create a design study for a low-cost attack aircraft. In 1969, the Secretary of the Air Force asked Pierre Sprey to write the detailed specifications for the proposed A-X project; Sprey's initial involvement was kept secret due to his earlier controversial involvement in the F-X project. Sprey's discussions with Skyraider pilots operating in Vietnam and analysis of aircraft used in the role indicated the ideal aircraft should have long loiter time, low-speed maneuverability, massive cannon firepower, and extreme survivability; possessing the best elements of the Ilyushin Il-2, Henschel Hs 129, and Skyraider. The specifications also demanded that each aircraft cost less than $3 million (equivalent to $ million today). Sprey required that the biography of World War II Luftwaffe attack pilot Hans-Ulrich Rudel be read by people on the A-X program.

In May 1970, the USAF issued a modified, more detailed request for proposals for the aircraft. The threat of Soviet armored forces and all-weather attack operations had become more serious. The requirements now included that the aircraft would be designed specifically for the 30 mm rotary cannon. The RFP also specified a maximum speed of , takeoff distance of , external load of , mission radius, and a unit cost of US$1.4 million ($ million today). The A-X would be the first USAF aircraft designed exclusively for close air support. During this time, a separate RFP was released for A-X's 30 mm cannon with requirements for a high rate of fire (4,000 round per minute) and a high muzzle velocity. Six companies submitted aircraft proposals, with Northrop and Fairchild Republic selected to build prototypes: the YA-9A and YA-10A, respectively. General Electric and Philco-Ford were selected to build and test GAU-8 cannon prototypes.

Two YA-10 prototypes were built in the Republic factory in Farmingdale, New York, and first flew on 10 May 1972 by pilot Howard "Sam" Nelson. Production A-10s were built by Fairchild in Hagerstown, Maryland. After trials and a fly-off against the YA-9, on 18 January 1973, the USAF announced the YA-10's selection for production. General Electric was selected to build the GAU-8 cannon in June 1973. The YA-10 had an additional fly-off in 1974 against the Ling-Temco-Vought A-7D Corsair II, the principal USAF attack aircraft at the time, to prove the need for a new attack aircraft. The first production A-10 flew in October 1975, and deliveries commenced in March 1976.

One experimental two-seat A-10 Night Adverse Weather (N/AW) version was built by converting an A-10A. The N/AW was developed by Fairchild from the first Demonstration Testing and Evaluation (DT&E) A-10 for consideration by the USAF. It included a second seat for a weapons system officer responsible for electronic countermeasures (ECM), navigation and target acquisition. The N/AW version did not interest the USAF or export customers. The two-seat trainer version was ordered by the Air Force in 1981, but funding was canceled by U.S. Congress and the jet was not produced. The only two-seat A-10 built now resides at Edwards Air Force Base's Flight Test Center Museum.

On 10 February 1976, Deputy Secretary of Defense Bill Clements authorized full-rate production, with the first A-10 being accepted by the Air Force Tactical Air Command on 30 March 1976. Production continued and reached a peak rate of 13 aircraft per month. By 1984, 715 airplanes, including two prototypes and six development aircraft, had been delivered.

When A-10 full-rate production was first authorized the aircraft's planned service life was 6,000 hours. A small reinforcement to the design was quickly adopted when the A-10 failed initial fatigue testing at 80% of testing; with the fix, the A-10 passed the fatigue tests, and 8,000-flight-hour service lives were becoming common at the time, so fatigue testing of the A-10 continued with a new 8,000-hour target. Fatigue testing for the new target quickly discovered serious cracks at Wing Station 23 (WS23) where the outboard portions of the wings are joined to the fuselage. The first production change was to add cold working at WS23 to address this problem. Soon after that, the Air Force determined that the real-world A-10 fleet fatigue was more harsh than estimated, forcing them to change their fatigue testing, introducing "spectrum 3" equivalent flight-hour testing.

Spectrum 3 fatigue testing started in 1979. This round of testing quickly determined that more drastic reinforcement would be needed. The second change in production, starting with aircraft #442, was to increase the thickness of the lower skin on the outer wing panels. A tech order was issued to retrofit the "thick skin" to the whole fleet, but the tech order was rescinded after roughly 242 planes, leaving about 200 planes with the original "thin skin". Starting with aircraft #530, cold working at WS0 was performed, and this retrofit was performed on earlier aircraft. A fourth, even more drastic change was initiated with aircraft #582, again to address the problems discovered with spectrum 3 testing. This change increased the thickness on the lower skin on the center wing panel, but it required modifications to the lower spar caps to accommodate the thicker skin. The Air Force determined that it was not economically feasible to retrofit earlier planes with this modification.

The A-10 has received many upgrades since entering service. In 1978, the A-10 received the Pave Penny laser receiver pod, which receives reflected laser radiation from laser designators to allow the aircraft to deliver laser guided munitions. The Pave Penny pod is carried on a pylon mounted below the right side of the cockpit and has a clear view of the ground. In 1980, the A-10 began receiving an inertial navigation system.

In the early 1990s, the A-10 began to receive the Low-Altitude Safety and Targeting Enhancement (LASTE) upgrade, which provided computerized weapon-aiming equipment, an autopilot, and a ground-collision warning system. In 1999, aircraft began receiving Global Positioning System navigation systems and a multi-function display. The LASTE system was upgraded with Integrated Flight & Fire Control Computers (IFFCC).

Proposed further upgrades included integrated combat search and rescue locator systems and improved early warning and anti-jam self-protection systems, and the Air Force recognized that the A-10's engine power was sub-optimal and had been planning to replace them with more powerful engines since at least 2001 at an estimated cost of $2 billion.

In 1987, Grumman Aerospace took over support for the A-10 program. In 1993, Grumman updated the damage tolerance assessment and Force Structural Maintenance Plan and Damage Threat Assessment. Over the next few years, problems with wing structure fatigue, first noticed in production years earlier, began to come to the fore. The process of implementing the maintenance plan was greatly delayed by the base realignment and closure commission (BRAC), which led to 80% of the original workforce being let go.

During inspections in 1995 and 1996, cracks at the WS23 location were found on many aircraft, most of them in line with updated predictions from 1993. However, two of these were classified as "near-critical" size, well beyond predictions. In August 1998, Grumman produced a new plan to address these issues and increase life span to 16,000 hours. This resulted in the "HOG UP" program, which commenced in 1999. Over time, additional aspects were added to HOG UP, including new fuel bladders, changes to the flight control system, and inspections of the engine nacelles. In 2001, the cracks were reclassified as "critical", which meant they were considered repairs and not upgrades, which allowed bypassing normal acquisition channels for more rapid implementation.

An independent review of the HOG UP program at this point concluded that the data on which the wing upgrade relied could no longer be trusted. This independent review was presented in September 2003. Shortly thereafter, fatigue testing on a test wing failed prematurely and also mounting problems with wings failing in-service inspections at an increasing rate became apparent. The Air Force estimated that they would run out of wings by 2011. Of the plans explored, replacing the wings with new ones was the least expensive, with an initial cost of $741 million, and a total cost of $1.72 billion over the life of the program.
In 2005, a business case was developed with three options to extend the life of the fleet. The first two options involved expanding the service life extension program (SLEP) at a cost of $4.6 billion and $3.16 billion, respectively. The third option, worth $1.72 billion, was to build 242 new wings and avoid the cost of expanding the SLEP. In 2006, option 3 was chosen and Boeing won the contract. The base contract is for 117 wings with options for 125 additional wings. In 2013, the Air Force exercised a portion of the option to add 56 wings, putting 173 wings on order with options remaining for 69 additional wings. In November 2011, two A-10s flew with the new wings fitted. The new wings improved mission readiness, decreased maintenance costs, and allowed the A-10 to be operated up to 2035 if necessary. The rewinging effort was organized under the thick-skin urgent spares kitting program.

In 2014, as part of plans to retire the A-10, the USAF considered halting the wing replacement program to save an additional $500 million; however, by May 2015 the re-winging program was too far into the contract to be financially efficient to cancel. Boeing stated in February 2016 that the A-10 fleet with the new TUSK wings could operate to 2040.

In 2005, the entire fleet of 356 A-10 and OA-10 aircraft began receiving the Precision Engagement upgrades including an improved fire control system (FCS), electronic countermeasures (ECM), and smart bomb targeting. The aircraft receiving this upgrade were redesignated A-10C. The Government Accounting Office in 2007 estimated the cost of upgrading, refurbishing, and service life extension plans for the A-10 force to total $2.25 billion through 2013. In July 2010, the USAF issued Raytheon a contract to integrate a Helmet Mounted Integrated Targeting (HMIT) system into the A-10C. The Air Force Material Command's Ogden Air Logistics Center at Hill AFB, Utah completed work on its 100th A-10 precision engagement upgrade in January 2008. The final aircraft was upgraded to A-10C configuration in June 2011. The aircraft also received all-weather combat capability, and a Hand-on-Throttle-and-Stick configuration mixing the F-16's flight stick with the F-15's throttle. Other changes included two multifunction displays, a modern communications suite including a Link-16 radio and SATCOM. The LASTE system was replaced with the integrated flight and fire control computer (IFFCC) included in the PE upgrade.

Throughout its life, the platform's software has been upgraded several times, and although these upgrades were due to be stopped as part of plans to retire the A-10 in February 2014, Secretary of the Air Force Deborah Lee James ordered that the latest upgrade, designated Suite 8, continue in response to Congressional pressure. Suite 8 software includes IFF Mode 5, which modernizes the ability to identify the A-10 to friendly units. Additionally, the Pave Penny pods and pylons are being removed as their receive-only capability has been replaced by the AN/AAQ-28(V)4 LITENING AT targeting pods or Sniper XR targeting pod, which both have laser designators and laser rangefinders.

In 2012, Air Combat Command requested the testing of a external fuel tank which would extend the A-10's loitering time by 45–60 minutes; flight testing of such a tank had been conducted in 1997, but did not involve combat evaluation. Over 30 flight tests were conducted by the 40th Flight Test Squadron to gather data on the aircraft's handling characteristics and performance across different load configurations. It was reported that the tank slightly reduced stability in the yaw axis, but there was no decrease in aircraft tracking performance.

The A-10 has a cantilever low-wing monoplane wing with a wide chord. The aircraft has superior maneuverability at low speeds and altitude because of its large wing area, low wing aspect ratio, and large ailerons. The wing also allows short takeoffs and landings, permitting operations from primitive forward airfields near front lines. The aircraft can loiter for extended periods and operate under ceilings with visibility. It typically flies at a relatively low speed of , which makes it a better platform for the ground-attack role than fast fighter-bombers, which often have difficulty targeting small, slow-moving targets.

The leading edge of the wing has a honeycomb structure panel construction, providing strength with minimal weight; similar panels cover the flap shrouds, elevators, rudders and sections of the fins. The skin panels are integral with the stringers and are fabricated using computer-controlled machining, reducing production time and cost. Combat experience has shown that this type of panel is more resistant to damage. The skin is not load-bearing, so damaged skin sections can be easily replaced in the field, with makeshift materials if necessary. The ailerons are at the far ends of the wings for greater rolling moment and have two distinguishing features: The ailerons are larger than is typical, almost 50 percent of the wingspan, providing improved control even at slow speeds; the aileron is also split, making it a deceleron.

The A-10 is designed to be refueled, rearmed, and serviced with minimal equipment. Its simple design enables maintenance at forward bases with limited facilities. An unusual feature is that many of the aircraft's parts are interchangeable between the left and right sides, including the engines, main landing gear, and vertical stabilizers. The sturdy landing gear, low-pressure tires and large, straight wings allow operation from short rough strips even with a heavy aircraft ordnance load, allowing the aircraft to operate from damaged airbases, flying from taxiways, or even straight roadway sections.
The front landing gear is offset to the aircraft's right to allow placement of the 30 mm cannon with its firing barrel along the centerline of the aircraft. During ground taxi, the offset front landing gear causes the A-10 to have dissimilar turning radii. Turning to the right on the ground takes less distance than turning left. The wheels of the main landing gear partially protrude from their nacelles when retracted, making gear-up belly landings easier to control and less damaging. All landing gears retract forward; if hydraulic power is lost, a combination of gravity and aerodynamic drag can lower and lock the gear in place.

The A-10 is exceptionally tough, being able to survive direct hits from armor-piercing and high-explosive projectiles up to 23 mm. It has double-redundant hydraulic flight systems, and a mechanical system as a back up if hydraulics are lost. Flight without hydraulic power uses the manual reversion control system; pitch and yaw control engages automatically, roll control is pilot-selected. In manual reversion mode, the A-10 is sufficiently controllable under favorable conditions to return to base, though control forces are greater than normal. The aircraft is designed to be able to fly with one engine, one half of the tail, one elevator, and half of a wing missing.

The cockpit and parts of the flight-control system are protected by of titanium aircraft armor, referred to as a "bathtub". The armor has been tested to withstand strikes from 23 mm cannon fire and some strikes from 57 mm rounds. It is made up of titanium plates with thicknesses from determined by a study of likely trajectories and deflection angles. The armor makes up almost six percent of the aircraft's empty weight. Any interior surface of the tub directly exposed to the pilot is covered by a multi-layer nylon spall shield to protect against shell fragmentation. The front windscreen and canopy are resistant to small arms fire.
The A-10's durability was demonstrated on 7 April 2003 when Captain Kim Campbell, while flying over Baghdad during the 2003 invasion of Iraq, suffered extensive flak damage. Iraqi fire damaged one of her engines and crippled the hydraulic system, requiring the aircraft's stabilizer and flight controls to be operated via the 'manual reversion mode.' Despite this damage, Campbell flew the aircraft for nearly an hour and landed safely.

The A-10 was intended to fly from forward air bases and semi-prepared runways with high risk of foreign object damage to the engines. The unusual location of the General Electric TF34-GE-100 turbofan engines decreases ingestion risk, and allows the engines to run while the aircraft is serviced and rearmed by ground crews, reducing turn-around time. The wings are also mounted closer to the ground, simplifying servicing and rearming operations. The heavy engines require strong supports: four bolts connect the engine pylons to the airframe. The engines' high 6:1 bypass ratio contributes to a relatively small infrared signature, and their position directs exhaust over the tailplanes further shielding it from detection by infrared homing surface-to-air missiles. The engines' exhaust nozzles are angled nine degrees below horizontal to cancel out the nose-down pitching moment that would otherwise be generated from being mounted above the aircraft's center of gravity and avoid the need to trim the control surfaces to prevent pitching.

To reduce the likelihood of damage to the A-10's fuel system, all four fuel tanks are located near the aircraft's center and are separated from the fuselage; projectiles would need to penetrate the aircraft's skin before reaching a tank's outer skin. Compromised fuel transfer lines self-seal; if damage exceeds a tank's self-sealing capabilities, check valves prevent fuel flowing into a compromised tank. Most fuel system components are inside the tanks so that fuel will not be lost due to component failure. The refueling system is also purged after use. Reticulated polyurethane foam lines both the inner and outer sides of the fuel tanks, retaining debris and restricting fuel spillage in the event of damage. The engines are shielded from the rest of the airframe by firewalls and fire extinguishing equipment. In the event of all four main tanks being lost, two self-sealing sump tanks contain fuel for 230 miles (370 km) of flight.

Although the A-10 can carry a considerable amount of munitions, its primary built-in weapon is the 30×173 mm GAU-8/A Avenger autocannon. One of the most powerful aircraft cannons ever flown, it fires large depleted uranium armor-piercing shells. The GAU-8 is a hydraulically driven seven-barrel rotary cannon designed specifically for the anti-tank role with a high rate of fire. The cannon's original design could be switched by the pilot to 2,100 or 4,200 rounds per minute; this was later changed to a fixed rate of 3,900 rounds per minute. The cannon takes about half a second to reach top speed, so 50 rounds are fired during the first second, 65 or 70 rounds per second thereafter. The gun is accurate enough to place 80 percent of its shots within a 40-foot (12.4 m) diameter circle from 4,000 feet (1,220 m) while in flight. The GAU-8 is optimized for a slant range of with the A-10 in a 30-degree dive.
The fuselage of the aircraft is built around the cannon. The GAU-8/A is mounted slightly to the port side; the barrel in the firing location is on the starboard side at the 9 o'clock position so it is aligned with the aircraft's centerline. The gun's 5-foot, 11.5-inch (1.816 m) ammunition drum can hold up to 1,350 rounds of 30 mm ammunition, but generally holds 1,174 rounds. To protect the GAU-8/A rounds from enemy fire, armor plates of differing thicknesses between the aircraft skin and the drum are designed to detonate incoming shells.

The AGM-65 Maverick air-to-surface missile is a commonly used munition for the A-10, targeted via electro-optical (TV-guided) or infrared. The Maverick allows target engagement at much greater ranges than the cannon, and thus less risk from anti-aircraft systems. During Desert Storm, in the absence of dedicated forward-looking infrared (FLIR) cameras for night vision, the Maverick's infrared camera was used for night missions as a "poor man's FLIR". Other weapons include cluster bombs and Hydra rocket pods. The A-10 is equipped to carry GPS and laser-guided bombs, such as the GBU-39 Small Diameter Bomb, Paveway series bombs, JDAM, WCMD and glide bomb AGM-154 Joint Standoff Weapon. A-10s usually fly with an ALQ-131 ECM pod under one wing and two AIM-9 Sidewinder air-to-air missiles under the other wing for self-defense.

The A-10 Precision Engagement Modification Program updated all A-10 and OA-10 aircraft in the fleet to the A-10C standard with a new flight computer, new glass cockpit displays and controls, two new color displays with moving map function, and an integrated digital stores management system.

Other funded improvements to the A-10 fleet include a new data link, the ability to employ smart weapons such as the Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM) and Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser, and the ability to carry an integrated targeting pod such as the Northrop Grumman LITENING or the Lockheed Martin Sniper Advanced Targeting Pod (ATP). Also included is the Remotely Operated Video Enhanced Receiver (ROVER) to provide sensor data to personnel on the ground.

Since the A-10 flies low to the ground and at subsonic speed, aircraft camouflage is important to make the aircraft more difficult to see. Many different types of paint schemes have been tried. These have included a "peanut scheme" of sand, yellow and field drab; black and white colors for winter operations and a tan, green and brown mixed pattern. Many A-10s also featured a false canopy painted in dark gray on the underside of the aircraft, just behind the gun. This form of automimicry is an attempt to confuse the enemy as to aircraft attitude and maneuver direction. Many A-10s feature nose art, such as shark mouth or warthog head features.

The two most common markings applied to the A-10 have been the European I woodland camouflage scheme and a two-tone gray scheme. The European woodland scheme was designed to minimize visibility from above, as the threat from hostile fighter aircraft was felt to outweigh that from ground-fire. It uses dark green, medium green and dark gray in order to blend in with the typical European forest terrain and was used from the 1980s to the early 1990s. Following the end of the Cold War, and based on experience during the 1991 Gulf War, the air-to-air threat was no longer seen to be as important as that from ground fire, and a new color scheme known as "Compass Ghost" was chosen to minimize visibility from below. This two-tone gray scheme has darker gray color on top, with the lighter gray on the underside of the aircraft, and started to be applied from the early 1990s.

The first unit to receive the A-10 Thunderbolt II was the 355th Tactical Training Wing, based at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Arizona, in March 1976. The first unit to achieve full combat-readiness was the 354th Tactical Fighter Wing at Myrtle Beach Air Force Base, South Carolina, in October 1977. Deployments of A-10As followed at bases both at home and abroad, including England AFB, Louisiana; Eielson AFB, Alaska; Osan Air Base, South Korea; and RAF Bentwaters/RAF Woodbridge, England. The 81st TFW of RAF Bentwaters/RAF Woodbridge operated rotating detachments of A-10s at four bases in Germany known as Forward Operating Locations (FOLs): Leipheim, Sembach Air Base, Nörvenich Air Base, and RAF Ahlhorn.

A-10s were initially an unwelcome addition to many in the Air Force. Most pilots switching to the A-10 did not want to because fighter pilots traditionally favored speed and appearance. In 1987, many A-10s were shifted to the forward air control (FAC) role and redesignated "OA-10". In the FAC role, the OA-10 is typically equipped with up to six pods of 2.75 inch (70 mm) Hydra rockets, usually with smoke or white phosphorus warheads used for target marking. OA-10s are physically unchanged and remain fully combat capable despite the redesignation.

A-10s of the 23rd TFW were deployed to Bridgetown, Barbados during Operation Urgent Fury, the American Invasion of Grenada. They provided air cover for the U.S. Marine Corps landings on the island of Carriacou in late October 1983, but did not fire weapons as Marines met no resistance.

The A-10 was used in combat for the first time during the Gulf War in 1991, destroying more than 900 Iraqi tanks, 2,000 other military vehicles and 1,200 artillery pieces. A-10s also shot down two Iraqi helicopters with the GAU-8 cannon. The first of these was shot down by Captain Robert Swain over Kuwait on 6 February 1991 for the A-10's first air-to-air victory. Four A-10s were shot down during the war, all by surface-to-air missiles. Another two battle-damaged A-10s and OA-10As returned to base but were written off, some sustaining additional damage in crash landings. The A-10 had a mission capable rate of 95.7 percent, flew 8,100 sorties, and launched 90 percent of the AGM-65 Maverick missiles fired in the conflict. Shortly after the Gulf War, the Air Force abandoned the idea of replacing the A-10 with a close air support version of the F-16.<ref name="F/A-16">"A-16 Close Air Support." "F-16.net". Retrieved: 5 March 2010.</ref>
U.S. Air Force A-10 aircraft fired approximately 10,000 30 mm rounds in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1994–95. Following the seizure of some heavy weapons by Bosnian Serbs from a warehouse in Ilidža, a series of sorties were launched to locate and destroy the captured equipment. On 5 August 1994, two A-10s located and strafed an anti-tank vehicle. Afterward, the Serbs agreed to return remaining heavy weapons. In August 1995, NATO launched an offensive called Operation Deliberate Force. A-10s flew close air support missions, attacking Bosnian Serb artillery and positions. In late September, A-10s began flying patrols again.

A-10s returned to the Balkan region as part of Operation Allied Force in Kosovo beginning in March 1999. In March 1999, A-10s escorted and supported search and rescue helicopters in finding a downed F-117 pilot. The A-10s were deployed to support search and rescue missions, but over time the Warthogs began to receive more ground attack missions. The A-10's first successful attack in Operation Allied Force happened on 6 April 1999; A-10s remained in action until combat ended in late June 1999.

During the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, A-10s did not take part in the initial stages. For the campaign against Taliban and Al Qaeda, A-10 squadrons were deployed to Pakistan and Bagram Air Base, Afghanistan, beginning in March 2002. These A-10s participated in Operation Anaconda. Afterwards, A-10s remained in-country, fighting Taliban and Al Qaeda remnants.

Operation Iraqi Freedom began on 20 March 2003. Sixty OA-10/A-10 aircraft took part in early combat there. United States Air Forces Central Command issued "Operation Iraqi Freedom: By the Numbers", a declassified report about the aerial campaign in the conflict on 30 April 2003. During that initial invasion of Iraq, A-10s had a mission capable rate of 85 percent in the war and fired 311,597 rounds of 30 mm ammunition. A single A-10 was shot down near Baghdad International Airport by Iraqi fire late in the campaign. The A-10 also flew 32 missions in which the aircraft dropped propaganda leaflets over Iraq.

In September 2007, the A-10C with the Precision Engagement Upgrade reached initial operating capability. The A-10C first deployed to Iraq in 2007 with the 104th Fighter Squadron of the Maryland Air National Guard. The A-10C's digital avionics and communications systems have greatly reduced the time to acquire a close air support target and attack it.

A-10s flew 32 percent of combat sorties in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom. The sorties ranged from 27,800 to 34,500 annually between 2009 and 2012. In the first half of 2013, they flew 11,189 sorties in Afghanistan. From the beginning of 2006 to October 2013, A-10s conducted 19 percent of CAS missions in Iraq and Afghanistan, more than the F-15E Strike Eagle and B-1B Lancer, but less than the 33 percent flown by F-16s.
In March 2011, six A-10s were deployed as part of Operation Odyssey Dawn, the coalition intervention in Libya. They participated in attacks on Libyan ground forces there.

The USAF 122nd Fighter Wing revealed it would deploy to the Middle East on October 2014 with 12 of the unit's 21 A-10 aircraft. Although the deployment had been planned a year in advance in a support role, the timing coincided with the ongoing Operation Inherent Resolve against ISIL militants. From mid-November, U.S. commanders began sending A-10s to hit IS targets in central and northwestern Iraq on an almost daily basis. In about two months time, A-10s flew 11 percent of all USAF sorties since the start of operations in August 2014. On 15 November 2015, two days after the ISIL attacks in Paris, A-10s and AC-130s destroyed a convoy of over 100 ISIL-operated oil tanker trucks in Syria. The attacks were part of an intensification of the U.S.-led intervention against ISIL called Operation Tidal Wave II (named after Operation Tidal Wave during World War II, a failed attempt to raid German oil fields) in an attempt to cut off oil smuggling as a source of funding for the group.

On 19 January 2018, 12 A-10s from the 303d Expeditionary Fighter Squadron were deployed to Kandahar Airfield, Afghanistan, to provide close-air support, marking the first time in more than three years A-10s had been deployed to Afghanistan.

The future of the platform remains the subject of debate. In 2007, the USAF expected the A-10 to remain in service until 2028 and possibly later, when it would likely be replaced by the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II. However, critics have said that replacing the A-10 with the F-35 would be a "giant leap backwards" given the A-10's performance and the F-35's high costs. In 2012, the Air Force considered the F-35B STOVL variant as a replacement CAS aircraft, but concluded that the aircraft could not generate sufficient sorties. In August 2013, Congress and the Air Force examined various proposals, including the F-35 and the MQ-9 Reaper unmanned aerial vehicle filling the A-10's role. Proponents state that the A-10's armor and cannon are superior to aircraft such as the F-35 for ground attack, that guided munitions other planes rely upon could be jammed, and that ground commanders frequently request A-10 support.

In the USAF's FY 2015 budget, the service considered retiring the A-10 and other single-mission aircraft, prioritizing multi-mission aircraft; cutting a whole fleet and its infrastructure was seen as the only method for major savings. The U.S. Army had expressed interest in obtaining some A-10s should the Air Force retire them, but later stated there was "no chance" of that happening. The U.S. Air Force stated that retirement would save $3.7 billion from 2015 to 2019. The prevalence of guided munitions allow more aircraft to perform the CAS mission and reduces the requirement for specialized aircraft; since 2001 multirole aircraft and bombers have performed 80 percent of operational CAS missions. The Air Force also said that the A-10 was more vulnerable to advanced anti-aircraft defenses, but the Army replied that the A-10 had proved invaluable because of its versatile weapons loads, psychological impact, and limited logistics needs on ground support systems.
In January 2015, USAF officials told lawmakers that it would take 15 years to fully develop a new attack aircraft to replace the A-10; that year General Herbert J. Carlisle, the head of Air Combat Command, stated that a follow-on weapon system for the A-10 may need to be developed. It planned for F-16s and F-15Es to initially take up CAS sorties, and later by the F-35A once sufficient numbers become operationally available over the next decade. In July 2015, Boeing held initial discussions on the prospects of selling retired or stored A-10s in near-flyaway condition to international customers. However, the Air Force then said that it would not permit the aircraft to be sold.

Plans to develop a replacement aircraft were announced by the US Air Combat Command in August 2015. Early the following year, the Air Force began studying future CAS aircraft to succeed the A-10 in low-intensity "permissive conflicts" like counterterrorism and regional stability operations, admitting that the F-35 would be too expensive to operate in day-to-day roles. A wide range of platforms were under consideration, including everything from low-end AT-6 Wolverine and A-29 Super Tucano turboprops and the Textron AirLand Scorpion as more basic off-the-shelf options to more sophisticated clean-sheet attack aircraft or "AT-X" derivatives of the T-X next-generation trainer as entirely new attack platforms.

In January 2016, the USAF was "indefinitely freezing" plans to retire the A-10 for at least several years. In addition to Congressional opposition, its use in anti-ISIL operations, deployments to Eastern Europe as a response to Russia's military intervention in Ukraine, and reevaluation of F-35 numbers necessitated its retention. In February 2016, the Air Force deferred the final retirement of the aircraft until 2022 after being replaced by F-35s on a squadron-by-squadron basis. In October 2016, the Air Force Material Command brought the depot maintenance line back to full capacity in preparation for re-winging the fleet. In June 2017 it was announced that the aircraft "...will now be kept in the air force’s inventory indefinitely."

On 25 March 2010, an A-10 conducted the first flight of an aircraft with all engines powered by a biofuel blend. The flight, performed at Eglin Air Force Base, used a 1:1 blend of JP-8 and Camelina-based fuel. On 28 June 2012, the A-10 became the first aircraft to fly using a new fuel blend derived from alcohol; known as ATJ (Alcohol-to-Jet), the fuel is cellulosic-based that can be derived using wood, paper, grass, or any cellulose based material, and are fermented into alcohols before being hydro-processed into aviation fuel. ATJ is the third alternative fuel to be evaluated by the Air Force as a replacement for petroleum-derived JP-8 fuel. Previous types were a synthetic paraffinic kerosene derived from coal and natural gas and a bio-mass fuel derived from plant-oils and animal fats known as Hydroprocessed Renewable Jet.

In 2011, the National Science Foundation granted $11 million to modify an A-10 for weather research for CIRPAS at the U.S. Naval Postgraduate School and in collaboration with scientists from the South Dakota School of Mines & Technology (SDSM&T), replacing SDSM&T's retired North American T-28 Trojan. The A-10's armor is expected to allow it to survive the extreme meteorological conditions, such as 200 mph hailstorms, found in inclement high-altitude weather events.


The A-10 has been flown exclusively by the United States Air Force and its Air Reserve components, the Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) and the Air National Guard (ANG). The USAF operates 283 A-10C aircraft, as of FY 2015.
United States Air Force

Air Combat Command

Pacific Air Forces


Air National Guard


Air Force Reserve Command


United States Air Force


Air Force Reserve Command


Air National Guard







The A-10 Thunderbolt II received its popular nickname "[[Warthog]]" from the pilots and crews of the USAF attack squadrons who flew and maintained it. The A-10 is the last of Republic's jet attack aircraft to serve with the USAF. The Republic [[F-84 Thunderjet]] was nicknamed the "Hog", [[F-84F Thunderstreak]] nicknamed "Superhog", and the Republic [[F-105 Thunderchief]] tagged "Ultra Hog". The saying "Go Ugly Early" has been associated with the aircraft in reference to calling in the A-10 early to support troops in ground combat.


[[Category:Anti-tank aircraft]]
[[Category:Fairchild aircraft|A-10 Thunderbolt II]]
[[Category:United States attack aircraft 1970–1979]]
[[Category:Twinjets]]
[[Category:Aircraft first flown in 1972]]
[[Category:Low-wing aircraft]]

</doc>
<doc id="12511562" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12511562" title="Montpelier Hill">
Montpelier Hill

Mount Pelier Hill () is a 383-metre (1,257-foot) hill in County Dublin, Ireland. It is commonly referred to as the Hell Fire Club (), the popular name given to the ruined building at the summit. This building – a hunting lodge built in around 1725 by William Conolly – was originally called Mount Pelier and since its construction the hill has also gone by the same name. The building and hill were respectively known locally as 'The Brass Castle' and 'Bevan's Hill', but the original Irish name of the hill is no longer known although the historian and archaeologist Patrick Healy has suggested that the hill is the place known as ' or ' in the "", the twelfth century diocesan register book of the Archbishops of Dublin.

Mount Pelier is the closest to Dublin city of the group of mountains – along with Killakee, Featherbed Bog, Kippure, Seefingan, Corrig, Seahan, Ballymorefinn, Carrigeenoura and Slievenabawnogue – that form the ridge that bounds the Glenasmole valley. On the slopes is a forestry plantation, known as Hell Fire Wood, which consists of Sitka spruce, larch and beech.

Originally there was a cairn with a prehistoric passage grave on the summit. Stones from the cairn were taken and used in the construction of Mount Pelier lodge. Shortly after completion, a storm blew the roof off. Local superstition attributed this incident to the work of the Devil, a punishment for interfering with the cairn. Mount Pelier Hill has since become associated with numerous paranormal events.

Members of the Irish Hell Fire Club, which was active in the years 1735 to 1741, used Mount Pelier lodge as a meeting place. Stories of wild behaviour and debauchery and occult practices and demonic manifestations have become part of the local lore over the years. The original name of the lodge has been displaced and the building is generally known as the Hell Fire Club. When the lodge was damaged by fire, the members of the Hell Fire Club relocated down the hill to the nearby Stewards House for a brief period. This building also has a reputation for being haunted, most notably by a massive black cat.

Adjacent to the Stewards House are the remains of Killakee Estate. A large Victorian house was built here in the early nineteenth century by Luke White. White's son, Samuel, oversaw the development of extensive formal gardens on the estate, including the construction of several glasshouses by Richard Turner. The estate passed to the Massy family through inheritance in 1880 and John Thomas Massy, the 6th Baron made extensive use of the house and ground to host shooting parties and society gatherings. The fortunes of the Massy family declined in the early twentieth century and Hamon Massy, the 8th Baron, was evicted from Killakee House in 1924. He became known as the "Penniless Peer". Following the eviction, Killakee House was demolished and the gardens fell into ruin.

Today Mount Pelier Hill and much of the surrounding lands, including Killakee Estate (now called Lord Massy's Estate) are owned by the State forestry company Coillte and are open to the public.

The building now known as the Hell Fire Club was built around 1725 as a hunting lodge by William Conolly, the Speaker of the Irish House of Commons. It was named Mount Pelier by Conolly but over the years has also been known as "The Haunted House", "The Shooting Lodge", "The Kennel", and "Conolly's Folly". It was one of several exclusive establishments using the name Hellfire Club that existed in Britain and Ireland in the 18th century.
While the building has a rough appearance today, the architecture is of a Palladian design. The upper floor consists of a hall and two reception rooms. On the eastern side, there was a third, timber-floored, level where the sleeping quarters were located. On the ground floor is a kitchen, servants' quarters and stairs to the upper floors. The entrance, which is on the upper floor, was reached by a long flight of stairs which is now missing. At each side of the building is a room with a lean-to roof which may have been used to stable horses. A stone mounting block to assist people onto their horses can be seen on the eastern side. To the front there was a semi-circular courtyard, enclosed by a low stone wall and entered by a gate. The house faces to the north, looking over Dublin and the plains of Meath and Kildare, including Conolly's primary residence at Castletown House in Celbridge. The grounds around the lodge consisted of a deer park. The identity of the architect is unknown: the author Michael Fewer has suggested it may have been Edward Lovett Pearce (1699–1733) who was employed by Conolly to carry out works at Castletown in 1724.

There was a prehistoric burial site at the summit of Mount Pelier Hill and stones from it were used in the construction of the lodge. A nearby standing stone was also used for the lintel over the fireplace. Shortly after its completion, a great storm blew the original slate roof off. Local superstition held that this was the work of the Devil, an act of revenge for disturbing the ancient cairn. Conolly had the roof replaced with an arched stone roof constructed in a similar fashion to that of a bridge. This roof has remained intact to the present day, even though the building has been abandoned for over two centuries and despite the roof being set alight with tar barrels during the visit of Queen Victoria to Ireland in 1849. There is little evidence that the lodge was put to much use. Conolly himself died in 1729.

The Irish Hell Fire Club was founded around 1737 by Richard Parsons, 1st Earl of Rosse, and James Worsdale. Lord Rosse was probably the president of the club. Evidence of the identities of other members comes from a painting by Worsdale entitled "The Hell Fire Club, Dublin", now held by the National Gallery of Ireland, which shows five members of the club seated around a table. The five men are Henry, 4th Baron Barry of Santry (who was tried and convicted for murder in 1739); Simon Luttrell, Lord Irnham; Colonel Henry Ponsonby; Colonel Richard St George and Colonel Clements. Most of their meetings occurred in Dublin city centre at the Eagle Tavern on Cork Hill, near Dublin Castle. Accounts of the club's meetings claim that members drank "scaltheen", a mixture of whiskey and hot butter, and that they left a chair vacant at each gathering for the Devil. The club's mascot was a black cat.

At some stage the lodge at Mount Pelier was let to the club by the Conolly family (coincidentally, William Conolly had purchased Mount Pelier Hill from Philip, Duke of Wharton, founder of the first Hell Fire Club in 1719.).

It is not clear to what extent, if any, the Hell Fire Club made use of the building. The author Michael Fewer has suggested that the remoteness of Mount Pelier's location is why there are almost no verifiable accounts of the activities that went on there. However, numerous (and very doubtful) stories surrounding the building have become part of local folklore, some of which have spread to a wider audience through publication in the nineteenth century in books such as Robert Chambers' "Book of Days" (1864) and in "The Gentleman's Magazine" (1731–1922).

One of the best known of these tells of a stranger who arrived at the club on a stormy night. Invited in, he joined the members in a card game. One player dropped his card on the floor and when he bent under the table to retrieve it noticed that the stranger had a cloven hoof. At this point the visitor disappeared in a ball of flame. This story, which is found in texts from at least the 1930s, is very similar to one associated with Loftus Hall, County Wexford. The Loftus family owned a hunting lodge – known as Dolly Mount – which was also to be found on Mount Pelier Hill.
Another story tells of a priest who came to the house one night and found the members engaged in the sacrifice of a black cat. The priest grabbed the cat and uttered an exorcism upon which a demon was released from the corpse of the cat.

One tale centres on club member Simon Luttrell, Lord Irnham, later Earl of Carhampton, one time Sheriff of Dublin. Luttrell is believed to have been the subject of "The Diaboliad", a 1777 poem dedicated to "the worst man in England". According to the story, Luttrell made a pact with the Devil to give up his soul within seven years in return for settling his debts but, when the Devil came to Mount Pelier lodge to claim his prize, Luttrell distracted the Devil and fled.

Other tales recount numerous drinking sessions and black masses at which animal sacrifices, and on one occasion the sacrifice of a dwarf, took place.

At some point during this period, the building was damaged by fire. There are several stories connected with this incident. One holds that the club set fire to the building when William Conolly's son refused to renew the lease on the lodge. An alternative story claims the club members did it to give the building a hellish appearance. Another story recounts that, following a black mass, a footman spilled a drink on "Burn-Chapel" Whaley's coat. Whaley retaliated by pouring brandy over the man and setting him alight. The fire spread around the building and killed many members. Following the fire, the club relocated further down the hill to Killakee Stewards House. However, the club's activities declined after this incident.
The Irish Hell Fire Club was revived in 1771 and was active for a further 30 years. Its most notorious member was Thomas "Buck" Whaley, son of Richard Chappell Whaley. This new incarnation was known as "The Holy Fathers". Meetings once again took place at Mount Pelier lodge and, according to one story, the members kidnapped, murdered and ate a farmer's daughter. Whaley eventually repented and, when he died in 1800, the Irish Hell Fire Club disbanded with his death.

The antiquarian Austin Cooper visited the house in 1779 and found it in a state of disrepair. Joseph Holt, a general of the Society of the United Irishmen recorded in his memoirs that he spent a night in the ruin of Mount Pelier while on the run following the 1798 Rebellion. Holt wrote of his experience, "I lay down in the arched room of that remarkable building. I felt confident of the protection of the Almighty that the name of enchantment and the idle stories that were told of the place had but a slight hold of my mind." The Conollys sold the lands to Luke White in 1800. They passed through inheritance to the Massy family of Duntrileage, County Limerick. When the Massy family became bankrupt, the lands were acquired by the State. Today, the building is maintained by Coillte, who manage the forestry plantations on Mount Pelier's slopes, and have installed concrete stairs and iron safety rails across the upper windows.

The remains of the prehistoric monument that originally stood at the summit can be seen to the rear of the Hell Fire Club building. Austin Cooper, on his visit in 1779, described it thus: "behind the house are still the remains of the cairn, the limits of which were composed of large stones set edgeways which made a sort of wall or boundary about high and withinside these were the small stones heaped up. It is diameter or in circumference. In the very centre is a large stone long and broad and about thick not raised upon large stones but lying low with the stones cleared away from about it. There are several other large stones lying upon the heap." It appears from this description that the central chamber of the monument – which was a passage grave – survived intact even after Mount Pelier was constructed. The historian Peter J. O'Keefe has suggested that many of the stones were taken away and used in the construction of the Military Road at the start of the nineteenth century. Today, all that remains is a circular mound in diameter and up to high with a dip at the centre where the chamber was located. The four large stones at the edge are all that survive of the kerbstones that formed the boundary of the monument. In close proximity is a second mound, high, on which an Ordnance Survey trig pillar stands. Close to the monument is a fallen standing stone, a pointed rock high.

However, in October 2016 a further excavation discovered a huge passage grave similar to that at Newgrange, probably dating back 5,000 years, under the ruins.

Further down the hill, along the Military Road, is a two-story house, known as The Stewards House or as Killakee House (not to be confused with the now-demolished Killakee House that served as the residence of the Massy family who owned the adjacent Killakee Estate). It was built around 1765 by the Conolly family as a hunting lodge. Over the years, it has served as a dower house and as a residence for the agent who managed the Killakee Estate. To the rear is a belfry; this was once a common feature of large farmhouses and was used to call the workers for meals. The Hell Fire Club held meetings here for a time following the fire that damaged Mount Pelier lodge. The house has a reputation for being haunted, particularly by a large black cat. Stories regarding the origin of this spectre either connect it with the account of the priest who exorcised a cat at the Hell Fire Club or with a cat that was doused in whiskey and set alight by members of the Hell Fire Club before escaping across the mountains with its fur aflame.

The best documented account of these hauntings occurred between 1968 and 1970. The "Evening Herald" and "Evening Press" newspapers carried a number of reports regarding a Mrs Margaret O'Brien and her husband Nicholas, a retired Garda superintendent, who were converting the house into an arts centre. The redevelopment had been a troubled affair with tradesmen employed on the work leaving complaining of ghosts. One night, a friend of the O'Brien's, artist Tom McAssey, and two workmen were confronted by a spectral figure and a black cat with glowing red eyes. McAssey painted a portrait of the cat which hung in the house for several years after. Although locals were sceptical of the reports, further apparitions were reported, most notably of an Indian gentleman and of two nuns called Blessed Margaret and Holy Mary who had taken part in black masses on Mount Pelier Hill. There were also reports of ringing bells and poltergeist activity. In 1970 an RTÉ television crew recorded a documentary at the house. In the documentary a clairvoyant called Sheila St. Clair communicated with the spirits of the house through automatic writing. In 1971, a plumber working in the house discovered a grave with a skeleton of a small figure, most likely that of a child or, perhaps, the body of the dwarf alleged to have been sacrificed by the members of the Hell Fire Club. The house operated as a restaurant in the 1990s before closing in 2001; it is now a private residence.

On the other side of the Military Road to Hell Fire Wood and the Stewards House is the remains of Killakee Estate (), now known as Lord Massy's Estate. These lands were first granted to Walter de Ridleford after the Norman invasion and later given to Sir Thomas Luttrell, an ancestor of Hell Fire Club member Simon Luttrell, by Henry VIII. The Luttrell family held onto the estate until the seventeenth century when it was relinquished to Dudley Loftus and then passed to William Conolly. In 1800, the Conolly family sold the estate to Luke White.
The White family built Killakee House on the estate in the early nineteenth century. This was a two-storey, thirty-six roomed stucco-faced house. It had a Tuscan-columned entrance and large three-windowed bows on the back and sides. Luke White's second son, Colonel Samuel White, inherited the estate on his father's death in 1824 and invested considerable effort in developing its gardens. In 1838, he engaged the services of Sir Ninian Niven, former director of the Botanic Gardens in Dublin. Niven laid out two Victorian formal gardens of gravel walks, terraces and exotic trees decorated with statues of Greek and Roman gods. Adjacent to the house was a terraced rose garden with a statue of Neptune. A second walled garden in a vale in the woods below the house contained more fountains and a range of glasshouses designed by Richard Turner. William Robinson, writing in "The Gardener's Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette" on 10 December 1864, said of the gardens, "I know of no better example of the
advantage of extensively planting and draining a barren and elevated
district than is afforded by this demesne of 500 acres."

When Samuel White's widow, Anne, died in 1880, she bequeathed the estate to her late husband's nephew, John Thomas, 6th Baron Massy. The Massys were a Protestant Ascendancy family who had come to Ireland in 1641 and owned extensive lands in Counties Limerick, Leitrim and Tipperary. Massy used Killakee House to entertain guests while shooting game on nearby Cruagh and Glendoo mountains. He also used the house to host parties during major events on the Dublin social calendar such as the Dublin Horse Show, the Punchestown Races and the Dublin Castle Season. During these events long lines of guests' carriages could be seen stretched along the road leading to the house. However, as a result of declining rental income and poor investment decisions, John Thomas Massy was in considerable debt when he died in 1915. By the time John Massy's grandson, Hugh Hamon Charles, 8th Baron Massy, inherited the estate, the family's finances were in an irreversible decline and in 1924 he was declared bankrupt and evicted from Killakee House. The Massys initially moved into the Stewards House before taking up residence in Beehive Cottage, the estate's gate lodge, by agreement with the bank. Hamon Massy, unable to find a job on account of his alcoholism became dependent on his wife, Margaret, whose modest salary from a job with the Irish Hospitals' Sweepstake was the family's only income. In the years up to his death in 1958, Hamon Massy, who became known as the "Penniless Peer", could be seen collecting firewood in the woods of his former family estate.
Following the eviction, Killakee House was briefly used as an operations base by the Detective Unit of the Garda Síochána in 1931 while they hunted IRA subversives who were hiding explosives at Killakee. When the bank was unable to find a buyer for the estate, it was acquired by a builder who stripped the house and then demolished it in 1941. The lands were eventually acquired by the State and opened to the public. In the late 1930s, the Director of Forestry, a German called Otto Reinhard, laid out the area as an urban forest. The trees have reclaimed most of the land once occupied by the formal gardens: all that remains is the brickwork at the rear of the Turner glasshouses and the system of irrigation canals and ponds for the exotic plants contained within.

In 1978, the archaeologist and historian Patrick Healy discovered the remains of a prehistoric wedge tomb in the woods. All the survives is the skeletal outline of the main chamber and the outer double walls. Most of the stones were removed to build the low stone wall that runs across the front of the tomb.

On the northern slopes is another ruined building, known as Carthy's or McCarthy's Castle. This is all that remains of Dolly Mount – also known as the "Long House" and "Mount Pelier House" – a large hunting residence built by Henry Loftus, Earl of Ely towards the end of the eighteenth century. The building was originally two stories high with bow windows each side of the hall door, above which was the Ely coat of arms. At each side of the house was an arched gate from which extended a range of ancillary buildings, terminating in a three-storied tower with an embattled top and pointed windows. The interiors were noted for their marble chimney pieces and stuccoed ceilings. The earl's first wife, Frances Monroe, was the aunt of Dorothea "Dolly" Monroe who was a celebrated beauty and in whose honour the house was named Dolly Mount. The Ely's subsequently abandoned the residence and the building soon fell into ruin, mainly at the hands of a tenant called Jack Kelly who wrecked the house to ensure his tenancy would not be disturbed. All, except for the tower at the western end, which is now known as Carthy's Castle, was demolished in 1950.

In the land adjacent to Carthy's Castle is Orlagh House which has been owned by the Augustinian Order since the mid-nineteenth century and is a retreat and conference centre run by the friars. It was built in 1790 by Mr Lundy Foot, a wealthy snuff merchant, who named the house Footmount. He was also a magistrate and was instrumental in condemning three members of the Kearney family to death for the murder of John Kinlan, the gamekeeper at Friarstown, near Bohernabreena, in 1816. Foot was subsequently murdered in 1835, an act that was attributed to relatives of the Kearneys. In fact, Foot was killed by James Murphy, the son of an evicted tenant farmer whose land Foot had bought following the eviction.

In 2017, Orlagh House was sold to a private buyer. With the decline in the Church, it was no longer economic for the small group of elderly Augustinians to live in such a large residence.

In a field opposite Orlagh House is a holy well associated with Saint Colmcille. A statue of the saint, designed by Joseph Tierney, was erected at the site in 1917. Pilgrims either drink the water or apply it to sore ears.

Mount Pelier Hill is accessed from the Hell Fire Wood car park along the R115 road between Rathfarnham and Glencullen. The woods offer around of forest roads and tracks as well as a permanent orienteering course. Lord Massy's Estate is also accessed from the R115, close to the Hell Fire Wood car park. The woods offer a nature trail and a permanent orienteering course. Lord Massy's Estate and Mount Pelier Hill are also traversed by the Dublin Mountains Way hiking trail that runs between Shankill and Tallaght.

In March 2017 plans were announced by South Dublin County Council, Coillte and the Dublin Mountains Partnership for a major Dublin Mountains Project development on the site of Montpellier Hill and the Hellfire Club, involving parking, a cafe, a treetop walkway, improved trails and a Visitors Centre.

Local residents and community groups have expressed opposition to the plan, citing the delicate eco-system of the area, risks of damage to recently discovered megalithic artwork and fears of traffic congestion resulting from a possible 300,000 visitors to the site. These groups have launched a campaign entitled "Save the Hellfire" aimed at persuading An Bord Pleanála to refuse planning permission for the project.






</doc>
<doc id="12513126" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12513126" title="Kangchu system">
Kangchu system

The Kangchu system was a socio-economic system of organisation and administration developed by Chinese agricultural settlers in Johor during the 19th century. The settlers organised themselves into informal associations (similar to the Kongsi organisations found in other Chinese communities), and chose a leader from among themselves. In Chinese, "Kangchu" (Chinese: 港主, Pinyin: Gáng Zhǔ, Teochew: Kaang6 Zhu8) literally means ‘master of the riverbank’, and was the title given to the Chinese headmen of these river settlements. The "Kangchu" leaders are also called "Kapitan".

The term "Kangchu" became widely used during the 19th century, as Chinese immigrants began to settle in and around Johor state and set up gambier and pepper plantations. The social and economic welfare of the early Chinese settlers came under the charge of local Chinese leaders, who were responsible for running these agricultural plantations, which were situated along the river banks. The Kangchu system traces its origins from the 18th century when Chinese coolies settled in Penang and Riau and set up gambier and pepper plantations there. The sovereign rulers of Johor, Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim and his son and successor, Sultan Abu Bakar, took up the Kangchu system during the first half of the 19th century to provide a more organised form of administration as Chinese immigrants began to settle in the state in great numbers and developed the state's agricultural economy.
Variants of the Kangchu system also thrived in other parts of Maritime Southeast Asia, where gambier and pepper were cultivated and where there were significant Chinese populations. The Kangchu and coolies who worked in the gambier and pepper plantations were mainly of Teochew origin, and were generally first- or second-generation Chinese immigrants. In 1917, the British colonial government in Johor implemented an act which abolished the Kangchu system in the state, and the value for gambier declined during the early 20th century.

The origins of the Kangchu system dates back to the mid-18th century, when early Chinese settlers in Penang experimented in cash crop plantations with various types of crops, including pepper, gambier, betelnut and clove. The plantations were abandoned by the late 18th-century, as Penang experienced wars from Buginese seafarers that resulted in many gambier plantations being destroyed; contributing to the decline in plantations was the growing popularity of the spice trade that reaped much greater profits. At the beginning of the 19th century, these Chinese settlers began to look south to Malacca and Singapore, where gambier and pepper plantations had also been established.

In the late 1820s, Chinese settlers from Singapore also began to look towards Johor for gambier and pepper cultivation at the encouragement of Temenggong Abdul Rahman and his successor, Daeng Ibrahim. As more Chinese settlers established gambier and pepper plantations in Johor during the 1840s, Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim formed a bureaucracy made up of Malay officials to oversee administrative affairs upon the Kangchu. He began issuing official permits, known as "Surat Sungai" (transliterated as "river documents") in Malay, to the Kangchu (leaders of the settlers) which permitted them to establish these plantations along the river banks. In turn, the Kangchu were required to pay taxes from the profits generated by the gambier and pepper farms and the "Surat Sungai", which had to be renewed after a specified period of time.

The first gambier and pepper plantations appeared in Southern Johor, notably Skudai. Lau Lib Keng, a Chinese settler based in Skudai, was the first person to receive a "Surat Sungai", whereby the river banks of Skudai were leased to Lau for the cultivation of gambier and pepper. More Chinese settlers came to Johor from the 1850s onwards, and forested areas in Southern Johor such as Tebrau, Plentong and Stulang were cleared for the cultivation of gambier and pepper. By the time Temenggong Daeng Ibrahim's son, Abu Bakar took office from his father in 1862, at least 37 "Surat Sungai" have been issued to various Kangchu, all of whom were collectively responsible for the operations of the 1,200 gambier and pepper farms in the state. Most of these Chinese leaders were also members of secret societies, and communal warfare often broke out in Singapore between different dialect groups as a result of conflicting economic interests. From the late 1850s onwards, the Kangchu began to exert political influence in the state affairs by establishing close ties with Temenggong Abu Bakar. In 1865, Abu Bakar granted official recognition to the Teochew-dominated Johor branch of the Ngee Heng Kongsi after a Kangchu, Tan Kee Soon, raised a small army to subdue Sultan Ali's forces, from whom Abu Bakar was facing considerable dissent but was unable to raise an organised army. Abu Bakar nevertheless called for the Ngee Heng Kongsi to accept Chinese settlers of other dialect groups to prevent possible communal warfare as a result of conflicting economic interests.

The crop produce from these plantations were generally exported to other countries from Singapore with the assistance of Chinese merchants based in that city. From the 1860s onwards, many of these Kangchu chalked up debts and began to sell their property rights to these merchants or to larger business magnates ("Kongsi" in Teochew) based in Singapore, who were known to the locals as "Tuan Sungai" (literally Masters of the River). The Kangchu then were often hired as supervisors or managers by the merchants to keep watch on the day-to-day operations of the gambier and pepper plantations. Temenggong Abu Bakar began to issue contract-style letters of recognition to these Kangchu; the letters were known by their Malay name "Surat Tauliah".

As the gambier and pepper plantations expanded in the 1870s, the more established Kangchu were entrusted with larger blocks of farms and made contracts with Chinese merchants from Singapore. The profits generated from harvests of these plantations formed the bulk of Johor's economy, and financed the development of Johor's infrastructure. Abu Bakar's relationship with the Chinese leaders was excellent, and he appointed many of them to political positions in the state. Of particular note, Abu Bakar appointed two Chinese leaders to the Johor State Council: a Kangchu from Chaozhou, Tan Hiok Nee, and a contractor from Taishan, Wong Ah Fook, who also owned gambier and pepper farms in Mersing in the 1880s. As the land along the river banks in Southern Johor was already taken by the earlier waves of Chinese settlers, newer Chinese settlers began migrating northwards in the 1870s and established new gambier and pepper plantations further north; new plantations were established in Yong Peng, Batu Pahat, Benut, Endau and Kota Tinggi. In particular, Abu Bakar actively encouraged Chinese settlers to establish plantations in Muar, shortly after the British Colonial Government ruled in favour of Abu Bakar over Tengku Alam Shah (Sultan Ali's eldest son) and his family, and granted Abu Bakar control of Muar.

At the end of the 19th century, Johor's economy began to diversify from gambier and pepper plantations to other agricultural crops. Starting with coffee in 1881, crops such as tapioca, tea, pineapple and rubber were introduced into the state. Coffee and tapioca was quickly abandoned in the 1890s when the value of these crops experienced a drop, while rubber was introduced and quickly established a strong foothold in Johor, as the world demand for rubber increased greatly around 1910. Prices for gambier plunged between 1905 and 1906, and many Kangchu abandoned gambier in favour of rubber. Further decline in the number of gambier and pepper plantations was fuelled by the colonial government's suppression of traditional farming methods employed by the Kangchu for planting gambier and pepper; these method led to soil exhaustion and a depletion of forests which was used as firewood in small factories. A few years before the Kangchu system was abolished, exports for both gambier and pepper plunged by a further 60% between 1912 and 1917.

The British had long frowned upon the Kangchu because of their links with secret societies in Singapore as well as their indulgence in social vices such as gambling and opium smoking, activities which the British had been actively suppressing in Singapore and the Federated Malay States. As early as 1890, the Governor of the Straits Settlements, Cecil Clementi Smith had lobbied Abu Bakar to adopt the Societies Ordinance and ban the Ngee Heng Kongsi, but was promptly turned down. Shortly after the British appointed an adviser to Johor, the British began attributing the high crime rates in the state to Chinese settlers loyal to the Kangchu. In 1915, the Johor state government, now effectively under the control of the British Colonial Government, passed the "Societies Enactment" which prompted the dissolution of the Ngee Heng Kongsi the following year. The Kangchu system was officially abolished December 1917 in an enactment passed by the Johor state government, which was by then effectively administered by the British colonial government.

The Temenggong of Johor (later Sultan of Johor) conferred upon the Kangchu with a large degree of administrative autonomy within the plot of land which each was granted. These included the right to collect taxes on behalf for the Temenggong, as well as for the welfare needs among the Chinese coolies living within the plot of land. The Kangchu generally granted tax exemption for the basic consumption by workers within the settlement. Some coolies took on new jobs such as shopkeepers and traders to serve the needs of other coolies within the settlement, and the Kangchu granted tax exemptions to these shopkeepers and traders on the sale of pork, opium and alcohol as well. The Kangchu reserved a portion of the land for the construction of a settlement for the coolies, from which small towns were formed and became the administrative centre of the Kangchu. These administrative centres were generally established within the coolie settlements located at the foot of the river, and were known as "Kangkar" (literally "Foot of the river", Chinese: 港脚, Pinyin: Gáng Jiǎo, Teochew: Kaang6 Caar8).

The Kangchu acted as the middleman in the bulk purchase of the settlement's commodities through suppliers based in Singapore. In particular, opium was highly popular among the coolies, although frowned upon by the British who took strong measures to suppress its distribution. The Kangchu formed illegal opium syndicates which had links to Chinese leaders from Singapore and other Malay states in the north, particularly Selangor. British contempt for the Kangchu was also fuelled by the coolies' preference for gambling and prostitution, both of which were seen as social vices by the British colonial government. The Kangchu maintained friendly relations with the Temenggong (later Sultan), and worked closely with the Ngee Heng Kongsi in administrative matters. In particular, the state government attempted to forge close relations with the Kangchu by the appointment of a Malay official who was conversant in Teochew and literate in Chinese characters, Mohamed Salleh bin Perang, as the liaison officer between the Temenggong and the Kangchu. Several years later, in the early 1870s, the state government worked closely with the Ngee Heng Kongsi to draft the "Kanun Kangchu" which had legal clauses that defined the powers of the Kangchu in Johor. The "Kanun Kangchu" contained 81 clauses in total, and was implemented in 1873.

Chinese settlers began migrating from the Riau Islands to Singapore in the 19th century shortly before the founding of Singapore by Sir Stamford Raffles in 1819. The native Malays joined the Chinese in growing gambier, although they cultivated it for subsistence rather than for commercial purposes. The number of gambier and pepper farms expanded greatly between 1819 and 1840, fuelled by the increasing demand for gambier by Chinese traders from China as well as pepper by European traders. As land nearer to the town in the south was quickly used up in the 1820s, the Kangchu began to establish farms near the northern parts of Singapore, particularly stretches of land across the Straits of Johor from Jurong, to the west of Punggol in the northeast. By 1851, there were about 800 gambier and pepper farms which covered 75% of Singapore's land surface, of which was dedicated to gambier while 2,614 was dedicated to pepper.

In the 1850s and 1860s, many Kangchu abandoned their plantations in Singapore as gambier produce declined due to over farming of the soil, and began to establish new gambier and pepper plantations in neighbouring Johor. Nevertheless, many of these Kangchu settled down as merchants in Singapore and managed the gambier and pepper farms by proxy, mainly through the liaison body of the Ngee Heng Kongsi which had members in Singapore and Johor. Some of these merchants purchased the property rights of gambier and pepper farms from the Kangchu in Johor, who would then assume managerial tasks to ensure the smooth operation of the plantation and the settlement.

Unlike its counterpart in Johor, the Ngee Heng Kongsi (also called "Ghi Hin Kongsi" in Hokkien) was recognised as an illegal society in Singapore and its activities were actively suppressed by the colonial government. Factionalism appeared within the Ngee Heng Kongsi in Singapore by the 1850s, as business leaders from various dialect groups were unable to agree upon key issues. In particular, relations between the Teochews and Hokkiens were hostile, partly because some Hokkien merchants competed with the Teochew merchants in the gambier and pepper trade, most of whom had established their bases in the Boat Quay area along the Singapore River.

The existence of the Kangchu was not recognised by the British colonial government, even though they exercised a similar degree of autonomy as their counterparts in Johor. Nevertheless, the Kangchu in Singapore had easy access to forested land in Singapore compared to their counterparts in Johor, as the British colonial government adopted a laissez-faire attitude to the Kangchu and imposed very little regulation on their agricultural activities. However, the British were wary of the fact that many Kangchu in Singapore were members of the Ngee Heng Kongsi, which was illegal in Singapore and enjoyed monopoly rights over the regional opium trade. The British appointed a Chinese official among the Kangchu to oversee the social and economic affairs of the gambier and pepper plantations in Singapore and to act as the intermediary.

The first gambier and pepper plantations appeared in the Riau Islands in the 1730s, after the Buginese warrior and second Yamtuan Muda of Riau, Daing Chelak, brought Chinese coolies from Malaya to Riau for the purpose of gambier cultivation, which was then widely used for medication among the locals. Another exodus of Chinese migrated to Riau in 1740 following unrest which erupted in Batavia, during which many Chinese were massacred. Chinese settlement in Riau continued into the 18th century, the majority of them coming from the Chaoshan area in Guangdong province, along with a sizeable minority from the southern parts of Fujian province.

Gambier and pepper farming were mainly confined to the Bintan (formerly spelled as Bentan) and Galang Islands. Similar to the Kangchu system in Johor, gambier and pepper plantations were established on grants of land by the Yamtuan Muda of Riau, who would issue land permits ("Surat Sungai") to the Kangchu who would direct the operations of the plantation and workers within the settlement. In the early and middle 19th century, many Chinese settlers and merchants from Riau relocated their businesses to Singapore, and established trading links between Riau and Singapore. These settlers and merchants still maintained trading links with Riau, as the Kangchu from Riau often shipped their produce to Singapore for free trade to evade taxes imposed by the Dutch colonial government. Like Singapore, competition for the gambier and pepper trade between the Teochews and Hokkiens in Riau led to communal tensions and sporadic violence in Riau during the 1840s and 1850s. In the early 20th century, the Chinese abandoned gambier and pepper plantations in favour of other agricultural practices, as the worldwide prices for gambier experienced a drastic drop in value and many pepper plants fell prey to a disease plaguing the archipelago.

The first Chinese immigrants settled along the coastal regions of Sarawak in significant numbers from the 18th century onwards and were engaged in the metal mining industry, mainly for gold and bauxite. As the supply of gold became exhausted from the 1820s onwards, the Chinese miners gradually turned to trade and agriculture. The Chinese of Teochew and Hakka heritage established gambier and pepper plantations in the 1870s and 1880s, and the White Rajah of Sarawak began to organise an administrative system for these plantations similar to the Kangchu system in Johor. The Kangchu of each plantation was appointed by the Charles Brooke, the then-White Rajah. Each Kangchu was given responsibilities to oversee the operations of the plantations under his jurisdiction and the welfare of the coolies living there. In 1875, the British promulgated a set of laws which defined the roles and responsibilities of the Kangchu; they were modelled very closely to the "Kanun Kangchu" that was introduced by Sultan Abu Bakar of Johor in 1873.

Charles Brooke encouraged the immigration of the Chinese coolies, beginning in the 1860s, to expand the state's gambier and pepper industry. Chinese settlers in neighbouring Sabah and Pontianak also established gambier and pepper plantations, although they existed as independent fiefdoms. These plantations rose to become one of the state's major industries as worldwide prices for gambier went up during the 1880s and 1890s. In the 20th century, as worldwide gambier prices took a dive, the Kangchu channelled their efforts into pepper and opium cultivation in the state. Sarawak's Kangchu system fell into obscurity in the 1920s, as the opium trade with Hong Kong steadily declined during the course of the decade.

The Kangchu system facilitated the growth of the gambier and pepper plantations and developed Johor's and Singapore's economies in the 19th century. The development of Johor's inland towns were attributed to the efforts by the various Kangchu, who were responsible for drawing the settlement plan for the coolies living within the plantation they were working on, from which new towns were formed. The Chinese immigrant population in Johor and Singapore grew in size during this period; Riau also experienced a similar growth during the 18th century. As a result of mass immigration by the Chinese into Johor, the Chinese quickly outnumbered the Malays in the state, although many Chinese coolies relocated to Singapore or other parts of Malaya as the gambier and pepper industry declined in the 20th century. Several towns and other places in Johor and Singapore, built upon sites of former gambier and pepper plantations, are named after former features of the Kangchu system, and are largely populated by ethnic Chinese.

The Teochew dialect became the lingua franca among the Chinese in many parts of Johor and Riau, as the majority of the Chinese from these areas were of Teochew origin, many of whom were descended from the Chinese coolies who had worked in the gambier and pepper plantations. The Teochews form the second-largest dialect group among Chinese Singaporeans, and many families can trace their family ancestry to immigrants who were Kangchu or coolies in these plantations.




</doc>
<doc id="12542166" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12542166" title="Alpine pika">
Alpine pika

The alpine pika ("Ochotona alpina") is a species of small mammal in the pika family, Ochotonidae. The summer pelage of different subspecies varies drastically but, in general, it is dark or cinnamon brown, turning to grey with a yellowish tinge during the winter. The alpine pika is found in western Mongolia, eastern Kazakhstan, and Russia (Tuva, Irkutsk, Altai, and Krasnoyarsk), as well as in China (northern Xinjiang and Heilongjiang), in very cold, mountainous regions. It is a generalist herbivore, and mainly forages on mosses, tree branches, pine nuts, and plant stems. It can emit three series of different vocalizations: a long call, a short call, and an alarm call. It is rated as a species of least concern on the IUCN Red List of Endangered Species.

German zoologist and botanist Peter Simon Pallas originally described the alpine pika in 1773, in his work "Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des Russischen Reichs". It is a large species in the pika family, Ochotonidae, which consists of small mammals that have short ears, forelimbs very slightly longer than hindlimbs, and no external tail. There are four recognised subspecies: "O. a. alpina" (Pallas, 1773), "O. a. cinereofusca" (Schrenk, 1858), "O. a. sushkini" (Thomas, 1924), and "O. a. changaica" (Ognev, 1940).

The northern pika was included as a subspecies of the alpine pika by several authorities such as Vinogradov and Argyropulo in 1941; Argyropulo in 1948; Gureev in 1964; Corbet in 1978; Honacki, Kinman, and Koeppl in 1982; Weston in 1982; and Feng and Zheng in 1985. However, in 1973, Nikolai Vorontsov and Elena Ivanitskaya, pointed out the difference between their chromosome numbers. In 1980, Vladimir Sokolov and V. N. Orlov treated them as separate species, with their ranges overlapping in the Khenteii and Khangai Mountains in Mongolia. It is believed that after glaciation, the ancestors of the alpine pika were restricted to the borders of the Sayan and Altai glaciers, as well as the periglacial region of the major North Asiatic glaciation. The American pika and the collared pika were also included as subspecies of the alpine pika, by A.I. Argyropulo in 1948, A.A. Gureev in 1964, and G.B. Corbet in 1968. However, in 1981, M.L. Weston found out that they were morphologically different from the alpine pika. In 1986, Corbet and J.E. Hill treated them as separate species. "O. a. sushkini" was formerly considered a subspecies of the Pallas's pika, but is now a subspecies of the alpine pika. The Helan Shan pika and the Hoffmann's pika were formerly included as a subspecies of the alpine pika, but are now considered an independent species based on their chromosome number, morphology, and bioacoustic behaviour.

The alpine pika measures in length, has long rounded ears ranging from in length, and weighs . The skull is narrow, measuring in length, and is less rounded and longer than the skull of the northern pika. In addition, the alpine pika has a longer snout, the back of the skull is bent more downward, and the bullae are deeper and much narrower, compared to those of the northern pika. The parietal bones (the two bones in the skull, which, when joined together at a fibrous joint, form the sides and roof of the skull) protrude at the front, forming a sloping angle with the interparietal bone (bone situated between the parietal bone and the supraoccipital bone located at the back and lower part of the skull), at the back. It has a large, thick cheek bone.

The summer pelage of different subspecies varies drastically but is generally dark or cinnamon brown. The back is dull, yellowish, ochre-grey in colour, with dark brown to black tips of the hairs. The latus (side of the body between the rib cage and the uppermost and largest part of the hip bone) is tinged with rust-red, and the underside is pale yellowish ochre. In winter, its pelage turns grey, with a yellowish tinge; the underside becomes greyish brown, and the anterior dorsum and head are tinged with yellow. The incisive foramen (funnel-shaped opening in the bony plate of the skull, located in the roof of the mouth, immediately behind the incisor teeth where blood vessels and nerves pass) are round, small, and are detached from the palatine foramen.

Despite geographic and seasonal variation, in sympatric zones, the adult alpine pika is larger than the adult northern pika by body measurements, and is usually more dull coloured.

The alpine pika inhabits mountainous areas in western Mongolia bordering the Gobi Desert, eastern Kazakhstan, southern Russia (Tuva, Irkutsk, Altai, and Krasnoyarsk) and China (northern Xinjiang and Heilongjiang). It is found on mountain ranges such as the Altai, Khangai, and Sayan, and is also distributed from the east and south of Lake Baikal eastward to the Amur River drainage. An isolated alpine pika population occurs at the northwest Ningxia-Hexi Zoulang-Gansu border, on the Helan Mountains. "O. a. cinereofusca" is found in Heilongjiang and Russia, while "O. a. nitida" is found in northern Xinjiang, Russia, Mongolia, and Kazakhstan.

The animal tends to be found in rocky habitats. It occupies talus piles (collection of broken rock pieces at the base of cliffs, volcanoes, or valley shoulders, accumulated due to periodic rockfall from adjacent cliff faces) with larger stones and rocky areas although it does not inhabit swampy montane tundra or talus lacking vegetation. It may also live in burrows under tree roots or in old moss-scree.

The alpine pika's habitat is separated from that of the northern pika by altitude or by microhabitat in their zone of sympatry, and it lives at both higher and lower altitudes than the northern pika. It is found at heights of above sea level in the Altai Mountains, and above in China.

In the early 1970s, an unexplained decline in the alpine pika population occurred throughout the western Sayan Mountains. Although in 1977 Khlebnikov suggested it was due to an epidemic, it was difficult to ascertain if such a large territory had been affected all at once. By 1986 or 1987, a few localities that had high alpine pika population densities 16 to 17 years earlier became devoid of the species, due to its low reproductive rate and the insular nature of its habitat.

The alpine pika is a generalist herbivore, mainly foraging for mosses, trees branches, pine nuts, and plant stems, which it gathers during the summer to create haypiles for use in winter. These haypiles were estimated by I.V. Travina in 1984 to be as much as 30 kg per hectare (12 kg per acre) when the population density is around 10 to 12 individuals per hectare. This store would sometimes be shared with other species such as reindeer. In 1978, Khlebnikova documented the influence exerted by the alpine pika on plant diversity and composition in the regions they inhabit. These include reduced seed content of the soil, decreased ratio of flowering plants, and slow succession of plants such as the Siberian pine due to the pika's foraging on young trees. The remnants of the haypiles, however, might facilitate plant growth and the accumulation of pellets that create spots of nitrophilic vegetation (vegetation rich in nitrogen).

The species lives in families, with population densities of 10 to 12 individuals per hectare. Family feeding territories do not overlap with each other, and mostly remain the same each year; however, the home territories of different family groups are larger and do overlap with each other. Both males and females have been observed to mark corners of stones mostly located near the center of their home territory, from April to December, by rubbing their neck glands against them.

The female's fecundity is low, as with other pikas inhabiting talus piles, and the size of litters decreases as the elevation increases. A.F. Potapkina observed a seasonal increase in the number of offspring per litter. On average, the female of the western Altai Mountains produces two litters, while in the northwestern Altai and the western Sayan Mountains she produces 2.7 litters—with 10% producing up to three litters in the latter case. In 1984, G.I. Makushin and G.I. Orlov determined the average annual mortality rate of the alpine pika to be 53% for populations living in forests and 41% for those living in the alpine zones—most of them aged between one and three years. The annual population density fluctuations of most populations were insignificant.

The alpine pika can emit three different vocalizations. The long call is heard during the mating season from only the subspecies "O. a. alpina", "O. a. changaica", and "O. a. nitida". The short call is a harsh, sharp whistle that is easily distinguishable from the short high-pitched whistle of the northern pika. The alarm call is given out immediately any danger from predators or humans is perceived, and can travel greater distances than the calls of most other pika species.

Internal parasites of the alpine pika include many worm species, such as "Schizorchis altaica", "Cephaluris andrejevi", "Heligmosomum dubinini", and "Eugenuris schumakovitschi". "Schizorchis altaica" was found in individuals inhabiting the southern Altai mountains, and "Heligmosomum dubinini" in those inhabiting the Sayan and Altai mountains.

Since 1996, the alpine pika has been rated a species of least concern on the IUCN Red List of Endangered Species. This is because it is widespread, with no known population decline. Despite the lack of data relating to its current population state, it is thought to have a stable trend, with some isolated populations exhibiting some variation. It has been regionally red-listed in China and Mongolia as a species of least concern, and about 12% of its population in Mongolia is found in protected areas.




</doc>
<doc id="12542372" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12542372" title="Turkestan red pika">
Turkestan red pika

The Turkestan red pika ("Ochotona rutila") is a species of mammal in the family Ochotonidae. The summer fur at its back is bright rufous and the ventral fur is white or ochraceous. The winter dorsal fur is pale brown and the ventral fur is white or light ochraceous in colour. It is found in the mountains of western Xinjiang in China, and sporadically also in the central Asian mountains in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. The female has a low fertility rate, and gives birth to offspring during the breeding season from spring to summer. She generally produces two litters each year, with two to six young. It is rated as a species of least concern on the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List of Endangered Species, but it is considered to be near-threatened within the China part of its range.

The Turkestan red pika is one of the 30 recognized species of mammal in the family Ochotonidae. It was first described by the Russian naturalist Nikolai Alekseevich Severtzov in 1873. In 1951, Ellerman and Morrison-Scott included the Chinese red pika ("Ochotona" "erythrotis") and the Glover's pika ("Ochotona" "gloveri") as subspecies of the Turkestan red pika. Multiple authors (Gureev in 1964; Weston in 1982; Feng and Zheng in 1985; and Feng, Cai, and Zheng in 1988) have since separated them as independent species, based on their colouration, zoogeography (branch of the science of biogeography that is concerned with the present and past geographic distribution of animal species), and skull morphology. The mammalogists Robert S. Hoffmann and Andrew T. Smith listed the Turkestan red pika as a species in the third edition of "Mammal Species of the World" that was published in 2005. Currently, it has no recognized subspecies.

The Turkestan red pika measures in length, of which is the tail. It weighs . The skull is large, measuring in length, and is moderately arched, and has broad and flat interorbital region (region of the skull is located between the eyes, anterior to the upper and back part of the skull). The frontal bone has no alveolus (hollow cavity in bone. Not the same structure as a pulmonary alveolus) above it. The front portion of the nasal cavities are noticeably inflated, and are usually longer than the middle part of the frontal bone. It has long ears which have grayish black dorsal sides. The summer dorsal fur is bright rufous, and it is white-spotted at the neck behind the ears, and the spots sometimes form a broad, yellowish white collar. The flanks (sides of the body between the rib cage and the uppermost and largest part of the hip bone) have yellowish cinnamon-buff tinge. The ventral fur is white or ochraceous in colour, but the chest has a rust-red transverse stripe. The winter dorsal fur is pale brown and the ventral fur is white or light ochraceous in colour. The hindfeet are long. The anterior palatine foramen (funnel-shaped opening in the bony plate of the skull, located in the roof of the mouth, immediately behind the incisor teeth where blood vessels and nerves pass) and the palatal foramen are combined.

In contrast with most other pikas, the Turkestan red pika is a quiet species, and is also commonly known as the "silent" pika. It has no alarm calls and no song vocalizations. In alarm conditions, it takes cover under rocks and emits a chattering call which is similar to that of the northern pika ("Ochotona hyperborea") and two subspecies of the alpine pika, "O. a. cinereofusca", and "O. a. scorodumovi". Individuals belonging to the same species are alerted by this signal.

The region of Turkestan is present in central Asia between the Gobi Desert and the Caspian Sea, and comprises Xinjiang, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. The Turkestan red pika is found in the mountains in western Xinjiang in China, and sporadically in the central Asian mountains such as the Pamir Mountains in Tajikistan, and the Tien Shan Mountains in southeastern Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and southeastern Kazakhstan. It is also probably found in northern Afghanistan. It is considered to be commonly found in the Iskanderkul Lake area of Tajikistan, and the Great Alma-Ata Lake area in Kazakhstan. Its range is allopatric with that of the Chinese red pika.

It is a rock-dwelling pika which usually inhabits talus deposits (collection of broken rock pieces at the base of cliffs, volcanoes, or valley shoulders, accumulated due to periodic rockfall from adjacent cliff faces) and takes shelter in large boulders. It is typically found at moderate elevations of less than from sea level, despite the availability of the talus environment.

The Turkestan red pika is a diurnal species, and is more active at dusk than at dawn. It lives in families consisting of the adult male, adult female and, during the reproductive season, their young. The population levels tend to remain constant each year. It has a low population density of 12 to 20 individuals, or 3 to 3.5 families, per hectare. Adjacent family territory centres are generally separated by , but can be as close as . Like other pika species, it is a generalist herbivore, and stores vegetation in the form of hayplies (piles of grass, legumes, or other herbaceous plants that serve as animal fodder). However, unlike most other pikas, it does not feed in open meadows, but in an area of within from the talus-vegetation edge. They have wide home ranges and can find sufficient food, as the vegetation on the talus is widely dispersed.

The female has a low fertility rate, and generally produces two litters each year, with two to six (averaging 4.2) young, during the breeding season from spring to summer. The offspring are not reproductively active in their birth summer. Throughout much of the summer after their birth, the young live with their parents and forage on vegetation stored by them. During the following winter most juveniles live with their parents. The adult male and the female are rarely seen together during autumn, even though they have a mutual home range.

The stoat ("Mustela erminea") is a major predator, and 19% of its feces were found to contain furs of the Turkestan red pika.

Since 1996, the Turkestan red pika is rated as a species of least concern on the IUCN Red List of Endangered Species. This is because although it has a patchy distribution, it is a widespread species in suitable habitat. It also has a stable population trend. There are no known major threats to the species, although low population density and low fertility rates are possible reasons for concern. At one time it used to be trapped for its fur, but that practice has now stopped. It is considered a near threatened species by the Chinese authorities in its distribution in that country.


</doc>
<doc id="12542378" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12542378" title="Moupin pika">
Moupin pika

The Moupin pika ("Ochotona thibetana"), also known as Ribetischer Pika, Moupin-Pika, Pika del Tibet, and Manipuri pika, is a species of mammal in the pika family, Ochotonidae. It has many subspecies, some of which may be distinct species. Its summer pelage is dark russet-brown with some light spots on the dorsal side, and ochraceous buff tinged on the belly. In winter it is lighter, with buff to dull brown dorsal pelage. A generalist herbivore, it is found in the mountains of the eastern Tibetan Plateau in China (Gansu, southern Qinghai, Yunnan, and Sichuan), Bhutan, India (Sikkim), and northern Myanmar. Both the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List of Endangered Species and the Red List of China's Vertebrates classify it as a species of least concern; although one subspecies may be endangered.

The Moupin pika was first described in 1871 by the French mammalogist and ornithologist Alphonse Milne-Edwards. There are five recognized subspecies according to the "Mammals Species of the World":
The Gansu pika ("Ochotona cansus") was previously treated as a subspecies of the Moupin pika, but is now considered a separate species based on its skull characteristics—shorter skull and a narrower interorbital region and zygomatic arch—and because intermediate forms do not occur in the extensive zones of sympatry. The Forrest's pika ("Ochotona forresti") was also a former subspecies, but it was listed as separate species by Feng and Zheng in 1985.

In 1951, Ellerman and Morrison-Scott listed the "O. t. osgoodi" as a subspecies of the steppe pika ("Ochotona pusilla") but in 1978, Corbet, and in 1982, Weston, based on morphometric analysis, included it in the Moupin pika. "O. t. sikimaria" was assigned to the Gansu pika by Feng and Kao in 1974, and by Feng and Zheng in 1985 because Thomas compared the subspecies to "O. c. sorella" in his original description. However, based on holotype analysis, "O. t. sikimaria" was found to have a longer skull and a wider interorbital region and zygomatic arch than the Gansu pika. The subspecies "O. n. lama", "O. n. aliensis", and "O. n. lhasaensis "were formerly assigned to the Moupin pika, but they are now considered to belong to the Nubra pika ("Ochotona nubrica").

"O. t. sikimaria" may be a treated as a separate species due to its widely separate geography than that of the other Moupin pika. It can be distinguished from other subgroups based on a different protrusion of the skull and variations in its genetic data. "O. t. sacraria" and "O.t. xunhuaensis" may also represent separate species, as they appear genetically very distinct from the other Moupin pika.

In 1938, Allen synonymized the Qinling pika ("Ochotona syrinx") with "O.t. huangensis". This assignment was followed by Ellerman and Morrison-Scott in 1951, by Gureev in 1964, and by Weston in 1982. In 1938 Allen, in 1951 Ellerman and Morrison-Scott, and in 1982 Weston synonymized "O.t. sacraria" with "O.t. thibetana", but in 1974, Feng and Kao, and in 1985, Feng and Zheng listed it as a subspecies of the Moupin pika.

A fairly small pika, the Moupin pika measures in length, and weighs . The skull is in length, and is larger than that of the Gansu pika. The frontal bone is flat and low, and has no alveolus above it. The auditory bullae are small, and the posterior processes of the cheek bone are almost parallel. The anterior palatine foramen (funnel-shaped opening in the bony plate of the skull, located in the roof of the mouth, immediately behind the incisor teeth where blood vessels and nerves pass) and the palatal foramen are combined. In summer, the dorsal pelage is dark russet-brown overall in color with some light spots and the ventral pelage is ochraceous buff-tinged; however, "O.t. xunhuaensis" has grayish ventral pelage, and a russet throat collar. It has a buff coloured collar along the middle line of the belly. The winter dorsal pelage is buff to dull brown. It has dark brown ears, measuring in length, and having white, narrow borders along its edges. The sole of the feet are furred. The hindfeet are long.

The species' range includes the mountains of the eastern Tibetan Plateau in Gansu, southern Qinghai, Yunnan, and Sichuan in China; in Bhutan; in Sikkim in India; and in northern Myanmar. The nominate subspecies "O.t. thibetana" occurs in southern Qinghai, western Sichuan, southeastern Tibet, and northwestern Yunnan; "O.t. nangquenica" occurs in Tibet; "O.t. sacraria" occurs in western Sichuan; "O.t. osgoodi" occurs in northeastern Myanmar; "O.t. sikimaria" occurs in Sikkim; and "O.t. xunhuaensis" occurs in eastern Qinghai.

It is found in rocky regions under canopies of "Rhododendron" and bamboo forests at lower elevations, and in subalpine forests in the higher parts of its distribution. While recorded at altitudes as low as above sea level, it favors elevations of . It has an area of occupancy of , with an extant of occurrence of .

The Moupin pika is a diurnal species, but it can be active at night. It is colonial, terrestrial pika that is known to dig burrows. It is a generalist herbivore, and creates haypiles for food storage. The breeding season starts in at least April and continues till July. The female produces litters of one to five young. According to tests, the Moupin pika has been found to contain astroviruses.

Since 1996, the Moupin pika has been rated as a species of least concern on the IUCN Red List of Endangered Species. This is because it is a widespread species and its population is not known to be suffering a serious decline. Although its current population trend is unclear, it is common throughout its distribution. It experiences a threat from habitat destruction due to small-scale deforestration of bamboo and Rhododendron woodlands, and grazing by livestock. Due to destruction of habitat, the Sikkim pika may be endangered, but the other forms do not appear to be threatened according to IUCN. The Red List of China's Vertebrates also lists the Moupin pika as a species of least concern. It occurs in the protected areas of the Changshanerhai, Jiuzhaigou, Nujiang, Wanglang, Wawushan, Wolong, and Zhumulangmafeng Nature Reserves. However, deforestation may pose a threat throughout its range in southern China. It occurs extremely rarely in northeastern India. It has also been stated that almost all of its habitat in India has been destroyed, locally making it "critically endangered." It is targeted as a pest in southern Gansu.




</doc>
<doc id="12565815" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12565815" title="Russian battleship Borodino">
Russian battleship Borodino

Borodino () was the lead ship of her class of pre-dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Russian Navy although she was the second ship of her class to be completed. Named after the 1812 Battle of Borodino, the ship was completed after the beginning of the Russo-Japanese War in 1904. "Borodino" was assigned to the Second Pacific Squadron sent to the Far East a few months after her completion to break the Japanese blockade of Port Arthur. The Japanese captured the port while the squadron was in transit and their destination was changed to Vladivostok. The ship was sunk during the Battle of Tsushima on 27 May 1905 due to explosions set off by a Japanese shell hitting a magazine. There was only one survivor from her crew of 855 officers and enlisted men.

"Borodino" was long at the waterline and long overall, with a beam of and a draft of , more than designed. Her normal displacement was , over more than her designed displacement of . Her intended crew consisted of 28 officers and 754 enlisted men, although she usually carried 826–46 crewmen in service.

The ship was powered by two four-cylinder vertical triple-expansion steam engines, each driving one three-bladed propeller, using steam generated by 20 Belleville boilers. Unlike her sisters, the engines and boilers were both built by the Franco-Russian Works and the boilers provided steam to the engines at a pressure of . The engines were rated at and designed to reach a top speed of . They produced, however, only on her builder's sea trials on 23 August 1904 and gave an average speed of . At full load she carried of coal that provided her a range of at a speed of .

"Borodino"s 40-caliber 12-inch guns were mounted in two twin-turrets, one each fore and aft. They had a rate of fire of about one round per 90 seconds. Sixty rounds per gun were carried. The twelve 45-caliber guns were mounted in six electrically powered twin-gun turrets carried on the upper deck. They had a practical rate of fire of approximately three rounds per minute and were provided with 180 rounds per gun. Four of the twenty guns used against torpedo boats were mounted in casemates just below the forward main gun turret, two on each side. These guns were placed well above the waterline for use in any weather, unlike the remaining sixteen guns, which were mounted in casemates one deck lower and distributed over the length of the ship, close to the water. The unsuitability of the lower deck guns was graphically demonstrated when "Borodino"s sister ship made a high-speed turn during her trials, heeling 15°, and began taking water through the lower casemates. Each gun had 300 rounds available. The ship also mounted twenty Hotchkiss guns for anti-torpedo boat defense. "Borodino" carried four torpedo tubes, one each above water in the bow and in the stern, and a submerged tube on each side forward.

The ship's waterline armor belt consisted of Krupp armor and was thick. The armor of her gun turrets had a maximum thickness of and her deck ranged from in thickness. The armored lower deck curved downwards to her double bottom and formed an anti-torpedo bulkhead.

Construction began on "Borodino", named after the 1812 Battle of Borodino, on 26 May 1899 at the New Admiralty Shipyard in Saint Petersburg. The ship was laid down on 23 May 1900 in the presence of Tsar Nicholas II, and launched on 8 September 1901. She was completed in August 1904 at the cost of 14,573,000 rubles.

On 15 October 1904, "Borodino" set sail for Port Arthur from Libau along with the other vessels of the Second Pacific Squadron, under the overall command of Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky. Rozhestvensky led his squadron, including "Borodino", down the Atlantic coast of Africa, rounding the Cape of Good Hope, and reached the island of Nosy Be off the north-west coast of Madagascar on 9 January 1905 where they remained for two months while Rozhestvensky finalized his coaling arrangements. During this time, Rozhestvensky learned of the capture of Port Arthur and changed his destination to Vladivostok, the only other port controlled by the Russians in the Far East. The squadron sailed for Camranh Bay, French Indochina, on 16 March and reached it almost a month later to await the obsolete ships of the 3rd Pacific Squadron, commanded by Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov. The latter ships reached Camranh Bay on 9 May and the combined force sailed for Vladivostok on 14 May. While exact figures are not available for "Borodino", it is probable that the ship was approximately overweight as she and her sisters were overloaded with coal and other supplies; all of which was stored high in the ships and reduced their stability. The extra weight also submerged the waterline armor belt and left only about of the upper armor belt above the waterline.

Rozhestvensky decided to take the most direct route to Vladivostok using the Tsushima Strait and was intercepted by the Japanese battlefleet under the command of Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō on 27 May 1905. At the beginning of the battle, "Borodino" was third in line behind Rozhestvensky's flagship, . Very little is known of the ship's actions during the battle as there was only a single survivor from the ship and visibility was poor for most of the battle, but Captain W. C. Pakenham, the Royal Navy's official military observer aboard the Japanese battleship under the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, noted that she was hit badly around 14:30, some 25 minutes after Russian ships opened fire. "Borodino" briefly fell out of her position after that hit, but apparently regained it by 14:50. By this time, she had a serious fire on the central portion of her superstructure.

"Knyaz Suvorov" suffered multiple hits early in the battle, some of which wounded Rozhestvensky and jammed the ship's steering so that she fell out of formation. Around 16:00, "Borodino"s captain, Petr Serebrennikov, now de facto commander of the fleet, turned "Borodino" south and led the Russian fleet out of sight. As Japanese cruisers closed in at around 17:05, he turned the fleet north to avoid them, but encountered the Japanese battleships an hour later. They concentrated their fire on "Borodino" and her sister, , both of which had lists from earlier damage. Captain Pakenham noted a conspicuous hit on "Borodino" at 18:57 and she was observed to be on fire at 19:04 by observers aboard Tōgō's flagship . Pakenham observed two 12-inch hits by the battleship at 19:18 that started a massive fire. Ten minutes later, after Tōgō ordered his ships to cease fire and disengage, the battleship fired her already-loaded 12-inch guns before turning away. One of these hit "Borodino" beneath her starboard forward six-inch turret and ignited the ready-use ammunition in the turret. The fire spread and caused a catastrophic detonation in a nearby 6-inch magazine. Subsequent detonations of other magazines blew open her hull and the ship quickly capsized and sank. Only one crewman, Seaman First Class Semyon Yushin, survived the explosion from her crew of 855, being rescued after surviving for twelve hours in the water.



</doc>
<doc id="12598939" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12598939" title="Diamond stingray">
Diamond stingray

The diamond stingray ("Dasyatis dipterura") is a species of stingray in the family Dasyatidae. It is found in the coastal waters of the eastern Pacific Ocean from southern California to northern Chile, and around the Galápagos and Hawaiian Islands. This bottom-dweller generally inhabits sandy or muddy flats near rocky reefs and kelp forests, to a depth of , though off Hawaii it may range considerably deeper. As its common name suggests, this species has an angular, diamond-shaped pectoral fin disc that is plain brown or gray above, with rows of tubercles along the midline and on the "shoulders". The long, whip-like tail has both dorsal and ventral fin folds, which distinguish this ray from the closely similar longtail stingray ("D. longa"). It typically grows to across.

When searching for food, diamond stingrays may form groups of up to hundreds of individuals. It is most active at night and preys mainly on burrowing invertebrates and small bony fishes, which are extracted from the bottom via suction or digging. This species is aplacental viviparous: once the embryos exhaust their yolk supply, they are nourished by histotroph ("uterine milk") produced by the mother. Females bear 1–4 pups every summer in estuaries; mating is followed by a ten-month period of either sperm storage or arrested embryonic development, after which the embryos rapidly mature over 2–3 months. The slowest-growing stingray known, this species is not resilient against fishing pressure. It is caught for food by artisanal fishers in Latin America, particularly in Mexico where it is one of the most economically important rays. This has led it to be assessed as Near Threatened in Mexico by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), while the species as a whole is listed as Data Deficient. Though innocuous towards humans, the diamond stingray's long, venomous tail spine is potentially dangerous.

In 1880, the diamond stingray was described twice by three American ichthyologists: as "Dasybatus dipterurus" by David Starr Jordan and Charles Henry Gilbert in "Proceedings of the United States National Museum", and as "Trygon brevis" by Samuel Garman in "Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology". Jordan and Gilbert's account was published in May while Garman's was published in October, making "dipterurus" (feminine "dipterura") the correct name as it was published first. However, when Garman synonymized the two in 1913 he inappropriately gave precedence to "brevis", leading to long-standing confusion. Both "Dasybatus" and "Trygon" were later synonymized with the genus "Dasyatis", but many authors still listed "D. brevis" in place of or in addition to "D. dipterura". Garman also synonymized the Hawaiian stingray ("D. hawaiensis") with "D. dipterura" in 1913, which has since been followed by most authors but requires more study for confirmation.

The species syntypes were collected from San Diego Bay, California. The specific epithet "dipterura" is derived from the Latin "di" ("two"), "ptero" ("wing"), and "ura" ("tail"), referring to the fin folds on both sides of its tail. Rat-tailed stingray is a former common name for this species. Lisa Rosenberger's 2001 phylogenetic analysis, based on morphology, determined the diamond stingray and the bluntnose stingray ("D. say") of the western Atlantic Ocean to be sister species, that likely diverged before or with the formation of the Isthmus of Panama ("c." 3 Ma). In addition, the two were found to be the second-most basal taxa in their genus, after the common stingray ("D. pastinaca").

The diamond stingray is found in the eastern Pacific Ocean from southern California to northern Chile, as well as around the Galápagos and Hawaiian Islands; it is very abundant around Baja California and in the Gulf of California. At the northern and southern extremes of its range, it is generally only present during periods of suitably warm water brought about by El Niño. There is a record of this ray from off British Columbia, which is unconfirmed and would be highly anomalous as it is known to be a tropical and warm-temperate species.

A bottom-dwelling inhabitant of inshore waters, the diamond stingray favors sandy or muddy bottoms, often near rocky reefs or kelp forests. Off southern California, it usually occurs from the intertidal zone to a depth of during the summer, shifting to depths of during late fall and winter. For unknown reasons, it prefers to overwinter in kelp forests rather than sandy flats. Off Chile, the diamond stingray occurs at a similar depth of . On the other hand, this species has been reported from as far down as off Hawaii, which if accurate would suggest that it utilizes a much greater range of depths than previously realized.

The diamond stingray attains a disc width of or possibly ; females grow larger than males. Its pectoral fin disc is rhomboid in shape, slightly wider than long, with angular outer corners and subtly convex margins. The snout is blunt-angled and non-projecting. The eyes are fairly large and immediately followed by the spiracles (paired respiratory openings). The mouth is strongly curved, containing 21–37 upper tooth rows and 23–44 lower tooth rows; the teeth are small and blunt, and arranged into flattened surfaces. Three or five papillae (nipple-like structures) are found in a row across the floor of the mouth.

The whip-like tail generally measures up to one and half times the length of the disc, and bears one (more if replacements have grown in) long, slender, serrated spine on the upper surface, closer to the base than the tip. Behind the spine, there are long dorsal and ventral fin folds that rise gradually, reaching a relatively high apex before sloping down abruptly. The presence of the upper fin fold separates this species from the similar longtail stingray ("D. longa"), which shares most of its range. However, the tail is often damaged, in which case differentiating the two species in the field becomes all but impossible. Young rays have completely smooth skin, while adults develop a row of low tubercles along the midline of the back, flanked by two shorter rows on the "shoulders". The tail also becomes covered in prickles. This species is a uniform olive to brown to gray above, darkening to black on the tail, and off-white below.

The diamond stingray is most active at night, spending much of the day buried in sand with only its eyes protruding. When foraging for food, it may be solitary but more commonly forms groups numbering up to the hundreds. There is strong segregation by sex and age. This species feeds on crustaceans, molluscs, and other invertebrates, as well as small bony fishes; its powerful jaws and molar-like teeth allow it to crush hard-shelled prey. It mainly targets burrowing organisms, but may also take prey exposed on the bottom. There is a record of a female across, that had gorged herself on at least 30 small crabs. In the Bahía Magdalena lagoon complex, Baja California Sur, its most important source of food are pea crabs, followed by the razor clam "Solyema valvulus", and then polychaete worms.

The typical hunting strategy of the diamond stingray is to cruise just above the sea floor, landing atop any prey encountered. It then quickly levers its body up-and-down with its disc, producing negative pressure to extract the prey from its burrow. This ray has also been known to excavate large pits by undulating its disc and spitting jets of water, so as to uncover buried prey. Diamond stingrays are frequently trailed by smaller fishes, including Mexican hogfish ("Bodianus diplotaenia"), Galapagos porgies ("Calamus taurinus"), greybar grunts ("Haemulon sexfasciatum"), spinster wrasses ("Halichoeres nichols"), and long-spine porcupinefish ("Diodon holocanthus"), which take advantage of the invertebrates stirred up by the ray's activities. Known parasites of this species include the tapeworms "Acanthobothrium bullardi", "A. dasi", "A. rajivi", and "A. soberoni", "Anthocephalum currani", "Parachristianella tiygonis", and "Pseudochristianello elegantissima", the flukes "Anaporrhutum euzeti" and "Probolitrema mexicana", and the monogenean "Listrocephalos kearni".

Like other stingrays, the diamond stingray is aplacental viviparous: the embryos are initially nourished by yolk, and later by histotroph ("uterine milk", rich in proteins and lipids) produced by the mother. Only the left ovary and uterus are functional in adult females. Several bays along the Pacific coast of Baja California are known to serve as nurseries. Most of the life history information available on this species has come from Bahía Magdalena, where females bear one litter of 1–4 pups per year. Courtship and mating occurs in late summer from July to August, but due to a ten-month period of either sperm storage or diapause (wherein the embryo becomes dormant), embryonic development does not begin until the following year and is completed within 2–3 months. Birthing takes place in summer from July to September in shallow estuaries; the newborns measure across. During El Niño years, the higher temperatures appear to shift the timing of birth forward. The diamond stingray has the lowest growth rate of any stingray species yet studied. Males reach sexual maturity at around across and 7 years of age, while females grow slower still, reaching maturity at around across and 10 years of age. The maximum lifespan has been estimated at least 19 years for males and 28 years for females.

At least one fatality off southern California has resulted from the long, venomous tail spine of the diamond stingray. However, it is not aggressive and will usually flee given the opportunity. This ray is not found off the United States in sufficient numbers to be economically important. Elsewhere in its range, it is caught in substantial numbers for human consumption, both intentionally and as bycatch; the pectoral fins or "wings" are sold fresh or filleted and salted. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) notes that the diamond stingray's low reproductive productivity renders it susceptible to population depletion, but currently lacks enough biological and fishery data to assess it beyond Data Deficient overall, or in the U.S., Central, and South American parts of its range.

In Mexico, the diamond stingray is one of the most important components of Pacific artisanal shark and ray fisheries, comprising around a tenth of the total annual catch. Its significance is likely underestimated, as Mexican fishery reports frequently suffer from misidentifications and a lack of species-specific data. It is mainly caught during summer and fall, being the most common ray landed in Bahía Magdalena, and second most common ray landed off Sonora state. Demersal gillnets are the main fishing gear employed; both adult and juvenile rays easily become entangled in the mesh by their tail spines, with juveniles known to have comprised most of the Bahía Magdalena catch in 1998–2000. This species is also often caught incidentally in bottom trawls, on longlines, and in fish traps. In the future, habitat degradation from increasing numbers of shrimp farms may pose an additional threat to this species in the region. As a result of these pressures, the IUCN has assessed the diamond stingray as Near Threatened in Mexican waters. No management schemes have yet been enacted for this species.



</doc>
<doc id="12599097" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12599097" title="Ocellated electric ray">
Ocellated electric ray

The ocellated electric ray or bullseye electric ray ("Diplobatis ommata") is a species of electric ray in the family Narcinidae, native to the shallow inshore waters of the eastern central Pacific from the Gulf of California to Ecuador. Reaching in length, this species has a rounded pectoral fin disc and pelvic fins with convex margins. Its short and thick tail bears two dorsal fins and terminates in a triangular caudal fin. The ocellated electric ray is named for the distinctive large eyespot on the middle of its disc, consisting of a black or yellow center surrounded by concentric rings. Its dorsal coloration is otherwise highly variable, ranging from plain to ornately patterned on a light to dark brown background. The front part of its disc is darker brown.

Solitary and nocturnal in nature, the ocellated electric ray is a bottom-dweller found in sandy and rocky habitats. It moves along the bottom by "hopping" on its pelvic fins, and feeds on small crustaceans and polychaete worms. For defense, it can generate an electrical discharge from its electric organs. This species probably bears live young that are sustained by yolk and later histotroph ("uterine milk") during gestation. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has listed the ocellated electric ray as Vulnerable, as it is susceptible to the heavy trawling activity within its limited range.

American ichthyologists David Starr Jordan and Charles Henry Gilbert described the ocellated electric ray in an 1890 article for the scientific journal "Proceedings of the United States National Museum". Their account was based on a female specimen caught by the United States Fish Commission steamer USS "Albatross" in 1888. The female was collected off the Pacific coast of Colombia at a depth of . Gilbert had previously obtained a specimen from Panama in 1882, but it had been destroyed in a fire before it could be studied. Jordan and Gilbert named the new species "ommata" (Greek for "eyed") in reference to the distinctive spot on its back, and assigned it to the genus "Discopyge". In 1948, Henry Bryant Bigelow and William Charles Schroeder created the new genus "Diplobatis" for this species based on then-unique subdivision of its nostrils. Three other species of "Diplobatis" have since been described from the Atlantic. The Atlantic species more closely resemble each other in morphology than they do the ocellated electric ray, though as a whole all four "Diplobatis" species are extremely similar. Another common name for this species is "target ray".

The pectoral fin disc of the ocellated electric ray is heart- or trowel-shaped and slightly wider than long. A pair of large, kidney-shaped electric organs are visible through the skin on either side of the head. The small eyes are followed by smaller spiracles, which have seven to ten small, rounded projections on their rims. The snout is broadly rounded, with each nostril divided into two openings by a strut. Between the nostrils is a curtain of skin with a smooth to gently wavy posterior margin. The small mouth forms a transverse line; the edge of the lower jaw is scalloped, and when closed usually conceals the teeth. There are 14–16 tooth rows in each jaw. The small and pointed teeth become progressively longer and sharper towards the back, and are arranged in a quincunx pattern. Five pairs of small gill slits are present on the underside of the disc.

The large pelvic fins originate beneath the disc and have convex trailing margins. Adult males have very short and thick claspers. The broad and flattened tail is shorter than the disc and bears a fold of skin along either side. There are two small dorsal fins, both with rounded to angular apices; the first is slightly smaller than the second, and its position varies from over to behind the pelvic fins. The caudal fin is triangular with rounded corners, and is roughly symmetrical above and below. The skin is soft and entirely devoid of dermal denticles.

The dorsal coloration of the ocellated electric ray is extremely variable, with the only constant being the large ocellus ("eyespot") in the middle of the back. The center of the ocellus is black or yellow, which is surrounded by concentric, alternating dark and light rings that may be either continuous or broken. The remainder of the upper surface is most commonly a shade of light brown with numerous fine dark dots; there may also be light dots, larger dark spots or blotches, and/or irregular brown marbling. Some individuals are plain light or dark brown with a black ocellus. The portion of the disc in front of the eyes is brown with up to five darker blotches. The dorsal pattern often extends to the ventral fin margins; the underside is otherwise white to cream-colored. This species grows up to long.

The ocellated electric ray is common in the tropical coastal waters of the eastern Pacific. Its range extends as far north as the Gulf of California and Bahía San Juanico in Baja California Sur, and as far south as Ecuador. A bottom-dwelling species, it has been recorded from the intertidal zone to a depth of . The favored habitat of this ray is sandy bays, though it can also be found over rubble bottoms, rocky terrain, and rhodolith beds.

Like the rest of its family, the ocellated electric ray can defend itself by producing a moderate electric shock. During the day, this solitary ray spends most of its time lying partially buried in sand, often near rocky reefs. It becomes more active at night, using its pelvic fins to "hop" along the sea floor. It feeds on small crustaceans such as amphipods and shrimp, as well as polychaete worms. Parasites documented from this species include the tapeworms "Acanthobothrium dollyae", "A. maryanskii", and "A. royi", and the fluke "Anaporrhutum euzeti". Though reproductive details are unknown, the ocellated electric ray is presumably viviparous, with the developing embryos sustained first by yolk and later by maternally produced histotroph ("uterine milk"), as in other electric rays. Females mature sexually at under long; the maturation size for males is unknown.

The shock from the ocellated electric ray is not dangerous to humans. It occasionally appears in the home aquarium trade, but is difficult to keep because it requires live invertebrates for food. The ocellated electric ray and other electric rays are used as model organisms in biomedical research because their electric organs are rich in ion channels and acetylcholine receptors, which play important roles in the human nervous system. The protein agrin, which concentrates acetylcholine receptors during human embryonic development, was first isolated from this species. Though the ocellated electric ray is not utilized economically, it is caught incidentally by shrimp trawlers. Its mortality from fishing has not been quantified but is thought to be high, considering that trawling operations in the Atlantic are known to take "Diplobatis" species in large numbers. The catch rate is also probably underestimated due to problematic identification. Given the restricted range of this species and the intensity of trawling within its habitat, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has assessed it as Vulnerable.


</doc>
<doc id="12602492" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12602492" title="Marbled electric ray">
Marbled electric ray

The marbled electric ray ("Torpedo marmorata") is a species of electric ray in the family Torpedinidae found in the coastal waters of the eastern Atlantic Ocean from the North Sea to South Africa. This benthic fish inhabits rocky reefs, seagrass beds, and sandy and muddy flats in shallow to moderately deep waters. It can survive in environments with very little dissolved oxygen, such as tidal pools. The marbled electric ray has a nearly circular pectoral fin disc and a muscular tail that bears two dorsal fins of nearly equal size and a large caudal fin. It can be identified by the long, finger-like projections on the rims of its spiracles, as well as by its dark brown mottled color pattern, though some individuals are plain-colored. Males and females typically reach and long respectively.

Nocturnal and solitary, the marbled electric ray can often be found lying the sea floor buried except for its eyes and spiracles. This slow-moving predator feeds almost exclusively on small bony fishes, which it ambushes from the bottom and subdues with strong electric bursts. It defends itself by turning towards the threat, swimming in a loop, or curling up with its underside facing outward, while emitting electric shocks to drive off the prospective predator. Its paired electric organs are capable of producing 70–80 volts of electricity. This species is aplacental viviparous, with the developing embryos sustained by yolk and histotroph ("uterine milk") produced by the mother. Mating takes place from November to January, and females bear litters of 3–32 pups every other year after a gestation period of 9–12 months. The newborn ray is immediately capable of using electricity to hunt.

The electric shock delivered by a marbled electric ray can be severe but is not directly life-threatening. Its electrogenic properties have been known since classical antiquity, when live rays were used to treat conditions such as chronic headaches. This and other electric ray species are used as model organisms in biomedical research. Various coastal demersal fisheries take the marbled electric ray as bycatch; captured rays are usually discarded as they have little commercial value. The impact of fishing on its population is uncertain, and thus International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has listed this ray under Data Deficient. In the Mediterranean Sea, it remains the most common electric ray and in some areas may be increasing in number.

French naturalist Antoine Risso described the marbled electric ray as "Torpedo marmorata" in his 1810 "Ichtyologie de Nice, ou histoire naturelle des poissons du département des Alpes maritimes" ("Ichthyology of Nice, or natural history of fishes in the Alpes-Maritimes"). The specific epithet "marmorata" means "marbled" in Latin, and refers to the ray's color pattern. Because no type specimens are known, in 1999 Ronald Fricke designated Risso's original illustration as the species lectotype.

Within the genus "Torpedo", the marbled electric ray belongs to the subgenus "Torpedo", which differs from the other subgenus "Tetronarce" in having fringed margins on their spiracles and generally ornate dorsal coloration. Other common names for this species include common crampfish, marbled torpedo, numbfish, and spotted torpedo.

Widely distributed in the eastern Atlantic Ocean, the marbled electric ray is found from Scotland and the southern North Sea southward to the Cape of Good Hope, South Africa, including all around the Mediterranean Sea. It prefers temperatures cooler than . This species is typically found at depths of off Britain and Ireland, off Italy, and down to off Tunisia. It has been recorded from as deep as . The marbled electric ray tends to be found deeper than the common torpedo ("T. torpedo"), which shares the southern portion of its range.

Bottom-dwelling in nature, the marbled electric ray inhabits rocky reefs and seagrass beds, as well as nearby areas with sandy or muddy bottoms. During warm summer months, pregnant females are known to migrate into Arcachon Bay in northwestern France, where they are commonly found in very shallow, muddy pools near oyster beds. This species may conduct a northward migration in summer and autumn, into the waters of the British Isles.

The body of the marbled electric ray is soft and flabby, and entirely lacks dermal denticles. The thick pectoral fin disc is nearly circular and comprises about 59–67% of the total length; the paired kidney-shaped electric organs are visible beneath the skin, outside of the small eyes. Immediately posterior to each eye is a large, oval spiracle, which bears 6–8 long, finger-like projections on the rim that almost meet at the center. On the "nape" behind the spiracles, there are 5–7 prominent mucous pores. Between the nostrils, there is a quadrangular curtain of skin much broader than long, that almost reaches the small, arched mouth. The teeth are small with a single pointed cusp, and are arranged with a quincunx pattern into a pavement-like band in either jaw. The five pairs of gill slits are small and located beneath the disc.

The two dorsal fins have rounded apexes and are placed close together; the base of each fin measures about two-thirds its height. The rear of the first dorsal fin base is located behind the rear of the pelvic fin bases. The second dorsal fin is only slightly smaller than the first. The short, robust tail has skin folds running along either side, and terminates in a large caudal fin shaped like a triangle with blunt corners. The upper surface has a dark mottled pattern on a light to dark brown background; some individuals are uniformly brown. The underside is plain off-white with darker fin margins. This species can grow up to long, though few exceed long for males and long for females. The much larger sizes attained by females can be attributed to the resource investment needed for reproduction. There seems to be little geographic variation in maximum size. The maximum weight on record is .

Solitary and slow-moving, the marbled electric ray may remain motionless for several days at a time. It is more active at night and spends much of the day buried in sediment with only the eyes and spiracles showing. Consistent with its sluggish nature, the marbled electric ray has a low blood oxygen carrying capacity and heart rate (10–15 beats/min), and consumes less oxygen than other sharks and rays of similar size. It is highly tolerant of being deprived of oxygen (hypoxia), allowing it to cope with deoxygenated bottom waters or being stranded in small pools by the falling tide. The ray stops breathing entirely when the oxygen partial pressure in the water drops below 10–15 Torr, and can survive such a state for at least five hours. It deals with extreme hypoxia by coupling anaerobic glycolysis to additional energy-producing pathways in its mitochondria, which serves to slow down the accumulation of potentially harmful lactate within its cells.

Like other members of its family, the marbled electric ray can produce a strong electric shock for attack and defense, produced by a pair of electric organs derived from muscle tissue. Each electric organ consists of 400–600 vertical columns, with each column composed of a stack of roughly 400 jelly-filled "electroplates" that essentially act like a battery. This ray has been measured producing up to 70–80 volts, and the maximum potential of the electric discharge has been estimated to be as high as 200 volts. The strength of the electric shock declines progressively as the ray becomes fatigued. Experiments "in vitro" have found that the nerves innervating the electric organ essentially stop functioning at temperatures below . As the water temperature in the wild regularly drops below this threshold in winter, it is possible that the ray does not use its electric organ for part of the year. Alternately, the ray may have a yet-unknown physiological mechanism to adapt electric organ function to the cold.

Known parasites of the marbled electric ray include the tapeworms "Anthocephalum gracile" and "Calyptrobothrium riggii", the leeches "Pontobdella muricata" and "Trachelobdella lubrica", the monogeneans "Amphibdella torpedinis", "Amphibdelloides kechemiraen", "A. maccallumi", "A. vallei", "Empruthotrema raiae", "E. torpedinis", and "Squalonchocotyle torpedinis", and the nematodes "Ascaris torpedinis" and "Mawsonascaris pastinacae".

The marbled electric ray is an ambush predator that employs electricity to capture prey. Vision is of little importance in hunting, as the ray's eyes are often obscured as it lies buried on the bottom. Instead, it likely relies on the mechanoreceptors of its lateral line, as it only attacks moving prey. The electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini may also contribute to prey detection.

Small, benthic bony fishes constitute over 90% of the marbled electric ray's diet by weight; these include gobies, hake, sea bass, mullets, jack mackerel, sea breams, goatfish, damselfish, wrasses, conger eels, and flatfish. Cephalopods such as European squid ("Loligo vulgaris") and elegant cuttlefish ("Sepia elegans") are a minor secondary food source. There is a single record of an individual that had swallowed a penaeid prawn, "Penaeus kerathurus", and a study of captive rays found that they reject live "Macropodia" crabs. Off southern France, by far the most important prey species is the leaping mullet ("Liza saliens"). Food items are swallowed whole; there is a record of a ray long that had consumed a three-bearded rockling ("Gaidropsarus vulgaris") long.

Two distinct types of prey capture behavior have been observed in the marbled electric ray. The first is "jumping", used by the ray to attack prey fish that swim close to its head, typically no farther than . In the "jump", the ray pulls back its head and then thrusts its disc upwards, reaching about two or three times as high as the prey fish is from the bottom. Simultaneously, it makes a single tail stroke and produces a high-frequency (230–430 Hz, increasing with temperature) burst of electricity. The initial electric burst is very short, containing only 10–64 pulses, but is still strong enough to cause tetanic contraction in the body of the prey fish, often breaking its vertebral column. As the ray glides forward, the motion of the jump sweeps the now-paralyzed prey beneath it, whereupon it is enveloped by the disc and maneuvered to the mouth. Electric bursts continues to be produced during this process; the total number of electric pulses over a single jump increases with size, ranging from 66 in a newborn long to 340 in an adult long. The jump lasts no more than two seconds.

The second type of prey capture behavior is "creeping", used by the ray for stationary or slow-moving prey; this includes stunned prey that may have drifted out of reach from a jumping attack. In creeping, the ray makes small up and down motions of its disc coupled with small beats of its tail. The raising of the disc draws water beneath it and pulls the prey towards the ray, while the lowering of the disc and the tail beats move the ray towards the prey in small increments. When it reaches the prey, the ray opens its mouth to suck it in. Short electric bursts are produced as necessary, depending on the movement of the prey, and continue through ingestion.

Because of its size and electrical defenses, the marbled electric ray does not often fall prey to other animals such as sharks. This species exhibits different defensive behaviors depending on whether a prospective predator grasps it by the disc or the tail. A ray touched on the disc will quickly turn toward the threat while producing electric shocks; this is followed by it fleeing in a straight line, after which it may re-bury itself. A ray touched on the tail will propel itself upward into a loop; if it has not escaped after the maneuver, the ray will curl into a ring with the belly facing outward, so as to present the area of its body with the highest electric field gradient (the underside of the electric organs) towards the threat; these behaviors are accompanied by short, strong electric shocks. The ray tends to produce more electric bursts when protecting its tail than when protecting its disc.

The marbled electric ray exhibits aplacental viviparity, in which the developing embryos are nourished initially by yolk, which is later supplemented by nutrient-rich histotroph ("uterine milk") produced by the mother. Adult females have two functional ovaries and uteruses; the inner lining of the uterus bears a series of parallel lengthwise folds. The reproductive cycle for females is probably biennial, while males are capable of mating every year. Mating occurs from November to January, and the young are born the following year after a gestation period of 9–12 months. The litter size ranges from 3 to 32, increasing with the size of the female.

The electric organs first appear when the embryo is long, at which time it has distinct eyes, pectoral and pelvic fins, and external gills. At an embryonic length of , the gill clefts close dorsally, leaving the gill slits beneath the disc as in all rays. At the same time, the four blocks of primordial cells that make up each electric organ rapidly coalesce together. The embryo's pectoral fins enlarge and fuse with the snout at a length of , giving it the typical circular electric ray shape. When the embryo is long, the external gills are resorbed and pigmentation develops. The embryo can produce electric discharges by a length of . The strength of the discharge increases by a magnitude of 10 over the course of gestation, reaching 47–55 volts by an embryonic length of , close to that of an adult.

Newborns measure approximately long, and are immediately capable of performing characteristic predatory and defensive behaviors. Males mature sexually at approximately long and five years of age, while females mature significantly larger and older at long and twelve years of age. The maximum lifespan is 12–13 years for males and around 20 years for females.

The shock delivered by the marbled electric ray can be painful but is seldom life-threatening, although there is a danger of a shocked diver becoming disoriented underwater. Its electrogenic properties have been known since classical antiquity, leading it and other electric fishes to be used in medicine. The ancient Greeks and Romans applied live rays to those afflicted with conditions such as chronic headaches and gout, and recommended that its meat be eaten by epileptics.

The marbled electric ray is caught incidentally in bottom trawls, trammel nets, and bottom longlines; it has little economic value and is mostly discarded at sea when captured. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) presently lacks enough population and fishery data to assess its conservation status beyond Data Deficient. At least in the northern Mediterranean, surveys have found that it remains the most common electric ray, and is perhaps becoming more abundant in Italian waters. This and other electric ray species are used as model organisms in biomedical research because their electric organs are rich in acetylcholine receptors, which play an important role in the human nervous system.



</doc>
<doc id="12602589" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12602589" title="John Adams (drummer)">
John Adams (drummer)

John Adams (born October 9, 1951) is a dedicated fan of the Cleveland Indians, a Major League Baseball team based in Cleveland, Ohio. Adams has played his bass drum in the bleacher seats during nearly every Indians home game since 1973, which has brought him notoriety and recognition from the Indians and other organizations. The Indians pay for two season tickets for Adams and his drum, he has been involved in two ceremonial first pitches, and he is the only fan for whom the Indians have dedicated a bobblehead day.

Adams first drummed at an Indians game on August 24, 1973, at Cleveland Stadium, at a game in which the Indians beat the Texas Rangers, 11–5. Adams, who was 21 years old at the time, has stated that he brought his bass drum to that first game because he wanted to add to the noise of "seat banging", a tradition at Cleveland Stadium in which fans would bang the swivel seat of their chairs against the chair's base during tense moments in the game. But Adams preferred to sit in the bleachers, where there were no seats to bang.

During the game, Bob Sudyk, a reporter for the "Cleveland Press", interviewed Adams and asked if he was going to drum again at the following game. Adams said no, but Sudyk wrote in his article that he would. According to Adams, "not to make a liar out of Bob, I showed up with my drum, and then I came to the next game and the next game and the next game." The Indians' promotions director at the time, Jackie York, also approached Adams and asked him to play at every game. Adams formally declined but continued to attend games with his drum.

Ever since, Adams has sat in the highest bleacher seat in left-center field with his bass drum; he has missed only about 40 home games in 43 seasons. Adams played at Cleveland Stadium until October 1993, when the Indians played their last game there. Next spring he moved with the team to its new ballpark, Jacobs Field (renamed Progressive Field in 2008). Adams played the drum at his 3,000th game on April 27, 2011. During his tenure, he has witnessed Indians pitcher Len Barker pitch a perfect game on May 15, 1981, and witnessed the Indians play in the 1995, 1997, and 2016 World Series.

Adams still uses the same 26-inch-wide bass drum he began with in 1973. He has stated that he bought it as part of a set for $25 at a garage sale. It has the same head on the side of the drum that Adams does not beat, but Adams has stated that he replaces the other side about twice a year and also goes through about three sets of mallets each year. During games, Adams tends to drum at particular moments: when the Indians take the field at the beginning of the game, if the Indians have runners in scoring position, if the Indians are tied or trailing near the end of the game, or if they are winning at the top of the ninth inning. Because of his drumming, Adams became a celebrity and his drum was soon nicknamed Big Chief Boom-Boom, by Indians radio announcer Herb Score. It has also helped him meet politicians, including U.S. senators and a Pakistani government official.

Adams has been recognized by the Cleveland Indians and other organizations for his long commitment to the team. On October 4, 2007, he threw out the ceremonial first pitch for the Indians' first game in the 2007 American League Division Series, against the New York Yankees. After Adams drummed at his 3,000th game on April 27, 2011, the Indians celebrated it the following Saturday, on April 30, 2011, by incorporating Adams in the ceremonial first pitch and putting on a pregame parade featuring Adams' fellow Indians fans carrying bongos, snares and plastic toy drums. For the ceremonial first pitch, Adams swung at the ball with his drum from home plate after it was thrown by former Indians player Joe Charboneau. Soon after the move to Jacobs Field, Cleveland began a record-breaking run of sellouts, which ended at 455 games in April 2001. Soon after, the Indians retired the number 455 in honor of their fans and Adams helped unveil the commemorative sign.

Adams once paid for his tickets (one for himself, and one for his drum), but the Indians now pay for two of his season tickets in honor of the contributions he has made to the ballpark atmosphere. Adams buys an additional two season tickets. In 2006, the Indians gave out bobblehead dolls depicting Adams, making him the only fan for whom the team has dedicated a bobble head day.

In 2008, he won the Hilda Award, which is awarded annually by The Baseball Reliquary "to recognize distinguished service to the game by a baseball fan" and is named in memory of Hilda Chester, a dedicated fan of the Brooklyn Dodgers. In April 2012, Great Lakes Brewing Company, a Cleveland-based brewery and brewpub, released a product called Rally Drum Red Ale in honor of Adams and Opening Day. In April 2015, "The Plain Dealer" columnist Tim Warsinskey wrote a column suggesting that a statue of Adams be built in Cleveland in his honor.

Adams also has a plaque located by his seat just under the left field scoreboard commemorating his tenure as the Indians' "#1 Fan".

Adams lives in Brecksville, Ohio, a suburb of Cleveland. He attended both Saint Ignatius High School in Cleveland and Parma Senior High School in Parma, Ohio, where he played bass drum in band before graduating from high school in 1969. He graduated from Cleveland State University, where he intends to pursue his master's degree. He is divorced and does not have any children. Adams worked on computer systems for AT&T until being laid off in October 2016. He has been teaching an aquatics class for students with disabilities, without pay, at Cleveland State University since 1978. Adams has also volunteered his time as a member of the Kiwanis service club and the community emergency response team in his hometown and has taught CPR and water safety.


</doc>
<doc id="12602850" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12602850" title="Sparsely-spotted stingaree">
Sparsely-spotted stingaree

The sparsely-spotted stingaree ("Urolophus paucimaculatus"), also known as the white-spotted stingaree or Dixon's stingaree, is a species of stingray in the family Urolophidae, common off the southern Australian coast. Preferring sandy flats and seagrass beds, this benthic ray can be found from close to shore to a depth of at least , and tends to occur deeper in the northern portion of its range. Reaching a length of , this species has a broad, diamond-shaped pectoral fin disc that is typically plain gray in color above with a V-shaped marking between the eyes. Individuals from southerly waters also generally exhibit a smattering of small, dark-edged white spots. This ray is further characterized by a distinctively bell-shaped curtain of skin between the nostrils. Its tail has a skin fold running along either side and a leaf-shaped caudal fin, but no dorsal fin.

Relatively inactive during daytime, the sparsely-spotted stingaree preys mainly on crustaceans, and to a much lesser extent on polychaete worms and other small benthic organisms. It is aplacental viviparous, with the mother provisioning her young with histotroph ("uterine milk"). Life history differs between the eastern and western subpopulations: eastern females bear litters of up to six pups with a twelve-month gestation period, while western females bear litters of only one or two pups with a ten-month gestation period. Also, western rays mature later and live longer than eastern rays. The venomous sting of the sparsely-spotted stingaree is potentially injurious to humans, and it has been reported to react aggressively if disturbed. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has listed it under Least Concern, as there is little fishing activity over the majority of its range.

The sparsely-spotted stingaree was described in a 1969 issue of "The Victorian Naturalist" by Joan Dixon of the Museum Victoria. The specific epithet "paucimaculatus" is derived from the Latin "paucus", meaning "few", and "maculatus", meaning "spotted". The type specimen was collected from the Bass Strait, near Cape Patton in Victoria. Subpopulations from the eastern and western portions of its range differ in aspects of life history and merit further taxonomic investigation, according to the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

One of the most abundant cartilaginous fishes off southern Australia, the sparsely-spotted stingaree has a relatively wide distribution extending from Crowdy Head in New South Wales to Lancelin in Western Australia, including the entirety of Tasmania. Its range has expanded southward in the past few decades, apparently due to climate change. In Port Phillip, its numbers increased from 1970 to 1991, likely as a result of fisheries depleting its ecological competitors.

Bottom-dwelling in nature, the sparsely-spotted stingaree inhabits a variety of sandy or seagrass-bottomed habitats, ranging from very shallow, sheltered bays and inlets to the open continental shelf, deep or more. Rays found further north, such as in the Great Australian Bight, tend to be found at depths greater than . By contrast, rays found further south, off Victoria and Tasmania, are most common in less than of water. There is no evidence for segregation by age or sex, though there may be an offshore migration during winter.

The sparsely-spotted stingray has a more or less diamond-shaped pectoral fin disc wider than long, with rounded outer corners. The anterior margins of the disc are nearly straight and converge at an obtuse angle on the fleshy snout, the tip of which barely protrudes from the disc. The small eyes are immediately followed by comma-shaped spiracles with angular or rounded posterior rims. The outer rim of each nostril is enlarged into a knob towards the back. Between the nostrils is a bell-shaped curtain of skin with a finely fringed trailing margin; only the Kapala stingaree ("U. kapalensis") has a similarly shaped nasal curtain. The small mouth contains five or six papillae (nipple-like structures) on the floor, most of which have forked tips. Additional small papillae are present on the outside of the lower jaw. The teeth in both jaws are small with roughly oval bases, and are arranged in a quincunx pattern. The five pairs of gill slits are short. The pelvic fins are small and rounded.

The tail measures 77–98% as long as the disc; it is very flattened at the base and slender towards the tip, which bears a deep, leaf-shaped caudal fin. There is a prominent fold of skin running along either side of the tail, and a serrated stinging spine placed on the upper surface about halfway along its length. There is no dorsal fin. The skin is completely devoid of dermal denticles. This species is uniformly light gray above with a darker V-shaped marking between the eyes, and white below with slightly darker lateral disc margins. Most rays from the southern portion of its range also have a handful of small, regularly arranged spots atop the disc, each white with a dark border. Juveniles have a black caudal fin, which lightens with age (except sometimes for the margin). The largest individual on record was long.

During the day, the sparsely-spotted stingaree spends much time resting motionless on the bottom, often buried in sand. Crustaceans form the main component of its diet, accounting for over 80% of food intake by volume with amphipods, mysids, and shrimps being most important. Polychaete worms, mostly of the relatively mobile, shallowly buried "errant" type, are a major secondary food source. On rare occasions, molluscs, echinoderms, and small bony fishes are also eaten. This species incorporates a progressively greater diversity of prey into its diet as it grows older; specifically, mysids, isopods, and amphipods decline in importance, while shrimps, polychaete worms, penaeid prawns, and crabs are consumed in greater proportions. The sparsely-spotted stingaree is preyed upon by the broadnose sevengill shark ("Notorynchus cepedianus"). It is known to be parasitized by a tapeworm in the genus "Acanthobothrium", and the monogeneans "Calicotyle urolophi" and "Merizocotyle urolophi".

Like other stingrays, the sparsely-spotted stingaree is aplacental viviparous: once the developing embryos exhaust their supply of yolk, the mother supplies them with nutrient-rich histotroph ("uterine milk") via specialized extensions of the uterine epithelium called "trophonemata". Females have a single functional ovary and uterus, on the right side, and an annual reproductive cycle. In the eastern subpopulation, ovulation occurs in spring or early summer and the litter size ranges from one to six, increasing with female size. The gestation period lasts approximately one year, and the newborns measure about long. Males reach sexual maturity at around long and two and a half years of age, and females at around long and three years of age. The maximum lifespan is at least 8 years for males and 9 years for females. In the western subpopulation, mating occurs in early or mid-summer and females only bear litters of one or two pups. The gestation period lasts ten months, with birthing taking place in late spring or early summer. The newborns measure across. Males mature sexually at around across and three years of age, and females at around across and five years of age. The maximum lifespan is 14 years. In both subpopulations, females grow more slowly and to a larger ultimate size than males.

Reported to be more aggressive than other stingarees, the sparsely-spotted stingaree readily employs its venomous sting if disturbed and can inflict a painful injury on a human. It is edible, but seldom brought to market. Fishing pressure is insignificant across large portions of this ray's range, including in the Great Australian Bight, though substantial numbers are caught incidentally by commercial fisheries off southeastern and southwestern Australia in beach seines and bottom trawls. The sparsely-spotted stingaree generally survives being captured, sorted, and discarded, though the process often causes it to abort any unborn young. Nevertheless, losses to fisheries appear to be sustainable at present, and thus the IUCN has listed this species under Least Concern. There are a number of small Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) within its range, and it would potentially benefit from the implementation of the 2004 Australian National Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks.



</doc>
<doc id="12610941" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12610941" title="Pancho Coimbre">
Pancho Coimbre

Francisco "Pancho" Coimbre Atiles (29 January 1909 – 4 November 1989), more commonly known as Pancho Coimbre, was a Puerto Rican professional baseball player. He was born in the municipality of Coamo and moved to Ponce early in his life. It was in Ponce where he would begin to actively participate in sports, both in sprinting and baseball. Coimbre played thirteen seasons in the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League (LBPPR), with the "Leones de Ponce". During this period the team won five league championships. He finished his career with an average of .337, and had an average of 2.2 strikeouts per season, this included four consecutive seasons from 1939 to 1942, without any strikeouts. Coimbre also won two LBPPR batting titles and the league's Most Valuable Player Award in 1943.

Coimbre traveled to New York City, after completing his first professional season in Puerto Rico, where he joined the Porto Rico Stars baseball team of the Negro Leagues. He was contracted by the New York Cubans, while playing with the Porto Rico Stars. He joined the NY Cubans and played several seasons for them. Coimbre's batting average remained over the .300 mark, including two seasons where he batted over .400. While playing in the Negro leagues he was selected to play in the league's East–West All-Star games twice, where he played with several players who in the future would be elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. He also played with teams established in Colombia, Venezuela, the Dominican Republic and Mexico. Following his retirement Coimbre worked as a coach and manager of teams in both the professional and amateur leagues of Puerto Rico. Coimbre, who was eighty years old, died because he was unable to escape the flames of a burning building in which he lived.

Francisco Coimbre was born in Coamo, Puerto Rico, to Guillermo Coimbre and Zoila Atiles. Upon his birth, he was inscribed as a resident of Arroyo in his birth certificate, following a common practice at the time. In 1922, he moved to Ponce along his mother, in order to live closer to his sister, Angela Coimbre. There he began playing baseball under the training and supervision of Miguel Caratini and Antonio Gordan, two hall of famers in the local league.

His first accomplishments in sports where in track and field, where he competed in the 50-yard dash, eventually developing his skills in other aspects of the sport. He continued practicing this sport while attending high school. Later he was transferred to another educational institution in Caguas, Puerto Rico, but when he tried to participate in an athletic competition he was denied permission because he was classified in a different division on the records of Puerto Rico's Instruction Department.

This event led to a court case which marked the first time in Puerto Rico that a court hearing was scheduled for a case involving sports. He subsequently transferred to Ponce High School, where the Instruction Department tried to have him removed of the athleticism team based on allegations that he had received payment as a student athlete. Judge Roberto Tood Jr. determined that the evidence against Coimbre was insufficient during the hearing and the case was dropped.

In high school, Coimbre played in a school league in the positions of pitcher and second baseman. His incursion in organized baseball came about when he was recommended by a member of the "Leones de Ponce", to the team officials. The Leones de Ponce was the local team of the Puerto Rican amateur league who was to play in a series against the San Juan Athletics. During that season the team needed additional players and he was selected by the team's owner, Pipo Maldonado. He debuted in a game that took place in Ponce, where he was given the position of right fielder and he had four hits in five at bats. He continued in the team and in 1928 participated in a championship series between his team and the team of Guayama, where Ponce won on six games. In the last game of this series Coimbre pitched and won with a final score of 5–3, in a game where the team almost lost following an error.

Coimbre's first performance outside Puerto Rico was in the Dominican Republic, where he played with a team named Sandino in Santiago de los Caballeros in 1927. He was accompanied by several Puerto Rican players during this stay. In 1929, he played for the "Magallanes" a team in Venezuela where he played as a pitcher and outfielder. Four of his teammates, who now had homes in Caracas, had played with him in the Puerto Rican league. After having a solid performance in the 1930 season of the amateur league, he was recruited by the Tigres del Licey team to play in the Dominican Republic, which was coached by Charles Dore. Following that season, he continued alternating between both leagues, playing with Santo Domingo in 1931.

After the Puerto Rican league season came to an end in 1932, Coimbre went to work as a security guard in a penal institution and only played with a semi-professional team. Shortly after, he was offered a contract to play in La Guaira, with a team called Santa Marta. The season concluded with Buchipluma, a second team owned by Santa Marta's proprietor winning the league's championship. Following his participation with Santa Marta, he continued playing, both in Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic. While playing with Licey, the team developed a rivalry with El Escogido, which gave Coimbre an opportunity to establish relationships with several players, from both countries. During this period the team continued to be coached by Dore, and included several known Dominican players. The team would win the league's championship once, but Coimbre decided not to assist the ceremony where the trophy was awarded choosing to stay in his hotel room instead. Dore took the cup to Coimbre so that he could have it in his possession some days, but he rejected this and suggested that it be filled with money for a donation.

In 1935, he moved to Maracaibo where he played for Pastora, in Zulia's Stadium. The team reached the league's final series but lost to Magallanes. Prior to this series, the team had to travel to Caimbas, an industrial city where the games where scheduled. The usual way of traveling there was by boat, but following Coimbre's advice the team was transported there by airplane. After the season was over he moved to La Victoria, Aragua, where one of his friends resided in a hacienda. There he played in a series that served to determine what the final roster of Concordia, a team that was going to travel to Puerto Rico that year, would be. Coimbre participated in the series, but choose to play with Ponce instead of Concordia. In 1937, he returned to the Dominican Republic and his team won the league's championship in what he described as the "most powerful team in his memory".

Later that year, when he returned to Puerto Rico, Coimbre discovered that the "Liga de Béisbol Profesional de Puerto Rico" (LBPPR) was being organized. When the league was organized they elected Teófilo Maldonado, a press writer, as their president. Coimbre joined the Ponce-Kofresí team, that represented Ponce. The team was coached by Isidro Fabré and owned by Juan Luis Boscio and the team's roster included several players that were known by the local fanbase, After the season's conclusion, Coimbre traveled to New York City for the first time in his life, after being invited by a close friend. Coimbre's original intention was to visit his sister instead, with whom he lived while in the city. In New York, he met Santiago Bartolomei who was the owner of a team named Puerto Rico Stars (also known as "Puerto Rican Stars"). Bartolomei visited Coimbre along a group of players and offered him a contract to play with the team. He accepted and joined the team that included players from Puerto Rico and Cuba.
While he played for the Porto Rico Stars, Alejandro Pompéz called him and made him an offer to play with the New York Cubans, which at the time he owned. Pompéz became interested in Coimbre after hearing several reviews of his work, but he was skeptical of these claims and therefore he was hesitant to contract him at first and didn't do so until a group of players recommended him. He debuted in a game against a team named Buschwick, in a game that took place in Brooklyn, New York. In his first two games with the team he connected four hits, three singles and a double. Following this performance Pompéz informed him that he was going to stay with the team. After the season concluded he was instantly offered a second contract with the Cubans, which by this time where playing in the National League of the Negro League. He also participated with Ponce during the 1940–1941 season of the winter league and concluded the season with a batting average of .401 and no strikeouts. During his second season with the Cubans he had an average of .409, and was included in the league's All-star Game for the first time in his career.

Following this, he returned to Puerto Rico and had an average of .372 with his team. This season marked the first time that Ponce won the LBPPR championship. The next season Coimbre won his first batting championship in the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League, finishing with an average of .342 after he connected hits in 22 consecutive games. In 1943, he had his best season in the Negro leagues in the United States, when he was selected to the East's All-Star team for a second occasion and had an average of .428, the highest one in his career with the Cubans. That year Coimbre received a tribute in the Yankee Stadium, where hundreds of Puerto Ricans reunited and awarded him a scroll and a ring recognizing his performance. That same year, he led the LBPPR in runs batted in, scoring 27 RBIs. He was subsequently invited to play in the Liga Mexicana de Beisbol (Mexican Baseball League) for the first time in his career, where he joined a team called Puebla. In the beginning, he had problems adapting to Mexico's climate however, his average improved over the course of the season, eventually finishing as one of the league's leaders. Coimbre experienced a similar pattern in the 1944–1945 LBPPR season, where he was unable to score a hit in the first games, but finished winning his second batting championship.

Later that year, he joined a team named "El Torices", which was organized in Barranquilla, Colombia. His participation with the team mostly consisted of managing work since he was unable to play due to a previous injury. During his time of inactivity, he worked in the Administration of Parks and Recreation, supervising softball games organized by local businessmen. Another injury product of an accidental pitch ended Coimbre's participation in the 1946 LBPPR season, the injury's treatment required hospitalization and recovery treatment. After recovering from the injury he traveled to New York in 1948, originally with the intention of joining the Baltimore Elite Giants or the New York Black Yankees. During this visit he was contacted by Chebrook, a team of the Canadian league to play in the right field position.

Coimbre was not able to play in his full capacity because he still experienced problems with the injury on his knee. He ended the season batting an average of .316, in a season where the team won the league's championship. Coimbre spent the 1948–1951 working as a designated hitter in the LBPPR. His final season in the league was in 1952, when he was reassigned to play in the right field and was the fourth player in the batting lineup. His last game was against the "Cangrejeros de Santurce", where a wild pitch re-injured his knee, prompting Coimbre's decision to retire as an active player.

Following his retirement Coimbre began working as the coach of the Leones de Ponce, leading the team to two championships as well as extending his work to the Caribbean Series, a tournament where the champions of each Caribbean league participate. He received an invitation from the team owner of the Caguas-Guayama team, which was established in Panama, to work as the team manager. Coimbre also worked in the administration of the "Indios de Mayagüez", when the team traveled to play in Havana, Cuba. He subsequently decided to work as a coach in the amateur league, while continuing his participation with the professional Ponce team and began coaching a team that represented Juana Díaz, Puerto Rico.

Coimbre began promoting an idea that focused in the performance of the team, instead of the success of individual players. In his first day as an amateur coach, Coimbre summoned the players to a conference, where he noted that if all of them felt like "stars" and played for statistics their collective performance would suffer. He won a national championship with the team, but decided to leave it and work with the "Cachorros de Ponce", where he won another championship. During this time he also worked as a talent scout with the Pittsburgh Pirates. As a scout he was directly responsible for the hiring of Roberto Clemente, when he urged the Pirates to draft him in the first draw of the Major League Baseball Draft, even though Clemente was under a minor league contract with the Brooklyn Dodgers.

Coimbre died on November 4, 1989, when he was trapped in a house fire. The fire originated in the house's kitchen while he was cooking, consuming the structures wooden frame. When Coimbre tried to escape he was unable to open the front door, because he had locked it with a padlock.

The City of Ponce honored the memory of Coímbre by naming its sports museum the "Museo Pancho Coímbre". The museum, which contains a large collection of sports memorabilia, is located on the Calle (Street) Lolita Tizol. Also, in Ponce, he is honored at the Park for the Illustrious Ponce Citizens. Also the building housing the Secretaría de Recreación y Deportes on Avenida Las Américas in Ponce is named "Francisco "Pancho" Coímbre". The town of Coamo also honored Coimbre by naming a sports complex "Complejo Deportivo Francisco Pancho Coimbre Park" after him.



</doc>
<doc id="12612688" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12612688" title="1910 Giro d'Italia">
1910 Giro d'Italia

The 1910 Giro d'Italia was the second edition of the Giro d'Italia, a cycling race organized and sponsored by the newspaper "La Gazzetta dello Sport". The race began on 18 May in Milan with a stage that stretched to Udine, finishing back in Milan on 5 June after a stage and a total distance covered of . The race was won by the Italian rider Carlo Galetti of the Atala-Continental team, with fellow Italians Eberardo Pavesi and Luigi Ganna coming in second and third respectively.

Eberardo Pavesi was the first rider to lead the race after winning the first stage into Udine. After the second stage, Carlo Galetti took the lead of the race. Galetti then successfully defended the lead all the way to the race's finish in Milan. En route to his overall victory, Galetti won two stages. The Atala-Continental team finished as winners of the team classification.

One major change was made to the calculation for the general classification before the start of the second Giro d'Italia. Originally a point was given to each rider for his placing on each stage, but the organizers chose to give the riders who placed 51st or higher in a stage 51 points and keep the point distribution system the same for the riders who placed 1st through 50th in a stage.

The organizers chose to increase the length of their race after the success from the first edition. The original race was eight stages long and the 1910 edition was increased by two stages, to ten. The overall length of the race was increased to close to 3,000 kilometers, which made the race close to 500 kilometers longer than the inaugural edition of the race.

A total of 101 riders started the second Giro d'Italia out of the 118 that signed up to participate. Of the 101 riders that began the Giro d'Italia on 18 May, twenty of them made it to the finish in Milan on 5 June. Riders were allowed to ride on their own or as a member of a team. There were six teams that competed in the race: Atala-Continental, Atena-Dunlop, Bianchi-Dunlop, Legnano-Dunlop, Otav-Pirelli, and Stucchi-Pirelli.

The notable participants included the reigning champion of the Giro d'Italia, Luigi Ganna. The peloton also contained some of the most famous Italian cyclists at the time in Carlo Galetti, Ezio Corlaita, Giovanni Rossignoli, and Eberardo Pavesi. Two-time Tour de France champion Lucien Petit-Breton rode the Giro for the second straight year, along with his fellow countryman Jean-Baptiste Dortignacq who had been successful in the Tour. The Giro also saw its first German participants, neither of whom completed the race.

The first stage of the second Giro d'Italia began with a large send off in the start city of Milan. The finish in Udine was hotly contested as five riders came to the finish line in a pack. Ernesto Azzini managed to out-sprint the other four riders in the leading group to win the stage. The next stage saw the first non-Italian stage winner in the history of the Giro d'Italia, the Frenchman Jean-Baptiste Dortignacq. Dortignacq managed to breakaway from his fellow group member Carlo Galetti and then solo to the stage victory while five other riders chased close behind. Galetti's second-place finish on the stage was high enough for him to take the lead of the race. The French success enraged the Italian fans and led the competing riders to ban unite against the foreign riders. The third stage saw three major Italian riders, Luigi Ganna, Carlo Galetti, and Eberardo Pavesi, and attack early on in the stage. The three riders then rode together all the way to the finish in Teramo. Galetti went on to win the stage, with Ganna and Pavesi following in quick succession.

The Giro's fourth stage saw a tough stage with poor conditions for the riders, which ultimately led to the withdrawal of many riders including the likes of Lucien Petit-Breton - who was ranked third overall at the time. The peloton's pace was slower due to the w poor conditions, which caused the riders to arrive two hours later than expected in Naples. Pierino Albini beat out the Frenchman Maurice Brocco by 36 seconds for stage victory. Prior to the fifth stage's start, Frenchman Jean-Baptiste Dortignacq withdrew from the race after citing an illness. The police suspected foul play and looked into the situation, but their results are disputed through contradicting stories. Due to impassable roads, the start of the fifth stage was moved from Naples to Capua and decreased the distance of the stage from to . Eberardo Pavesi won the fifth stage after leading for most of the race.

The peloton remained intact for roughly the first half of the sixth stage. Luigi Ganna and Carlo Galetti broke away from the pack and made it to the finish in Rome where Ganna then edged out Galetti for the stage victory. During the next stage, a group of six riders lead for the most part before Galetti and Ganna broke away again. The two riders made their way to the finish in Genoa, where a large crowd of spectators came to see the finish. Ganna went on to win his second consecutive stage, while Galetti extended his lead over the rest of the field. The race's eighth stage contained some harsh climbs, most notably the Giovi. The finish of the stage was hotly contested as Galetti, Ganna, and Eberardo Pavesi finished at the same time, with Galetti winning the stage in the end.

Eberardo Pavesi dominated the difficult ninth stage that contained the major climbs of the Nava, Tenda, and San Bartolomeo. Pavesi went on to win the stage by close to six minutes over the second-place finisher Luigi Ganna. The race's tenth and final stage was marred by rain. Race leader Carlo Galetti crashed into a hay wagon early on in the stage and sustained some heavy wounds, he would get back on his bike and finish the stage in fifth place. Despite the rain in Milan, many spectators still came to watch the riders arrive. Luigi Ganna was the first rider to cross the finish line in Milan and in doing so, he won his third stage of the 1910 Giro d'Italia. Carlo Galetti won the Giro d'Italia by a margin of eighteen points over Pavesi. Galetti and his team, Atala-Continental, won the team classification.

There were 20 cyclists who had completed all ten stages. For these cyclists, the points they received from each of their stage placing's were added up for the general classification. The cyclist with the least accumulated points was the winner.


</doc>
<doc id="12640874" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12640874" title="2007–08 Sunderland A.F.C. season">
2007–08 Sunderland A.F.C. season

The 2007–08 season was the 113th full season in Sunderland A.F.C.'s history, their 107th in the league system of English football and 7th in the Premier League. After finishing 1st in the Championship during the 2006–07 season, Sunderland were promoted to the Premier League as champions. Sunderland had been relegated in the 2005–06 season with the record low points tally at the time of 15. The 2007–08 season was Roy Keane's first as a manager in the Premier League having won the Championship in his debut season.

Keane introduced 12 new signings in pre-season and allowed seven players to leave the club. They won their first game of the season, but subsequently started to struggle for points, winning just two games in their first 16. Their longest winning streak came towards the end of the season as they won three consecutive games. This late run helped Sunderland finish 15th, though they only won two away games, of which the first came in late March. The team suffered first round exits in two of the cup competitions they entered: in the second round of the League Cup and the third round of the FA Cup. Kenwyne Jones was the club's top goalscorer, recording 7 goals in the league. Left-back Danny Collins was named as Sunderland's player of the season, while on loan centre-back Jonny Evans was named as the club's young player of the season for the second season running. The club's average attendance of 42,728 was the fifth highest in the division.

Discussions of takeover were held over the summer involving an Irish group, the Drumaville Consortium, led by Niall Quinn. They completed the takeover in July for £10 million as Quinn's group took 72.59% of the club's shares. During the 2006–07 season, Roy Keane took over as manager from chairman Niall Quinn, who served as manager for the first six games of the season. Keane had a successful start to his managerial career with a 2–1 win over Derby County on 11 September 2006. On transfer window deadline day, Keane signed new players; Dwight Yorke, Liam Miller, Ross Wallace, Stanislav Varga, Graham Kavanagh and David Connolly. A 2–0 win over Leicester City on 1 January 2007 sparked an 18-game unbeaten streak for Sunderland, which was eventually ended on 21 April 2007 after a 3–1 defeat at the hands of Colchester United.

Sunderland reached the top of the Football League Championship for the first time in the season with a 2–1 win over Southampton, which included an 87th-minute winner from Grant Leadbitter. Their promotion was confirmed as third placed team Derby County lost 2–0 to Crystal Palace, as a result Birmingham City were also promoted. On the last day of the season, the Championship title would be decided. Sunderland won their game 5–0 against Luton Town, while Birmingham suffered a defeat against Preston North End thus crowning Sunderland as champions.

Sunderland's pre-season was busy with transfer activity, seeing eight players come in, and five players leave. Kenny Cunningham retired, Tommy Miller, William Mocquet, Kevin Smith were released, while Robbie Weir, Jamie Chandler and David Dowson were all promoted to the first team from the club's youth system. Their first signing of the season was of Greg Halford from Charlton Athletic, and their first transfer out of the club when Stephen Elliott moved to Wolverhampton Wanderers. On 13 July 2007, Sunderland signed the former Newcastle United player Michael Chopra from Cardiff City for £5 million and Manchester United midfielder Kieran Richardson on 16 July.

Fellow north east team Darlington was Sunderland's first pre-season friendly, Sunderland won the game 2–0 with goals from Ross Wallace and Anthony Stokes at The Darlington Arena. This was followed up by a shock defeat to Scunthorpe United on 21 July where they were beaten 1–0. Sunderland went on a tour of Ireland, where they would play Bohemians, Cork City and Galway United. They beat Bohemians 1–0 on 28 July thanks to a Stern John goal, but were held to a 1–1 draw at Cork City as Liam Miller scored the Sunderland goal. Their final game of the tour against Galway United ended as a 4–0 win for Sunderland, with goals from Michael Chopra, Kieran Richardson, David Connolly and Stern John. Juventus travelled to the Stadium of Light to commemorate its ten-year anniversary. The game ended 1–1 as Daryl Murphy scored, but the Italian side scored with two minutes remaining to draw the game.

Sunderland signed Dickson Etuhu from Norwich City for £1.5 million on 17 July, and Paul McShane from West Bromwich Albion on 26 July for £2.5 million. With the start of the Premier League season looming, Sunderland broke their transfer record to buy Scottish international goalkeeper Craig Gordon from Heart of Midlothian for £9 million. The club's last signing before the start of the season was Roy O'Donovan from Cork City for an undisclosed fee.

Sunderland's season started against Tottenham Hotspur on 11 August 2007. Sunderland won the game through a last minute goal from Michael Chopra in front of an attendance of 43,967. Their second game of the season was an away fixture to Birmingham City, a Paul McShane own goal had put Sunderland behind in the 28th minute, but Michael Chopra scored his second goal of the season to equalise. Birmingham took the lead again through Garry O'Connor but Sunderland scored another last minute goal, this time from Stern John to save a point. On 24 August ex Manchester United and Newcastle United striker Andy Cole joined the club on a free transfer from Portsmouth. Sunderland travelled to the JJB Stadium unbeaten on 18 August but lost 3–0 to Wigan Athletic. On 25 September Liverpool beat Sunderland 2–0 to give them their second consecutive defeat. On the same day, Tobias Hysén returned to his native Sweden with IFK Göteborg after he and his wife were suffering from home sickness. Luton Town produced a league cup shock as they beat Sunderland 3–0 at Kenilworth Road. Sunderland signed three more players before the transfer deadline; Ian Harte from Levante on a free transfer, Danny Higginbotham from Stoke City for £3 million, and Kenwyne Jones from Southampton for £6 million with Stern John going in the opposite direction.

Sunderland opened the month with a 1–0 defeat away to Manchester United on 1 September, Louis Saha scored the winner 18 minutes from full-time. Roy Keane said "I'm delighted with the overall performance. It would have been nice to test their goalkeeper a bit more but overall I'm delighted with the players' efforts." about the team's display. Jack Pelter signed for Sunderland on 8 September, from New Zealand team Canterbury United, on a free transfer in an original one-month deal. Two weeks after the defeat to Manchester United, Sunderland beat Reading 2–1 on 15 September. Kenwyne Jones and Ross Wallace scored the Sunderland goals in a game which was overshadowed by the tribute paid to 1973 FA Cup Final scorer Ian Porterfield who died on 11 September 2007. Sunderland met Middlesbrough on 22 September in their first north east derby of the season. Grant Leadbitter scored in the 2nd minute to put Sunderland in front, but two ex-Sunderland players; Julio Arca and Stewart Downing put Middlesbrough into the lead. Liam Miller scored an 89th minute volley to save a point for Sunderland. Grant Leadbitter scored his second goal in as many games on 29 September as Blackburn Rovers beat Sunderland 2–1.

October started with an away fixture against Arsenal at the Emirates Stadium on 7 October. Sunderland went 2–0 down within the first 14 minutes. However, Sunderland levelled the score at 2–2 with goals from Ross Wallace on the 25th minute and Kenwyne Jones on the 48 minute. Arsenal won the game 3–2 after a late Robin van Persie goal. Sunderland suffered back-to-back defeats when they lost 3–1 away to West Ham United on 21 October. Kenwyne Jones got the goal for Sunderland. Fulham came to the Stadium of Light on 27 October, Fulham took the lead in the 32nd minute with a 30-yard free kick from Simon Davies. Sunderland snatched a point when Kenywyne Jones scored an 86th-minute equaliser. The wearsiders had gone down to ten men in the 67th minute when Greg Halford was sent off.

Sunderland lost 1–0 away to Manchester City on 5 November after a goal from Stephen Ireland. Manager, Roy Keane, expressed his frustration in a post match interview saying "We didn't deserve anything. I don't feel we did enough to get anything out of the game. I don't think their keeper had too many saves to make, did he?". 10 November was the first Tyne–Wear derby of the season. Danny Higginbotham put Sunderland into the lead shortly after half time, but James Milner drew Newcastle level on the 68th minute after his cross beat goalkeeper Craig Gordon into the far post. Sunderland had a chance to win the game when ex-Newcastle forward Michael Chopra headed against the bar minutes from full-time. Sunderland ended the month on a low as they were beaten 7–1 away to Everton on 24 November. Dwight Yorke scored Sunderland's only goal just before half time. Roy Keane said "It's hard to take, but we lose as a team and I picked the team and sorted the tactics so I have no problem taking responsibility for what happened."

On 1 December Sunderland beat Derby County 1–0. The defeat against Everton led to Craig Gordon being dropped from the side. He was replaced by Darren Ward who made a save to push Kenny Miller's strike onto the post. With the game looking to be heading towards a draw, Anthony Stokes scrambled to ball in to win the game. On 8 December Sunderland travelled to Stamford Bridge to play Chelsea. Sunderland went behind in the 23rd minute through an Andriy Shevchenko goal. Chelsea won the game 2–0 after Liam Miller was sent off whilst giving a penalty away, which Frank Lampard scored. Sunderland played Aston Villa on 15 December, Danny Higginbotham put Sunderland ahead with a 10th-minute header. Villa midfielder Shaun Maloney equalised when he scored a from a 71st minute free kick. Sunderland could have won the game late on, but Danny Collins' header was ruled out by referee Steve Bennett for a foul. Roy Keane displayed his annoyance at Bennett saying "It sums up (the referee's) day. He was giving everything against us and to say we're disappointed would be an unbelievable understatement. You could sense he was waiting to blow his whistle. It would be nice to see him later."

Reading reversed their defeat to Sunderland previously in the season by winning 2–1 on 22 December. Reading had led 1–0 after a 69th-minute goal from Ívar Ingimarsson. Michael Chopra levelled the match by scoring an 82nd-minute penalty. A goal by Stephen Hunt in the 90th minute sparked controversy as it appeared not to have crossed the line. Sunderland met Manchester United on Boxing Day at the Stadium of Light, they were beaten 4–0 in a game were Sunderland striker Martyn Waghorn made the step up from the club's Youth system to the first team. Martyn Waghorn promoted to first team from Youth system. Sunderland ended 2007 with a 3–1 home win to Bolton Wanderers on 29 December, Kieran Richardson, Kenwyne Jones and Daryl Murphy were the scorers.

Sunderland began the new year with a 1–0 away loss to Blackburn Rovers on 1 January. Dean Whitehead had the chance to put Sunderland in the lead, but missed his penalty kick. Minutes later, Blackburn won a penalty of their own; Benni McCarthy converted the penalty before Dwight Yorke was sent off late on. Jonny Evans returned to Sunderland on loan for the second time for the remainder of season from Manchester United. Sunderland met Wigan Athletic in the FA Cup third round as they lost 3–0 on 5 January. On 12 January Kieran Richardson scored a double to beat Portsmouth 2–0 at the Stadium of Light. Sunderland made their first permanent signing of the January transfer window when Frenchman Jean-Yves Mvoto signed from Paris Saint-Germain on 15 January for an undisclosed fee. Mvoto said "This is a big opportunity for me, I'm pleased to be at Sunderland."

On 19 January Sunderland played Tottenham Hotspur. An early Aaron Lennon goal saw Spurs take the lead, and Robbie Keane's 100th goal for the club in the 90th minute won the game for Tottenham at White Hart Lane. Phil Bardsley signed for the club on 22 January from Manchester United for £2 million,
the next day Rade Prica also signed for the club, from AaB Aalborg for £2 million. New signing Rade Prica scored a goal on his debut for Sunderland to wrap up a 2–0 win at home to Birmingham City on 29 January. Daryl Murphy scored the first goal in the 15th minute. Andy Reid signed for the club on the last day of the January transfer window deadline from Charlton Athletic for £4 million.

Sunderland had a poor start to the month, as they lost 3–0 away to Liverpool on 2 February. They had two penalty appeals turned down, prompting Roy Keane to comment, "We felt they were penalties. But I didn't feel we were going to get those decisions today." Following a recent heart attack in a League Cup game between Leicester City and Nottingham Forest, Clive Clarke had his Sunderland contract terminated on 5 February due to the event while on loan at Leicester. Sunderland bounced back from the defeat to Liverpool with a 2–0 win against Wigan Athletic on 9 February. Dickson Etuhu put them in the lead before Daryl Murphy scored a 25-yard strike in off the bar. Sunderland, however, lost their next game 1–0 to Portsmouth on 23 February at Fratton Park.

On 1 March Sunderland drew 0–0 away to Derby County. Michael Chopra could have put the team in the lead, only for it to be ruled out for offside. Sunderland's manager said, "He [Chopra] was clearly onside and we are always told that the advantage goes with the attacking player." An Andrew Johnson goal on the verge of half time helped Everton to a 1–0 win at the Stadium of Light on 8 March. Sunderland lost consecutive games when Chelsea beat them 1–0 on 15 March due to a Didier Drogba goal. Andy Reid came close to putting Sunderland in front as his free kick was plucked from the top corner by Carlo Cudicini. Sunderland's first away win of the season came on 22 March when they won 1–0 at Villa Park against Aston Villa. An 83rd minute Michael Chopra scored the winning goal for Sunderland. A 2–1 win at home to West Ham United on 29 February helped Sunderland to their first consecutive wins of the season. Kenwyne Jones' first goal since late December levelled the score at 1–1 and a 95th minute Andy Reid goal won the game.

A 3–1 away win to Fulham on 5 April helped Sunderland to nine points in three games, as goals came from Danny Collins, Michael Chopra and Kenwyne Jones. They lost 2–1 at home to Manchester City on 12 April. Manchester City were awarded a dubious penalty given by Mike Riley, and Elano converted it in the 79 minute. Dean Whitehead equalised with a near post volley after Andy Reid crossed the ball. Manchester City, however, still had time to win the game and Darius Vassell scored an 89th minute scuffed shot to beat Craig Gordon. On the return fixture of the Tyne and Wear derby on 19 April Sunderland were defeated 2–0 away to Newcastle United. The next game was another derby for Sunderland, this time the Tees–Wear derby on 26 April. Sunderland won the game 3–2 at home to Middlesbrough, with goals from Danny Higginbotham, Michael Chopra and an Emanuel Pogatetz own goal, thus securing their safety and staying in the Premier League.

After ensuring their own safety, Sunderland travelled to Bolton Wanderers on 3 May, who were not yet safe from relegation. Sunderland lost the game 2–0 at the Reebok Stadium. On 11 May, the last game of the Premier League season, Sunderland played Arsenal at the Stadium of Light. Arsenal won the game 1–0 through a Theo Walcott goal. Sunderland also recorded their highest home attendance of the season, when the match was watched by 47,802 people. Sunderland finished the season with 39 points in 15th place, with Kenwyne Jones as top goal scorer with seven goals. Left-back Danny Collins was named as Sunderland's player of the season, while on-loan centre-back Jonny Evans was named as the club's young player of the season for the second season running. They finished with an average home attendance of 42,728 which was the fifth highest in the league.




</doc>
<doc id="12648949" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12648949" title="Amphidromus">
Amphidromus

Amphidromus is a genus of tropical air-breathing land snails, terrestrial pulmonate gastropod mollusks in the family Camaenidae. The shells of "Amphidromus" are relatively large, from to in maximum dimension, and particularly colorful. During the 18th century, they were among the first Indonesian land snail shells brought to Europe by travelers and explorers. Since then, the genus has been extensively studied: several comprehensive monographs and catalogs were authored by naturalists and zoologists during the time period from the early 19th to the mid 20th centuries. Modern studies have focused on better understanding the evolutionary relationships within the group, as well as solving taxonomic problems.

The genus "Amphidromus" is unusual in that it includes species that have dextral shell-coiling and species that have sinistral shell-coiling. In addition, some species within this genus are particularly notable because their populations simultaneously include individuals with left-handed and right-handed shell-coiling. This is an extremely rare phenomenon, and very interesting to biologists. Studies focused on the soft anatomy of "Amphidromus" are scattered and fragmentary. Information on the internal anatomy is known only from a few species, and no larger, comparative morphological study has ever been carried out.

Species in the genus "Amphidromus" are arboreal — in other words, they are tree snails. However, more detailed information on their habits is still lacking. The general feeding habits of these snails are unknown, but a few species are known to feed on microscopic fungi, lichens or terrestrial algae. "Amphidromus" themselves are preyed upon by birds, snakes, and probably also by smaller mammals such as rats.

The generic name is derived from the ancient Greek words ' (), meaning "on both sides", and ' (), meaning "running", alluding to the different chiralities of the shells. The shells of "Amphidromus" are relatively large, and quite colorful; considerable numbers of them were among the first Indonesian land snail shells brought back to Europe by travelers and explorers during the 18th century. Comparatively speaking, malacologists have gathered a much smaller number of specimens.

Several species and forms were described before 1800, most of them with inadequate locality data. At least two names — "Amphidromus laevus" (Müller, 1774) and the form "A. perversus" f. "aureus" Martyn, 1784 — still (as of 2017) have not yet been reported from a precise locality. During the first half of the nineteenth century, many species and varieties were named, again usually with poor locality data. Not until Eduard von Martens (1867) published his monograph was there an attempt to cover the entire complex of species within this genus. The 1867 monograph contained considerable information both on the variation within the genus, and on the problems of the geographic distribution of the species. Many concepts that originated with von Martens are still (as of 2017) in use.

In 1896, Hugh Fulton organized 142 specific and varietal names into eighteen species groups containing a total of 64 species. When Henry Augustus Pilsbry's 1900 monograph "Manual of Conchology" appeared, the number of species in the genus "Amphidromus" had increased to 81, and these were placed in nineteen groups. Pilsbry's study has remained the only illustrated monograph of the genus, and it is still considered indispensable for any serious study of the genus.

Since 1900, the major taxonomic studies on "Amphidromus" have been faunistic (a study of the fauna of some territory or area) in scope. The papers of American malacologist Paul Bartsch (1917, 1918, 1919) on the Philippine species, Bernhard Rensch (1932) on the Lesser Sunda Islands forms, and Tera van Benthem Jutting (1950, 1959) on Javan and Sumatran populations are especially comprehensive. Potentially the most valuable contribution is that of Curt Haniel (1921), who discussed the variation within "A. contrarius" and "A. reflexilabris" on Timor; the variations in color and form were well illustrated in a series of color plates.

Literature published after 1900 contains many scattered descriptions of new color forms and subspecies. Of the 309 names in the nomenclatural list, 111 (35.9%) were published after Pilsbry (1900). Adolf Michael Zilch (1953) listed type specimens in the Senckenberg Museum, and illustrated many previously unfigured species. Frank Fortescue Laidlaw & Alan Solem (1961) recognized 74 species by name, and considered that material from the Banda Islands probably represented an undescribed species. Eleven of the species recognized by Laidlaw & Solem were described after the appearance of Pilsbry's monograph. However, several species recognized by Pilsbry have subsequently been subordinated to subspecific or varietal status, and a few names have been transferred to incertae sedis, since they are based on hundred-year-old references that have not been substantiated by more recent collectors. In fact, the study by Laidlaw & Solem (1961) forms a supplement to Pilsbry's monograph with his extensive plates, and many of Laidlaw & Solem's conclusions concerning the relationships of color forms described as species were taken not so much from new samples, but from the extent of variation that was outlined by Haniel (1921) in his pioneer study.

Species in the genus "Amphidromus" usually have smooth, glossy, brightly colored, elongate or conic, dextrally or sinistrally coiled shells. The shells are moderately large, ranging from to in maximum dimension, having from 6 to 8 convex whorls. Their color pattern is usually monochromatic yellowish or greenish, but can be variegated. The aperture is oblique or ovate in shape, without any teeth or folds, and with the aperture height ranging from two-fifths to one-third of total shell height. The peristome is expanded and/or reflected, and is sometimes thickened. The columella may be straight or recurved, and the parietal callus is weak to well-developed, and the umbilicus may be open or closed. The radula is spatulate, has cusped teeth arranged in rows, usually with a monocuspid central tooth and bicuspid or tricuspid lateral teeth. The jaw is thin and weak, with low flat ribs. The pallial region is sigmurethrous, with a very long, narrow kidney. The genitalia are that of typical camaenids, with a long seminal receptacle, a short penis with low insertion of the retractor muscle, and a short or long epiphallic caecum (flagellum and appendix). The spermatophores have a pentagonal outline in cross-section. "Amphidromus" are typically arboreal animals.

The shells of "Amphidromus" are relatively large, from one to three inches high, and colorful. "Amphidromus" has an elongate-conic or ovate-conic helicoid shell of 5 to 8 whorls. The shell may be thin and fragile, or very heavy and solid, with no known correlation of shell structure with distribution or habitats.

In some species within this genus, the shell coils invariably to the right, and in many others just as invariably to the left. However, a significant number of species in this genus are "amphidromine"; this term means that both left- and right-handed shell coiling are found within the same population. One could say they are "polymorphic" for the direction of shell coiling, but because there are only two possible types of shell coiling, they are described as "dimorphic" in coiling. The two types of shell coiling occur in some species in approximately equal numbers, other species have a distinct predominance of one phase. There is as yet no information on the heredity of this character in "Amphidromus".

Because almost all other species of amphidromine gastropods, such as ones within the genera "Partula" and "Achatinella", have already become extinct, the genus "Amphidromus", containing over 110 species, is uniquely useful for the study of the evolution of asymmetry in animals, and this is why the conservation of this genus is of essential importance to biologists.

The whorls of the shell of species of "Amphidromus" are moderately convex and, with only a few exceptions, are smooth or have a faint sculpture of growth lines. However, a sculpture of moderately heavy oblique radial ribs has appeared at least four separate times in the genus, and can be seen in the following species: "Amphidromus costifer" Smith from Binh Dinh Province in Vietnam; "A. begini" Morlet from Cambodia; "A. heccarii" Tapparone-Canefri from Celebes; and the "A. palaceus"-"A. winteri" complex from Java and Sumatra. Correlated with the ribbing is a light, monochrome coloration, and a thin shell with a large aperture and a flaring lip. Many solid shells in other species do show a slight roughening of the surface, but this is very different from the ribbed sculpture mentioned above.

The aperture is generally large, varying from about two-fifths to one-third the height of the shell, often within the same population. Usually the lip is at least somewhat expanded, and in forms such as "A. reflexilabris" Schepman and "A. winteri" (Pfeiffer) var. "inauris" Fulton, the lip can only be called flaring. In "A. perversus" (Linnaeus) and most other thick-shelled species, the lip is internally thickened, forming a "roll" in its expansion, and has a very heavy parietal callus. In thin-shelled species, the lip is usually a simple reflected edge. The umbilical area can be partially open, nearly closed, or sealed. This feature sometimes provides a useful criterion for specific identification. The angle of the parietal wall varies, but no precise information on this has been compiled.

Generally the whorls of the shell increase rather regularly in size, however, species which are probably closely related, such as "A. sinistralis" (Reeve) and "A. heccarii" Tapparone-Canefri, can have quite different degrees of whorl increment. No attempt has been made to express these differences meristically, since most of the available material was inadequate for statistical treatment. Actual dimensions of the shell vary greatly both within and between species. The minimum adult size is about 21 mm high, the observed maximum about 75 mm. There is not much variation in adult size within species: only a few species, notably "A. maculiferus", "A. sinensis" and "A. entobaptus", have a variation in adult size that is greater than seven or eight millimeters in total.

The single most major aspect of shell variation within the genus is the color patterning. In general, many arboreal snails are brightly colored, obvious examples being the bulimulid genera "Drymaeus" and "Liguus", the cepolid "Polymita", and the camaenid "Papuina". However, "Polymita", "Liguus" and "Amphidromus" are particularly noted for their color variations. The basic ground color of "Amphidromus" appears to be yellow, and this color is usually (except for "Amphidromus entobaptus") confined to the surface layers of the shell, since worn specimens appear to be nearly devoid of color. In some species the background color is whitish, and a few have dark background colors. The apical whorls are pale, purple, brown, or black, and this sometimes varies within a population (as in "A. quadrasi"). A few species, for example "A. schomburgki", have a deciduous green periostracum.

Continuous zonal patterns can take the form of whitish subsutural bands ("A. similis"), heavy subperipheral pigmentation ("A. perversus" var. "infraviridis"), subsutural color lines ("A. columellaris"), broad spiral color bands ("A. metabletus", "A. webbi"), or narrow spiral bands ("A. laevus"). Interrupted zonation can consist of the interruption of bands into spots in ("A. maculatus"); highly irregular splitting of zones ("A. perversus" vars. "sultanus" and "interruptus"); formation of oblique radial streaks which run parallel to (in "A. inversus") or cross (in "A. latestrigatus") the incremental growth lines; or almost every conceivable combination and variation of these factors. Often the pattern will change radically from the apex to the body whorl (in "A. quadrasi" vars.). The aperture, parietal callus, columella, lip, and umbilical region are variously marked with pink, brown, purple, white, or black. Haniel (1921) includes several color plates which clearly demonstrate the extent of color variation within two species of the "Syndromus" type. "A. perversus" and "A. maculiferus" of the subgenus "Amphidromus" are equally variable, whereas species such as "A. inversus" and "A. similis" are almost uniform in coloration.

In shells of most of the species in the subgenus "Amphidromus", resting stages are marked by the deposition of a brown or black radial band called a varix. This appears to be rare in the subgenus "Syndromus", although the shell of "A. laevus" does show evidence of interruption of the spiral banding after a resting phase.

Species recognition is based on combinations of minor structural variations in the shape, aperture, whorl contour, umbilical region, and color pattern. It appears to be the case that many species have a stable color pattern, while other species seem to vary tremendously. Adequate unselected field samples will enable a better understanding of the relative stability or variability of particular species in single localities.

Information concerning the soft anatomy of "Amphidromus" is widely scattered and fragmentary. The most complete account is that of Arnold Jacobi (1895) on specimens from Great Natuna (Natuna Islands) and Djemadja (Anamba Islands). Unfortunately, although it is clear that anatomical differences exist in the two species Jacobi dissected, unfortunately we do not know which forms he worked on, because he had incorrectly identified his material. In his paper he referred to the two species as "Amphidromus chloris" and the "interruptus" phase of "A. perversus". However, that is not possible, because in reality "Amphidromus chloris" is a species found only in the Philippine Islands, and the "interruptus" phase of "A. perversus" is not present in the Natuna Islands.

Carl Arend Friedrich Wiegmann (1893, 1898) discussed portions of the anatomy of "A. adamsii", "A. porcellanus", "A. contrarius", and "A. sinistralis". Walter Edward Collinge (1901, 1902) briefly noted features of "A. palaceus" and "A. parakensis" (reported as "A. perversus"). Haniel (1921) dissected "A. contrarius" and "A. reflexilabris", and Bernhard Rensch published a few scattered notes in his various faunistic surveys. A few earlier notes are mentioned in Pilsbry (1900).

Characters such as the long, narrow kidney with reflexed ureter and closed secondary ureter, the penial complex with distinct penis, which is continuous with the epiphallus, epiphallic caecum (a flagellum and an appendix), unbranched gametolytic duct, lack of vaginal accessory organs, and the basic condition of the nervous and retractor muscle systems support the inclusion of "Amphidromus" in the family Camaenidae. This group of snails occur in a wide variety of habitats in the tropics of Eastern Asia and Australasia, and is one of the most diverse families in the clade Stylommatophora. Though Laidlaw & Solem (1961) provided no more additional details on the anatomy of "Amphidromus", subsequent studies by distinct authors, e.g., Bishop (1977) and Solem (1983), have demonstrated that the reproductive system can provide valuable data for species recognition.

Prior to 1900, the similarity in shape of the shell of "Amphidromus" to that of South American tree snails in the family Bulimulidae had misled taxonomists. However, the dissections made by Wiegmann and Jacobi clearly showed that the inner anatomical features of "Amphidromus" were the same as those of the Asian-Indonesian Camaenidae, and that the resemblance of the shell of "Amphidromus" to that of bulimulids was merely an example of parallelism.

Laidlaw and Solem (1961) recognized 75 species in the genus "Amphidromus", and placed another seven names under "incertae sedis". In 2010, 87 species in the genus "Amphidromus" were recognized. Species within the genus "Amphidromus" are divided into two subgenera, as in the following list:


Originally described as "Helix perversus" by Linnaeus in 1758, "Amphidromus perversus" is the type species of the genus "Amphidromus", by the subsequent designation of Eduard von Martens (1860). Species in the subgenus "Amphidromus" are amphidromine (left-handed and right-handed snails occur within the population) with a few exceptions. Four dextral taxa are: "A. givenchyi", "A. protania", "A. schomburgki dextrochlorus" and "A. inversus annamiticus"; and one sinistral: "A. atricallosus classiaris". These species usually have shells which have ht following characteristics: they are large (height often exceeding ); they have a height/width ratio of less than 1.85; and a shell color which is yellowish or greenish. Anatomically they have a long epiphallus and flagellum, and an appendix is usually present.


All but two species within the subgenus "Syndromus" are sinistral. The exceptions are the amphidromine "A. glaucolarynx" and the dextral "A. kruehni". The type species of the subgenus "Syndromus" is "A. contrarius" Müller, 1774, by the subsequent designation of Adolf Michael Zilch (1960). Species in the subgenus "Syndromus" have smaller shells (height usually less than and height/width ratio greater than 1.85), with variable color pattern. They also have a short epiphallus and flagellum, lacking an appendix. A third possible subgenus, "Goniodromus" Bülow, 1905 (type species "Amphidromus büllowi" Fruhstorfer, 1905), is also cited in the literature, though its subgeneric status is yet to be confirmed.

Molecular analyses of partial sequences of 16S rDNA of 18 distinct species carried out by Sutcharit and colleagues (2007) indicate that "Amphidromus" is a monophyletic group. In their study, different cladograms obtained through distinct methods such as maximum parsimony, neighbor joining and maximum likelihood were congruent among themselves. Though the topology obtained for the subgenus "Amphidromus" was fairly consistent with current taxonomy, the phylogeny of sinistral "Syndromus" species showed no such correspondence. Also according to their results, enantiomorphy seems to be the ancestral state of shell coiling in the genus "Amphidromus", which is contrary to the general expectation of dextrally coiled shells as an ancestral condition.

Despite being morphologically identical, some specimens supposedly belonging to three species, namely "Amphidromus semitessellatus", "A. xiengensis" and "A. areolatus", apparently had polyphyletic origins of mtDNA haplotypes. This resulted in the same species simultaneously appearing in distinct clades along the topology: for instance, "A. areolatus" can be found in two different clades in Sutcharit and colleague's (2007) cladogram, clustered respectively with "A. xiengiensis" and also with "A. semitesselatus". According to the authors, these results could be explained by convergent and polymorphic shell color patterns (e.g., the shells of the specimens had very similar colors and shape, though the mtDNA markers showed significant differences). Alternatively, they could also be the result of introgressive hybridization or ancestral polymorphism of mtDNA. In any case, analyses of phylogeography using other markers (nuclear markers or other mtDNA markers) or additional morphological characters would still be necessary to further clarify these issues.

Currently, no reliable pre-human fossil occurrences of "Amphidromus" have been recorded. Tera van Benthem Jutting (1932) reported finding several specimens of "A. filozonatus" which had been eaten in prehistoric times by natives, in Sampoeng Cave, central Java; and a few years later (van Benthem Jutting, 1937, pp. 92–94) the same author reported a single specimen of "A. palaceus" from the Trinil Beds of Java. Neither record predates human occupancy, and therefore these shed no light on the pre-human history of "Amphidromus".

The genus "Amphidromus" ranges from eastern India, in south-western Asia (limited to the north by the Himalayas), to northern Australia (limited eastward by Weber's Line). "Amphidromus" species are found in localities as follows: from the Garo Hills and Khasi Hills of Meghalaya in northeastern India; throughout Burma, Malay Peninsula, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Indonesia as far east as the Sulawesi, Banda Islands, Timor and the Tenimber Islands (but not on Ceram, Buru, Halmahera, Batjan Island, the Obi Islands, the Aru and Kei Islands or the Talaud Archipelago and some Celebesian satellite islands); in the southern Philippines, notably Mindanao and the Balabac, Palawan; and in northern Australia (solely represented by "Amphidromus cognatus").

"Amphidromus" species are arboreal land snails. Further information concerning the habits and mode of life of the species of "Amphidromus" is almost non-existent, however, these snails have generally been collected while they were crawling on trees or shrubs. The diet of "Amphidromus" is unknown, but "Amphidromus atricallosus perakensis" is thought to feed on microscopic fungi, lichens or terrestrial algae.

Despite the great diversity within this genus, as of 2017, comprehensive life-history studies of "Amphidromus" species are still lacking; only a few observations of behavior of species within the genus exist, and these observations are scattered throughout the literature. A study by Eugen Paravicini (1921) described egg-laying behaviour in "Amphidromus palaceus" var. "pura" at Palimanan, West Java. According to Paravicini's observations, in October, 1920, locals from West Java brought in two "nests" containing snails that had just begun depositing their eggs; one snail had folded the exterior leaves of a young bamboo shoot and gummed them together into a pointed cornet. The shoot hung vertically with the narrow end pointed upward, and the wide opening below. The upper part of the sack was filled with eggs when collected. The snail descended slowly, rotating around its longitudinal axis, and deposited eggs until the entire cavity was filled up. If a crack in the basket exposed eggs to the air, they quickly dried up. Two days after capture, egg-laying was finished, and the snail closed the opening by folding over more leaves. Probably four days were spent in egg-laying, since the cavity was half filled at the start of observations. A second nest of similarly folded mango leaves contained 234 eggs. The volume of eggs in each case greatly exceeded the size of the snail, indicating that the eggs must be encapsulated just before deposition. The capsules were very thin, and dried quickly upon any exposure to the air. October marked the start of the rainy season and probably this is the normal breeding period. Eggs of "A. porcellanus" were reported by van Benthem Jutting (1950, p. 493) to have started hatching only ten days after being laid. Similar nest-building habits have been reported for other species, but no complete study of a life cycle has been published. Up until 1961, no information was available on the cycle of activity, longevity, rate of growth, etc.

Schilthuizen et al. (2005) described the spatial structure of a population of "A. inversus" in Malaysia. Schilthuizen et al. (2007) found that there is sexual selection in mating with snails of the opposite chirality. This means that the left-handed snails mate more often with right-handed snails than they do with snails of the same coiling. Additionally there are anatomical adaptations of the spermatophore and of the female part of the reproductive system for the success of these matings.

Predators of "Amphidromus" snails include the red-crowned barbet "Megalaima rafflesii", and probably other bird species. Asian snakes in the genus "Pareas" are known to feed on "Amphidromus" species by removing the soft parts from the shells. Many shells of "Amphidromus" were found in the den of a rat in Malaysia.


This article incorporates public domain text from the reference.


</doc>
<doc id="12652684" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12652684" title="Dyer Lum">
Dyer Lum

Dyer Daniel Lum (1839 – April 6, 1893) was a 19th-century American anarchist, labor activist and poet. A leading syndicalist and a prominent left-wing intellectual of the 1880s, Lum is best remembered as the lover and mentor of early anarcha-feminist Voltairine de Cleyre.

Lum was a prolific writer who wrote a number of key anarchist texts and contributed to publications including "Mother Earth", "Twentieth Century", "Liberty" (Benjamin Tucker's individualist anarchist journal), "The Alarm" (the journal of the International Working People's Association) and "The Open Court", among others. Following the arrest of Albert Parsons, Lum edited "The Alarm" from 1892 to 1893.

Traditionally portrayed as a "genteel, theoretical anarchist", Lum has recently been recast by the scholarship of Paul Avrich as an "uncompromising rebel thirsty for violence and martyrdom" in the light of his involvement in the Haymarket affair in 1886.

Lum was a descendant of the prominent New England Tappan family as his grandfather was an American revolutionary. In hopes of bringing about the end of slavery, he volunteered to fight for the Union Army in the American Civil War. He served as an adjutant in the Fourteenth New York Cavalry and later as a brevet captain, seeing combat in the Red River Campaign. A bookbinder by trade, Lum became active in the American labor movement in the aftermath of the war. He served as a secretary to Samuel Gompers and ran for lieutenant governor of Massachusetts on the Labor Reform ticket of abolitionist Wendell Phillips in 1870.

Lum became widely known in 1877 after a period traveling across the country as secretary to a congressional committee appointed to "inquire into the depression of labor". Between 1880 and 1892, he was an advocate of direct action and trade unionism and in later years was "the moving spirit of the American group" which worked for the commutation of Alexander Berkman's sentence for the latter's attempted assassination of Henry Clay Frick. Lum committed suicide in 1893 after suffering from severe depression, although at the time the cause of death was reported in the anarchist press as "fatty degeneration of the heart".

When Lum met Voltairine de Cleyre in 1888, he was twenty-seven years her elder and had lived a life rich in experience. They forged an "unshakable" friendship and Lum had a profound influence on de Cleyre's political development which evolved in an opposite direction to his as she started out as an orthodox Tuckerite individualist anarchist, but became increasingly involved with the radical labor movement and ultimately called for a panarchist anarchism without adjectives movement. Their relationship ended after five years of intense involvement, leaving their planned collaborative project—a lengthy social and philosophical anarchist novel—ultimately unpublished.

Lum was closely associated with and worked alongside the martyrs of the Haymarket affair in Chicago in 1886. In an 1891 essay, he wrote that August Spies sent word to the militants on the afternoon of May 4 that they were not to bring arms to the Haymarket. This order was not respected, Lum note, as "one man disobeyed that order; always self-determined, he acted upon his own responsibility, preferring to be prepared for resistance to onslaught rather than to quietly imitate the spiritual "lamb led to slaughter". Lum asserted that the eight defendants were initially unaware of the bomb-thrower's identity, although it became known to two of them ("but neither Spies nor Parsons"), believed by Paul Avrich to be George Engel and Adolph Fischer.

In Lum's account, the bomb-thrower's name "was never mentioned in the trial and is today unknown to the public". Paul Avrich attests that Lum urged Albert Parsons to refuse clemency and plotted to rescue the anarchists from Cook County Jail by attacking it with explosives. According to de Cleyre, he then assisted the suicide of Louis Lingg (one of the eight defendants) by smuggling into Lingg's prison cell a dynamite cap concealed in a cigar which Lingg subsequently lit, thereby blowing off half his face and leaving himself lingering for several hours in torturous pain before dying.

Lum's political philosophy was a fusion of individualist anarchist economics, "a radicalized form of "laissez-faire" economics" inspired by the Boston anarchists, with radical labor organization similar to that of the Chicago anarchists of the time. Lum's ideas have variously been described as individualist anarchist, syndicalist, mutualist and anarcho-communist as well as anarchist without adjectives. Herbert Spencer and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon influenced Lum strongly in his individualist tendency. He developed a mutualist theory of unions and as such was active within the Knights of Labor and later promoted anti-political strategies in the American Federation of Labor. Frustration with abolitionism, spiritualism and labor reform caused Lum to embrace anarchism and radicalize workers as he came to believe that revolution would inevitably involve a violent struggle between the working class and the employing class. Convinced of the necessity of violence to enact social change, he volunteered to fight in the American Civil War, hoping thereby to bring about the end of slavery. Kevin Carson has praised Lum's fusion of individualist "laissez-faire" economics with radical labor activism as "creative" and described him as "more significant than any in the Boston group".

Lum argued in "The Economics of Anarchy" that the labor problem was a result of intervention by the state in creating monopolies, with particular reference to the land and money monopolies. Lum advocated the destruction of the land monopoly which he saw as a government-granted monopoly by abolishing land titles and to allow free access to land, thus making the extraction of rent impossible. Similarly, mutual banks set up to issue their own currencies would end the state monopoly and undercut the ability of banks and lenders to charge interest. His thoughts could be summarized as such: 






</doc>
<doc id="12790259" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12790259" title="Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom (1988 video game)">
Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom (1988 video game)

Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom is an action game released in 1988 for the Nintendo Entertainment System. The game is based on the arcade game and film of the same name. The resulting product differed from the arcade version in several aspects, but kept the same underlying premise and style.

By December 1988, there were two versions of the game available, distributed by Tengen and Mindscape, although the software itself was identical. After a lawsuit, Tengen's unlicensed version was pulled from the shelves and Mindscape's became the standard. "Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom" gives the player control of Indiana Jones as he makes his way through the temple in a series of 12 levels or "waves." In the final wave, the player must defeat the villain of the film, Mola Ram, on a rope bridge that recreates the final scene in the movie. Reception of the game was generally negative.

The film version of "Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom" was released in 1984 and starred Harrison Ford as Indiana Jones. A year later, in 1985, Atari Games capitalized on the franchise by releasing the initial version of the game on arcade machine. This version was a platform and fighting game and featured theme music and sound clips from the actual film. The game takes place over three zones that are based on the movie's plot, where the objective is to free the slave children and recover the Sankara stones. This version was also the first translated from any of the movies in the Indiana Jones series into an arcade game, although "Raiders of the Lost Ark" for the Atari 2600 and "Indiana Jones in the Lost Kingdom" for the Commodore 64 had come out in 1982 and 1985 respectively.

Nintendo of America's Nintendo Entertainment System was the best selling console system and almost all video game developers and publishers wanted to contribute the video game library. The NES, at its peak, controlled 90% of the 8-bit market in the United States. Companies such as Konami, Capcom and Acclaim Entertainment derived many of their gaming ideas from two sources to better capitalize on the growing industry. The first strategy was to take games that were already popular on arcade, such as Contra, and port them to home console versions. Their second idea was to produce game versions of popular movies and television.

"Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom" satisfied both of these categories. Aside from the original arcade version, the Commodore 64, Amstrad CPC, and ZX Spectrum system had released ports of the arcade game in 1987. By December 1988, the Nintendo Entertainment System had already seen two separate editions of the "Temple of Doom" game. The first version, distributed by Tengen, came in a black cartridge that was different from Nintendo's traditional grey colour format. By this point, however, Tengen had split from Nintendo and was producing unlicensed games that attempted to circumvent the need for a 10NES lockout chip. Nintendo filed suit and Tengen lost, forcing it to remove its NES games from the market. The officially licensed version was released by Mindscape in the form of a standard Nintendo cartridge. Aside from the differences in cover art and cartridge form, however, the actual software of the two games is identical. After the NES version, the game was subsequently released for Atari ST and MSX in 1987, and Amiga, DOS, and Apple in 1989.

There are several differences between the arcade game and its console adaptation. In the original arcade version, the Sankara Stones were not all found in one location at the end of a wave. Instead, Jones had to travel through a temple every two rounds. In addition, the entire style of play is different and bestows upon the player more weapons and items for Jones to collect from the slave children he frees. Jones was also unable to jump in previous incarnations of the game.

The plot of the NES version follows the storyline of the original movie. At the onset of the game, Jones has just reached the Pankot Palace featured in the movie and is preparing to free the slave children, recover the missing Sankara Stones and defeat Mola Ram and his Thuggee entourage. The game differs from the original arcade version in many respects, including the layout and the manner in which one progresses through the game, but the plot remains unchanged in both versions.

The player advances through 12 levels (called "waves"), the first nine of which require Jones to travel through the palace and recover the Sankara Stones. In these stages, the player may restart the game with all items intact in the last area reached. Afterwards, if the player dies, they must return to the Chamber of Kali (Wave 9) and finish the game from that point. Each level also has a timer that goes from 99 to zero. If time runs out, the player is confronted by Mola Ram and loses one life and all of their items. All levels also contain mine cart rooms, where Jones can ride the rails through the levels across hazards and past enemies.

Wave 9 requires the player to cross a river of lava by stunning the monsters that live there. Once across, Jones must grab the Sankara Stones to progress to the Map Room where he can use the map pieces he has collected to figure out where the secret door exit is in Wave 10. Alternatively, there is a secret idol in Wave 8 that will reveal the hidden exit. To pass requires the use of both TNT and the Sankara Stones. Wave 11 leads to the exit and Wave 12 recreates the scene with the rope bridge and the final battle with Mola Ram.

The game contains a variety of elements that both aid and hinder the player's progress through the waves. At his disposal, Jones has TNT, guns, swords, hats for extra lives, jewels for extra time and his classic whip. Opposing him are bats, rats, snakes, spiders and an endless supply of Thugee servants. In addition, if Jones lands in any of the lava pits, crashes a mine cart or hits a boulder or spike trap, he loses one life.

Although hyped up in "Nintendo Power"'s "Video Shorts" section as an upcoming release, "Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom" met with generally negative reception. Aside from the difficulty level of the game, the official reviewer for the Indiana Jones fan community "TheRaider.net" noted that Jones' new jumping ability is glitchy, causing him to leap downwards no matter which direction he is facing, unless the player is holding down the button for the particular direction in which they want to jump. Also cited as flaws are poor controls, unappealing graphics, the number of enemies, and the text-only ending screen. The reviewer admitted, however, that the game's "respectable attempt to preserve John Williams' musical score" was one of its only highlights. The original arcade version was the first Atari System 1 game to talk to the players using speech capability, a feature lacking in the console version due to the limitations of the hardware. The arcade game, like the console adaptation, obtained its theme music (as well as sound effects that were absent on the NES version) from the film itself.

Skyler Miller, a reviewer at Allgame who compared the console adaptation to the original game, admitted that the graphics are "recognizable," but claims that the version is "missing much of the original's detail and character." Miller's final judgment was to call it "a passable effort" and to compare unfavourably to the arcade version. Edward J. Semrad, a contemporary technical writer and computer specialist with the "Milwaukee Journal Sentinel" included the game in his list of games that were "watered-down versions of what we see in the arcades" and praised the PC version for its superiority.


</doc>
<doc id="12829891" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12829891" title="Winter of 1946–47 in the United Kingdom">
Winter of 1946–47 in the United Kingdom

The winter of 1946–47 was a harsh European winter noted for its impact in the United Kingdom. It caused severe hardships in economic terms and living conditions. There were massive disruptions of energy supply for homes, offices and factories. Animal herds froze or starved to death. People suffered from the persistent cold, and many businesses shut down temporarily. When warm weather returned, the ice thawed and flooding was severe in most low-lying areas.

Beginning on 21 January 1947, the UK experienced several cold spells that brought large drifts of snow to the country, blocking roads and railways, which caused problems transporting coal to the electric power stations. Many had to shut down, forcing severe restrictions to cut power consumption, including restricting domestic electricity to nineteen hours per day and cutting some industrial supplies completely. In addition, radio broadcasts were limited, television services were suspended, some magazines were ordered to stop publishing, and newspapers were reduced in size. These measures, on top of the low temperatures, badly affected public morale and the Minister of Fuel and Power, Emanuel Shinwell, became a scapegoat; he received death threats and had to be placed under police guard. Towards the end of February, there were also fears of a food shortage as supplies were cut off and vegetables were frozen into the ground.

Mid-March brought warmer air to the country which thawed the snow lying on the ground. This snowmelt rapidly ran off the frozen ground into rivers and caused widespread flooding. More than 100,000 properties were affected, and the British Army and foreign aid agencies were required to provide humanitarian aid. With the cold spell over and the ground thawing, there were no further weather problems. The winter had severe effects on British industries, causing the loss of around 10% of the year's industrial production, 10 to 20% of cereal and potato crops, and a quarter of sheep stocks. The governing Labour Party began to lose its popularity, which led to them losing many seats to the Conservative Party at the 1950 general election; on top of other factors. That winter is also cited as a factor in the devaluation of the pound from $4.03 to $2.80 and the introduction of the Marshall Plan to rebuild war-torn Europe. The effects on the rest of Europe were also severe, with 150 deaths from cold and famine in Berlin, civil disorder in the Netherlands and business closures in the Republic of Ireland.

The effects of the cold winter were exacerbated by problems in the energy sector which caused coal supplies to become low. The coal and electricity industries had been recently nationalised by Clement Attlee's government and placed under the control of the Minister of Fuel and Power, Manny Shinwell. Shinwell oversaw efforts to increase production, but there were concerns that the coal supply was inadequate. At the start of the winter the coal stockpiles contained enough coal to last for just four weeks, compared to the usual supplies of ten to twelve weeks which existed before the war. However, Shinwell allowed himself to be lulled into a false sense of security by over-optimistic productivity reports from the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM). These reports failed to translate into real production as the government feared to take on the NUM, whose members' absentee rates were 2.5 times those of the pre-war period. The risk of a coal shortage caused the public to buy electric fires to ensure a source of heat for their homes. This, in turn, put a greater strain on the supply of electricity – the monthly demand increase caused by electric fires in 1946 was roughly the same as the annual increase in generating capacity. Shinwell was warned in mid-October that a coal shortage was possible, but gambled on a mild winter to keep consumption low so that he would not have to risk a confrontation with the miners.

The winter began with two periods of cold weather in December 1946 and January 1947, but the coldest period did not begin until 21 January 1947. The main cause of the cold weather was an anti-cyclone which sat over Scandinavia from 20 January. This high-pressure area blocked the progression of depressions across the Atlantic Ocean and forced them to the south of the United Kingdom, resulting in strong easterly winds which brought snow to eastern and south-eastern England before progressing across the entire country. This cold spell continued and by 30 January the Isles of Scilly were under of snow and the overnight temperature at Writtle, Essex, was . Throughout January the highest recorded temperature in England and Wales was and the minimum was .

The easterly winds continued into February, which developed into one of the coldest months on record. At Kew Observatory there was no recorded temperature above for the month and only twice was the overnight temperature above . No sunshine at all was recorded at Kew for twenty days from 2 February, whilst across England and Wales the month was the second-dullest February since records began in 1929, with only 30.8 hours of sunshine or 1.1 per day. In contrast, West Scotland was near-record dry and unusually sunny, though still extremely cold. On 20 February the ferry service across the English Channel between Dover and Ostend was suspended due to pack ice off the Belgian coast. In some places snow fell on 26 days out of 28 in the month and a temperature of was recorded at Woburn, Bedfordshire, on 25 February. As a result, railways were badly affected by drifts of light powdery snow and three hundred main roads were made unusable. Several hundred villages were cut off. Ice floes were also seen off the coast of East Anglia, causing a hazard to shipping.

This cold weather exacerbated the fuel problem. Stockpiles of coal at the pits and depots froze solid and could not be moved. The snow also trapped 750,000 railway wagons of coal and made roads unusable, further hampering transport. A force of 100,000 British and Polish troops and German prisoners of war were put to work clearing snow from the railways by hand, while desperate attempts were made to get fuel to power stations by coal-carrying ships which risked storms, fog and ice to reach their destinations. Despite such expedients, lack of fuel forced many power stations to shut down or reduce their output. The Royal Navy launched Operation Blackcurrant, which used diesel generators aboard submarines to provide supplementary power to coastal towns and dockyards.

Shinwell acted to reduce consumption of coal by cutting the electricity supply to industry completely and reducing the domestic supply to 19 hours per day across the country. In consequence factories across the country were forced to shut and up to four million people claimed unemployment benefits. Although so many people were made redundant there was little unrest and no major public disorders. Television services were suspended completely, radio broadcasts were reduced, some magazines were ordered to stop being published, and newspapers were cut in size to four pages or one sheet. Food rations, still in use from the Second World War, were cut to levels lower than in the war years. These measures made little difference to the rate of coal consumption but served to reduce public morale.

Despite Shinwell's actions the fuel supply remained insufficient and blackouts occurred across large swathes of the country, forcing even the staff at Buckingham Palace, the Houses of Parliament and London's Central Electricity Board to work by candlelight. A trade meeting with representatives from Russia and Iceland was also held without light or heating; one of the items discussed was the purchase of coal from Britain. The public was reduced to queuing at gasworks to collect coke for use as fuel. Supplies of aspirin also ran low as it was then a product of coal-tar, thousands of chickens in poultry farms died of the cold, and public transport services were cut to save fuel. Shinwell became increasingly unpopular with the general public and received a bomb threat, after which a four-man police guard was stationed at his house in Tooting. Despite this, he remained very popular with the miners, which made the government wary of dismissing him in case it caused industrial action. By 27 February sea conditions had improved and more than 100 coal ships had managed to unload their cargoes at the power stations, easing the fuel crisis.

During this period there was a fear that, despite the rationing, food supplies could run out owing to the effects of the cold on vegetables, livestock and delivery vehicles. In response, the government started a largely unsuccessful campaign to popularise Snoek, an inexpensive South African variety of fish; the public found the fish unpalatable and its stocks were eventually used as cat food. Many winter root vegetables could not be harvested as they were frozen into the ground, and in some areas pneumatic drills were used to excavate them. Frost destroyed of potatoes and, as a result, potatoes were rationed for the first time.

On 4–5 March came heavy snow which left drifts across much of the country with some lying deep in the Scottish Highlands. On 5 March one of the worst British blizzards of the 20th century occurred. Food supplies were again affected by the snow-bound roads and in some places the police requested permission to break into delivery lorries stranded by the snow.

On 10 March milder air of began to move north across the country from the south-west, rapidly thawing the snow lying on low ground. However, after such a long frost the ground stayed frozen. The frozen ground caused much surface run off which resulted in widespread flooding. Further heavy snowfalls occurred as the milder air pushed northwards. On 14 March the deepest ever recorded depth of snow lying in an inhabited location of the UK was measured at Forest-in-Teesdale in County Durham at . On 15 March a deepening depression moved in from the Atlantic, bringing heavy rain and gales. It was the start of the wettest March for 300 years. By 16 March winds reached with gusts, causing breaches in dykes in East Anglia that resulted in the flooding of of land, and blowing many trees down. The rivers Thames and Lea flooded in London, causing the Windsor borough engineer Geoffrey Baker to remark: "We could only cope if we had a spare Thames, or two."

On 17–18 March the River Trent overtopped its banks in Nottingham. Large parts of the city and surrounding areas were flooded, in which 9,000 properties and nearly a hundred industrial premises were affected – some to first-floor height. The suburbs of Long Eaton, West Bridgford and Beeston suffered particularly badly. Two days later, in the lower tidal reaches of the river, the peak of the flood combined with a high spring tide to flood villages and 2,000 properties in Gainsborough. River levels dropped when the floodbank at Morton breached, resulting in the flooding of some of farmland in the Trent valley. The flooding subsided in the west of the country by 20 March but rivers in the east were still rising and the Wharfe, Derwent, Aire and Ouse all burst their banks in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Selby was also badly affected with 70 per cent of houses being flooded. More than 100,000 properties were affected by the flooding and the Army worked to prevent the spread of the floodwater, particularly at pumping plants and power stations. Royal Engineers on national service handed out milk to families with babies and the Australian Red Cross assisted in Gloucester. The people of Canada sent food parcels to villages in Suffolk and the Premier of Ontario, George A. Drew, offered to help distribute them personally. The flooding lasted for about a week, with some waters taking an additional ten days to subside.

The winter had a lasting effect on Britain's industry; by February 1947 it was already estimated that that year's industrial output would be down by 10 per cent. The effects of the March floods added a further £250–375 million (equivalent to £– billion in ) in damage. Farming was particularly badly hit with cereal and potato harvests down 10 to 20 per cent on the previous two years. Sheep farmers lost one quarter of their flocks and it would be six years before sheep numbers recovered.

In Wales a disaster fund of £4,575,000 was partly allocated to assist farmers who lost about 4 million sheep.

The winter had political ramifications and caused the public to lose faith in a Labour government who could not maintain food and electricity supplies. Shinwell never publicly admitted that the crisis had resulted from low coal supplies, instead blaming the climate, the railway system, or capitalism generally. But the public blamed the long-time Labour activist, and Shinwell was forced to resign in October. Shinwell's resignation did not absolve the party: Labour lost a large number of seats to the Conservative Party in the following election (but retained a slim majority). Youngs et al. conclude that, "Probably more than anything else, the fuel crisis of 1947 led to a loss of public confidence in the Labour government." 

The effects of the winter came at a time of heavy government spending with 15 per cent of the GDP being spent on the armed forces and large expenditure on the new National Health Service and post-war reconstruction. This made the currency less stable and, coupled with the emergence of the dollar as the currency of choice for foreign reserves, led the government to slash the Bretton Woods official exchange rate from $4.03 to $2.80. This was a major event in Britain's decline from superpower status. With the country struggling to feed its people at home and those it was responsible for in war-torn Europe, it also caused the US to take a greater interest in Europe and push through the Marshall Plan for assistance to Britain and the continent. In addition, the winter is cited as the reason for the emigration of thousands of British people, particularly to Australia. The winter as a whole was less cold than the winter of 1963 but more snow was recorded.

The winter affected many other European countries. Similar cold periods and snowfalls were seen in much of Central Europe and the southern Baltic region. De Bilt, near Amsterdam in the Netherlands, experienced its worst winter since 1790. Because of the anticyclone to the north of the United Kingdom, several incoming Atlantic depressions which would otherwise have hit Britain tracked south to the Mediterranean region, resulting in Portugal, Spain, and Southern France having more rain than usual while remaining relatively warm. For example, the February rainfall at Gibraltar was , three times the average. As a result, France experienced both the extreme cold in the north and much rain in the south. The winter caused 150 deaths from the cold and lack of food in Berlin, which was still recovering from its devastation during the final stages of the Second World War. It caused schools in the Netherlands to be closed, led to a mob attack on a goods train carrying coal in Copenhagen, and caused the closure of businesses and the restriction of domestic gas supplies in Ireland.






</doc>
