<doc id="34918910" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34918910" title="Daybreaker (Architects album)">
Daybreaker (Architects album)

Daybreaker is the fifth studio album by British metalcore band Architects. It was released on 28 May 2012 in the United Kingdom and most of Europe and on 5 June 2012 in the United States. It was the last album to feature guitarist Tim Hillier-Brook, who left the band on 16 April 2012. "Daybreaker" was co-produced by the band and Ben Humphreys at Outhouse Studios in Reading, Berkshire, and used the same team and studio that were used for recording the band's third studio album, "Hollow Crown". "Daybreaker" was praised by music writers for its variety.

The album debuted on charts in five countries but failed to appear on any mainstream top 40. To promote it, Architects released five music videos, toured five continents (2012's "Almost World Tour" was filmed for the documentary ) and issued a re-release of the album to commemorate their departure from Century Media Records. "Daybreaker" received a positive response from critics; some praised its use of atmospheric elements and the return to a heavier style, while others criticised it as uninspired.

In the band's fourth album, 2011's "The Here and Now", the band set out to mix their typical sounds with the music they were listening to at the time. The response was polarising. During the publicity for "The Here and Now", the band praised it as a progression for them; they did not want to reject an album they had just released. But their own lack of belief in the record and their growing concern that they were irrelevant started to severely affect the band's confidence in themselves and their style.

Songs recorded during early demo sessions after "The Here and Now" became b-sides for re-releases. During this time, the band became certain they wished to make another "heavy" record. Tom Searle said, "some people might say we've regressed, but I think we've found our enthusiasm for playing heavy music again. I'm excited again by what I've come up with on guitar and lyrically it's much more political and less personal." The band started to write socially aware lyrics during the writing phase of "Daybreaker"; vocalist Sam Carter said this was a result of the band touring the world and seeing things he felt were downplayed by the media.

The band recorded "Daybreaker" at Outhouse Studios in Reading, Berkshire, where they had previously recorded "Ruin" (2007) and "Hollow Crown" (2009). "Daybreaker" had the same production and engineering team as did "Hollow Crown"; John Mitchell acted as "Daybreaker's" mixing engineer, and Mitchell described "Daybreaker" as "the album they should have made after "Hollow Crown"". Tom Searle said that during the recording, he and Hillier-Brook were constantly practising to perfect the highly technical guitar riffs.

Architects invited Jon Green from Deez Nuts, Oliver Sykes from Bring Me the Horizon, and Drew York from Stray from the Path to sing on the album. They invited Green because they believed his screaming vocals had a "Satanic" quality, while a collaboration with Sykes was something the band considered "long overdue", since Carter had sung on Bring Me the Horizon's 2008 album "Suicide Season". On 16 April 2013, shortly before "Daybreaker" release, Hillier-Brook announced he would leave the band to pursue other projects. The band had thought Hiller-Brook seemed unhappy while he was a member of Architects.

"Daybreaker" was first announced with a tentative release date of "summer". The album was released in the United Kingdom on 28 May 2012. In June 2013, Century Media Records re-released it in North America exclusively for the band's performance at Warped Tour 2013. This version includes their single "Black Blood" and covers of Bon Iver's "Blood Bank" and Thrice's "Of Dust and Nations".

In early November 2011, Architects announced a plan to release "Devil's Island", the first song from the then-unnamed follow-up to their fourth studio album "The Here and Now". They released it on 4 December 2011, with a b-side song called "Untitled". Both the song and the accompanying music video reference rioting in England in 2011, and the music video features clips of the riots. "Devil's Island" was well received by critics for its return to the mathcore style of their third album, "Hollow Crown". "Thrash Hits" said, "more-melodic aspects of Architects are still very much on show", that the song used "increased harsh vocals" and that the guitar tones were reminiscent of those on "Early Grave", the opening track of "Hollow Crown". J.J. Nattrass of "Bring The Noise" said, "the track is sweeping and melodic in parts, whilst bursting with high tempo and visceral raw energy in others." Tim Dodderidge, writing for "Mind Equals Blown", praised the song's lyrics, saying, "Architects has taken on an important issue in Britain today and made a song that questions humanity; it may have a lasting effect on listeners that bands like Rise Against have been able to do, though they sound nothing alike". The band supported the single's release with a five-day UK headline tour in December 2011; supporting acts were Deaf Havana, Tek-One and Heights.

On 26 March 2012 Architects released a typography-styled music video for "These Colours Don't Run". The music video was designed to "capture the madness that is America, be it good or bad". Tom Searle wanted the video "[to get] people thinking and talking. And in the land of the freeyou know nothing comes for free!" The band's third single "Alpha Omega" was released on 7 May 2012 after a radio debut on Daniel P. Carter's BBC Radio 1 Rock Show podcast on 24 April 2012. The music video for the song was posted on 10 May 2012. On 12 December, Architects released another typography-styled video for "Even If You Win, You're Still a Rat".

"Black Blood" was released on 3 June 2013 to promote the re-released version of "Daybreaker"; the single also had a typography-style video. The song was released in conjunction with Architects' performances at Warped Tour 2013; it was featured on the Warped Tour sampler that was released for free download on Amazon.com. The band initially wanted to record a music video for the song but they cancelled shooting because Tom Searle was afflicted with skin cancer.

Throughout March 2012, Architects and Touché Amoré supported Rise Against on their European tour. Hillier-Brook's last tour with Architects was the April 2012 British tour with Rolo Tomassi and Stray from the Path. Between March and June that yearthe last few months before the large tours in support of DaybreakerArchitects performed at several festivals; the Swiss Konzerthaus Schüür in Lucerne, the La Boule Noire near Paris, Groezrock Festival in Belgium, British touring festival Slam Dunk Festival in Leeds and Hatfield, and German festivals Summerblast Festival, Traffic Jam Festival and Summerbreeze Festival.<ref name="century-tours/festivals"></ref> Because Hillier-Brook had announced he would leave Architects on 16 April 2012 after his final performance with the band at Groezrock Festival, Josh Middleton of Sylosis joined the band as touring guitarist. In late April, Architects supported The Devil Wears Prada and Whitechapel on a six-day tour of South America.

Architects began promoting "Daybreaker" by playing several large European festivals throughout June and July 2013, before embarking on tour legs in south-east Asia, Australasia, North America and Europe, which were dubbed "The Daybreaker Almost World Tour". Most of the tour dates were published in July, the first leg of the tour began in August with 16 dates in Canada with support from Struc/tures and Asightforsewneyes. In September, the band headed to Asia to play dates in Hong Kong, Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia and China. In late September and early October, the band played 12 gigs in New Zealand and Australia supporting The Amity Afflictionit was Architects' first tour of Australia since December 2010. The final leg of the tour took place in Europe, with supporting bands While She Sleeps and Heights in mainland Europe, and Deez Nuts, Bury Tomorrow and The Acacia Strain in the UK. The tour's British leg included a gig at UK Warped Tour, a one-day festival headlined by Lostprophets and Bring Me the Horizon at Alexandra Palace in London on 10 November . A documentary about Architects' touring experiences was titled "".

In 2013, Architects expanded their promotional reach to the United States, a country they were not confident in. They were "tired of losing money" with their tours in the US and "[the band] were about ready to give up on America". Starting in March, with opening act Crossfaith they supported Enter Shikari and then joined the American Warped Tour 2013 in June. The band also made single appearances in Europe at several summer festivals, including Download Festival 2013 in the UK. The band announced they would tour the US for the third time in 2013 in November and December with co-headliners Protest The Hero and support from "The Kindred" and "Affiance". They also announced plans to tour Australia before the end of 2013. Architects' final performance in support of "Daybreaker" and their first in India occurred at the Saarang culture festival on 11 January 2014.

According to Andrew Kelham, "Daybreaker" is an "urgent and resurgent" record; it has been identified by critics as metalcore, progressive metal, mathcore and post-hardcore. Architects have been credited for fusing the intense technicality and metallic style of "Hollow Crown" with the "soaring vocals" and the much improved production of "The Here and Now". The album is defined by a number of features, including a contrast of singing and extreme metal screaming, and melodic choruses complemented by "soaring" vocals, technical guitar work with palm muted breakdowns and the use of string instruments and piano to generate atmosphere. "Daybreaker" is noted for fusing influences from Architects' previous two albums "The Here And Now" and "Hollow Crown"; many reviewers have cited the album as a return to the band's heavier, more technical roots. When he interviewed the band, Kelham wrote, "some will see "Daybreaker" as an apology, but it's not. Others will view it as a hasty attempt to claw back the glories of third album "Hollow Crown", but it's not that either. It's a collection of songs about moving on, growing up and making sense of what has come before".

The record's opening track is "The Bitter End", an introduction built on skittish electronics, dark piano chords, xylophone notes, orchestral harmonies, haunting vocals and lyrics. The album then breaks into intense and heavy songs such as "high-octane" tracks "Alpha Omega" and "These Colours Don't Run", which are full of "interesting rhythms and powerful melodies".

The piano-led track "Truth Be Told" gives the record a break from the chaos; it explores post-hardcore territory by following a "loop-like rhythmic structure". "Outsider Heart" has been compared to the math rock guitar playing of Meshuggah. "Devil's Island" has been described as "a full-body seizure set to electric guitar". Architects began to experiment with elements such as the addition of string instruments and piano that would help generate atmosphere. This is evident in the melodic songs "Truth Be Told", "Behind The Throne" and "Unbeliever". "Behind the Throne" is an intense, atmospheric, ambient-rock song with a grandiose, electro-drummed backdrop.

Lyrically, the album discusses negative aspects of religion and society, and is seen as a "companion piece" to Enter Shikari’s "A Flash Flood of Colour". "Daybreaker" lyrics were written by Carter and Tom Searle, who focused on political and "bigger picture" themes. Carter described "Devil's Island" as "one of the hardest songs to write" because of the prominence of its theme of rioting. Searle, who focused on its lyrics, said, "With money firmly ingrained into our global society we really need to look to alternative solutions when problems like the riots occur because violence is never the solution". Carter said "Black Blood", which was included on the re-release, is about the oil industry, society's strong dependence on oil and the way "short term profit is the only thing these people think about, instead of the longevity of what we really could do and how we could stabilize what's really going on in the world right now".

"Daybreaker" debuted at number one on the UK Rock & Metal Albums Chart and at number 42 on the UK Album Charts for selling 3,208 copies. It became the highest-charting release by Architects in their five-album career; "The Here And Now" had reached number 57. The next week, the album fell to number 12 on the Rock & Metal, then to number 33, and it left the chart the following week. The album debuted on the US Top Heatseekers chart at number 28, selling 1,200 copies in its first week. In Belgium, the album charted at number 182, and in Germany at number 93.

"Daybreaker" received positive reviews from music critics. Some reviewers praised the band for texturing and progressing their sound, and for writing socio-political lyrics. The album was criticised for sounding forced or formulaic. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, "Daybreaker" received an average score of 73, based on 8 reviews, which indicates generally favourable reviews.

About.com writer Ryan Cooper praised the album, awarded it four stars out of five and said it "laughs in the face of those who think passionate realism, artistic integrity and mass commercial appeal are all mutually exclusive. Daybreaker balances all three with pretty much perfect dexterity." Raziq Rauf writing for the BBC praised the band for the album's musical diversity with its use of electronic songs like album-opener "The Bitter End" and the band's use of technicality and melody in songs. He summarised the album by saying, "Daybreaker is a great album. It’ll go down as one of Architects’ finest worksit’s certainly their most well-rounded release to date." "Big Cheese" writer Paul Hagen praised the album's lyrical content, saying, "Socially turbulent times seems to produce the best music and if bands can keep channelling genuine anger into their art, there are going to be some more really great albums released over the next few years".

Canadian music magazine "Exclaim!" published two reviews of "Daybreaker". Bradley Zorgdrager gave an unfavourable review of the album's sound. He said although the tracks are "catchy and occasionally compelling, they're essentially identical and formulaic, as the atmospheric build-ups and soaring riffs make way for boring breakdowns. The metal-influenced parts sound forced to appease fans disappointed with their last release, which results in Daybreaker sounding more like a business move than a work of art." Scott Harms' review was more favourable, praising the band's return to a much more aggressive style. He credits it for incorporating influences from previous albums, saying "they have found a balance in which to return to the Searle brothers' heavy sounds while carefully incorporating Sam Carter's soaring clean vocals". Harms summarised his review by saying, "as a whole, ["Daybreaker"] sounds epic". Adam Rees of "Metal Hammer" rated the album 7 out of 10, acknowledging the "abundant" inclusion of string instruments and piano and the way these instruments create atmosphere. Ress ended his review by calling "Daybreaker", "A brave and brilliant British metal album". Canoe.ca author Darryl Sterdan awarded the album 2.5 stars out of 5, saying it "balanc[es] their newfound sensitivity and maturity with plenty of good old-fashioned techno-metal frenzy and primal-scream aggro. Pity they didn’t write memorable songs while they were at it."

"Alt Sounds" writer Candice Haridimou gave the album a rating of 94% out of 100% and praised the album's lyrical content. She said the political nature of the album also uses emotional dramatisation to capture the listener, particularly in songs like "Devil's Island". Haridimou states the song "drives remorse into the cold hearts of those involved. It’s a severe and poignant song that will stand the test of time." Ryan Bird, in an otherwise positive review of "Daybreaker", criticised it upon first hearing it; he said it struggled to settle into any distinctive rhythm or groove. However, Bird concluded his review by saying, "but despite its relative (and relatively few) faults. 'Daybreaker' represents a victory for a band who some had once been so eager to write off, suggesting that maybejust maybethey've got what it takes to bring both sides [of their fanbase] together".

"Daybreaker" featured on several lists of best albums of 2012, including "Rock Sounds" top 50 at number 48, "Kerrang!"'s 101 at number 36 and Ourzone's at number 23 out of 25.




</doc>
<doc id="34992141" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34992141" title="Strang School District No. 36">
Strang School District No. 36

Strang School District No. 36, or the Strang Public School, is a historic school located in Fillmore County, Nebraska, in the village of Strang. The school is one of the two sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places in the village of Strang. The school building is a small, two-story, brick public schoolhouse, which was built to replace the schoolhouse that was previously located on that site. The schoolhouse was built between 1929 and 1930, and replaced the previous schoolhouse, which burned down in 1928. The schoolhouse still retains all original building materials. The school served high school students from 1930 to 1951, and still functions as a school today, serving grades K–8. The NRHP listing also includes a flagpole located outside the schoolhouse, and five pieces of playground equipment.

In October 1928 a fire destroyed the small school that had previously been located in Strang. Classes were held in two local churches and the Belle Prairie Township Hall for the remainder of that year, while the townspeople held a series of meetings to discuss the construction of a new schoolhouse. Later in 1928, plans for the new schoolhouse were drawn up and approved, and construction on the new Strang Public School began in 1929. The majority of the people that worked on constructing the school were local townspeople. The first classes in the new school were held in February 1930. The schoolhouse was constructed in a "fireproof" fashion, as to prevent another accident. The new schoolhouse was constructed to hold students from first through twelfth grades, from Strang and the surrounding communities. Primary students attending classes were located on the second floor and secondary students classes were held on the first floor. Since construction, there have been no projects undertaken to refurbish or restore the original building, as to protect its historical importance. In 1951, due to a decline in enrollment, the school reduced to serving just students in grades K through 8, and has remained this way since. In fall of 2001, the school had an enrollment of just eight students. By the fall of 2004 (the last published figures available), that number had fallen to just five.

The Strang Public School is a near perfect example of what is considered a typical twentieth-century "fireproof" schoolhouse in Nebraska, and is constructed somewhat symmetrically. The school was constructed in a simplified version of the Renaissance Revival style, consisting of two stories, with a flat roof.

The building is constructed in a rectangular shape, symmetrical on the exterior, and measures by . The approximate height measurements are not provided by the Register. Large, six over six paned windows are located in the front and the back of the building on both floors. Similar windows are also located on the south side of the building, but only on the top floor. There are no windows located on the north side. The entire exterior of the building is constructed from brick. The roof is flat and constructed of roofing cement, with a parapet located around it, with a section of a chimney that sticks out of the south end of the roof. The most prominent feature of the exterior of the building is the large, central pavilion, with a stepped gable parapet wall.

The first level of the building contains two classrooms, both of which have a cloakroom, a set of three swivel doors, and a large slate chalkboard that covers one of the walls. The first story also contains two bathrooms, four small storage closets, and a central hall, as well as a large stairwell leading up to the second floor. The second story contains three classrooms, with the same features as those downstairs, along with an office and three small storage rooms. A metal fire escape door is located in the center of the west wall of the second story. The schoolhouse also has a partial basement, which contains a large storage room, a coal room, and a disused coal furnace.

The Strang Public School is positioned at the intersection of Main Street and Sharon Street, on the southern edge of Strang, originally planned as a convenient location for the teachers and students coming from surrounding communities. The campus consists of the main schoolhouse, five historic pieces of playground equipment, a flagpole located in front of the building, a basketball/tennis court located north of the school building, and a large playing field west of the schoolhouse. The entire property is contained inside a 300 by 300 foot square plot of land.

A flagpole is located outside the main entrance to the school building, and is included in the NRHP listing as a contributing feature. A set of gym bars, a tether ball pole, a swing set, a "slippery slide", and a merry-go-round are located on the south and west sides of the property, and are all listed as contributing features. A fenced tennis and basketball court is located on the north side of the property, and a large track and playing field are located on the west side of the property, but none of these features are included in the listing.

Strang School District No. 36 was added to the National Register of Historic Places on June 25, 1992. On its nomination, Strang School District No. 36 was cited as being significant under criteria C, with the statement: "as a multi-story, brick, "fireproof" school building, an example of a type, period, and method of construction representative of school buildings constructed in many communities in Nebraska, particularly in Fillmore County, during the first quarter of the twentieth century". The school's listed year of significance was 1930, the year it was constructed. The school is considered significant to the surrounding community by Fillmore County, due to its importance to education an historic qualities, being one of the oldest buildings in the area.


Bibliography


</doc>
<doc id="35039133" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35039133" title="Constitutional history of Zimbabwe">
Constitutional history of Zimbabwe

The constitutional history of Zimbabwe starts with the arrival of white people to what was dubbed Southern Rhodesia in the 1890s. The country was initially run by an administrator appointed by the British South Africa Company. The prime ministerial role was first created in October 1923, when the country achieved responsible government, with Sir Charles Coghlan as its first Premier. The third Premier, George Mitchell, renamed the post Prime Minister in 1933.

The Rhodesian Prime Minister acted as Head of His or Her Majesty's Rhodesian Government, under the largely symbolic supervision of a British colonial Governor, until Rhodesia issued its unrecognised Unilateral Declaration of Independence on 11 November 1965. British-appointed figures such as the Governor were thereafter ignored by Salisbury. The unrecognised state's system of government, however, remained otherwise unchanged, right down to its declared loyalty to Elizabeth II, which Britain did not acknowledge. This situation remained until March 1970, when Rhodesia adopted a republican system of government. In republican Rhodesia, the Prime Minister instead nominally reported to the President.

The Prime Minister was responsible for nominating the other members of the government, chairing meetings of the Rhodesian Cabinet, and deciding when to call a new general election for the House of Assembly. He retained this role following the reconstitution of Rhodesia under black majority rule, first into Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979, then into Zimbabwe the following year. The Zimbabwean government was headed by a Prime Minister from 1980 to 1987, when that post was superseded by an executive presidency. The former Prime Minister, Robert Mugabe, became President; he was succeeded by Emmerson Mnangagwa during the 2017 coup d'état.

Having secured the Rudd Concession on mining rights from King Lobengula of Matabeleland on 30 October 1888, Cecil Rhodes and his British South Africa Company were granted a Royal Charter by Queen Victoria in October 1889. Under this charter, the Company was empowered to trade with indigenous rulers, form banks, own and manage land, and raise and run a police force. In return for these rights, the British South Africa Company would administer and develop any territory it acquired, while respecting laws enacted by extant African rulers, and upholding free trade within its borders. Though the Company made good on most of these pledges, the assent of Lobengula and other native leaders, particularly regarding mining rights, was often evaded, misrepresented or simply ignored. Lobengula reacted by making war on the new arrivals, their Tswana allies and the local Mashona people in 1893. The resulting conflict ended with Lobengula's torching of his own capital at Bulawayo, his death from smallpox in early 1894, and the subsequent submission of his "izinDuna" (advisors) to the Company. Violent rebellion to the north-east, in neighbouring Mashonaland, was forcibly put down by the Company during 1897.

Following these victories, the British South Africa Company controlled a country equivalent to modern Zambia and Zimbabwe. This domain was initially referred to as "Zambesia" (or Zambezia) after the Zambezi, which bisected it; however, the first immigrants almost immediately began instead calling their new home "Rhodesia" in honour of their Company benefactor, and this name was officially adopted in 1895. Matabeleland and Mashonaland, both of which lay south of the Zambezi, were first formally referred to by Britain as "Southern Rhodesia" in 1898, and were united under that name in 1901. The areas to the river's north, Barotziland-North-Western Rhodesia and North-Eastern Rhodesia, were governed separately, and amalgamated in 1911 to form Northern Rhodesia.

The head of the southern territories' government during this time was in effect the Company's regional administrator. The first of these was appointed in 1890, soon after the Pioneer Column's establishment of Fort Salisbury, the capital, on 12 September that year. From 1899, the administrator governed as part of a ten-man Legislative Council, originally made up of himself, five other members nominated by the Company, and four elected by registered voters. The number of elected members rose gradually under Company rule until they numbered 13 in 1920, sitting alongside the administrator and six other Company officials in the 20-member Legislative Council. The Company's Royal Charter, which originally ran out in October 1914, was renewed for a further ten years in 1915.

The post of national administrator was held by three people, with three others holding the post while it only covered Mashonaland; between 1898 and 1901, a separate office existed in Matabeleland.

Southern Rhodesians of all races fought for Britain in the First World War, during which the Responsible Government Association (RGA) was formed in 1917. By 1919, Sir Charles Coghlan, a South African-born Bulawayo lawyer, had become the RGA's leader. The RGA sought self-government for Southern Rhodesia within the British Empire—the same "responsible government" previously granted to Britain's colonies in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa as a precursor to full dominion status—and opposed Southern Rhodesia's proposed integration into the recently formed Union of South Africa. The accession of territories governed by the British South Africa Company was explicitly provisioned for by Section 150 of the "South Africa Act 1909", the British Act of Parliament which created the union in 1910 by consolidating the Empire's Cape, Natal, Orange River and Transvaal Colonies into a unitary dominion. The Company originally stood against Southern Rhodesia's addition, fearing the territory's potential domination by Afrikaners, but changed its tune dramatically when, in 1918, the Privy Council in London ruled that unalienated land in the Rhodesias was owned not by the Company but by the Crown.

The loss of the ability to raise funds through the sale of land hampered the Company's ability to pay dividends to its shareholders, and caused its development of Southern Rhodesia to slow. Believing that membership in the union could help solve both problems, the Company now backed Southern Rhodesia's incorporation as South Africa's fifth province. However, this prospect proved largely unpopular among Southern Rhodesian settlers, most of whom wanted self-government, and came to vote for the RGA in large numbers. In the 1920 Legislative Council election, the RGA won ten of the 13 seats contested. A referendum on the colony's future was held on 27 October 1922—at the suggestion of Winston Churchill, then Britain's Colonial Secretary, continuing the initiative of his preprocessor Viscount Milner—and responsible government won the day by 59%. Southern Rhodesia was duly annexed by the Empire on 12 September 1923, and granted full self-government on 1 October the same year. The new Southern Rhodesian government immediately purchased the land from the British Treasury for £2 million, and ten years later paid the same sum to the British South Africa Company for the country's mineral rights.

The RGA reorganised itself to become the governing Rhodesia Party, with Coghlan as Southern Rhodesia's first Premier. The title was changed to Prime Minister in 1933 by George Mitchell, the third man to hold the office. In 1932, the Southern Rhodesian leader was first invited to an Imperial Conference. Although Southern Rhodesia was not a dominion, it was seen elsewhere in the Empire as a "sui generis" case among Britain's colonies, and worthy of inclusion, particularly as it was the only one which governed itself. Southern Rhodesian Prime Ministers thereafter became a regular fixture at such meetings and, from 1944, at Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conferences.

The Rhodesia Party remained in power until September 1933, when, despite narrowly topping the popular vote, it lost the month's election, winning only nine of the 30 seats compared to the Reform Party's 16. Although the Reform Party was left-wing in name, many of its leading members, including the new Prime Minister Dr Godfrey Huggins, were politically conservative; the more rightist members of the party merged with the Rhodesia Party in 1934 to form the United Party, and, with Huggins at the helm, roundly defeated the rump left wing of the Reform Party to begin 28 years of uninterrupted stewardship.

Though uninvolved in foreign affairs, and therefore obliged to follow Britain's lead, the colony enthusiastically supported the mother country during the Second World War, symbolically affirming the British declaration of war before any other part of the Empire. During the ensuing conflict over 26,100 Southern Rhodesians of all races served in the armed forces, "pro rata" to white population a higher contribution of manpower than any other British colony or dominion, and more than the UK itself. George VI knighted Huggins in 1941, and, with the war still ongoing, Britain made overtures towards dominion status. Huggins dismissed this, saying it was imperative to win the war first. The idea of dominionship was raised again in 1952, but Salisbury once more did not pursue it, instead following the results of a referendum held early the next April to enter an initially semi-independent Federation with the directly administered British colonies of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland.

A month after Southern Rhodesia, Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland formed the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in August 1953, Huggins became the amalgamated body's first Prime Minister. Salisbury was designated the Federal capital, and the United Party renamed itself the United Rhodesia Party. Garfield Todd took over as Southern Rhodesia's Prime Minister. Huggins headed the Federal government for three years, then retired in November 1956 after a combined 23 years as a national leader. The United Rhodesia Party merged with the Federal Party to become the United Federal Party (UFP) in November 1957, and the liberal Todd was voted out of office by the more right-wing members of his party four months later, in February 1958. He was replaced by Sir Edgar Whitehead. Todd led his own version of the United Rhodesia Party against the UFP and the Dominion Party in June the same year, but failed to win a single seat—the UFP won 17 of the 30 seats, with the Dominion Party taking the remainder.

Whitehead served as Prime Minister for the next four years, under Federal leader Roy Welensky, as black nationalist ambitions and changing international attitudes propelled the Federation towards collapse. In Southern Rhodesia, constitutional changes adopted in 1961 as the result of a referendum split the heretofore non-racial (though qualified) electoral roll into graduated "A" and "B" rolls; the latter had lower qualifications, and was intended to cater for prospective black voters who had previously not qualified.

This plan was given assent by the Southern Rhodesian and British governments, and initially enjoyed support from black nationalists in the country, though the latter soon reversed their stance, saying the changes did not go far enough. Some government members opposed this partitioning of the electorate, which essentially divided it along ethnic lines; the UFP's chief whip in the Federal assembly, Ian Smith, resigned in protest, saying the new system was "racialist". Former Dominion Party leader Winston Field formed the pro-independence Rhodesian Front (RF) in 1962 to contest that November's Southern Rhodesian election, with Smith running as his deputy, and in a shock result won 35 of the 50 territorial "A"-roll seats. Field and Smith became Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister respectively, and remained in office after the Federation's dissolution on the last day of 1963.

After the Federation broke up on 31 December 1963, Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland became independent during 1964, respectively renamed Zambia and Malawi, and under black majority governments. Southern Rhodesia was denied the same under the ideal of "no independence before majority rule" that was newly ascendant in Britain and elsewhere. The RF was enraged by what it saw as British duplicity; according to Field and Smith, Britain's Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State R. A. Butler had verbally promised "independence no later than, if not before, the other two territories" at a meeting in 1963, in return for Salisbury's help in winding up the Federation. Butler denied having said this.

Under severe pressure from his ministers to resolve this issue, Field travelled to England in March 1964 to pursue sovereign statehood, but returned empty-handed a month later. He resigned his position on 13 April; this came as no surprise to many government insiders, but appeared sudden to most sections of the general public. Smith promptly accepted the cabinet's invitation to take over, though he expressed surprise at the nomination. A farmer and erstwhile British Royal Air Force pilot from the rural town of Selukwe, Smith was Southern Rhodesia's first native-born head of government. He immediately promised to take a harder line on independence than his predecessor.

Only two months into his premiership, Smith was deeply offended when Whitehall informed him that, for the first time since 1930, Southern Rhodesia would not be represented at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference. Huggins described this in 1969 as tantamount to "kicking [Southern Rhodesia] out of the Commonwealth". When Northern Rhodesia became Zambia on 24 October 1964, Southern Rhodesia dropped "Southern" from its name, and initiated legislation to this effect. Britain refused assent two months later, saying that although the colony was self-governing, it did not have the power to rename itself. Salisbury continued using the shortened name anyway.

The Rhodesian government, which remained predominantly white, contended that it had almost complete support from all races in its drive for full statehood; in October 1964, a national "indaba" (tribal conference) comprising 622 black representatives unanimously backed independence under the 1961 constitution, and a month later a general independence referendum yielded an 89% "yes" vote for the same. Harold Wilson's British Labour Cabinet did not give credence to either of these tests of opinion, and continued to insist on an immediate shift to majority rule before the granting of sovereign independence. Campaigning on an election promise of independence, the RF called a new general election for May 1965, and won all 50 "A"-roll seats.

Negotiations between Smith and Wilson took place throughout the rest of the year, but repeatedly broke down; between July and September, a parallel development concerned Rhodesia's opening of a representative mission in Lisbon, which Britain opposed, but proved unable to stop. Soon after Smith visited London in October 1965, Wilson resolved to curb his rival's ambitions. During his own visit to Salisbury later that month, he proposed to safeguard future black representation in the Rhodesian parliament by withdrawing control over the Rhodesian parliamentary structure to London. Salisbury had held these powers since 1923. This proved the last straw for Smith's Rhodesian government, which issued the Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI) on 11 November.

The Rhodesians modelled their independence document on that of the American Thirteen Colonies in 1776, which remains the only other such proclamation in the history of the British Empire. According to UDI—which went unrecognised by Britain, the Commonwealth and the United Nations, all of which declared it illegal and imposed economic sanctions—the Rhodesian government still professed loyalty to Elizabeth II, whom it called the "Queen of Rhodesia". The British-appointed Governor, Sir Humphrey Gibbs, remained at his post in Salisbury, but was now ignored by the local government, which appointed its own "Officer Administrating the Government" to fill his ceremonial role. Smith represented Rhodesia in two abortive rounds of talks with Wilson, first aboard HMS "Tiger" in 1966, then on HMS "Fearless" two years later. Under Rhodesia's 1965 constitution, the Prime Minister remained at the head of Her Majesty's Rhodesian Government until 2 March 1970, when a republican constitution was adopted in line with the results of a referendum held the previous June. In the Republic of Rhodesia, the Prime Minister formally reported to the President.

Smith and the RF decisively won three more general elections during the 1970s. The Anglo-Rhodesian Agreement of 1971–72, which would have legitimised the country's independence in Britain's eyes, fell apart after a British test of Rhodesian national opinion reported most blacks to be against it. The Rhodesian Bush War, fought against the government by the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army (ZANLA) and the Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA), the respective guerrilla armies of the Maoist Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU) and its Warsaw Pact-aligned Marxist rival, the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU), intensified soon after, starting with ZANLA's attack on Altena and Whistlefield Farms in the country's north-east in December 1972. After a strong security force counter-campaign, the South African détente initiative of December 1974 introduced a ceasefire, which the security forces respected, and the guerrillas ignored. This shifted the course of the war significantly in the nationalists' favour.

Mozambican independence under a communist government in 1975 further assisted the cadres, and exacerbated the Rhodesian government's economic dependency on South Africa. Unproductive talks between Smith and the guerrilla leaders took place at Victoria Falls in 1975, then in Geneva the following year. In March 1978, the Internal Settlement was agreed between the government and moderate nationalist parties, the most prominent of which was Bishop Abel Muzorewa's United African National Council (UANC). The militant nationalist campaigns continued, however, and indeed extended to attacks on civilian aircraft: ZAPU shot down Air Rhodesia Flight 825 in September 1978, then Air Rhodesia Flight 827 in February 1979. ZANU and ZAPU boycotted the elections held per the Internal Settlement in April 1979, which UN Security Council Resolution 448 called "sham elections ... [held] in utter defiance of the United Nations". In these elections, the UANC won a majority in the new House of Assembly, with 51 of the 72 common roll seats (for which universal suffrage applied) and 67% of the popular vote. The RF took all 20 of the seats elected by white voters and also provided eight non-constituency members. All of this settled, Rhodesia became black majority-ruled Zimbabwe Rhodesia on 1 June 1979, with Muzorewa replacing Smith as Prime Minister.

With Muzorewa and the UANC in government, Zimbabwe Rhodesia failed to gain international acceptance. ZANU leader Robert Mugabe publicly damned Muzorewa's new order, dismissing the bishop as a "neocolonial puppet"; he pledged to continue ZANLA's campaign "to the last man". Muzorewa took office at the head of a UANC–RF coalition cabinet made up of 12 blacks and five whites. "Instead of the enemy wearing a white skin, he will soon wear a black skin," said Mugabe, just before the bishop took over. The Bush War went on until December 1979, when Salisbury, Whitehall and the revolutionary nationalists signed the Lancaster House Agreement in London. Zimbabwe Rhodesia came under the temporary control of Britain, and a Commonwealth monitoring force was convened to supervise fresh elections, in which ZANU and ZAPU would take part for the first time. ZANU won, and, with Mugabe as Prime Minister, formed the first government of Zimbabwe following its recognised independence on 18 April 1980.

Seven years into Mugabe's premiership, Zimbabwe scrapped the white seats amid sweeping constitutional reforms in September 1987. The office of Prime Minister was abolished in October; Mugabe became the country's first executive President two months later. Mugabe and the ZAPU leader Joshua Nkomo signed a unity accord at the same time merging ZAPU into ZANU–PF with the stated goal of a Marxist–Leninist one-party state.




</doc>
<doc id="35216832" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35216832" title="Action of 10 April 1795">
Action of 10 April 1795

The Action of 10 April 1795 was a minor naval engagement during the French Revolutionary Wars in which a squadron of French Navy frigates was intercepted by a British battle squadron under Rear-Admiral John Colpoys which formed part of the blockade of the French naval base of Brest in Brittany. The French squadron split up in the face of superior British numbers, the three vessels seeking to divide and outrun the British pursuit. One frigate, "Gloire" was followed by the British frigate HMS "Astraea" and was ultimately brought to battle in a closely fought engagement. Although the ships were roughly equal in size, the British ship was easily able to defeat the French in an engagement lasting just under an hour.

The other French ships were pursued by British ships of the line and the chase lasted much longer, into the morning of 11 April when HMS "Hannibal" caught the frigate "Gentille". "Hannibal" was far larger than its opponent and the French captain surrendered immediately rather than fight a futile engagement. The third French frigate, "Fraternité" successfully escaped. After refitting in Portsmouth, Colpoys' ships returned to their station off Brest, the blockade remaining in place for the remainder of the year.

Great Britain and France had been at war for more than two years by April 1795, and British dominance at sea was well established, with the Royal Navy maintaining substantial blockade fleets off all of the principal French naval ports. The biggest port on the French Atlantic coast was at Brest in Brittany, from which French raiders could attack British shipping in the English Channel and Western Atlantic. The most efficient commerce raiders were frigates, light and fast warships that could strike rapidly and with devastating effect if left unopposed. One of the major roles of the British blockade squadrons was the detection and elimination of French frigates as they emerged from their bases.

In April 1795, the inshore squadron of the British blockade at Brest was commanded by Rear-Admiral John Colpoys, who had at his command five ships of the line: HMS "London", HMS "Valiant", HMS "Colossus", HMS "Hannibal" and HMS "Robust" and frigates HMS "Astraea" and HMS "Thalia". Colpoys' ships had formed an effective blockade: on 29 March they had taken the French corvette "Jean Bart" and the following day recaptured a lost British merchant ship. At 10:00 on 10 April, the British squadron was cruising off the approaches to Brest when three ships were spotted to the west.

Colpoys immediately ordered his squadron to give chase and at 12:00 the strange ships were identified as a squadron of French frigates. The French ships were the 36-gun "Gloire", "Gentille" and "Fraternité", led by Captain Beens of "Gloire" and on a three-month raiding cruise from Brest in the Bay of Biscay that had so-far been uneventful: the only prize taken had been a small Spanish merchant brig. Beens quickly discovered the danger his squadron was in, and gave orders for them to sail westwards away from the British squadron. However, the wind favoured Colpoys and his vastly superior squadron rapidly gained on the French frigates. The first British ship to come within range was the 74-gun HMS "Colossus" under Captain John Monkton, which managed to exchange distant gunfire with the rearmost French ship before the gap widened once more.

Seeing that his ships were in danger of being caught by the much larger British ships of the line, Captain Beens gave orders for the squadron to separate. "Gentille" and "Fraternité" splitting from "Gloire" to the west with the ships of the line HMS "Hannibal" and HMS "Robust" in close pursuit while "Gloire" swung northwest, eluding most of the British squadron except for the 32-gun frigate HMS "Astraea" under Captain Lord Henry Paulet, which managed to stay in contact throughout the afternoon.

At 18:00, with the rest of the pursuit far behind, Paulet succeeded in bringing "Gloire" within range of the cannon on his ship's quarterdeck. Opening fire with these guns brought a response from Beens' sternchaser guns, the frigates exchanging cannon shot for four and a half hours as "Astraea" slowly caught up with its elusive opponent. At 22:30, Paulet was finally close enough to lay "Astraea" alongside "Gloire" and the two frigates exchanged fire at close range for the next 58 minutes, Paulet concentrating his gunnery on the hull of the French ship while Beens' ordered his men to disable the British ship's rigging and masts. "Gloire" was a substantially larger ship than "Astraea", both in weight of shot and gross tonnage, and the battle was fiercely contested: Beens suffered a head injury and all three of "Astraea"'s topmasts taking serious damage, so much so that the main topmast collapsed in the aftermath of the action. However at 23:28, with two British ships of the line visible in the distance, Beens surrendered his ship to Paulet.

Both ships had suffered damage, with the injuries to "Astraea"'s masts requiring urgent repairs while "Gloire" had also suffered damage to its rigging and sails. The French ship had also taken heavy casualties, with 40 men killed or wounded, including the captain. In contrast, "Astraea" had not lost a single man, although one of the eight wounded subsequently died. Paulet effected repairs to both ships and gave temporary command of "Gloire" to Lieutenant John Talbot, who was subsequently promoted. He then brought both ships to the Portsmouth, where Colpoys was reconstituting his scattered squadron.

It was while sailing off the Isle of Wight that Colpoys learned from Captain Edward Thornbrough of "Robust" that "Hannibal" had succeeded in catching the French frigate "Gentille" early on the morning of 11 April. The French captain surrendering without a fight before the overwhelming British force that he faced, shocked that his frigate had been caught by a ship of the line in open waters. In response, "Hannibal"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s captain, John Markham, proudly claimed that "Hannibal sails like a witch". "Hannibal" subsequently joined "Robust" in the chase of "Fraternité", succeeding in firing several shot at the French ship before falling behind in a period of calm weather. After a chase of several days, "Fraternité"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s captain lightened his ship by throwing guns and stores overboard and ultimately escaped pursuit, later rejoining the Brest fleet and participating in a number of subsequent campaigns. Both "Gloire" and "Gentille" were purchased for the Royal Navy, the entirety of Colpoy's squadron sharing in the prize money by prior arrangement. Neither ship was in particularly good condition however and neither had long service in the British fleet. Colpoys returned to the inshore blockade of Brest with his squadron following a brief refit at Portsmouth, remaining off the port for the remainder of the year.



</doc>
<doc id="35228710" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35228710" title="Action of 24 October 1793">
Action of 24 October 1793

The Action of 24 October 1793 was a minor naval engagement during the first year of the French Revolutionary Wars. While cruising in the Northern Bay of Biscay, the British Royal Navy frigate HMS "Thames", under Captain James Cotes, encountered the much larger French frigate "Uranie", under Captain Jean-François Tartu. The ships engaged, with each suffering severe damage until they separated after nearly four hours of continual combat. Cotes ordered his crew to make hasty repairs, intending to resume the battle, but "Uranie"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s crew, with their captain dead, slipped away while "Thames" was unable to manoeuvre. At 16:00, with repairs on "Thames" ongoing, a French squadron of three frigates and a brig, under Captain Zacharie Allemand, arrived, firing on "Thames" as they approached. Outnumbered, Cotes surrendered his ship to Allemand, who commended Cotes on his resistance to the far larger "Uranie".

The French brought "Thames" into Brest, where sailors from Allemand's squadron looted the frigate. The British officers were imprisoned for the next two years. The frigate was commissioned into the French Navy as "Tamise", and "Uranie" was renamed "Tartu" in honour of her deceased captain. Both vessels then served with the French Atlantic Fleet, "Tamise" until 8 June 1796, when the British recaptured her off the Scilly Isles, and "Tartu" until 30 December 1796 when the British captured her during the "Expédition d'Irlande".

In February 1793, amid rising political tension, the French Republic declared war on Great Britain, drawing Britain into the French Revolutionary Wars. At sea, the Bay of Biscay, the Western Approaches and the English Channel all became areas of significant naval activity as French privateers sailed on raiding cruises against British merchant shipping. To augment these attacks, the French naval authorities dispatched squadrons of frigates to attack British trade routes. To counter these operations, the Royal Navy sent their own frigates to sea, sometimes in squadrons and sometimes on single patrols.

A French frigate squadron sent to on a cruise in the Northern Bay of Biscay in the early autumn of 1793 was commanded by Captain Zacharie Allemand and consisted of the frigates "Carmagnole", "Résolue", "Sémillante" and "Uranie" with the brig-corvette "Espiègle". On 22 October, the squadron sighted the 16-gun Spanish brig "Alcoudia" and Allemand ordered "Uranie" under Captain Jean-François Tartu to separate from the squadron and pursue the Spaniard. "Uranie" was easily able to capture "Alcoudia", taking the prisoners on board the frigate and establishing a prize crew on the brig. Two days later, "Uranie" was sailing southwards in company with the prize with the wind at the southwest, when a sail appeared to the north at 09:30.

The new arrival was a British ship sent from the Channel Fleet on a lone patrol: the frigate HMS "Thames" under Captain James Cotes. "Thames" was an old frigate, built in 1758 and carrying 32 12-pounder guns. The ship was below its standard complement of 215 men, sailing with only 184, which meant that the 6-pounder guns that augmented the main battery could not be manned. By comparison, "Uranie" was five years old and carried 40 18-pounder guns and weighing almost double the weight of the British ship. Her full complement was of 260 men, but she lacked 60 of her sailors, dispatched in prize crews over three captured ships, and was burdened with over 260 prisoners. At first unsure of the identity of the ship to the north, Tartu hoisted a blue flag as an identification signal and sent the "Alcoudia" away in case the ship should be revealed to be hostile. Cotes did not respond to the signal, and the two ships were soon hidden from one another by a rain squall.

At 10:15 the weather cleared, leaving both frigates well in sight of one another, both Tartu and Cotes identifying the opposing ship as an enemy and clearing for action, Tartu hoisting the French tricolour. With both captains determined on battle, the frigates approached one another rapidly on opposing tacks. "Uranie" was the first to fire, discharging a full broadside at "Thames" and then wearing around to pull alongside "Thames" on the same tack. The manoeuvre placed the two frigates directly alongside one another and a close engagement began, each discharging broadside after broadside at the another. At 12:15, a round shot swept "Uranie"s quarterdeck, killing a helmsman, cutting a boy in half, wounding another, and severing Tartu's leg under the knee; Tartu was brought below deck and Lieutenant Wuibert assumed command of "Uranie". The fight continued in this manner for several hours, until 14:20, when "Uranie" was able to pull ahead of "Thames" and fire several broadsides into the bows of the British ship, raking her. British historian William James recorded that the crew of "Uranie" then attempted to board via the starboard bow of "Thames", but were driven off by fire from Cotes' bow guns, which had been double–shotted for this reason. However the after action report by Lieutenant Wuibert on "Uranie" states that no boarding action was attempted.

With the boarding attempt thwarted "Uranie" pulled back, turning southwards to put distance between the vessels. Tartu, brought below deck and dying, had ordered a retreat for fear that his prisoners would revolt and because the engagement was drifiting in the east-north-east direction, where two sails, assumed to be British warships, had been sighted. It was assumed on "Thames" that the French ship was retreating, the British crew cheering as the firing ceased. Cotes however anticipated a resumption of the action and ordered his men to begin making repairs immediately: "Thames" was so badly damaged that pursuit was out of the question. All three of "Thames"<nowiki>'</nowiki> masts had been shot through, most of the rigging had been torn away, the hull and decks were badly damaged and 34 men were killed or wounded. "Uranie" was in a similar state, and hauled up approximately away, the masts intact but damaged with most of the rigging shot through and numerous holes smashed through the hull. It was also evident on "Thames" that the crew of the French ship were pumping water over the side, an indication that the ship had been damaged below the waterline.

Cotes' ship was fit only to sail with the wind, and the captain urged his men to make greater efforts to repair their ship before "Uranie" could come up with them again. So engrossed was the British crew with their repairs that it was not until 16:00 that it was realised that the French frigate was no longer holding station within sight, and had completely disappeared. This led some on the British ship to assume that "Uranie" had sunk, although in fact the ship had simply turned away in an effort to make it back to Rochefort to repair the damage suffered in the engagement. Also apparent were a number of sails in the distance. These rapidly approached and were revealed to be a frigate squadron flying the Union Flag. Cotes was unable to manoeuvre his ship or respond to the new arrivals, which were soon identified as French vessels wearing false flags. The leading frigate pulled up close to "Thames" and fired a broadside at the British frigate. Cotes immediately hailed the French, announcing that he was in no position to fight them due to the damage his ship had suffered and that he was striking his flag.

Allemand requested that Cotes come aboard "Carmagnole", but Cotes responded that he was unable to do so as his ship's boats had all been destroyed. Allemand sent a boat from his own ship to "Thames" and brought Cotes to "Carmagnole" as a prisoner of war; Cotes used the delay to destroy his ship's documents. Allemand questioned Cotes intently about the nature of his recent combat and, on identifying "Uranie" as one of his own squadron, commented that Tartu should have defeated "Thames" in half the time the action had taken.

"Thames" subsequently returned to Brest with Allemand's squadron on 25 October, although the British ship was thoroughly looted during the journey by the French sailors, whose officers were unable to exert any control over them. The ship's officers had been removed, including the surgeon, and therefore the British wounded did not receive medical treatment until the squadron arrived at Brest on 25 October; two subsequently died, making the total British deaths 13, with 21 wounded. Cotes wrote a report on the engagement, which he sent to the Admiralty from captivity in Gisors, which the French authorities intercepted and delayed, with the result that the first news of "Thames"<nowiki>'</nowiki> fate did not arrive in Britain until 7 May 1794. Cotes was soon afterwards exchanged and returned to Britain, where a court-martial investigating the loss of "Thames" exonerated him. Several of his officers were not repatriated however, remaining in French captivity for the next two years.

"Uranie" lost four killed, including Captain Tartu, and seven wounded, including three seriously, and the frigate arrived at Rochefort soon afterwards, where in honour of the captain's death, she was renamed "Tartu". It was subsequently incorrectly reported in Britain that the ship's name was changed to "Tortue" (tortoise) to disguise its identity after being defeated by "Thames". "Thames" was taken into French service as "Tamise", and participated in the Atlantic campaign of May 1794 the following year. The French lost both frigates in 1796. HMS "Santa Margarita" recaptured "Tamise" in an engagement near the Scilly Isles between British and French frigate squadrons at the Action of 8 June 1796. Some six months later, the ship of the line HMS "Polyphemus" captured "Tartu" on 30 December in the aftermath of the disastrous "Expédition d'Irlande".



</doc>
<doc id="35241453" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35241453" title="The Don (Nas song)">
The Don (Nas song)

"The Don" is a song by American rapper Nas. Released as the second single from his tenth studio album, "Life Is Good" (2012), it is produced by record producers Da Internz, Heavy D and Salaam Remi, who all helped write the song along with Nas, although Heavy D died before the song could be finished. Built around a sample of "Dance in New York" by reggae singer Super Cat, a former collaborator of Nas, "The Don" is backed by a boom bap, reggae-tinged production with additional drum and piano sounds. Lyrically, Nas attempts to reaffirm his status as a "street poet", addressing the hardships of poverty within disadvantaged societies and the realities of weapon and drug problems.

"The Don" was released to digital retailers on April 3, 2012. Although the song was not commercially successful, charting only in the lower regions of the UK Singles Chart, it received acclaim from music critics, many of whom praised Nas' rapping style and lyrics, especially the realistic persona he conveyed. Some also pronounced themselves impressed with Nas' motivation at such a point in his long career. A music video for "The Don", directed by Aristotle Torres, was premiered on April 27, 2012, which attempts to present several aspects of Nas' lifestyle, including performing at concerts, as well as his experiences in New York City, his place of residence.

"The Don" was produced by Da Internz, Heavy D and Salaam Remi – the latter a regular collaborator with Nas on many of his previous songs, including the singles "I Can" and "Made You Look". Heavy D originally presented the song "Dance in New York", by reggae singer Super Cat to Remi in the belief that Remi could create a "crazy" production if he could choose an appropriate part of the song to sample and edit. Nas, who had worked with Super Cat earlier in his career, claimed that Super Cat actually mentioned him in "Dance in New York" on his first listening of the song. Remi began to try and edit the song, and put together the bassline that would eventually be used on "The Don", but could not work with the sample that he had been given extensively: after learning the identity of the original producer of "Dance in New York", Jah Thomas, he paid Thomas in return for use of the song's multitrack.

Remi continued to work on the production whilst also putting together material for the posthumous Amy Winehouse album "" (2011) in London: whilst there, he learnt of Heavy D's recent death, encouraging him to complete the production for "The Don". After Nas received the song, he requested that production duo Da Internz work on "The Don" and edit it further before it would be rapped over. In an interview with "XXL", Da Internz called it "an honour that you wouldn't believe" to have worked on the song once they knew of Heavy D's involvement in its conception, as they had wished to work with him before he died: they also praised Nas' attitude in the recording studio, describing "his bars [and] his approach" as "just special". Following the song's completion, radio disc jockey Funkmaster Flex premiered "The Don" on the New York City radio station Hot 97 on March 15, 2012; Def Jam Recordings later released it to digital retailers on April 3, 2012.

"The Don" was written by Nasir Jones, Dwight Myers, Salaam Gibbs, Marcos Palacios and Ernest Clark, and produced by Myers under his production name Heavy D, Gibbs under his production name Salaam Remi, and Palacios and Clark under their production name Da Internz. Gibbs also provided additional bass sounds in the song's production. The song was recorded by Gleyder Disla at Instrument Zoo Studios and by Brian Summer at Conway Recording Studios – recording studios in Miami, Florida and Hollywood, California respectively. Reggae artists Super Cat and Jah Thomas are credited as writers on "The Don", as a sample of the song "Dance in New York", which the duo wrote together, is interpolated in "The Don". Audio mixing was carried out by Jaycen Joshua at Larrabee Studios in Hollywood, California, with additional vocals being provided by Red Alert. "The Don" was mastered by Chris Gehringer at Sterling Sound, New York City.

"The Don" is a hip hop song of three minutes and two seconds in length. It begins with the first use of a sample of "Dance in New York" by Super Cat, used as a means of explaining the importance of music to poorer communities. Following this, Nas' lyrics are backed by an "airy", boom bap-orientated production, composed by producers Da Internz, Heavy D and Salaam Remi, containing influences of reggae, whilst also featuring a prominent "bass thud", staccato drum and piano break – similar in style to much of the production featured on Nas' debut album, "Illmatic" (1994). Other parts of "Dance in New York" are blended into the song's production throughout. A reviewer for DJBooth felt that the production shared an old-fashioned aesthetic with Nas' previous single, "Nasty", noting that "The Don" "shares its predecessor’s grimy, old-school informed yet forward-looking feel". Ken Capobianco shared similar sentiments about the song's style, observing that it "evoke[s] the sound and feel of New York’s '90s hip-hop heyday". Henry Adaso of About.com noted Nas' lyrics as consistent with his persona of a "street poet", writing that "there are gun threats, car boasts, thoughts of rooftop sex, shoutouts to New York rap pioneers, and references to real drug rings". According to "Rolling Stone" writer Simon Vozick-Levinson, Nas "deftly" addresses his earlier life by describing "a concise portrait of the artist as a young man". Heavy D, who died before the song was fully completed, is also mentioned by Nas in the song's lyrics, where he notes that Heavy D was the one who came up with the production and the ideas behind it before he showed it to Remi.

"The Don" received universal acclaim from music critics, with Nas's lyrics drawing particular praise. Rico Barrino of Artistdirect praised Nas's rapping as being able to impress in different contexts, calling his lyrics "both catchy and commanding" and noted his "precise, potent lyrical poetry honed by 20 years in the game". Writing for MTV News, Rob Markman called the production "a sonic departure" from Nas' previous work, but complimented his lyrics as "vintage" and pointed out the consistency of the lyrical quality throughout the song. In his review of "The Don" for About.com, Henry Adaso described the song as "the type of lyrical exercise Nas only throws down once or twice per album", and that songs such as "The Don" gave a case for Nas' inclusion "as one of hip-hop's all-time greats", also picking up on his "assured" boasts and the "quiet confidence" enveloped in his tone. Adaso also expressed a positive response towards the song's production, expressing his surprise that having three different producers working on the song had not led to a "case of too many cooks in the kitchen", writing that "instead, we get a cohesive, hard-hitting, face-melting, reggae-tinged beat". A reviewer of the song for DJBooth wrote of Nas' performance as "at turns wistful, threatening and braggadocious", and praised the production's "compulsively head-noddable groove". In their review of "Life Is Good", Sputnikmusic recommended "The Don" to first-time listeners of Nas, stating to be an exhibition of Nas' "incredible lyrical structures" and "how rapidly this guy can punch out the syllables". They also noted it as a "change of pace" from the more downtempo material on "Life Is Good". In his review of "Life Is Good" for "Prefix Magazine", Charlie Kaplan called "The Don" the album's "clear highlight" and felt it a fitting tribute to Heavy D's life and work, writing that it "raises a glass to the recently departed overweight lover with a vivid tour of New York rap's classic soundscapes". For the chart week dated July 28, 2012, "The Don" debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 196.

A music video for "The Don" was filmed in New York City, and directed by Aristotle Torres. On April 18, 2012, a 30-second promotional clip of the video was released online, which contained shots of skyscrapers and Nas being escorted out of a crowd of party-goers into a white Rolls-Royce. Graphics then appear, announcing the forthcoming release of the full video.

The video begins with a shot of a yacht out on water, which then segues to an image of the Statue of Liberty: the words "Nas" and "The Don" have been superimposed in mid-air on the left and right-hand sides of the statue respectively. After quickly moving between various images of New York City, Nas is shown sitting at a table at an open-air restaurant with a female, at which point he raps the opening lyrics of the song. Again, the video moves rapidly between images, this time addressing Nas' lifestyle, with shots of sunglasses, jackets and shirts all featured. Shortly following this, Nas is escorted into a white Rolls Royce, wearing a white suit. He is then shown standing in a ring of fire set up on the ground, whilst continuing to recite lyrics from the song.

The video then continues to alternate between three different settings: Nas' journey in the Rolls Royce, during which he is driven around New York; him standing in the ring of fire, performing lyrics from the song; and him sitting in a club, surrounded by several women, also performing lyrics from the song. Black-and-white shots are then shown of Nas performing at a concert, with many fans shown supporting him. Finally, the video ends with several aerial shots of New York City, and an image of the letter "N" burned into the ground.

Nas first performed "The Don" live on March 18, 2012, as part of a set specially organised by video service Vevo at the music festival South by Southwest. At the 2012 ESPY Awards, Nas performed "The Don" as part of a medley of songs from "Life Is Good", including "Nasty" and "Summer on Smash", the latter which he performed with rapper and producer Swizz Beatz. On July 17, 2012, as part of an appearance on the satirical television program "The Colbert Report", Nas performed both "The Don" and the single "Daughters", a song which also appears on "Life Is Good".


The credits for "The Don" are adapted from the liner notes of "Life Is Good".




</doc>
<doc id="35247604" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35247604" title="Pilot (Sports Night)">
Pilot (Sports Night)

Pilot is the pilot episode of the television series "Sports Night", written by Aaron Sorkin and directed by Thomas Schlamme, which premiered on ABC in the United States on September 22, 1998. The pilot introduces viewers to a varied group of personalities working on a fictional late-night American sports show called "Sports Night", on the CSC network.

The episode centres on the team's attempts to broadcast a feature about an African athlete who is due to take part in his first race following recovery from a potentially career-ending injury. One of the two lead anchors on the show, Casey, is called up for having an unprofessional attitude on and off screen in the light of his recent divorce from his wife, and is even thinking of leaving the show. Producer Natalie is stuck in a dilemma when she becomes attracted to her colleague Jeremy, who is the new sports statistician at the network.

Six characters receive top billing in the episode: Casey McCall (Peter Krause), Dan Rydell (Josh Charles), Dana Whitaker (Felicity Huffman), Isaac Jaffe (Robert Guillaume), Natalie Hurley (Sabrina Lloyd) and Jeremy Goodwin (Joshua Malina). Several recurring characters also appear in the first episode, including Kim (Kayla Blake), Elliot (Greg Baker), Chris (Timothy Davis-Reed) and Will (Ron Ostrow). Robert Mailhouse guest-stars as J.J., while Bernard Hocke and Nina Jane Barry appear as Dave and Claire respectively.

The episode received largely positive reviews. The episode has received multiple nominations and has won Outstanding Directorial Achievement for a Comedy Series at the 52nd Directors Guild of America Awards and also a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series.

The pilot episode introduces the six main characters of the series, as well as the cast of supporting characters. Casey McCall, one of the co-anchors of Sports Night, a sports television roundup show running at 11pm on CSC, the "number 3 sports network" – a channel modeled on ESPN and similar – is displaying a negative attitude, both on and off screen, as a result of his recent divorce. Dan Rydell, his co-anchor, tries to get back his positive attitude, while J.J. and the network executives begin to get vocal about his need to improve or leave the company. Dana Whitaker, his producer, vociferously defends him to the executive producer, Isaac Jaffe, even while she tries to get him to shape up before they override her shielding of him. At the same time, Casey himself is thinking about quitting sports broadcasting, citing the moral decay he's seen on the job, in spite of Dan's observation that he'd only be doing it for the wrong reasons. Dana also hires a new associate producer, the highly strung but brilliant Jeremy Goodwin, who co-producer Natalie Hurley takes a liking to. At the end of the episode, a unique sporting event involving the return of a 41-year-old injured athlete to the running track makes Casey change his mind.

Sorkin gathered inspiration for the show from a number of places. According to the "Huffington Post", "Sorkin got the idea [for the show] from watching TV...while writing "The American President". He was watching ESPN, and found the humor and banter from the anchors (Dan Patrick and...either Keith Olbermann or Craig Kilborn) intoxicating, and decided to create a comedy set in that world". The show utilises a laugh track, which the Post-Gazette described as following "an unwritten primetime rule: all half-hour shows, except animated comedies...must have a laugh track" and Hollywood.com's Peter Hall calls a "goof" that "crippled" the first few episodes" of the show. It is used sparingly in the pilot as ""Sports Night" has so many dramatic moments".

The show was pitched as not being aimed exclusively at sports fans, with the tagline "It's about sports. The same way "Charlie's Angels" was about law enforcement." Based on the pre-air pilot, ABC ordered "Sports Night" for the fall 1998 television season.

The pilot episode, as with the rest of the series, uses an ensemble cast, with six of the cast members identified as main characters. Peter Krause and Josh Charles played the two lead anchors on the CSC network, Casey McCall and Dan Rydell respectively. Felicity Huffman played "Sports Night" producer Dana Whitaker, while Robert Guillaume appeared as her boss, Isaac Jaffe, the executive producer. The main cast is rounded off by Sabrina Lloyd, who plays co-producer Natalie Hurley, and Joshua Malina, who plays Jeremy Goodwin, a new addition to the crew in the pilot. Other characters given billing include Kayla Blake as Kim, Greg Baker as Elliot, Timothy Davis-Reed as Chris and Ron Ostrow as Will.

It was announced on May 18, 1998 that the show would debut on Tuesdays at 9:30 as part of ABC's comedy block, following "Home Improvement", "The Hughleys" and "Spin City". The series debuted on ABC in the opening week of the 1998–99 television season, on September 22, 1998. ABC finished behind CBS in viewing figures for the opening week of programming, while ratings across the networks fell by 4 million compared to the previous year.

Entertainment Weekly critic Ken Tucker was positive, despite his initial skepticism. He worried that Aaron Sorkin would not be able to translate big-screen success on films such as "A Few Good Men" and "The American President" to television, and believed before watching the show that it was "a golden opportunity to stink up prime time with the sort of smug, smirky, life-drainingly ironic talking heads who've outlasted their naughty-boy novelty status on ESPN". However, after watching the show, he wrote "But against all odds, Sports Night is a home run, a hole in one, a touchdown — at once the most consistently funny, intelligent, and emotional of any new-season series."

The Huffington Post's Bob Sassone, while reviewing the show retrospectively in 2006, praised the "intelligent writing, fast-paced dialogue, and a strong ensemble cast of smart, moral characters all working toward a common goal." He also pointed out links between"Sports Night" and Aaron Sorkin's next production, the critically acclaimed "The West Wing". The Washington Post called "Sports Night" "the best new ABC sitcom of the season" and also commented "Aaron Sorkin...[has] certainly got a knack for snappy, and occasionally moving, dialogue." They were among a number of publications to point out how the show would appeal to sports fans and non-sports enthusiasts alike. The Associated Press marked "Sports Night" out as one of the few potential successes amongst the freshman shows for the 1998–99 season. Entertainment Weekly believed that the season as a whole deserved to be nominated for best comedy at the Emmys.

The episode received multiple award nominations. The episode's director Thomas Schlamme won Directors Guild of America award for Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Comedy Series in 1999. The episode also won for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series at the Emmy Awards in 1999. Bonnie Zane and Paula Rosenberg were nominated for an Artios Award for Best Casting for TV, Comedy Pilot from the Casting Society of America.



</doc>
<doc id="35296160" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35296160" title="Superstar (Madonna song)">
Superstar (Madonna song)

"Superstar" is a song by American singer-songwriter Madonna from her twelfth studio album "MDNA" (2012). It was released on December 3, 2012, in Brazil only as a special edition free CD with Brazilian newspaper "Folha de S.Paulo". The song was written and produced by Madonna, Hardy "Indigo" Muanza and Michael Malih and is a dance-pop track, which has electronic and pop influences. Instrumentation featured in "Superstar" includes guitars and drum machines. Lyrically, Madonna compares her boyfriend with famous men, such as John Travolta, Abraham Lincoln, Al Capone, among others and claims to be his "biggest fan".

The accompanying artwork for the single was created by Brazilian graffiti artist Simone Sapienza, who won a contest sponsored by Johnnie Walker's Keep Walking Project in Brazil. She was chosen by Madonna from ten finalists of the contest. "Superstar" received mixed to positive reviews from music critics, most of whom felt it would be a potential single and praised the production, while others dismissed the lyrical content. A music video for the track was shot, however it was controversial since Madonna wanted to dress as a "Terror Bride", a combination of an Iraqi bridal veil and a US soldier's uniform. Subsequently, the video was never released. "Superstar" was used in a television campaign for US TV channel Bravo, supporting its "Summer by Bravo" promotion including stars from its original programming.

"Superstar" was written and produced by Madonna, Hardy "Indigo" Muanza and Michael Malih and was recorded at MSR Studios in New York City. After the completion of "MDNA", critics around the world were invited to Abbey Road Studios for an initial review of the album. Many critics noted that Madonna's daughter Lourdes' vocals appeared in "Superstar", which was subsequently confirmed by the singer herself. When Madonna was talking to "The Sun" about her daughter's collaboration, she said: "[Lola] just came over to the studio that day. Then I said, 'Oh, can you sing this part?' and she agreed to." Further explanation about Lourdes' singing on the track was given:

She has a very good voice. She's quite shy about it and won't admit it. Lots of people are knocking on my door to meet her about everything, movies, what-not. But she's not really interested in any of it. She just wants to go to school. She says to me, 'Mum, I just want to be a normal kid. I'm not ready for any of that.' I respect that, and if she ever wants to work with me on any level, I welcome it. But otherwise, I leave her to homework and school.
Musically, "Superstar" is an uptempo dance-pop song, that features influences of electronic and pop music. The track was mixed by Demacio 'Demo' Castellon for The Demolition Crew, and recorded by Angie Teo. Editing for the track was completed by Stephen 'The Koz' Kozmeniuk for The Demolition Crew. The song makes references to historical figures including Marlon Brando, James Dean, Al Capone, Bruce Lee, Julius Caesar, Abraham Lincoln and John Travolta. "Billboard"s Keith Caulfied noted dubstep influences during the bridge, and like other songs on "MDNA", "Superstar" takes time to change the composition into a fast-paced track. According to Neil McCormick from "The Daily Telegraph", the composition features a "shimmering ambiance built up from a ringing guitar loop and echoing tom-tom pattern that might have been constructed from Beatles' drum fills." Along with the looping music, the lyrics are simple and obtuse in nature, which McCormick believed was done deliberately like "You can have the password to my phone / I'll give you a massage when you get home". There are also references to her older songs like "Into the Groove" (1985) with the line, "You're Travolta getting "into your groove"".

The accompanying artwork for "Superstar" was created by Brazilian graffiti artist Simone Sapienza, known as Siss. It was directed by Binho Ribeiro and Giovanni Bianco. On the cover Madonna wears a shorts with a whip, while a phrase reads; "The shorts says: 'let's have dinner!'. The whip says, 'but you must pay for'". A contest sponsored by Keep Walking Brazil project selected 30 proposed covers, and Sapienza was chosen by Madonna after being among the ten finalists. The creator said she did not know she was participating in a cover contest and explained, "My work is connected to the status of women. I like strong women, who work hard for what they think is right."

"Superstar" was released as a promotional single in Brazil on December 3, 2012. Readers of Brazilian newspaper "Folha de S.Paulo" received a free copy of the single together with their newspaper. The single features the original album version along with a remixed version by DJ Eddie Amador. The song was also used in a television campaign for US TV channel Bravo, supporting its "Summer by Bravo" promotion including stars from its original programming.

"Superstar" received generally mixed to favorable reviews from music critics. Becky Bain from Idolator called it a "sweet love song" and compared it as the sweeter, more simplified version of "Ray of Light". Andy Gill from "The Independent" stated the song was an "obvious hit single" and compared the song to her 1990 release, "Vogue". MuuMuse's Bradley Stern complimented "the sugary-sweet, instantly summer-friendly" nature of the song, while Alexis Petridis from "The Guardian" described the composition of the track as "saccharine". Dean Piper from the "Daily Mirror" felt the song was not one he was "immediately keen on – but the one that's in my head. It's lyrically very simple [...] It's a little rockier than the others and more conventional." Sharing the same view, "The Sun"s Gordon Smart called the song a "stand-out" on "MDNA". Priya Elan from "NME" was very positive towards the song, and described it, along with "Girl Gone Wild", as "accomplishments" and "sound better than they have any right to." While reviewing the album, Robert Copsey from Digital Spy noted that "Superstar" was the most "relaxed [sounding] song" compared to the rest of the tracks which he described as kind of "in-yer-face." Neil McCormick from "The Daily Telegraph" described the song as "sweet and summery". Writing for Popjustice, Brad O'Mance rated the song 9 out of 10 and explained in detail:

The lyrical reference points in ['Superstar'] are all quite interesting—if you consider the youth-obsessed reference collaborators of the first two singles and how uncomfortable it all feels. 'Superstar' offers a glimpse of something far more comfortable in its own skin. All the reference points will mean very little to your average 17-year-old. We suppose the idea is that they're icons whose imagery transcends generations blah blah blah but after all the aggressive positioning of the first two singles it's great to hear Madonna relaxing into this sort of song. The lyrics about being in love are a bit soppy but love makes you go a bit soppy sometimes.

Michael Roffman from "Consequence of Sound" was more critical towards the lyrical content, describing the song itself as "infantile" and her lyrics like they were "stripped from a fifth grader's notebook at the history fair." "Slant Magazine"s Sal Cinquemani gave it a mixed review, calling its lyrical content a "faux pas". Another mixed reception came from writers of Virgin Media, who awarded it three stars out of five, and called it a "passable slice of electro-hued chart-pop." Enio Chiola from "PopMatters" gave it a poor review for its lyrical content by calling it "badly written", but stated that songs like "'Superstar' and 'Masterpiece' indicates that Madonna isn't just a blubbering mess of bitterness." In his review of "MDNA" for Pitchfork Media, Matthew Perpetua said that the track, along with "B-Day Song" from the album, are "mesmerizingly dumb lyrics" and are as "spiteful trolling rather than vapid pandering." Gigwise listed the lyrics as one of the most embarrassing moments on "MDNA".

Although no music video was officially confirmed or produced, media outlets reported that a music video for "Superstar" was to be shot in October 2012. Madonna wanted to dress as a "Terror Bride", which is a combination of an Iraqi bridal veil and a US soldier's uniform. The dress was to be portrayed as a statement for oppression against women and warfare. However, the singer's advisers talked her out of wearing the costume because they thought it would "put her life at risk". Sources then stated "[Madonna] had the outfit ready to go. She was really proud of it and said it was her 'Terror Bride' costume [...] At first, when people started telling her it was madness, she just brushed it off, but when they mentioned that her actions could put her life at risk, she decided to ditch it from her video and certainly won't be wearing it on stage." Madonna said she was "really disappointed" about not wearing the outfit, but had put aside the idea for a future use.


Credits adapted from the "MDNA" album liner notes.

After the release of "MDNA", "Superstar" debuted at number 150 on the South Korea International Downloads chart, with a total of 174,917 streams and digital downloads.


</doc>
<doc id="35301656" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35301656" title="All Saints' Church, Shuart">
All Saints' Church, Shuart

All Saints' Church, Shuart (), in the north-west of the Isle of Thanet, Kent, in the south-east of England, was established in the Anglo-Saxon period as a chapel of ease for the parish of St Mary's Church, Reculver, which was centred on the north-eastern corner of mainland Kent, adjacent to the island. The Isle of Thanet was then separated from the mainland by the sea, which formed a strait known as the Wantsum Channel. The last church on the site was demolished by the early 17th century, and there is nothing remaining above ground to show that a church once stood there.

The area of the Isle of Thanet where All Saints' Church stood had been settled since the Bronze Age, and land in the west of the Isle of Thanet was given to Reculver in the 7th century. All Saints' Church remained a chapel of ease for the parish of Reculver until the early 14th century, when the parish was broken up to form separate parishes for Herne and St Nicholas-at-Wade. The area served by All Saints' was merged with that of St Nicholas-at-Wade, which became the centre of a new parish with All Saints' as its chapel. The churches of All Saints and St Nicholas continued to have a junior relationship with the parish of Reculver, making annual payments to the church there.

All Saints' originally consisted of a nave and chancel, to which a sanctuary was added in the first building phase. The church was extended on three occasions between the 10th and 14th centuries – a period of population growth – to include an aisled nave, a western tower and a northern chapel; its windows featured stained glass. The church was abandoned in the 15th century, presumably because the parish could no longer support two churches. It was demolished, and virtually all of its masonry removed, some of which may have been used in improvements to the church of St Nicholas. The settlement of Shuart remained as an area of local administration into the 17th century, but it is now regarded as a deserted medieval village. There were no visible remains of All Saints' Church by 1723, although land there remained as glebe belonging to the parish of St Nicholas. The site of All Saints' Church was excavated by archaeologists between 1978 and 1979. The main structure had been robbed of its materials leaving only the foundations, from which the archaeologists were able to interpret the history of the building's construction and its form. Among the foundations were discovered numerous stone carvings, floor tiles, remnants of stained glass, and several disturbed graves.

The place-name "Shuart" is from the Anglo-Saxon language and means a skirted, or cut-off, piece of land. The earliest evidence of human settlement at Shuart dates to the Bronze Age; a rectangular Bronze Age enclosure lies a little to the north of the site of All Saints' Church, and a collection of objects from that period, known as the "Shuart Hoard", was found south-west of the site in the 1980s. Occupation continued through the Iron Age and Roman period. Structures, pottery and glass dating to these times have been found nearby, as well as human burials and cremations.

The site's history in the Anglo-Saxon period begins with the division of the Isle of Thanet into eastern and western parts during the 7th century. The division is attributed in medieval sources to the route taken by a tame female deer that was set free to run across the island by Æbbe, founder and first abbess of the double monastery at Minster-in-Thanet, thereby marking out its endowment. The route was circuitous, beginning on the north side of the island at Westgate-on-Sea and ending on the south side at Sheriff's Court, halfway between Minster-in-Thanet and Monkton, which are about apart. While land to the east of this route was given to Æbbe for her monastery, which was in existence by 678, land to the west, described broadly as "Westanea", or "the western part of the island", was given to the monastery at Reculver by King Hlothhere of Kent in 679. This division of the island is apparent in Domesday Book, which was compiled in 1086, and remained an important feature in the early 15th century, when it was included prominently in a map of the island drawn up by Thomas Elmham. According to Edward Hasted the division was still marked in 1800 by "a bank, or lynch, which goes quite across the island, and is commonly called St. Mildred's lynch."

The monastery at Reculver had been established in 669, and developed as the centre of a "large estate, a manor and a parish". By the early 9th century it had become "extremely wealthy", but it then came under the control of the archbishops of Canterbury. By the 10th century the church and its estate appear to have fallen into royal hands, since King Eadred of England gave them in 949 to Christ Church, Canterbury, now known as Canterbury Cathedral. The Anglo-Saxon charter recording the gift shows that the Reculver estate still included land in the west of the Isle of Thanet at that time. Two slightly earlier charters give a more complicated picture: in 943, King Edmund I of England gave land at St Nicholas-at-Wade to a layman, and in the next year he gave the same layman land at Monkton, by means of a charter recording that land to the west and north of Monkton – evidently at Sarre – was nonetheless still regarded as belonging to Reculver, rather than to either the archbishop or the king. However, while King Edmund I's mother Eadgifu gave lands in Kent, including Monkton, to Christ Church in 961, all of the documents recording these transactions entered the Christ Church archive; and, if the land that Christ Church acquired on the Isle of Thanet in the 10th century was the same as the "Liberty" shown on Thomas Elmham's map from the early 15th century, then the site of All Saints' Church, Shuart, must have been included. Neither Shuart nor St Nicholas-at-Wade are mentioned by name in Domesday Book; but they may have been included in the entry for Reculver, which was then recorded as a hundred in its own right, and was held entirely by the archbishop of Canterbury, but for a portion held from him by a tenant. An analysis of the archbishop's holdings in Domesday Book concludes that All Saints' was among them.

A church dedicated to All Saints was established at Shuart some time between 679 and the 10th century. Although the status of the church at Reculver as mother church for the area dates from the 7th century, and may have led to the establishment of a church at Shuart then, this chapel might equally have been a development in response to acquisition of land in the area by Christ Church, Canterbury, in the mid-900s. Examination of the building's archaeological remains has failed to provide a more precise date, but a church stood at Shuart for about 100 years or more before the establishment of a nearby church at St Nicholas-at-Wade, since the earliest church there was "almost certainly built in the late 11th century".

The original church of All Saints was a rectangular building aligned on an east-west axis, measuring by . It consisted of a western nave and an eastern chancel, with a sanctuary added to the eastern end of the chancel in the first phase of building. The chancel was about long, and the nave was small, taking up only about of the building's overall length. They were connected by a recessed passageway about long but only about across at its narrowest, the foundations for which suggest a heavy structure, perhaps including a vaulted ceiling. The size of the community this church was originally built to serve is unknown, although Domesday Book records the presence of 90 villeins and 25 bordars in the manor of Reculver in 1086, which included land on the Isle of Thanet, but consisted mainly of land in mainland Kent. Those numbers can be multiplied four or five times to account for dependants, since they only represent adult male heads of households; Domesday Book does not say where in the manor they lived.

A second phase of building was undertaken between the 10th and 11th centuries, in which the church was enlarged. The west wall was demolished, allowing the nave to be extended to the west by , and the passageway between it and the chancel was opened out and replaced with a lighter chancel arch. A third phase followed in the 12th century, when the nave was rebuilt as a much larger structure with north and south aisles, each lined by four columns, and measuring about wide by long. A tower about square was added to the western end of the church either at this time or in a fourth phase of building carried out in the 13th century. This fourth phase involved the installation of new windows featuring stained glass, especially at the eastern end of the nave, comparable to the "grisaille" glass still in the south transept of York Minster that dates from about 1240. A chapel was also added to the north side of the church, measuring about wide by long, with an altar at its eastern end, and paved with tiles about square. Flemish floor tiles were also installed in the church, probably in the 15th century.

The expansion of the church coincided with a period of growth in the population of Reculver parish as a whole, which had expanded to more than 3,000 people by the late 13th century. The first record to mention All Saints' explicitly dates from 1284, when the community it served complained to the archbishop of Canterbury that the vicar of Reculver had failed to provide a chaplain to celebrate daily mass. In 1296 the archbishop settled a dispute concerning a duty to pay for repairs to the church, specifying that this was owed by owners of property on and around part of "North Street". In 1310 Archbishop Robert Winchelsey of Canterbury established St Nicholas-at-Wade as a separate parish, with All Saints' Church as its chapel, served by a vicar and an assistant priest. According to the document by which that was done, the population of the parish of Reculver had grown so large that the provision of a single vicar had become inadequate. While Thanet was then still an island separated from the rest of Kent by the Wantsum Channel, the new arrangement was also prompted by the inconvenience posed by the distance between these chapels on the Isle of Thanet and their mother church at Reculver. However, the document specified that the vicar of the new parish of St Nicholas-at-Wade had to pay £3.3s.4d (£3.17) annually to the vicar of Reculver "as a sign of subjection". The vicar also had to go to Reculver "in procession" with his assistant priest and his parishioners every year on Whit Monday – the eighth day after Easter – as well as being present at Reculver for the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, the patron saint of Reculver, on 8 September. The visits to Reculver continued in the mid-16th century, when they were recorded by John Leland, and the parish of St Nicholas-at-Wade was still making annual payments to Reculver in the 19th century. Archbishop Winchelsey's instructions also set out relative values for the parishes of Reculver and St Nicholas-at-Wade, in allocating dues for taxes known as "clerical tenths". Reculver was liable for 12s.1d (60.5p), compared to St Nicholas-at-Wade's liability of 11s.4d (57p). The first vicar of St Nicholas-at-Wade was named by Archbishop Winchelsey as Andrew de Grantesete.

Thomas Elmham's map of the Isle of Thanet, drawn in the early 15th century, shows the church with its tower, but a map of 1596 by Philip Symonson, which shows churches "as they actually appeared", shows a church without a tower. Examination of the church's foundations indicates that it was probably a ruin by the middle of the 15th century and was demolished, but was replaced by a smaller structure, without a tower, up to 20 years later. It may be that material from All Saints' Church was used in the construction of a new clerestory for the nave of St Nicholas' church in the late 15th century, and the medieval baptismal font now in Reculver's parish church of St Mary the Virgin at Hillborough probably came from All Saints'. By 1630 there was no church: in that year, the vicar and churchwardens of St Nicholas-at-Wade reported the existence of glebe of called "Allhallows close, in part of which antiently stood the chapel of All Saints, or Alhallows"; and, in 1723, antiquarian John Lewis wrote that the church was "now so entirely demolished, with all the fences around it, that there are no marks of either of them."

The decline of All Saints' Church and the community of Shuart may have begun with the Black Death of 1348–9. Further, this decline coincides with the closing of the adjacent Wantsum Channel. This channel had been a preferred route for sea-borne trade between England and continental Europe in medieval times, probably providing "a large part of the early prosperity of Kent", besides supporting a local industry collecting salt, but it was progressively blocked by silt. While tax records of the 15th century show that the inhabitants of Shuart had then included men of the Cinque Port of Dover, shipping through the Wantsum Channel had ceased by about the end of the 15th century, and the northern section adjacent to Shuart was merely a creek by the middle of the 16th century. The abandonment of the church presumably arose through the cost of keeping two churches – All Saints and St Nicholas – in what had become a "remote, rural parish". Shuart continued to be represented in tax records in the 17th century: in 1624 it was assessed as a "vill" at the rate of £4.6s.4d (£4.32) for the archaic taxes known as "fifteenths and tenths" – this rate had been fixed in 1334, and may be compared with the rate for St Nicholas-at-Wade of £10.7s (£10.35) – and Shuart appears as a borgh, or tithing, in records of the Hearth Tax for 1673. However, the parish as a whole was in decline. In 1563 the parish of St Nicholas-at-Wade was the second smallest on the Isle of Thanet by number of households, having only 33, and by 1800 there were "not ... near so many". By 1723 the settlement of Shuart was a matter of historical record only. John Lewis wrote then that seems as if anciently a Vill or Town belonged to [the chapel of All Saints]", and the only building recorded by Lewis was a "good farm house". The farmhouse was built in the late 17th century and still stands, but otherwise today Shuart is considered a deserted medieval village.

The site of All Saints' Church, Shuart, was recorded on Ordnance Survey maps in the 19th century, and was confirmed in the mid-20th century through aerial photography by Kenneth St Joseph. On the north side of a road between Shuart Farm and Nether Hale Farm, the site is on farmland now owned by St John's College, Cambridge, and was excavated with the college's permission by the Thanet Archaeological Unit between 1978 and 1979.

The only surviving part of the main structure was its foundations of rammed chalk, which nonetheless allowed a construction history to be developed, but various elements of the structure were also found. These included mortar flooring, glazed floor tiles, green sandstone, Caen stone, Quarr stone from the Isle of Wight and stained glass. Among stone fragments were numerous carvings, including "two small delicately carved pieces of foliage which are certainly twelfth-century work". Fragments of mortar showing the imprint of barnacles were found among the rubble in the foundation trenches, indicating that some of the stone used in the structure had been fetched from the shoreline. A number of graves were also discovered, one of which had been covered by an unmarked stone, but they had been robbed and filled with rubble containing fragments of human bone. Two of the graves had been dug between the demolition of the church and the construction of a smaller, short-lived replacement in the 15th century. While virtually all of the building's structure had been robbed, presumably for use elsewhere, much of what remained had been destroyed by ploughing.



</doc>
<doc id="35308229" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35308229" title="Ratna Sarumpaet">
Ratna Sarumpaet

Ratna Sarumpaet (born 16 July 1948) is an Indonesian human rights activist. She is also a theatrical producer, actress, film director, and writer.

Sarumpaet, born into a politically active Christian family in North Sumatra, initially studied architecture in Jakarta. After seeing a play by Willibrordus S. Rendra in 1969, she dropped out and joined his troupe. Five years later, after marrying and converting to Islam, she founded the Satu Merah Panggung; the troupe did mostly adaptations of foreign dramas. As she became increasingly concerned about her marriage and unhappy about the local theatre scene, two years later Sarumpaet left her troupe and began to work in television; she only returned in 1989, after divorcing her abusive husband.

The murder of Marsinah, a labour activist, in 1993 led Sarumpaet to become politically active. She wrote her first original stageplay, "Marsinah: Nyanyian dari Bawah Tanah" ("Marsinah: Song from the Underground"), in 1994 after becoming obsessed with the case. This was followed by several other politically charged works, several of which were banned or restricted by the government. Increasingly disillusioned by the autocratic acts of Suharto's New Order government, during the 1997 legislative elections Sarumpaet and her troupe led pro-democracy protests. For one of these, in March 1998, she was arrested and jailed for seventy days for spreading hatred and attending an "anti-revolutionary" political gathering.

After her release, Sarumpaet continued to participate in pro-democracy movements; these actions led to her fleeing Indonesia after hearing rumours that she would be arrested for dissent. When she returned to Indonesia, Sarumpaet continued to write politically charged stageplays. She became head of the Jakarta Art Board in 2003; two years later she was approached by UNICEF and asked to write a drama to raise awareness of child trafficking in Southeast Asia. The resulting work served as the foundation for her 2009 feature film debut, "Jamila dan Sang Presiden" ("Jamila and the President"). This film was submitted to the 82nd Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film but not nominated. The following year, she released her first novel, "Maluku, Kobaran Cintaku" ("Maluku, Flame of My Love").

Sarumpaet was born on 16 July 1948 in Tarutung, North Tapanuli Regency, North Sumatra. She was the fifth of ten children born to Saladin Sarumpaet, Minister of Defence in the Revolutionary Government of the Republic of Indonesia rebel government, and Julia Hutabarat, a women's rights activist. Both were also prominent in the Christian community. Three of her siblings – Mutiara Sani, Riris Sarumpaet and Sam Sarumpaet – are members of the Indonesian art community. As a teenager she moved to Jakarta to study there, finishing her high school studies at PSKD Menteng. In his biography, her classmate Chrisye recalled that Sarumpaet was very confident; he noted that she enjoyed writing poetry and then reading it in a loud voice while other students were engaging in other activities.

By 1969 she was studying architecture at the University of Indonesia. It was at this time that she saw a performance of "Kasidah Berzanji" ("The Berzanji Chant") by a troupe led by Willibrordus S. Rendra, which convinced her to drop out of university and join the troupe. In 1974 she founded Satu Merah Panggung Theater, which performed adaptations of foreign works such as the "Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" and William Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet" and "Hamlet" – in the latter, Sarumpaet played the titular role.

Sarumpaet became interested in Islam in her teenage years, but only converted around 1974 after marrying Achmad Fahmy Alhady, an Arab-Indonesian. Together they had four children: Mohammad Iqbal Alhady, Fathom Saulina, Ibrahim Alhady, and Atiqah Hasiholan. Atiqah is also an actress and would later star in her mother's film "Jamila".

In 1976, Sarumpaet, who was suffering domestic violence at home and discouraged by the market, left theatre and entered the film industry. After her divorce, which took several years and required records of her broken ribs to satisfy the religious courts, she returned to theatre in 1989 with a performance of Shakespeare's "Othello". Sarumpaet began working as a director in 1991, with the television serial "Rumah Untuk Mama" ("House for Mother"), which was broadcast on the state-owned television station TVRI. That same year, she adapted "Antigone", a tragedy by French writer Jean Anouilh, in a Batak setting.

Sarumpaet's first original stageplay, "Marsinah: Nyanyian dari Bawah Tanah" ("Marsinah: Song from the Underground"), was performed in 1994 despite a sponsor abandoning the project near the showing date. The stageplay was based on the 1993 murder of Marsinah, a labour rights leader from East Java, and explored issues of political repression. The murder sparked a period of political activity for Sarumpaet. According to Barbara Hatley in "Inside Indonesia", Sarumpaet was obsessed with the case, including seeing Marsinah's face while writing. Sarumpaet later reported that the way the murder was conducted, with Marsinah raped and mutilated, then discarded in a forest, "symbolised the deep, trivialising contempt which men, especially powerful men, feel towards women who dare to speak out".

After "Marsinah", Sarumpaet and Satu Merah Panggung performed several other politically themed dramas, including "Terpasung" ("Chained"; 1995), about male dominance and violence against women, and "Pesta Terakhir" ("The Last Party"; 1996), about the funeral of a dictator without any mourners. In 1997, after the Marsinah case was closed due to contaminated DNA evidence, Sarumpaet released "Marsinah Menggugat" ("Marsinah Revolts"; 1997), a monologue in which Marsinah describes her murder. The play was banned in three cities. During the 1997 elections, Sarumpaet and her troupe performed with a coffin labeled "Democracy". For their action, they were arrested and held for twenty-four hours.

On 11 March 1998, Sarumpaet and eight others were arrested during a gathering held in concurrence with a meeting of the People's Consultative Assembly, in which she and the gathered persons sang the national anthem "Indonesia Raya" and "Padamu Negeri" ("To You, My Country") in front of security forces. The government had banned political meetings of more than five people earlier that month. Six of those arrested were brought up on charges, including Sarumpaet, who was charged with spreading hatred and attending an "anti-revolutionary" political gathering. Her pre-trial motion complaining about irregularities in the arrest, including the lack of a warrant, was dismissed by the court; a judge on the case commented that "singing 'Indonesia Raya' and '[Padamu Negeri]' is proof of their political crime". She was sentenced to 70 days in prison on 20 May – equal to her time served – then released. A day after her release, President Suharto resigned, bringing an end to the New Order.

After her release, Sarumpaet continued to be active in pro-democracy groups; she also wrote another play, "Sang Raja" ("The King"). Towards the end of 1998, with the political situation in Indonesia increasingly unstable and Sarumpaet rumoured to be wanted for stirring up dissent, she fled to Europe via Singapore. In December 1998, the Tokyo-based Asia Foundation for Human Rights awarded Sarumpaet the Female Human Rights Special Award.

By 2002 Sarumpaet had returned to Indonesia, where she debuted a stageplay entitled "Alia, Luka Serambi Mekah" ("Alia, Wound of Serambi Mekah") at Ismail Marzuki Park in Jakarta; it was her first stageplay since the fall of Suharto. Dealing with Indonesian military operations in Aceh, the play was later performed in five other cities. In December 2002 it was scheduled to be broadcast on TVRI in commemoration of Human Rights Day, but pulled at the last minute due to intervention from the military. In 2001, she and her troupe put on "Dalam Kegelapan Panjang" ("In a Long Darkness"), which dealt with the children of victims of the anti-communist purges of 1965–1966.

In 2003, Sarumpaet was selected to head the Jakarta Art Board (), a position which she held until 2006.
Two years after her selection, Sarumpaet was approached by UNICEF and asked to do a survey of child trafficking in Southeast Asia and promote awareness of the problem. After discovering the extent of the problem, she wrote "Pelacur dan Sang Presiden" ("The Prostitute and the President"), spending six months interviewing prostitutes in Surabaya, Surakarta, Garut, and Borneo in preparation. The play was shown in five different cities in 2006 and received warmly. Also in 2006, Sarumpaet organised the seventh triannual Women's Playwright International Conference in Bali.

After "Pelacur", Sarumpaet began working on a film adaptation entitled "Jamila dan Sang Presiden" ("Jamila and the President"). The film's production took three years, due in part to a lack of funding; the total budget was Rp.6.5 billion (US$800,000) Released on 30 April 2009, the film was well received both domestically and internationally. It was submitted to the 82nd Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film, but not nominated.

Sarumpaet released her first written work of fiction on 10 December 2010, in commemoration of Human Rights Day. Entitled "Maluku, Kobaran Cintaku" ("Maluku, Flame of My Love"), the novel is about the love of a Christian woman and Muslim man set amidst the Maluku sectarian conflict; it delves into the causes of the conflict, including poverty and provocation by the armed forces.

On 23 July 2008, while "Jamila" was in production, Sarumpaet nominated herself as an independent presidential candidate in the 2009 elections. She attempted to raise funding through selling "stocks" in her campaign through the Akar Indonesia, established especially for the campaign; according to Sarumpaet, the technique was meant to show that people who were not wealthy could run for president. She did not make the ballot, after the Constitutional Court of Indonesia ruled that independent candidates would not be allowed to run.

In June 2014, Sarumpaet was upset by a Time magazine article that criticized a music video with Nazi overtones made by Indonesian rock singer Ahmad Dhani in support of 2014 presidential candidate Prabowo Subianto and his running mate Hatta Rajasa. The article, headlined "This Indonesian Nazi Video Is One of the Worst Pieces of Political Campaigning Ever", was written by reporter Yenni Kwok. On Twitter, Sarumpaet accused Kwok of having embarrassed Indonesia by making a false report on a survey on CNN. She also mentioned Kwok's Chinese ethnicity and her former address, and posted a photo of Kwok and her child. Kwok said Sarumpaet's actions went "beyond bullying" and asked her to remove the photo or face legal action. Sarumpaet subsequently deleted the photo.
On the morning of 2 December 2016, Sarumpaet was arrested at a Jakarta hotel on suspicion of being part of a group allegedly plotting a coup against the government of President Joko Widodo. She was released the following day. 
In September 2018, Sarumpaet posted a photo showing her bruised face which went viral online, claiming that she was assaulted by unknown assailants at the Husein Sastranegara International Airport in Bandung where she claimed to be attending an international conference. This resulted in prominent opposition figures, including Prabowo Subianto, publicly condemning the "cowardly attack". Subsequent police investigations found that she was not at the airport during the alleged time, and was instead in a plastic surgery clinic in Jakarta.

Soon afterwards, she admitted that her claims were lies, and that she made up the assault story to hide the plastic surgery from her family. She was also quoted as saying that she is "the best hoax creator". She was then fired from Prabowo Subianto's campaign team for the 2019 presidential election, with Prabowo publicly apologizing for amplifying her claims. On October 4, she was apprehended at Soekarno-Hatta International Airport, where she was about to fly to Chile to attend an international conference, with Jakarta's Tourism Agency funding her. She is suspected of violating Article 28 of the Electronic Information and Transactions Law for allegedly spreading fake news.According to police, Ratna paid for the plastic surgery from the same bank account that had been used to collect money for the victims of the June 2018 Lake Toba ferry disaster.



</doc>
<doc id="35332840" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35332840" title="Noise in music">
Noise in music

In music, noise is variously described as unpitched, indeterminate, uncontrolled, loud, unmusical, or unwanted sound. Noise is an important component of the sound of the human voice and all musical instruments, particularly in unpitched percussion instruments and electric guitars (using distortion). Electronic instruments create various colours of noise. Traditional uses of noise are unrestricted, using all the frequencies associated with pitch and timbre, such as the white noise component of a drum roll on a snare drum, or the transients present in the prefix of the sounds of some organ pipes.

The influence of modernism in the early 20th century lead composers such as Edgard Varèse to explore the use of noise-based sonorities in an orchestral setting. In the same period the Italian Futurist Luigi Russolo created a "noise orchestra" using instruments he called intonarumori. Later in the 20th century the term noise music came to refer to works consisting primarily of noise-based sound.

In more general usage, noise is any unwanted sound or signal. In this sense, even sounds that would be perceived as musically ordinary in another context become noise if they interfere with the reception of a message desired by the receiver. Prevention and reduction of unwanted sound, from tape hiss to squeaking bass drum pedals, is important in many musical pursuits, but noise is also used creatively in many ways, and in some way in nearly all genres.

In conventional musical practices sounds that are considered "unmusical" tend to be treated as noise. "Oscillations and Waves" defines noise as irregular vibrations of an object, in contrast to the periodical, patterned structure of music. More broadly, electrical engineering professor Bart Kosko in the introductory chapter of his book "Noise" defines noise as a "signal we don't like." Paul Hegarty, a lecturer and noise musician, likewise assigns a subjective value to noise, writing that "noise is a judgment, a social one, based on unacceptability, the breaking of norms and a fear of violence." Composer and music educator R. Murray Schafer divided noise into four categories: Unwanted noise, unmusical sound, any loud system, and a disturbance in any signaling system.

In regard to what is noise as opposed to music, Robert Fink in "The Origin of Music: A Theory of the Universal Development of Music" claims that while cultural theories view the difference between noise and music as purely the result of social forces, habit, and custom, "everywhere in history we see man making some selections of some sounds as noise, certain other sounds as music, and in the "overall development" of all cultures, this distinction is made around the "same" sounds." However, musicologist Jean-Jacques Nattiez considers the difference between noise and music nebulous, explaining that "The border between music and noise is always culturally defined—which implies that, even within a single society, this border does not always pass through the same place; in short, there is rarely a consensus ... By all accounts there is no "single" and "intercultural" universal concept defining what music might be."

Musical tones produced by the human voice and all acoustical musical instruments incorporate noises in varying degrees. Most consonants in human speech (e.g., the sounds of "f", "v", "s", "z", both voiced and unvoiced "th", Scottish and German "ch") are characterised by distinctive noises, and even vowels are not entirely noise free. Wind instruments include the whizzing or hissing sounds of air breaking against the edges of the mouthpiece, while bowed instruments produce audible rubbing noises that contribute, when the instrument is poor or the player unskilful, to what is perceived as a poor tone. When they are not excessive, listeners "make themselves deaf" to these noises by ignoring them.

Many unpitched percussion instruments, such as the snare drum or maracas, make use of the presence of random sounds or "noise" to produce a sound without any perceived pitch. See timbre. Unpitched percussion is typically used to maintain a rhythm or to provide accents, and its sounds are unrelated to the melody and harmony of the music. Within the orchestra unpitched percussion is termed auxiliary percussion, and this subsection of the percussion section includes all unpitched instruments of the orchestra no matter how they are played, for example the pea whistle and siren.

Although percussion instruments were generally rather unimportant in ancient Greek music, two exceptions were in dance music and ritual music of orgiastic cults. The former required instruments providing a sharply defined rhythm, particularly "krotala" (clappers with a dry, nonresonant sound) and "kymbala" (similar to finger-cymbals). The cult rituals required more exciting noises, such as those produced by drums, cymbals, jingles, and the "rhombos" (bull-roarer), which produced a demonic roaring noise particularly important to the ceremonies of the priests of Cybele. Athenaeus ("The Deipnosophists" xiv.38) quotes a passage from a now-lost play, "Semele", by Diogenes the Tragedian, describing an all-percussion accompaniment to some of these rites:
An altogether darker picture of the function of this noise music is painted by Livy in "Ab urbe condita" xxxix.8–10, written in the late first century BC. He describes "a Greek of mean condition ... a low operator in sacrifices, and a soothsayer ... a teacher of secret mysteries" who imported to Etruria and then to Rome a Dionysian cult which attracted a large following. All manner of debaucheries were practised by this cult, including rape and 

A Tahitian traditional dance genre dating back to before the first contact with European explorers is "ʻōteʻa", danced by a group of men accompanied solely by a drum ensemble. The drums consist of a slit-log drum called "tō‘ere" (which provides the main rhythmic pattern), a single-headed upright drum called "fa‘atete", a single-headed hand drum called "pahu tupa‘i rima", and a double-headed bass drum called "tariparau".

In Shaanxi in the north of China, drum ensembles accompany "yangge" dance, and in the Tianjin area there are ritual percussion ensembles such as the "Fagu hui" Dharma-drumming associations, often consisting of dozens of musicians. In Korea, a style of folk music called "Nongak" (farmers' music) or "pungmul" has been performed for many hundred years, both by local players and by professional touring bands at concerts and festivals. It is loud music meant for outdoor performance, played on percussion instruments such as the drums called "janggu" and "puk", and the gongs "ching" and "kkwaenggwari". It originated in simple work rhythms to assist repetitive tasks carried out by field workers.
South Asian music places a special emphasis on drumming, which is freed from the primary time-keeping function of drumming found in other part of the world. In North India, secular processional bands play an important role in civic festival parades and the "bārāt" processions leading a groom's wedding party to the bride's home or the hall where a wedding is held. These bands vary in makeup, depending on the means of the families employing them and according to changing fashions over time, but the core instrumentation is a small group of percussionists, usually playing a frame drum ("ḍaphalā"), a gong, and a pair of kettledrums ("nagāṛā"). Better-off families will add shawms (shehnai) to the percussion, while the most affluent who also prefer a more modern or fashionable image may replace the traditional ensemble with a brass band. The Karnatic music of southern India includes a tradition of instrumental temple music in the state of Kerala, called "kṣētram vādyam". It includes three main genres, all focussed on rhythm and featuring unpitched percussion. "Thayambaka" in particular is a virtuoso genre for unpitched percussion only: a solo double-headed cylindrical drum called chenda, played with a pair of sticks, and accompanied by other "chenda" and elathalam (pairs of cymbals). The other two genres, panchavadyam and pandi melam add wind instruments to the ensemble, but only as accompaniment to the primary drums and cymbals. A "panchavadyam" piece typically lasts about an hour, while a "pandi melam" performance may be as long as four hours.

The Turkish janissaries military corps had included since the 14th century bands called "mehter" or "mehterân" which, like many other earlier military bands in Asia featured a high proportion of drums, cymbals, and gongs, along with trumpets and shawms. The high level of noise was pertinent to their function of playing on the battlefield to inspire the soldiers. The focus in these bands was on percussion. A full "mehterân" could include several bass drums, multiple pairs of cymbals, small kettledrums, triangles, tambourines, and one or more Turkish crescents.

Through Turkish ambassadorial visits and other contacts, Europeans gained a fascination with the "barbarous", noisy sound of these bands, and a number of European courts established "Turkish" military ensembles in the late-17th and early 18th centuries. The music played by these ensembles, however, were not authentically Turkish music, but rather compositions in the prevalent European manner. The general enthusiasm quickly spread to opera and concert orchestras, where the combination of bass drum, cymbals, tambourines, and triangles were collectively referred to as "Turkish music". The best-known examples include Haydn's Symphony No. 100, which acquired its nickname, "The Military", from its use of these instruments, and three of Beethoven's works: the "alla marcia" section from the finale of his Symphony No. 9 (an early sketch reads: "end of the Symphony with Turkish music"), his "Wellington's Victory"—or "Battle" Symphony—with picturesque sound effects (the bass drums are designated as "cannons", side drums represent opposing troops of soldiers, and ratchets the sound of rifle fire), and the "Turkish March" (with the expected bass drum, cymbals, and triangle) and the "Chorus of Dervishes" from his incidental music to "The Ruins of Athens", where he calls for the use of every available noisy instrument: castanets, cymbals, and so forth. By the end of the 18th century, the "batterie turque" had become so fashionable that keyboard instruments were fitted with devices to simulate the bass drum (a mallet with a padded head hitting the back of the sounding board), cymbals (strips of brass striking the lower strings), and the triangle and bells (small metal objects struck by rods). Even when percussion instruments were not actually employed, certain "alla turca" "tricks" were used to imitate these percussive effects. Examples include the "Rondo alla turca" from Mozart's Piano Sonata, K. 331, and part of the finale of his Violin Concerto, K. 219.

At about the same time that "Turkish music" was coming into vogue in Europe, a fashion for programmatic keyboard music opened the way for the introduction of another kind of noise in the form of the keyboard cluster, played with the fist, flat of the hand, forearm, or even an auxiliary object placed on the keyboard. On the harpsichord and piano, this device was found mainly in "battle" pieces, where it was used to represent cannon fire. The earliest instance was by Jean-François Dandrieu, in "Les Caractères de la guerre" (1724), and for the next hundred years it remained predominantly a French feature, with examples by Michel Corrette ("La Victoire d'un combat naval, remportée par une frégate contre plusieurs corsaires réunis", 1780), Claude-Bénigne Balbastre ("March des Marseillois", 1793), Pierre Antoine César ("La Battaille de Gemmap, ou la prise de Mons", ca. 1794), and Jacques-Marie Beauvarlet-Charpentier ("Bataille d'Austerlitz", 1805). In 1800, Bernard Viguerie introduced the sound to chamber music, in the keyboard part of a piano trio titled "La Bataille de Maringo, pièce militaire et historique". The last time this pianistic "cannon" effect was used before the 20th century was in 1861, in a depiction of the then-recent The Battle of Manassas in a piece by the black American piano virtuoso "Blind Tom" Bethune, a piece that also feature vocalised sound-effect noises.

Clusters were also used on the organ, where they proved more versatile (or their composers more imaginative). Their most frequent use on this instrument was to evoke the sound of thunder, but also to portray sounds of battle, storms at sea, earthquakes, and Biblical scenes such as the fall of the walls of Jericho and visions of the apocalypse. The noisy sound nevertheless remained a special sound effect, and was not integrated into the general texture of the music. The earliest examples of "organ thunder" are from descriptions of improvisations by Abbé Vogler in the last quarter of the 18th century. His example was soon imitated by Justin Heinrich Knecht ("Die durch ein Donerwetter" "unterbrochne Hirtenwonne", 1794), Michel Corrette (who employed a length of wood on the pedal board and his elbow on the lowest notes of the keyboard during some improvisations), and also in composed works by Guillaume Lasceux ("Te Deum": "Judex crederis", 1786), Sigismond Neukomm ("A Concert on a Lake, Interrupted by a Thunderstorm"), Louis James Alfred Lefébure-Wély ("Scène pastorale", 1867), Jacques Vogt ("Fantaisie pastorale et orage dans les Alpes", ca. 1830), and Jules Blanc ("La procession", 1859). The most notable 19th-composer to use such organ clusters was Giuseppe Verdi. The storm music which opens his opera "Otello" (1887) includes an organ cluster (C, C, D) that is also the longest notated duration of any scored musical texture.

Percussive effects in imitation of drumming had been introduced to bowed-string instruments by early in the 17th century. The earliest known use of "col legno" (tapping on the strings with the back of the bow) is found in Tobias Hume's "First Part of Ayres" for unaccompanied viola da gamba (1605), in a piece titled "Harke, Harke". Carlo Farina, an Italian violinist active in Germany, also used "col legno" to mimic the sound of a drum in his "Capriccio stravagante" for four stringed instruments (1627), where he also used devices such as "glissando", tremolo, pizzicato, and "sul ponticello" to imitate the noises of barnyard animals (cat, dog, chicken). Later in the century, Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber, in certain movements of "Battalia" (1673), added to these effects the device of placing a sheet of paper under the A string of the double bass, in order to imitate the dry rattle of a snare drum, and in "Die liederliche Gesellschaft von allerley Humor" from the same programmatic battle piece, superimposed eight different melodies in different keys, producing in places dense orchestral clusters. He also uses the percussive snap of fortissimo "pizzicato" to represent gunshots.

An important aspect of all of these examples of noise in European keyboard and string music before the 19th century is that they are used as sound effects in programme music. Sounds that would likely cause offense in other musical contexts are made acceptable by their illustrative function. Over time, their evocative effect was weakened as at the same time they became incorporated more generally into abstract musical contexts.

Orchestras continued to use noise in the form of a percussion section, which expanded though the 19th century: Berlioz was perhaps the first composer to thoroughly investigate the effects of different mallets on the tone color of timpani. However, before the 20th century, percussion instruments played a very small role in orchestral music and mostly served for punctuation, to highlight passages, or for novelty. But by the 1940s, some composers were influenced by non-Western music as well as jazz and popular music, and began incorporating marimbas, vibraphones, xylophones, bells, gongs, cymbals, and drums.

In vocal music, noisy nonsense syllables were used to imitate battle drums and cannon fire long before Clément Janequin made these devices famous in his programmatic chanson "La bataille" (The Battle) in 1528. Unpitched or semi-pitched performance was introduced to formal composition in 1897 by Engelbert Humperdinck, in the first version of his melodrama, "Königskinder". This style of performance is believed to have been used previously by singers of lieder and popular songs. The technique is best known, however, from somewhat later compositions by Arnold Schoenberg, who introduced it for solo voices in his "Gurrelieder" (1900–11), "Pierrot Lunaire" (1913), and the opera "Moses und Aron" (1930–32), and for chorus in "Die Glückliche Hand" (1910–13). Later composers who have made prominent use of the device include Pierre Boulez, Luciano Berio, Benjamin Britten (in "Death in Venice", 1973), Mauricio Kagel, and Wolfgang Rihm (in his opera "Jakob Lenz", 1977–78, amongst other works). A well-known example of this style of performance in popular music was Rex Harrison's portrayal of Professor Henry Higgins in "My Fair Lady". Another form of unpitched vocal music is the speaking chorus, prominently represented by Ernst Toch's 1930 "Geographical Fugue", an example of the Gebrauchsmusik fashionable in Germany at that time.

In the 1920s a fashion emerged for composing what was called "machine music"—the depiction in music of the sounds of factories, locomotives, steamships, dynamos, and other aspects of recent technology that both reflected modern, urban life and appealed to the then-prevalent spirit of objectivity, detachment, and directness. Representative works in this style, which features motoric and insistent rhythms, a high level of dissonance, and often large percussion batteries, are George Antheil's "Ballet mécanique" (1923–25), Arthur Honegger's "Pacific 231" (1923), Sergei Prokofiev's ballet "Le pas d'acier" (The Steel Leap, 1925–26), Alexander Mosolov's "Iron Foundry" (an orchestral episode from his ballet "Steel", 1926–27), and Carlos Chávez's ballet "Caballos de vapor", also titled "HP" (Horsepower, 1926–32). This trend reached its apex in the music of Edgard Varèse, who composed "Ionisation" in 1931, a "study in pure sonority and rhythm" for an ensemble of thirty-five unpitched percussion instruments.

Following Varèse's example, a number of other important works for percussion ensemble were composed in the 1930s and 40s: Henry Cowell's "Ostinato Pianissimo" (1934) combines Latin American, European, and Asian percussion instruments; John Cage's "First Construction (in Metal)" (1939) employs differently pitched thunder sheets, brake drums, gongs, and a water gong; Carlos Chávez's Toccata for percussion instruments (1942) requires six performers to play a large number of European and Latin-American drums and other unpitched percussion together with a few tuned instruments such as xylophone, tubular chimes, and glockenspiel; Lou Harrison, in works such as the "Canticles" nos. 1 and 3 (1940 and 1942), "Song of Queztalcoatl" (1941), Suite for Percussion (1942), and—in collaboration with John Cage—"Double Music" (1941) explored the use of "found" instruments, such as brake drums, flowerpots, and metal pipes. In all of these works, elements such as timbre, texture, and rhythm take precedence over the usual Western concepts of harmony and melody.

Use of noise was central to the development of experimental music and avant-garde music in the mid 20th century. Noise was used in important, new ways.

Edgard Varèse challenged traditional conceptions of musical and non-musical sound and instead incorporated noise based sonorities into his compositional work, what he referred to as "organised sound." Varèse stated that "to stubbornly conditioned ears, anything new in music has always been called noise", and he posed the question, "what is music but organized noises?".

In the years immediately following the First World War, Henry Cowell composed a number of piano pieces featuring tone clusters and direct manipulation of the piano's strings. One of these, titled "The Banshee" (1925), features sliding and shrieking sounds suggesting the terrifying cry of the banshee from Irish folklore.

In 1938 for a dance composition titled "Bacchanale", John Cage invented the prepared piano, producing both transformed pitches and colorful unpitched sounds from the piano. Many variations, such as prepared guitar, have followed. In 1952, Cage wrote "4′33″", in which there is no deliberate sound at all, but only whatever background noise occurs during the performance.

Karlheinz Stockhausen employed noise in vocal compositions, such as "Momente" (1962–64/69), in which the four choirs clap their hands, talk, and shuffle their feet, in order to mediate between instrumental and vocal sounds as well as to incorporate sounds normally made by audiences into those produced by the performers.

Robert Ashley used audio feedback in his avant-garde piece "The Wolfman" (1964) by setting up a howl between the microphone and loudspeaker and then singing into the microphone in way that modulated the feedback with his voice.
Noise is used as basic tonal material in electronic music.

When pure-frequency sine tones were first synthesised into complex timbres, starting in 1953, combinations using inharmonic relationships (noises) were used far more often than harmonic ones (tones). Tones were seen as analogous to vowels, and noises to consonants in human speech, and because traditional music had emphasised tones almost exclusively, composers of electronic music saw scope for exploration along the continuum stretching from single, pure (sine) tones to white noise (the densest superimposition of all audible frequencies)—that is, from entirely periodic to entirely aperiodic sound phenomena. In a process opposite to the building up of sine tones into complexes, white noise could be filtered to produce sounds with different bandwidths, called "coloured noises", such as the speech sounds represented in English by "sh", "f", "s", or "ch". An early example of an electronic composition composed entirely by filtering white noise in this way is Henri Pousseur's "Scambi" (Exchanges), realised at the Studio di Fonologia in Milan in 1957.

In the 1980s, electronic white noise machines became commercially available. These are used alone to provide a pleasant background noise and to mask unpleasant noise, a similar role to conventional background music. This usage can have health applications in the case of individuals struggling with over-stimulation or sensory processing disorder. Also, white noise is sometimes used to mask sudden noise in facilities with research animals.

While the electric guitar was originally designed to be simply amplified in order to reproduce its sound at a higher volume, guitarists quickly discovered the creative possibilities of using the amplifier to modify the sound, particularly by extreme settings of tone and volume controls.

Distortion was at first produced by simply overloading the amplifier to induce clipping, resulting in a tone rich in harmonics and also in noise, and also producing dynamic range compression and therefore sustain (and sometimes destroying the amplifier). Dave Davies of The Kinks took this technique to its logical conclusion by feeding the output from a 60 watt guitar amplifier directly into the guitar input of a second amplifier. The popularity of these techniques quickly resulted in the development of electronic devices such as the fuzz box to produce similar but more controlled effects and in greater variety. Distortion devices also developed into vocal enhancers, effects units that electronically enhance a vocal performance, including adding "air" (noise or distortion, or both). Guitar distortion is often accomplished through use of feedback, overdrive, fuzz, and distortion pedals. Distortion pedals produce a crunchier and grittier tone than an overdrive pedal.

As well as distortion, rock musicians have used audio feedback, which is normally undesirable. The use of feedback was pioneered by musicians such as John Lennon of The Beatles, Jeff Beck of The Yardbirds, Pete Townshend of The Who, and Jimi Hendrix. Hendrix was able to control feedback and turn it into a musical quality, and his use of noise has been described as "sculpted – liquid and fire expertly shaped in mid-air as if by a glass blower." Other techniques used by Hendrix include distortion, wah, fuzz, dissonance, and loud volume.

In the mid-1960s, jazz began incorporating elements of rock music, and began using distortion and feedback, partially due to the efforts of Jimi Hendrix, who had strong links with jazz. The proto-punk band MC5 also used feedback and loudness and was inspired by the avant-garde jazz movement. Jazz musicians who have incorporated noise elements, feedback and distortion include Bill Frisell, David Krakauer Cecil Taylor, Gábor Szabó, Garnett Brown, Grachan Moncur III, Jackie McLean, John Abercrombie, John McLaughlin, Joseph Bowie, Larry Coryell, McCoy Tyner, Ornette Coleman, Pat Metheny, Phil Minton, Roswell Rudd, and Scott Henderson.

Since its origins in the Bronx during the 1970s, hip hop music has been associated with noise. According to author Mark Katz techniques such as scratching are an expression of transgression where scratching, like the visual art of graffiti, is a form of vandalism. "It is a celebration of noise," writes Katz, "and no doubt part of the pleasure it brought to DJs came from the knowledge that it annoyed the older generation." Scholar William Jelani Cobb states that "though the genre will always be dismissed by many as brash, monotonous noise, the truth is that hip hop has undergone an astounding array of lyrical and musical transformations." Scholar Ronald Radano writes that "no term in the modern lexicon conveys more vividly African-American music's powers of authenticity and resistance than the figure of 'noise'. In hip-hop parlance, 'noise,' specifically 'black noise', is that special insight from the inside, the anti-philosophy that emerges front and center through the sound attack of rap." Radano finds the appearance of "black noise" nearly everywhere in the "transnational repetitions of rap opposition," but stresses that despite its global nature, black noise still conforms to American racial structures. Radano states that "rather than radicalizing the stable binaries of race, noise inverts them; it transforms prior signs of European musical mastery — harmony, melody, song — into all that is bitchin', kickin', and black."

The hip hop group Public Enemy in particular has been noted for its use of noise in its music. The group's second album, "It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back" (1988), was backed by the production team The Bomb Squad, who helped craft the album's layered, anti-harmonic, anarchic noise. Michael Eric Dyson describes the album as a "powerful mix of music, beats, screams, noise, and rhythms from the streets", and considers it an example of the revival of black radical and nationalist thought. Public Enemy member Chuck D acknowledges that the group's use of noise was an intentional attempt to blur the boundaries between popular music and the noise of everyday life, a decision which writer Jason W. Buel says "ran directly counter to the values of mainstream music of the time." He explains that "without a doubt" this intentional use of noise influenced not only the next decade of hip-hop, but of rock as well. Furthermore, notes Buel, the incorporation of noise served a political function, elevating the ordinary and thus suggesting that common, ordinary people should consider themselves on the same footing as their political and cultural leaders.

Noise music (also referred to simply as noise) has been represented by many genres during the 20th century and subsequently. Some of its proponents reject the attempt to classify it as a single overall genre, preferring to call noise music a "non-genre", an "aesthetic", or a collection of genres. Even among those who regard it as a genre, its scope is unclear. Some commentators use the phrase "noise music" (or "noise") to refer specifically to Japanese noise music, while others instead use the term Japanoise.

While noise music is often nowadays associated with extreme volume and distortion and produced by electronic amplification, the tradition dates back at least to the Futurist Luigi Russolo, who rejected melody, constructed original instruments known as intonarumori and assembled a "noise orchestra" in 1917. It was not well received. In his 1913 manifesto "The Art of Noises" he observes:
At first the art of music sought purity, limpidity and sweetness of sound. Then different sounds were amalgamated, care being taken, however, to caress the ear with gentle harmonies. Today music, as it becomes continually more complicated, strives to amalgamate the most dissonant, strange and harsh sounds. In this way we come ever closer to noise-sound.


Most often, musicians are concerned not to produce noise, but to minimise it. Noise reduction is of particular concern in sound recording. This is accomplished by many techniques, including use of low noise components and proprietary noise reducing technologies such as Dolby.

In both recording and in live musical sound reinforcement, the key to noise minimisation is headroom. Headroom can be used either to reduce distortion and audio feedback by keeping signal levels low, or to reduce interference, both from outside sources and from the Johnson–Nyquist noise produced in the equipment, by keeping signal levels high. Most proprietary noise reducing technologies also introduce low levels of distortion. Noise minimisation therefore becomes a compromise between interference and distortion, both in recording and in live music, and between interference and feedback in live amplification. The work of Bart Kosko and Sanya Mitaim has also demonstrated that stochastic resonance can be used as a technique in noise minimisation and signal improvement in non-linear dynamical systems, as the addition of noise to a signal can improve the signal-to-noise ratio.

Noise created by mobile phones has become a particular concern in live performances, particularly those being recorded. In one notable incident, maestro Alan Gilbert halted the New York Philharmonic in a performance of Gustav Mahler's Symphony No. 9 until an audience member's iPhone was silenced.

Music played at excessive volumes is often considered a form of noise pollution. Governments such as that of the United Kingdom have local procedures for dealing with noise pollution, including loud music.

Noise as high volume is common for musicians from classical orchestras to rock groups as they are exposed to high decibel ranges. Although some rock musicians experience noise-induced hearing loss from their music, it is still debated as to whether classical musicians are exposed to enough high-intensity sound to cause hearing impairments. Music-induced hearing loss is still a controversial topic for hearing researchers. While some studies have shown that the risk for hearing loss increases as music exposure increases, other studies found little to no correlation between the two.

In 2008 Trygve Nordwall, the manager of the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra, invoked new EU rules forbidding more than 85 decibels in the workplace, as a reason for dropping the planned world premiere of Dror Feiler's composition "Halat Hisar "(State of Siege) because it was "adverse to the health" of the musicians. The twenty-minute composition "starts with the rattle of machine-gun fire and gets louder" ("Das Stück beginnt mit Schüssen aus Maschinengewehren, die vom Band zugespielt werden, und das ist noch die leiseste Stelle.") Orchestra manager Trygve Nordwall reported that "readings were taken during rehearsals and even when toned down, Halat Hisar measured about 130 decibels, equivalent to hearing a jet aircraft taking off", and one member of the orchestra reported suffering headaches and permanent tinnitis after sustained exposure for three hours during rehearsals ("Ein Orchestermusiker habe nach der Probe des Stückes drei Stunden lang permanente Ohrgeräusche (Tinnitus) gehabt"). Headphones for the musicians were suggested, but they objected they could not hear each other and the composer also rejected the idea, adding that his composition was "no louder than anything by Shostakovich or Wagner".

Many bands, primarily in the rock genre, use excessive volumes intentionally. Several bands have set records as the loudest band in the world, with Deep Purple, The Who, and Manowar having received entries in the Guinness Book of World Records. Other claimants to the title include Motörhead, Led Zeppelin, Gallows, Bob Dylan's 1965 backing electric band, Grand Funk Railroad, Canned Heat, and the largely fictional parody group Spinal Tap. My Bloody Valentine are known for their "legendarily high" volume concerts, and Sunn O))) are described as surpassing them. The sound levels at Sunn O))) concerts are intentionally loud enough that they are noted for having physical effects on their audience.








</doc>
<doc id="35365727" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35365727" title="2009 Women's Cricket World Cup Final">
2009 Women's Cricket World Cup Final

The 2009 Women's Cricket World Cup Final was a cricket match between New Zealand and England played on 22 March 2009 at the North Sydney Oval in Australia. It was the culmination of the 2009 Women's Cricket World Cup, the ninth Women's Cricket World Cup. England won the final by four wickets, clinching their third World Cup title and their first outside England. It was the second time that the two teams had met at this stage of a World Cup – England won their previous final contest in 1993.

After winning the toss, New Zealand captain Haidee Tiffen opted to bat first. Her side were bowled out in 47.2 overs for a total of 166 runs. All-rounder Lucy Doolan, batting at number nine, was the highest scorer for New Zealand with 48. England bowler Nicky Shaw took a career-best four wickets for 34 runs. In their response, England built an opening partnership of 74 runs and continued to score steadily. Despite regularly losing wickets, they reached the winning total with 23 balls to spare, earning England their first World Cup title for 16 years. Shaw, who had initially not been included in the England team, was named player of the match after replacing the injured Jenny Gunn just minutes before the start of the match.

New Zealand were drawn in Group A of the competition, along with the West Indies, South Africa and their "traditional rivals" Australia. They started their campaign against Australia. Haidee Tiffen scored a cautious half-century for New Zealand, but her dismissal triggered a collapse in which the team lost seven wickets for the addition of 34 runs. In their reply, Australia regularly lost wickets, and a six over bowling spell by Kate Pulford, in which she took three wickets for 30 runs, slowed the run chase. After an initial rain delay held up the game, a second downpour finished the match, with Australia 13 runs short by the Duckworth–Lewis method. Tiffen missed New Zealand's second match, against the West Indies, with an injury, and Aimee Mason deputised as captain. For the second time in as many matches, New Zealand suffered a collapse, losing their first six wickets for 104 runs. A seventh-wicket partnership of 57 between Mason and Sarah Tsukigawa helped New Zealand to remain competitive in the match, and they completed their 50 overs with 192 runs. According to "Cricinfo", the West Indian reply "was devoid of momentum". Spin bowlers Mason and Lucy Doolan took three wickets apiece to limit the West Indies to 136 runs for the loss of eight wickets from their overs. In their final group stage match, New Zealand ensured that they won the group with a big win over South Africa. Amy Satterthwaite, Sara McGlashan and Nicola Browne all scored half-centuries as their team reached a total of 250 for five. South Africa struggled in their chase: only Cri-Zelda Brits reached double figures in an innings dominated by the bowling of Mason and Suzie Bates, who collected four wickets each.

England were placed in Group B, alongside India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. In their first contest, against Sri Lanka, they scored 277 runs, aided by a 95-ball century from Claire Taylor, and a half-century by Caroline Atkins. Sri Lanka batted their full allocation of overs, but lost by 100 runs. Laura Marsh took three wickets, and three of the Sri Lankan batsmen were run out in their chase. Following the match, Jenny Gunn's bowling action was reported to the International Cricket Council (ICC) as being potentially illegal, but she was cleared a few days later. England faced India in their second match, in a contest billed as the battle for top spot in the group. England won the match easily, bowling India out for 169; with Gunn and Holly Colvin each taking three wickets, and unbeaten half-centuries from both Atkins and Claire Taylor. Another large win, over Pakistan, guaranteed England finished as group winners. Marsh took a career-best five wickets to help bowl Pakistan out for just 78 runs, a total which her side reached in less than half of their allowed overs.

England and New Zealand met each other in the first match of the Super Sixes. England batted first, and despite being 96 for four at one stage, 57 runs from captain Charlotte Edwards, and a rapid 22 runs from Gunn, helped their side recover to post a total of 201 for five. In response, New Zealand began positively, and were boosted by a half-century from their captain, Tiffen, but the spin bowling of Edwards, Marsh and Colvin controlled the run rate, and New Zealand were eventually bowled out for 170, Edwards taking four wickets. England's following match was against the West Indies, and they once again surpassed 200 runs after batting first. Sarah Taylor, Claire Taylor and Atkins all scored half-centuries to propel England to their total of 236 for eight. The English bowlers then dismissed the West Indies for 90 runs, with Marsh collecting three wickets. The win secured England a place in the final, irrespective of the result in their final match against Australia.

In their second match, New Zealand faced an Indian side which had beaten Australia in their first Super Six contest. India batted first and scored 207, during an innings in which they lost four batsmen to run outs. New Zealand began their response well, putting on a partnership of 78 runs for the first wicket between Pulford and Tiffen. After Tiffen's dismissal, Bates supported Pulford, who eventually fell for 71 runs, and New Zealand reached their target with 14 balls to spare. New Zealand set a record partnership for the second wicket in women's ODIs in their final match: Bates scored 168 and Tiffen 100 as the pair put on 262 runs together. Bates played an aggressive innings, scoring her runs from 105 balls, including 6 sixes and 19 fours. New Zealand reached 373 from their overs, and bowled Pakistan out for 150, granting themselves a 223 run victory, and qualifying for the final. England were outplayed by Australia in their final Super Six match: Shelley Nitschke slowed the run rate during her bowling, taking two wickets and restricting England to just fourteen runs from her ten overs. England were bowled out for 161, a total Australia chased down within 34 overs.

Prior to the start of the competition, Jenny Roesler of "Cricinfo" suggested England and New Zealand, along with Australia, as the favourites to win the competition. The final was a repeat of the 1993 final, when England won at Lord's. Both sides had won the World Cup previously, but only when hosting the tournament. New Zealand achieved the feat in 2000, while England were winners in both 1973 and 1993. In addition to losing the 1993 final to England, New Zealand were also finalists in 1997, losing to Australia in India. England had contested five previous finals; losing to Australia in subsequent tournaments in 1978, 1982 and 1988. England all-rounder Gunn aggravated a calf-strain during the warm-up, and was replaced by the team's vice-captain Nicky Shaw, who had previously been omitted from the side. Huw Richards, writing for the "International Herald Tribune", described both England and New Zealand as worthy finalists, and noted that he was disappointed with the performance of Australia, who finished fourth.

The final was played on "a gloriously sunny day" at the North Sydney Oval, a multi-purpose stadium in North Sydney, New South Wales. The ground had hosted a number of matches earlier in the tournament, and during the 1988 Women's Cricket World Cup, but has never hosted men's international cricket. The match, played in front of 2,300 people, began at 10:00 AEDT, with a scheduled lunch interval from 13.10 to 13.55. Steve Davis, of Australia, and the South African Brian Jerling were appointed as the on-field umpires for the match. Davis was a member of the Elite Panel of ICC Umpires, the highest designation for an umpire, while Jerling was on the International Panel of Umpires and Referees, the next most senior designation. Tyron Wijewardena and Jeff Brookes fulfilled the off-field roles of third and fourth umpires respectively, and Brian Aldridge served as match referee. Aldridge had previously umpired the 1992 Cricket World Cup Final.

Despite conditions conducive to swing bowling, New Zealand's captain, Tiffen, chose to bat first after winning the toss. England opened the bowling with seam from one end, provided by Katherine Brunt, and spin at the other, from Isa Guha. Brunt's bowling spell was described by the BBC's Aimee Lewis as "superb", and teammate Shaw credited her with putting the New Zealand batsmen under pressure. New Zealand progressed to 46 for the loss of just the opener Pulford, before England made their first bowling change. The England vice-captain, Shaw, was brought on, and made an immediate impact. From her third ball, Bates mistimed an attempted loft over mid-on, and was caught by Atkins. The following ball, Satterthwaite fell for a duck, edging an outswinging delivery to the wicket-keeper, Sarah Taylor. Four overs later, Tiffen was also dismissed by Shaw, providing a thick edge to Sarah Taylor. Although middle-order batsmen McGlashan and Mason both got starts, New Zealand collapsed to 101 for seven. Doolan joined Browne at the crease, and the pair provided their side with some degree of a recovery: Doolan scored 48 runs in a partnership of 63 to help New Zealand to their total of 166. After the dismissal of Doolan, who was stumped off a wide delivery, New Zealand subsided rapidly, losing their final two wickets for just two more runs. "The New Zealand Herald" criticised the batting as being "indifferent", but Richards credited England for their "tight bowling and fielding" to restrict New Zealand.

In their response, England began confidently: opening batsmen Atkins and Sarah Taylor built a partnership larger than any managed by New Zealand, scoring 74 runs before the dismissal of Taylor for 39. Atkins played a more patient innings than Taylor, and scored the most runs for her side, accruing 40 from 85 balls. Claire Taylor came to the crease upon Sarah Taylor's dismissal and played with a similar attacking intent, striking four boundaries during her 21 runs before she was bowled by Mason. England's middle order suffered their own collapse against the opposition spin bowlers Doolan and Mason, their scoring rate slowing significantly from 4.78 runs per over at the end of the fourteenth over to 3.58 twenty overs later. Edwards was given out after being caught by wicket-keeper Rachel Priest for 10 runs, though she did not actually hit the ball. Despite their struggles through the middle overs, Richards opined that "England never looked like losing." It was Shaw who once again galvanised England, batting with a more attacking style than those that had struggled before her. Her score of 17 not out pushed England towards the winning target, and a single from Colvin secured victory for England with 23 balls remaining in the innings. Shaw's contribution earnt her the player of the match accolade.

Match officials

Key

The ICC awarded England US$45,000 for their cup win, while New Zealand received $25,000. The team of the tournament included seven finalists: England's Edwards was selected as captain, and was joined by teammates Brunt, Marsh, Claire Taylor and Sarah Taylor. Bates and Pulford represented New Zealand in the team, while Sophie Devine was named as the team's twelfth woman. Claire Taylor, who finished the tournament as the leading run-scorer, was named as the Player of the Tournament. The month after the final, Taylor became the first woman to be selected as one of "Wisden's" Cricketers of the Year.

The two sides met again three months later to contest the final of the 2009 Women's World Twenty20. England once again won the contest, and in doing so became the first team of either sex to be champions in all three cricketing formats: Test, One Day International and Twenty20. Each of the top four in the 2009 tournament automatically qualified for the 2013 Women's Cricket World Cup. Neither England nor New Zealand reached the final of that tournament, but instead met in the third-place playoff, which England won by four wickets.



</doc>
<doc id="35391004" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35391004" title="Europa and the Pirate Twins">
Europa and the Pirate Twins

"Europa and the Pirate Twins" is a song by English artist Thomas Dolby, from his 1982 album "The Golden Age of Wireless". Written by Dolby, who produced it alongside Tim Friese-Greene, the song was released as a single on 3 October 1981.

The song, described as a "synth pop classic", was inspired by the atmosphere of World War II, and features a guest appearance by XTC's Andy Partridge. The single reached a peak position of 48 in the United Kingdom, Dolby's home country, as well as charting in the United States and Canada.

Taken from the album "The Golden Age of Wireless", "Europa and the Pirate Twins" was written by Thomas Dolby, who produced it in collaboration with Tim Friese-Greene. The song opens with a "bluesy" harmonica solo, performed by Andy Partridge of the band XTC. The song makes use of electronic drums, and features a "high-register" synthesiser line throughout. The song's main musical hook is a "Bo Diddley beat", a repetitive rhythm common in several musical genres.

Drowned in Sound's Joseph Stannard has noted that "Europa and the Pirate Twins" is written with World War II as a strong influence, and that the song "emphasises the short distance between [Dolby's] generation and the one which endured the last global conflict". Dolby has described the song, along with the tone of the album, as reflecting "a sense of [a] relationship that's going on as being overwhelmed by something on a grander level", adding that "there's a very strong wartime atmosphere to it". The song was described as "a semi-autobiographical romp" in the liner notes for Dolby's 2009 greatest hits album "The Singular Thomas Dolby", the release of which was overseen by the singer. "Europa and the Pirate Twins" received a "sequel" on Dolby's 1992 album "Astronauts & Heretics", in the song "Eastern Bloc"; which has been described by "Audio" magazine as "appealingly faithful" to the original.

"Europa and the Pirate Twins" was released as a single in the United Kingdom on 3 October, 1981. It was Dolby's first major label release, taken from his EMI-released début album "The Golden Age of Wireless". The song spent three weeks in the UK Singles Chart, reaching a peak position of 48. The song first appeared in "RPM" magazine's Canadian singles chart on 18 June 1983, debuting at number 50. It eventually reached a peak position of 45 in that chart. The song debuted in the United States' "Billboard" Hot 100 singles chart on 2 July 1983, spending five weeks there and peaking at number 67. It also reached a peak position of 37 on the "Billboard" rock chart in 1982.

The song's release was accompanied by a music video, blending together several elements of footage. These included footage of the Ziegfeld Follies, Dolby interacting with a futuristic "telecomputer", and black-and-white shots of a Dolby and a shrouded female figure by the coast. The video was written and directed by Dolby.

"Europa and the Pirate Twins" has been described by Peter Buckley, in his book "The Rough Guide to Rock", as "showcas[ing] Dolby's trademark combination of the charming and the gimmicky". Writing for Allrovi, Stewart Mason described the song as "a hyperactive synth pop classic", whose "every nook and cranny is stuffed with some sort of ear-grabbing hook". Mason added that the song "pack[s] a remarkable amount of detail into two short verses and a bridge" and "resolves with a soaring, bittersweet chorus". Writing about the song's music video, Dennis Shin of PopMatters described Dolby as being on the "leading edge" in the medium, highlighting the videos for "She Blinded Me with Science" and "Hyperactive!" in addition to describing that for "Europa and the Pirate Twins" as being "one of his lesser-known and unsung videos".



</doc>
<doc id="35460602" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35460602" title="901 New York Avenue">
901 New York Avenue

901 New York Avenue NW is a mid-rise Postmodern high-rise located in Washington, D.C., in the United States. The structure was developed by Boston Properties in an effort to help to revitalize the Mount Vernon Square neighborhood, and was completed in 2005. It is located on a roughly triangular parcel bounded by New York Avenue NW, K Street NW, and 10th Street NW, and is north of the CityCenterDC mixed-use residential, office, and retail project.

The triangular area was originally home to Victorian housing but in 1977, the city used eminent domain to purchase the area southwest of Mount Vernon Square itself, and over the next few years, the homes and businesses on these blocks were razed. In the 1980s, Golub Realty and Willco Construction purchased the site and proposed an 11-floor office block. They sold it to Peterson Co., who sold it to Monument Realty in May 1999. Monument Realty had envisaged building either an office and retail complex, or a 1,000-room hotel. They finally sold it to Boston Properties for $43.2 million in October 2000. Boston Properties closed the parking lot on the site in late August 2002, and began construction of the building the following month.

The architectural height of the building is , although the height of the main roof is just and the height of the top floor is . It has 11 stories, and a four-story underground parking garage. Reports of the building's interior space vary widely, with the most recently reported by the mainstream media. The facade is of polished granite and precast concrete in two colors. An atrium three stories in height with 36-foot (11 m) long arched steel trusses forms the lobby. Two very small parks exist on the triangular parcel of land, which are owned by the National Park Service. Acadiana, a 185-seat upscale restaurant on the ground floor which served Louisiana-and Cajun-style seafood was cited by "Esquire" magazine as one of the best new restaurants in the entire United States in 2006. The restaurant closed in December 2018, and as of January 2019 no replacement tenants have been announced.

Originally, Victorian-style townhomes occupied the triangular area bounded by K Street NW, New York Avenue NW, and 10th Street NW on Mount Vernon Square. The neighborhood was originally a vibrant business district with sizeable Victorian homes, but the area went into a steep decline in the 1930s. During the 1968 Martin Luther King, Jr. riots, the area around the square suffered rioting, arson, and extensive vandalism.

In 1977, the city used eminent domain to purchase the area southwest of Mount Vernon Square itself. Over the next few years, the homes and businesses on these blocks were razed. One of the last businesses to exist on the 901 New York Avenue NW lot was a Chinese restaurant named Nan King (which was one of the first restaurants in the city to serve dim sum). It stayed in business until 1979. Although the Washington Convention Center was constructed on the blocks just south of 901 New York Avenue, nothing was built on the triangular block itself. In time, it was turned into a parking lot.

Golub Realty and Willco Construction purchased the site from the city in the 1980s. Although the site was zoned for residential use only, in 1988 Golub/Willco proposed building an 11-story office building on the property. Under a city policy known as "residential linkage," Golub/Willco would be able to construct their office building if they created or renovated low-income housing elsewhere in the city. By May 1992, Golub/Willco had agreed to purchase a 27-unit apartment building in Northwest Washington and to restore 149 homes in Southeast Washington, but the proposed office building never was constructed.

Golub/Willco sold the lot to the Peterson Co., but in May 1999 the Peterson Co. sold the land to Monument Realty. Sources vary as to the amount, with reported prices of $14.5 million, $17.75 million, and $22 million. Monument Realty proposed two uses for the lot; a office and retail complex, or a 1,000-room hotel to serve visitors at the D.C. convention center. Monument estimated that the hotel would cost $206 million. But in order to make it profitable, the cost would need to be reduced to $169 million. In 1999, the government of the District of Columbia created a tax increment district to promote downtown redevelopment and housing. Monument sought $57.3 million in tax-increment financing but never received approval from the city for the funds.

In late October 2000, Monument Realty sold the parcel for $43.2 million to Boston Properties. Although media outlets reported that Boston Properties intended to build a hotel on the site, the company stated that it had never seriously considered the possibility. Rather, they had intended to construct an office building for occupancy by government agencies, law firms, and trade associations. The company announced that construction was scheduled to commence in mid-2001, and to be open to tenants by mid-2003. The architectural firm of Davis Carter Scott was hired to design the structure. The sale to Boston Properties closed on December 8, 2000. Meanwhile, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) had requested proposals from real estate firms for construction of a new headquarters. Boston Properties submitted its building for consideration by the SEC shortly after the sale closed. But the SEC ruled out the site in mid-February 2001.

Boston Properties had submitted its building design for SEC consideration even though the site had not yet been zoned for office/retail space. About of the site was still zoned for residential housing. In April 2009, the D.C. Zoning Commission approved a "residential linkage" agreement with Boston Properties. The Zoning Commission did so because Monument Realty had agreed two years earlier to pay into a city-run affordable housing construction fund and spend $2 million to build three townhouses in a low-income area — satisfying the "residential linkage" requirement.
Despite the zoning victory, Boston Properties decided not to begin construction until it had a lead tenant signed. But six months later, in November 2001, the law firm of Finnegan, Henderson, Farabow, Garrett & Dunner signed a letter of intent to lease of the building. Boston Propoerties announced that it intended to build a , 11-story structure to accommodate its tenants. In March 2002, the company said it would begin construction in September. It also announced that the ground floor would be devoted to retail, and there would be four levels of underground parking. The Finnegan firm's contact was signed in March 2002, at which time Boston Properties increased the floor space to and delayed the expected completion date to late 2004.

Boston Properties closed the parking lot in late August 2002, and began construction the following month. A month after construction began, the law firm of Shea & Gardner signed a lease at 901 New York Avenue for of space. Boston Properties now said the delivery date for the building was September 2004. In February 2003, the law firm of Powell Goldstein Frazer & Murphy signed a lease for of space (even though the media had previously reported that it had turned down Boston Properties). By now the building's square footage was said to be on 11 stories. By September 2003, more than 80 percent of the building had been leased, although the delivery date was again delayed to late 2004. In May 2004, the law firm of Piper Rudnick reportedly signed a lease for of space in the building, but the firm later opted for a lease for in a Boston Properties building located at 505 Ninth Street NW.

In June 2004, 901 New York Avenue NW was 75 percent leased, at an average cost of $36 per square foot. The delivery date was changed once more to September 2004. The building, however, was eventually delivered in early 2005.

Even as the building was being erected, it was threatened with demolition. The construction of the Walter E. Washington Convention Center left the city with very few hotels rooms to accommodate the greatly expanded number of visitors expected. A convention center "headquarters hotel" was urgently needed, but controversy raged for several years over where to put the hotel. In mid-2004, the Washington Convention and Sports Authority (WCSA) commissioned a study of potential sites. In the fall of 2004, the WCSA study stated that one of three options was to seize 901 New York Avenue NW and build a 1,500-room convention center hotel on the site.

In June 2005, the Council of the District of Columbia voted to put the new convention center "headquarters hotel" west of 9th Street NW between L Street NW and Massachusetts Avenue NW.

901 New York Avenue NW is an 11-story Class A office building with retail space on the ground (first) floor. The architectural height of the building is , although the height of the main roof is just and the height of the top floor is . Reports of the building's interior space vary widely, with the most recently reported by the mainstream media. However, Clark Construction Group, the general contractor on the $54 million building, says the interior space is . There is of retail space on the ground floor, and four underground parking levels.

The facade is of polished granite and precast concrete in two colors. An atrium three stories in height with long arched steel trusses forms the lobby. The ceiling of the lobby consists of square decorative hollow beams and acrylic panels.

Two very small parks exist on the triangular parcel of land, which are owned by the National Park Service. These open spaces were preserved, and overlaid with precast concrete pavers. Benches were added to permit public seating.

Clark Construction was the general contractor. Smislova, Kehnemui & Associates was the structural engineer, and Girard Engineering handled the mechanical engineering. Clark Interiors, a subsidiary of Clark Construction, and Davis Carter Scott designed the Finnegan offices (which are contained on floors five through 11). A grand staircase surrounded by a curved glass wall extends to all floors. Among the other building features constructed were a cafeteria, computer repair facility, data center, kitchen, mailroom, meeting rooms, offices, reception area, and videotaping facility.

Clark Interiors and SKB Architecture & Design designed the Goodwin Procter law offices, which extend from floors six through nine. The four floors are connected by a grand staircase manufactured by glass, stainless steel, stone, and wood. The wall alongside the staircase consists of decorative panels wrapped in fabric, wood trim, and stainless steel accents.

Clark Interiors and Gensler (a Washington, D.C., design firm) also designed the offices of Boston Properties, which moved its D.C. offices into the building. The space contains a reception area, conference rooms, and offices. The reception area floor is clad in stone, with carpeting in sections.

The building has not been widely reviewed by critics. Hank Steuver, writing for "The Washington Post", said the exterior exhibits "a sweep and charm".

One of its ground floor tenants won several awards during its 13 years of operation, ultimately closing in 2018. Acadiana was a 185-seat upscale restaurant which served Louisiana-and Cajun-style seafood. "Esquire" magazine called it one of the best new restaurants in the entire United States in 2006. "Frommer's" said of the restaurant, "The restaurant's high ceilings, ornate chandeliers, and oversize urns fit with the prevailing, over-the-top atmosphere. This is New Orleans right here. New Orleanians say the cuisine's the real thing, starting with the biscuits, served with a pepper jelly and cream cheese condiment, continuing on to deviled eggs, charbroiled oysters, and crabmeat and artichoke gratin starters; and even further to jambalaya, étouffée, red snapper in an almondine sauce and barbecue shrimp. Service is excellent".



</doc>
<doc id="35467594" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35467594" title="Morchella importuna">
Morchella importuna

Morchella importuna is a species of fungus in the family Morchellaceae described from North America in 2012. It occurs in gardens, woodchip beds, and other urban settings of northern California and the Pacific Northwest region of the United States and Canada. The fungus has also been reported from Turkey, Spain, France, Switzerland, Canada and China, although it is unknown whether this is a result of accidental introductions. It is considered a choice edible mushroom. The fruit bodies develop a distinctive ladder-like pattern of pits and ridges on the surface of their conical caps.

Officially described in 2012, "Morchella importuna" was one of 14 new North American species that resulted from the Morel Data Collection Project.
The type locality was in King County, Washington. It was previously identified as phylogenetic species "Mel"-10 in a 2011 publication, and erroneously as the "Classic North American Black Morel" in 2005, where it was lumped together with "Morchella angusticeps", and what has since been described as "M. brunnea". The specific epithet "importuna", which means "inconsiderate" or "assertive", refers to the morel's habit of causing "consternation and distress among gardeners and homeowners whose territory has been invaded".

As argued in a recent study by Richard et al. however, the name "Morchella importuna" is probably a later synonym of an old European taxon, such as "Morchella elata", "Morchella vaporaria" or "Morchella hortensis".

The fruit bodies of "M. importuna" are high. The cap is high and measures wide at its widest point. It is conical to widely conical or occasionally egg-shaped. Its surface has pits and ridges, with 12–20 primary vertical ridges and numerous transecting horizontal ridges, creating a laddered appearance. The cap is attached to stipe with a sinus about 2–5 mm both deep and wide. The ridges are smooth or finely velvety and colored pale to dark gray when young, becoming dark grayish brown to nearly black in age. They are bluntly rounded when young, but later become sharpened or eroded. Pits are vertically elongated in all stages of development. They have a smooth or finely velvety texture. The pits open and deepen with development, progressing from gray to dark gray when immature to grayish brown, grayish olive or brownish yellow at maturity. The stipe measures high and wide, and is often somewhat thicker near the base. Its whitish to pale brownish surface is smooth or finely mealy with whitish granules. It develops longitudinal ridges and grooves (particularly near the base) as the fruit body matures. The flesh is whitish to watery tan, measuring 1–3 mm thick in the hollow cap; in the stipe, this tissue is sometimes arranged as chambers or layers. The sterile inner surface of the cap is whitish and pubescent (covered with short soft "hair").

The ascospores are elliptical, smooth, and measure 18–24 by 10–13 µm. The cylindrical, hyaline (translucent), asci are eight-spored, measuring 220–300 by 12–25 µm. Paraphyses are septate, measuring 150–250 by 7–15 µm. They are cylindrical with variably shaped tips: rounded to roughly club-shaped, pointy, or fuse-shaped. Elements on the sterile ridges are septate and measure 25–300 by 10–30 µm. Terminal cells are cylindrical with a rounded tip that is variably shaped similar to the paraphyses. Both the paraphyses and the terminal cells are hyaline or brownish in dilute (2%) potassium hydroxide.

As a member of the "Morchella elata" group of black morels, "M. importuna" is sought after as a choice edible mushroom. Raw morels are poisonous and should always be cooked.

The rare Pacific Northwest morel "Morchella hotsonii", known only from its type collection, is quite similar in appearance to "M. importuna". The former species is distinguished by its finely velvety surface.

A saprobic fungus, "Morchella importuna" fruit bodies grow in wood chips, gardens, and planters in urban areas. Kuo suggests that it has mycorrhizal tendencies when grown in an environment with trees. Known primarily from northern California and the Pacific Northwest region of the United States, it has been reported from British Columbia (Canada), California, Washington, Nevada, and Oregon, although there have been a few isolated reports of the morel from the Midwestern United States and from eastern North America. Fruiting occurs in the spring, from March until May. Identified as phylogenetic species "Mel-10", "Morchella importuna" has also been found in Turkey and China, but it remains unclear whether dispersal between these distant locations occurred naturally or through accidental introduction by humans.



</doc>
<doc id="35476086" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35476086" title="2012 Guinea-Bissau coup d'état">
2012 Guinea-Bissau coup d'état

On 12 April 2012, a coup d'état in Guinea-Bissau was staged by elements of the armed forces about two weeks before the second round of a presidential election between Carlos Gomes Júnior and Kumba Ialá. The coup started in the evening with military personnel and equipment making its way onto the streets, followed by the state-owned media being taken off-air.

Both second-round candidates and the incumbent president were initially arrested by the junta. Members of the Military Council, which ran the country until an interim National Transitional Council was established on 15 April, said that one of the reasons for the coup was the incumbent civilian administration's call for Angolan help to reform the military. Following international condemnation and sanctions against leaders of the junta, an agreement was signed that led to the third place candidate in the election, Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo, being selected as interim president. The presidential election was aborted and postponed for at least two years into the future. An interim government was tasked with administering Guinea-Bissau in the meantime.

The media and international think-tanks have highlighted the country's instability and labelled it a narcostate. The country has frequently featured military involvement in civil administration since independence. As such, the events leading up to the 2012 coup include military unrest in 2010 and a failed coup attempt in 2011. The latter followed infighting between the country's Navy and the Army. Guinea-Bissau's instability is also exacerbated as a transit point for drug shipments from Latin America to Europe and there are allegations that government ministers and military personnel are bribed to keep silent.

Following the death of President Malam Bacai Sanhá on 9 January 2012, a new election was scheduled to be held within 90 days in accordance with the constitution. Despite a peaceful campaign, there were external fears of possible violence or a coup d'état if the army did not approve of the winner. In this regard, UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called for a "peaceful, orderly and transparent" election. Just before the attack, presidential candidate Kumba Ialá, who claimed to have ties with members of his Balanta ethnic group, who are the largest ethnicity in the military, warned of "consequences" if there was campaigning for the second round of the election due to his allegations of fraud in the first round that were unanswered. The first round result was rejected by five of the nine candidates. Campaigning was due to start on 13 April for the second round, until its disruption as a result of the coup d'état.

Days before the coup, fellow Lusophone country Angola announced its forces would be ending the two-year-old Angolan Military Mission in Guinea Bissau (MISSANG) that followed a similar failed effort by the European Union as part of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). State-owned Angolan news agency "ANGOP" said that the Angolan troops were sent to Guinea-Bissau in March 2011 in accordance with a bilateral military agreement to reform the armed forces. On 16 April, Guinea-Bissau Defense Minister Jorge Tolentino Araújo was scheduled to arrive in Angola to meet his counterpart Cândido Pereira dos Santos Van-Dúnem and the Army Chief-of-Staff Geraldo Sachipengo Nunda. He was also expected to visit the Higher Warfare School (ESG) and the Higher Technical Military Institute (ISTM). The same day as the coup, the two Lusophone countries of Angola and Cape Verde agreed to review their defense cooperation agreements. Presidential candidate and former Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior was also unpopular with the army for his attempts to reform the institution.

According to Portugal's "SIC Notícias", a day before the coup an unidentified military commander claimed Gomes Júnior would allow Angolan troops into the country. He also claimed that soldiers possessed a "secret document" that allowed the Guinea-Bissau government to sanction an Angolan attack on Guinea-Bissau's military. The leaders of the junta released an unsigned communique that read they "did not have ambitions of power" and that the coup was a reaction to the alleged agreement with Angola because the 200 military trainers would "annihilate Guinea-Bissau's armed forces." The spokesman for the junta that took over after the coup, Lieutenant-Colonel Daha Bana na Walna later said that Gomes Júnior and Pereira were ousted because of "unease" in the armed forces over the election, a sentiment echoed by diplomats. Gomes Junior was also viewed as the "candidate of Angola" in the election, according to Chatham House's Africa director Alex Vines. He also said that the months leading up to the events featured media commentary and hostility towards Angola.

On 12 April, gunfire was heard between 19:00 and 21:00, as mutinous troops attempted to overthrow the government by seizing control of the centre of the capital Bissau. Initial reports by diplomats in the country said presidential candidate Carlos Gomes Júnior and interim President Raimundo Pereira were missing. The mutineers seized control of the offices of the incumbent African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) and radio stations. They also fought police officers loyal to the government, forcing them to retreat after coming under fire from RPGs. The soldiers blocked the roads into and out of the capital city and the national radio and television was taken off-air at 20:00.

The perpetrators of the coup targeted Gomes Júnior's residence, which was attacked by grenades and surrounded by troops, as gunfire was heard nearby. Journalists were also prevented from approaching the scene. Camilo Lima da Costa, the son of the head of the national election commission Desejado Lima da Costa, told "RDP África", one of the radio stations still broadcasting, that the soldiers had looted his father's house but that both his parents were safe. Soldiers ransacked and looted other houses they raided as well. Soldiers also sealed off the embassies to prevent members of the government from fleeing and hiding with foreign diplomats. Several unnamed politicians were arrested during the night by the army.

Peter Thompson, the head of the U.K. Electoral Observation Mission in the country for the election, described the situation on the night of the coup as "a very large presence of the military in the streets. It did seem quite coordinated last night in terms of how the roads were shut off...Today the streets are very calm, the city is much quieter than it normally would be. People are staying home. I do know that the army has taken control of the state media and state television, and they haven't released anything official." There was speculation on Senegal's "RFM radio" by reporter Noah Mankali that Gomes Júnior had been assassinated by the army during the night by soldiers from the same Balanta ethnic group as Ialá Embaló.
An unnamed number of government ministers, as well as the Director General of the Judicial Police João Biague, were in hiding. Interior Minister Fernando Gomes, who may have been in the custody of the mutinous soldiers, said he "feared for his life." On 14 April, "Lusa" journalist Antonio Aly Silva told the outlet that he had been arrested for a short while, but was later released at the same time as singer Dulce Neves and many of Gomes Junior's bodyguards. Senegal closed its land border with Guinea-Bissau on 13 April.

People began to venture out of their homes at dawn and there appeared to be little to no presence of soldiers on the streets and no messages over radio or television from either the government or the coup leaders. There was an "unusual" quiet in Bissau, although photographs showed a big hole in Gomes Júnior's residence as a result of the attack. Soldiers were seen standing guard outside radio and television stations, including the state-run television office, and the presidential offices in Bissau. An overnight curfew was imposed the following day with orders for the members of the civilian government to turn themselves over to the army. Private radio stations were also shut. On 14 April, some businesses started to reopen but they closed early in accordance with the curfew.

The coup leaders formed the "Military Command" under the leadership of the Deputy Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces General Mamadu Ture Kuruma. The next day, they put forth conditions for a national unity government after having announced the ouster of Gomes Júnior. Its goals were: the removal of obstacles to reforming the security sector; fighting drug trafficking and consumption; overcoming a culture of impunity; and the continuation of enhancing the democratic process.

Interim President Raimundo Pereira and the Chief-of-Staff of the Armed Forces General Antonio Indjai were "under the control of the army," however there were rumours circulating that Indjai could be hiding and that soldiers were going to every embassy looking for him. Indjai's spokesman Daba Naualna said that Periera and Gomes Júnior were "well and alive" and added that "the [army chief-of-staff] thinks, for the sake of the country, that power cannot fall into the streets and decided to have [the military] play its part in seeking solutions with the political class to resolve this crisis." The Military Command later announced that they were also holding Ialá Embaló. The detained officials were later released. The UN later reported that the head of the Supreme Court and the Election Commission were also in hiding, along with three unnamed cabinet ministers.

Senior officers of the army also met the leaders of the political parties and called on them to form the transitional government, but added that the army would control the defence and interior ministries. The meeting was also attended by: Indjai, who was later arrested; the deputy chief-of-staff General Mamadu Ture Kuruma; the heads of the army, air force and navy; the army's spokesman Lieutenant-Colonel Daha Bana na Walna and four colonels. However there was no one from the incumbent PAIGC. Consultations with 23 parliamentary and extra-parliamentary parties discussed issues such as: a transitional government including, an interim president and head of the National Assembly, as well as a PAIGC-nominated prime minister other than the incumbent and a government of national unity inclusive of all parties; and the dissolution of the National Assembly with a government led by the National Transitional Council (NTC) under interim leadership.

The five leading opposition candidates (Mohamed Ialá Embaló, Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo, Henrique Rosa, Baciro Djá, and Vicente Fernandes) announced at a joint news conference that the boycott of the second round of the election would be in the name of "justice." Agnela Regalla of Union for Change, who also attended the meeting, said that "the military chiefs suggested the idea of new presidential and legislative elections." The spokesman for the coalition of opposition parties, Fernando Vaz, said that discussion continued for a third day and that the grouping had invited PAIGC to participate. After the meeting the coalition agreed upon a set of proposals to put forward to the Military Command for a transitional unity government.

There were some small protests supporting Gomes Júnior in downtown Bissau, although, according to Peter Thompson, soldiers arrested several of the protesters and put roadblocks on the streets. PAIGC, commenting on the transitional government, said that it "rejects any anti-constitutional or anti-democratic proposal of a solution to the crisis," while also calling for the release of those detained. Tensions mounted within PAIGC between factions supporting Gomes Júnior and Nhamadjo. On 15 April, a demonstration of about 30 people at the National Assembly, where talks on a transition government were ongoing, was dispersed by soldiers. The National Union of Workers of Guinea-Bissau, which has a membership of about 8,000 mostly civil servants, called for a general strike the next day.

On 16 April, an agreement, which intentionally excluded PAIGC, was reached with 22 of the 35 opposition parties to set up a National Transitional Council. According to Vaz, the size, composition and mandate period would be determined the following day and then discussed with the Military Command. He also said that existing institutions would be dissolved and that two committees would run the country, one would manage foreign affairs and the other would handle social affairs. The former committee was due to meet the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) the following day. The transitional civilian government will rule up to two years before new elections will be held. National Assembly speaker Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo, who had previously rejected the office of interim president in April 2012, was again selected as interim president on 11 May 2012. Sory Djaló was the speaker of the NTC.

At an ECOWAS summit in Ivory Coast convened to discuss the Malian crisis, Foreign Minister Mamadu Saliu Djaló Pires, upon learning of the events unfolding in his country, called for international support as "the situation is serious. The soldiers are occupying the streets. I spoke to the interim Prime Minister <nowiki>[</nowiki>Adiato Djaló Nandigna<nowiki>]</nowiki> and she said she was under fire" and added that the international community should have an "energetic reaction" to the coup. Pires also dismissed claims that Indjai was arrested suggesting that he was, in fact, a part of it (he was also involved in the 2010 military unrest before being appointed chief-of-staff).

During the early hours of the event, the Foreign Minister of Ivory Coast (the host country of ECOWAS) Daniel Kablan Duncan said that the "information indicates to us that there is a coup underway. ECOWAS formally and rigorously condemns such an attempted coup d'etat," he added that "it's sad that after the example of Senegal, where the elections finished so well, that we have, after Mali, a new forceful intervention in Guinea-Bissau. What I can say at this moment is that...the situation won't be accepted by ECOWAS." ECOWAS Commission President Kadré Désiré Ouedraogo issued a statement that read: "The commission firmly denounces this latest incursion by the military into politics and unreservedly condemns the irresponsible act, which has once more demonstrated their penchant to maintain Guinea-Bissau as a failed state." ECOWAS later decided to send a contingent of military personnel in order to provide security. The delegation, which would also include civilians, would be led by Guinean President Alpha Condé. ECOWAS also said the election runoff should go ahead. ECOWAS constitutes a contact group, chaired by Nigeria and comprising delegations from Benin, Cape Verde, Gambia, Guinea, Senegal and Togo, to coordinate its efforts at resolving the crisis. ECOWAS also had a standby force to fill a vacuum that could be left by the departing MISSANG force, as well as considering International Criminal Court recommendations.

The United Nations Security Council (which included fellow Lusophone country Portugal) unanimously condemned the coup with a resolution that stated "the forcible seizure of power from the legitimate government of Guinea-Bissau by some elements of its armed forces. [We] firmly denounce this incursion by the military into politics". The President of the UNSC, U.S. Ambassador Susan Rice, said "the [UN] Secretariat urged the international community to address the cycle of violence and impunity in Guinea-Bissau" and also called for "the immediate restoration of civilian authority...[We] note with profound regret that these events are occurring just prior to the launch of the campaign for the second round of the presidential election". Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said that he was "extremely concerned" about the arrests of the civilian leadership, while his spokesman Martin Nesirky said that Ki-Moon called for the mutineers "to immediately and unconditionally release all detainees and ensure the safety and security of the general population." The UNSC unanimously voted to "restore constitutional order" in the country and approved Resolution 2048 with sanctions, including issuing travel bans on the diplomatic passports, on five members of the military junta on 18 May. The five members sanctioned were: General Antonio Indjai, Major General Mamadu Ture Kuruma, Inspector-General of the Armed Forces General Estêvão na Mena, Chief of Staff of the Air Force Brigadier General Ibraima Camara and MC spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Daha Bana na Walna. In December, the UNSC expressed concern over the transition process back towards civilian administration. The UN recommended steps to ensuring a "way forward" entailed: mediation between national actors, targeted sanctions on the perpetrators, the deployment of training and protections forces in accordance with the ECOWAS/CPLP road map or the recommendation of the incumbent prime minister and foreign minister for a peacekeeping force.

The Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP) called an extraordinary meeting to take place in Lisbon on 14 April. The meeting was to be attended by the foreign ministers of the member countries: Angola's Georges Rebelo Chicoti, Brazil's Antonio Patriota, Guinea-Bissau's Mamadou Djalo Pires, Mozambique's Oldemiro Julio Marques Baloi and Portugal's Paulo Portas. The CPLP also condemned the coup and exhorted the UN, African Union (AU) and ECOWAS to work towards restoring the "constitutional order" of Guinea-Bissau. They further called for a cessation of military actions that threatened the state or the "legality" of Guinea-Bissau. At the CPLP meet in Lisbon, Pires had said that the "persecution is continuing." The CPLP later issued a statement of condemnation and also called for a UN-authorised military intervention saying that it had "take[n] the initiative of...forming an interposition force in Guinea-Bissau, with a mandate defined by the United Nations Security Council" that would seek to maintain "constitutional order, protect civilians and the country's legitimate institutions." It added that it supported the Angolan presence in the country and the initiate would be carried out according to consultations with ECOWAS, the AU and the EU. Rifts developed between ECOWAS and CPLP over the resolution mechanisms. The former, supported by Nigeria, Senegal, Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso, advocated a year-long transitional process; while the later, supported by Portugal and Angola, advocated an immediate resumption of the election.

The African Union Commission's chairperson Jean Ping said that he condemned the "outrageous acts which undermine the efforts to stabilise the situation in Guinea-Bissau and tarnish the image of the country and Africa." In mid-May, Guinea-Bissau was suspended from the AU. A spokesman for the European Union's High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton said that "the EU has already suspended most of its aid to Guinea-Bissau" and called on the Military Command to release the detained leaders and restore the "legitimate government." Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, the Secretary-General of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, called the coup a "heinous and unacceptable act", adding that it would hinder security and the democratic process as it had occurred weeks before the runoff. He also called for the detained politicians to be released. Meanwhile, on 24 April the African Union Peace and Security Council ministerial meeting met at its headquarters in Addis Ababa to discuss matters pertaining to resolving the crisis in the country.

Angolan Defense Minister Cândido Pereira dos Santos Van-Dúnem said that Angola will "continue to provide full support [to Guinea-Bissau because of] excellent ties," adding that the withdrawal date for the troops was being discussed. On 1 October, the UN Ambassador Ismael Abraao Gaspar Martins said that it was seeking a solution to "normalisation of constitutional order" through the work of the UNSC, AU, CPLP and ECOWAS.

Angola's "Lusa" reported that Portugal, the former coloniser, issued advisories to its citizens to stay in their homes It also rejected claims of an "untoward" attitude by Angola. A Foreign Ministry spokesman said that "the Portuguese government is appealing for a halt to the violence and respect for the law." Portas later called for the detained civilian leadership to be released. Defence Minister José Pedro Aguiar-Branco said that the Portuguese military was ready to evacuate its citizens. "It is our responsibility and our job to ensure adequate preparedness in the event that the evacuation be necessary." Portugal also issued a travel warning for its citizens. On 15 April, it was announced that two naval vessels and an aircraft were on their way to somewhere in West Africa ready for a possible evacuation of 4,000–5,000 Portuguese citizens. On 1 October, Portugal's UN Ambassador José Filipe Moraes Cabral echoed the statement of Angola at the same meeting.

Fellow Lusophone countries Brazil and Timor Leste also reacted to the events, with Brazil's Ministry of External Relations expressing their "preoccupation" with the events and saying that it would call for an extraordinary meeting of the UNSC to discuss the issue. Timor Leste's President José Ramos-Horta said that "the situation in Guinea-Bissau, which I have followed over the years, is extraordinarily complex, dangerous, because it can degrade into more violence, and the country is not in a position to afford that new setback in the peace process and its democratisation." He also offered to mediate the crisis. His offer was accepted on 16 April.

Guinean Foreign Minister Edouard Niankoye Lama called for "restoration of peace and stability" and of "all democratic institutions," when speaking at the General debate of the sixty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf also criticised the "unconstitutional unraveling, of democratic governments" at the UNGA. Namibian President Hifikepunye Pohamba said at the UNGA General debate that he denounced the "unconstitutional changes" and praised ECOWAS for its work in trying to resolve the issue. Nigeria also condemned the coup and President Goodluck Jonathan also told the UNGA General debate: "Guinea-Bissau is another flash point of instability in the sub-region in which Nigeria and ECOWAS are engaged. Indeed, the Contact Group, headed by Nigeria was set up by the Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS to help establish a transitional government with a view to returning that country to political and constitutional order. In furtherance of this objective, Nigeria provided the sum of 10 million US dollars to the Interim Government in Guinea-Bissau to assist in the stabilisation of the country." Russia called for the restoration of the civilian government.

Canada condemned the coup; while the United States' White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said, "We call for the release of all government leaders and urge all parties to reconcile their differences through the democratic process." The United States' embassy issued a statement that read: "It is regrettable that elements of the Bissau-Guinean military have chosen to derail the democratic process in Guinea-Bissau." At a daily press briefing, the State Department spokesman Mark Toner called on all sides to the conflict to "put down their weapons, release government leaders immediately and restore legitimate civilian leadership," adding that it "appeared the junta had taken control of media outlets, as they were off-air and the headquarters of PAIGC and were trying to restrict movement" and that "we regret that they have chosen to disrupt the democratic process, which already was challenged by the opposition's call to boycott the second round of elections." The State Department also issued a travel warning to the country and called on its citizens already in the country "to shelter in place and avoid the downtown area of Bissau."

On 9 June, the last police and armed forces personnel of the MISSANG mission left the country. In late August, the Commissioner for Natural resources, Environment and Rural Development Ibraima Dieme announced the Union had approved a loan of 15 billion CFA francs to the country for security system reforms. However, the spokesman of the transitional government, Fernando Vaz, also announced that an agreement with Angola Bauxite to build a deepwater port so as to export bauxite would need to be renegotiated as "the agreement signed in 2007 by the government of Carlos Gomes Junior is not fair ... As a result, the terms of the agreement must be reviewed. The transitional government will not accept that Bissau receives 10 percent [of revenues] while Angola Bauxite takes 90 percent." The project, which had been inaugurated in July 2011, had previously stalled prior to the coup as a result of concern over political instability and an environmental impact study that had not yet been published despite passing the deadline. If completed the port at Buba would have a capacity to host three 70-tonne vessels at any given time, while the project as a whole would also lead to the creation of a three million tonne-a-year mine in Boe.

By the end of the year the "New York Times" reported an increase in drug trafficking in the country and thus calling the events "cocaine coup;" it also cited a U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration employee as saying the country is "probably the worst narco-state that's out there on the continent. [Guinea-Bissau is] a major problem [for the U.S.A.]. People at the highest levels of the military are involved in the facilitation [of trafficking]. In other African countries government officials are part of the problem. In Guinea-Bissau, it is the government itself that is the problem." A sentiment echoed by regional UN staff. The head of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for West and Central Africa Pierre Lapaque also said: "There has clearly been an increase in Guinea-Bissau in the last several months. We are seeing more and more drugs regularly arriving in this country;" while the EU's ambassador to the country Joaquin Gonzalez-Ducay added: "As a country it is controlled by those who formed the coup d'état. They can do what they want to do. Now they have free rein." 

On 21 October, soldiers again attacked an army barracks in what the "New York Times" said was a coup attempt against the interim government. It also cited the arrest of an unnamed dissident army captain on 27 October as the organiser of the counter-coup attempt and reported that two other unnamed government critics were assaulted and left outside Bissau. Army Chief of Staff General Antonio Indjai laughed off questions that he was the power behind the throne and responded to the criticism in saying: "People say I'm a drug trafficker. Anybody who has the proof, present it! We ask the international community to give us the means to fight drugs." Gonzalez-Ducay then responded: "I can't believe that the one who controls the drug trafficking is going to fight the drug trafficking." The U.S. State Department's Foreign Service Officer for Guinea-Bissau Russell Hanks, who is not present in the country following the U.S. shutting its embassy during the Bissau-Guinean Civil War in 1998, said: "You will only have an impact on this transition by engagement, not by isolation. These are the people who came in to pick up the pieces after the coup." His staff pointed to photographs of newly created stretches of road in a remote rural area near the Senegal border that had space for small planes to land and they suggested was under the supervision of the armed forces. Chief of Guinea-Bissau's judicial police João Biague reported on a dubious aircraft landing months before the coup near Indjai's farm. He also added that "The traffickers know [our judicial authority] can't do much. The agents we have in the field want to give up because they have nothing to eat." Guinea-Bissau's former prosecutor general added: "A country that's not capable of discussing its own problems — it's not a country, it's not a state."

The leader of the coup attempt was Pansau Ntchama, a commando who is the ex-bodyguard of Guinea-Bissau's former army chief of staff. Fernando Vaz said of him: "He is a man with political ambitions living in Portugal. He appeared here in order to carry out this attempted coup ... He flew to Gambia, and then he went to Angola to pick up arms ... He has fled into the bush, but we are confident that we will catch him."

In response to the UNSC resolution for the restoration of civilian and constitutional rule, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon appointed Timor-Leste's Jose Ramos-Horta as his special representative to the country on 31 January 2013, replacing Rwanda's Joseph Mutaboba.


</doc>
<doc id="35478568" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35478568" title="Central African Republic women's national football team">
Central African Republic women's national football team

The Central African Republic women's national football team represents the Central African Republic (CAR) in women's international football competitions. The team has not played any international matches to date, but the country's youth national team has played in several matches and events, including an Under-19 World Cup qualifying competition in which the team lost in the semi-finals. As is the case across Africa, the women's game faces numerous challenges. Football was only formally organised in 2000, and there are only 400 players competing at the national level.

In 1985, only a few countries had women's national football teams, and the Central African Republic was no exception. In 2006, the team trained five times a week.

As of March 2012, the team was not ranked by FIFA due to it not having played any international matches.

The country has a national under-20 side. This team has participated in the qualifying competition for the FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup, which prior to 2006 was an under-19 tournament in which the CAR team also took part. In 2002, the qualifiers began with an African Women's Under-19 Championship. The CAR faced Equatorial Guinea in a home-and-away series in the first round, winning both matches by scores of 1–0 and 2–0. The country was set to play Zimbabwe in the quarterfinals, but Zimbabwe withdrew from the competition. In the semi-finals, the CAR met South Africa in a home match, but lost 0–2. The team was scheduled to play a return match in South Africa, but the host country refused to grant the Central African players visas, which led to South Africa's disqualification from the tournament. South Africa appealed the decision and visas were subsequently issued to Central African players, but the team then withdrew from the competition. In 2010, the Central African Republic women's national under-20 football team participated in the African Women's U-20 World Cup qualifiers. They had a walkover win against São Tomé and Príncipe in the first round but did participate in the second or third rounds.

The development of women's football in Africa faces several challenges, including limited access to education, poverty amongst women, inequalities and human rights abuses targeting women. Many quality players leave the country seeking greater opportunity in Europe or the United States. In addition, most of the funding for women's football in Africa comes from FIFA, not the local national football associations.

The Central African Football Federation, the CAR's national football association, was founded in 1961 and became a FIFA affiliate in 1964. In the CAR, there is no national association staffer dedicated to women's football and no women on the board or in the executive committee. With assistance from FIFA, the federation developed a women's programme starting in 2000. A national competition and school competition were later introduced. Football is one of the most popular women's sports in the CAR. There were about 200 registered youth players in the country and 200 registered senior players as of 2006. There are 80 club-level teams with women on them, 20 of which are exclusively for women.


</doc>
<doc id="35512379" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35512379" title="Tonga at the 2012 Summer Olympics">
Tonga at the 2012 Summer Olympics

Tonga participated in the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, United Kingdom, which were held from 27 July to 12 August 2012. The country's participation in London marked its eighth appearance in the Summer Olympics since its debut at the 1984 Summer Olympics. The delegation included three competitors: two in athletics, Joseph Andy Lui and ʻAna Poʻuhila, along with one short distance swimmer Amini Fonua. The latter entry was Tonga's first appearance in Olympic swimming competition. Lui and Fonua qualified through wildcard places while Po'uhila made the games by meeting qualification standards. Fonua was selected as the flag bearer for the opening ceremony while Lui held it at the closing ceremony. Lui and Fonua failed to progress farther than the preliminary round of their respective events while Po'uhila finished 29th in the heat stage of the women's shot put contest.

Tonga participated in eight Summer Olympic Games between its debut at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, United States and the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, England. The country sent its largest delegation to an Olympic Games with seven to the 1984 Summer Olympics. No Tongan athlete has ever won a medal at the Olympic Games. Tonga participated in the London Summer Games between 27 July to 12 August 2012. The Tongan National Olympic Committee (NOC) selected two athletes through wildcard places. Usually, an NOC would be able to enter up to three qualified athletes in each individual event as long as each athlete met the "A" standard, or one athlete per event if they met the "B" standard. However, since Tonga had no athletes that met either standard, they were allowed to select two athletes, one of each gender, as wildcards.

The three athletes that were selected by Tonga to compete at the London Games were Joseph Andy Lui in the men's 100 metres, ʻAna Poʻuhila in the women's shot put contest and Amini Fonua in the men's 100 metre breaststroke. The country's male Olympic football team failed to qualify after being defeated by New Zealand 10-0 in their last group stage match in the OFC Men's Olympic Qualifying Tournament. Along with the three athletes, the country's delegation was led by its chef de mission Ahongalu Fusimalohi. Fonwa was selected as the flag bearer for the opening ceremony while Lui held it at the closing ceremony. Fusimalochi said in June 2012 that the team hoped ten athletes would be qualified, but after that did not occur, he expected that the competitor's performance in London will inspire participants who wanted to compete at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.

At the age of 20, Joseph Andy Lui was the youngest person to represent Tonga at the London Games. He had not taken part in any previous Olympic Games, Lui qualified for the Games by using a wildcard because his fastest time of 10.82 seconds, set at the 2011 Oceania Athletics Championships, was 0.58 seconds slower than the "B" qualifying standard for his event, the men's 100 metres. In preparation for the games he trained in his native Tonga and spent one month in Gold Coast, Queensland. Lui was drawn in the first heat of the preliminary round on 4 August, finishing fourth out of seven athletes, with a time of 11.17 seconds. He finished in front of Mohan Khan of Bangladesh (11.25 seconds) but behind Guinea-Bissau's Holder da Silva (10.69 seconds) in a heat led by Bruno Rojas from Bolivia (10.62 seconds). Overall Liu placed 65th out of 75 runners and did not advance into the first round because his time was 0.48 seconds slower than Da' Silva's time who progressed him into the later stages. After the Games he said to "ABC Radio Australia" that while he did not expect to run quickly, he expressed his desire to represent Tonga at the Rio Games.

ʻAna Poʻuhila was the oldest person (and the sole female athlete) to take part for Tonga at the London Olympic Games at the age of 32. She had participated in the previous two Olympic Games in Athens and Beijing. Po'uhila gained entry into the Games by meeting qualification standards because her best throw of 16.40 metres, set at the 2011 Pacific Games, was 0.90 metres better than the "B" qualifying standard for the women's shot put competition. She spent time in Auckland preparing for the Games. During the qualifying heat of her event, which took place on 7 August, the Tongan field athlete was placed in the sixteen-person second heat. Po'uhila was given three attempts to put the shot as far as she could. During the first attempt, she lobbed the shot 15.80 metres, ranking 14th in her heat. Po'uhila was unable to best the ranking on her ranking when she lobbed it 15.75 metres, placing 11th amongst those who threw during the second try. Her third and final attempt, 15.11 metres, did not beat her first attempt. Using her best mark, 15.80 metres, Po'uhila placed 29th out of 30 athletes who completed the event. She finished ahead of Elena Smolyanova of Uzbekistan (14.42 metres) but behind Taiwan's Lin Chia-ying (17.43 metres) in a heat led by Yevgeniya Kolodko of Russia (19.31 metres). Of the 30 athletes who finished the event Po'uhila finished in 29th, and did not progress into the final.

Competing at his first Olympics, Amini Fonua was the sole representative to compete in Swimming on Tonga's behalf. He qualified for the games by gaining a universality place from FINA because his time of one minute and 4.02 seconds did not reach the "A" (Olympic Qualifying Time) or "B" (FINA/Olympic Invititional Time) standard entry times for his event, the men's 100 metre breaststroke. Fonua's qualification meant Tonga made their first appearance in Olympic swimming competition. He spent time training in the United States in preparation for the Olympics. In an interview before the Games Fonua stated it was an honour to be his country's first Olympic swimmer and hoped he would not be the only such competitor. He was drawn in the contest's first heat on 28 July, finishing first out of four swimmers, with a time of one minute and 3.65 seconds. Fonua was ahead of the nearest-placed finisher Mubarak Al-Besher of the United Arab Emirates (one minute and 5.26 seconds). Overall he placed 41st out of 44 competitors and was unable to advance into the semi-final after finishing 3.07 seconds slower than the slowest athlete who made the next stage.



</doc>
<doc id="35567948" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35567948" title="Moodu Pani">
Moodu Pani

Moodu Pani () is a 1980 Indian Tamil-language thriller film written, directed and filmed by Balu Mahendra and produced by Raja Cine Arts. Starring Shoba and Pratap K. Pothen in the lead roles, with N. Viswanathan, Ganthimathi, Mohan and Bhanu Chander in supporting roles, it is based on two novels: "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan" (1978) by Rajendra Kumar, and "The Collector" (1963) by John Fowles. The film tells the story of Chandru (Pothen), who has a strong hatred towards prostitutes and would kill any such woman whom he encounters. He falls in love with Rekha (Shoba) and believes marrying her will end his psychological distress.

"Moodu Pani" was the third directorial venture of Mahendra and his second Tamil film after "Azhiyatha Kolangal" (1979). It also marked Mohan's debut in Tamil cinema. Filming began in January 1980 and ended that April, with shooting taking place mostly in Udupi and Ooty. The film's similarities to Alfred Hitchcock's "Psycho" (1960) and the Oedipal elements between Chandru and his mother have been widely discussed. The soundtrack was composed by Ilaiyaraaja, this being his 100th film, and his brother Gangai Amaran was the main lyricist.

"Moodu Pani" was released on 6 November 1980 to critical acclaim, with particular praise for the performances of Pothen and Shoba, and Ilaiyaraaja's music, especially the song "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae". The film was a commercial success, running for over 200 days in theatres. It was also responsible for a resurgence of the thriller genre in Tamil cinema at that point. Despite the film propelling Pothen to stardom, it also led to him being typecast in similar roles.

Chandru, the managing director of an export company in Bangalore, has a hatred for prostitutes since childhood, a consequence of having watched his mother being beaten by his father everyday after he spent the night with a prostitute. Raghunath, a police inspector, knows Chandru and his mother. His son Ravi is engaged to Rekha, the daughter of his friend.

Haunted by memories of the prostitute, Chandru lures two prostitutes to lonely places and murders them as he sees that woman in each of them. Rekha's female friend Pallavi comes to Bangalore to meet her, and telephones her for her residential address. The conversation is overheard by the Madam of a brothel, who misleads Pallavi. Instead of being taken to Rekha's house, Pallavi is taken to the brothel and forced into prostitution. Rekha and Raghunath search for Pallavi. Chandru comes to the same brothel and takes Pallavi in his car, but kills her. Rekha learns of Pallavi's murder through Raghunath; neither Rekha nor Raghunath are aware that Chandru is the murderer.

Still photographer Bhaskar takes pictures of his lover with a motorbike in the background. Chandru, who had come on that motorbike, had parked it there and murdered a prostitute who enticed him near the same location, then rode away. Reading about the murder in a newspaper, Bhaskar shows Raghunath the pictures with the murderer's motorbike in the background. Raghunath investigates and learns that the owner has lent it to his friend.

Troubled by his constant anger, Chandru meets with a psychiatrist who advises him to marry soon so that he will no longer be lonely, saying the loneliness is leading him to dwell on his past and indulge in extreme acts. Chandru meets Rekha at a theatre and then at a book stall. He proposes to Rekha and even pleads with her to marry him. Surprised at his extreme pleading, Rekha politely tells him that she loves someone else (Ravi), and their marriage is already fixed. Raghunath is startled when Rekha tells him about Chandru's marriage proposal.

Chandru keeps following Rekha; one day when she goes to visit her friend, he makes her unconscious and takes her away to a bungalow in Ooty. When she regains consciousness, he tells her that he had purchased this house in Ooty only for her, and again asks her to marry him. When Rekha refuses and begs to be freed, he asks her to stay for at least a month so that she can understand him better, and then reduces it to a week. He makes all the arrangements to ensure that she cannot escape. Rekha later slams Chandru with a spade and runs away. He manages to catch and imprison her in the garage of his house, but is hospitalised for his injury.

Raghunath visits Chandru's office for an enquiry and learns that he has gone to Ooty. He also meets Chandru's psychiatrist and learns about his hatred for prostitutes. He immediately connects this with the recent news of the prostitutes murdered in the city. Raghunath visits Chandru's house. Hidden in the garage, he finds the same motorbike photographed by Bhaskar. With his suspicions growing stronger, he arrives in Ooty to meet Chandru and visits the police station, where he finds Chandru's car. The area's inspector tells Raghunath that an unknown person came in the car to the hospital and was admitted; the car was brought to the police station for safety. Raghunath visits the hospital, but finds that Chandru has left. Raghunath is joined by Ravi, and both rush to Chandru's house.

Meanwhile, Rekha escapes from the garage and enters the room where Chandru earlier claimed his mother stays. However, she finds only a skeleton and is cornered by Chandru, who tries to assault her. Ravi and Raghunath hear Rekha screaming and rush to the room. Raghunath subdues Chandru, who collapses and reveals that the skeleton is his mother's. Raghunath understands Chandru's love for his mother and his traumatic childhood, which had made him develop a hatred for women with loose morals. Chandru is arrested, while Rekha and Ravi unite.





After directing and writing two original films: the Kannada film "Kokila" (1977) and the Tamil film "Azhiyatha Kolangal" (1979), Balu Mahendra decided that his third directorial be based on a published novel. The film was "Moodu Pani", an adaptation of "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan", a 1978 Tamil novel by Rajendra Kumar, and "The Collector", a 1963 English novel by John Fowles. Mahendra said he based 40% of the film on "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan", and 60% on "The Collector". It was produced by Raja Cine Arts, and edited by D. Vasu. In addition to writing the screenplay and directing the film, Mahendra also served as the cinematographer. The producer of the film is not credited, while K. R. Shanmugham is listed under "Thayarippu Nirvagam" (production administration).

Pratap K. Pothen was cast as Chandru, the mild-mannered and psychopathic serial killer of prostitutes. He had previously collaborated with Mahendra on "Azhiyatha Kolangal". Shoba, who had appeared in both "Kokila" and "Azhiyatha Kolangal", was chosen to play the female lead, with Mahendra claiming the film was "specially made" for her. It was her final collaboration with Mahendra before her death.

N. Viswanathan was cast as the police inspector Raghunath, and Bhanu Chander was chosen to play Raghunath's son and Rekha's fiancé Ravi (although he was not credited), while Ganthimathi was cast as the Madam of a brothel. Vijaychandrika appeared as a prostitute murdered by Chandru. Mohan, who later became a leading actor in Tamil cinema, made his debut in Tamil with this film, playing the still photographer Bhaskar. It was his second film under Mahendra's direction, following "Kokila".

Principal photography for "Moodu Pani" began in January 1980 and ended in late April, a few days before Shoba's suicide on 1 May. The film was shot primarily in Udupi and Ooty. Mahendra shot the film in hilly places "to capture that misty feel". In making "Moodu Pani", Mahendra faced the challenge of distinguishing it from P. Bharathiraja's "Sigappu Rojakkal" (1978), which had a similar theme. The final length of the film was .

Although "Moodu Pani" is officially based on "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan", Mahendra acknowledged to also having been inspired by Alfred Hitchcock's thriller "Psycho" (1960). According to Rukmini Krishnan of "Daily News and Analysis", it was "Psycho" that inspired Mahendra to make "Moodu Pani". R. Ilangovan of "Frontline" stated that while Mahendra was inspired by "Psycho", his camera work, the "mist-covered nights" of Bangalore and Ooty, and the "weirdness" of the subject made the film "unique". While "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan" and its author were acknowledged in the opening credits of the film, Hitchcock and "Psycho" were not. According to Sify, there is a strong similarity between "Moodu Pani" and "Psycho" as the male leads in both films keep the skeletal remains of their respective mothers, which they continue to communicate with. Mahendra's disciple Ameer noted the Oedipal elements between Chandru and his deceased mother.

Mahendra, in his now defunct blog "Moondram Pirai...", referred to the film as a suspense thriller, while N. Venkateswaran of "The Times of India" described it as a psychological thriller. Devika Bai, writing for the "New Straits Times", referred to "Moodu Pani" as a whodunit film. The 2017 book "Indian Horror Cinema" by Mithuraaj Dhusiya likened it to a slasher film because of the numerous prostitutes murdered by Chandru. K. Hariharan, director of the L. V. Prasad Film & TV Academy, noted that sexuality and the repression of desire were the dominant motifs in "Moodu Pani", expressed through the mysterious misty atmospheres of Ooty where the protagonist confronts their psychological antagonist. He also noted that "Moodu Pani", like many of Mahendra's films, borrowed its themes and stylistic devices from French New Wave and New Hollywood styles of filmmaking. Ilangovan noted that Chandru's character, which was depicted as having flashes of wickedness bordering on perversion, was new to Tamil cinema. Crime and detective fiction writer Pattukkottai Prabakar considers "Moodu Pani", along with "Sigappu Rojakkal" and "Nooravathu Naal" (1984), to explore the personalities and behavioural traits of psychopaths in detail.

The film's soundtrack and score were composed by Ilaiyaraaja, this being his 100th film. It was also the first film in which he collaborated with Mahendra; Ilaiyaraaja would later compose for all of Mahendra's films until "Thalaimuraigal" (2013), the director's last film before his death in February 2014. Mahendra recalled in 2007, "When I first met [Ilaiyaraaja] I explained him what my kind of movie is and what I expect from him. The background score should allow meaningful silences in my films. I believe silence conveys more than words or music".

"Moodu Pani" marked A. R. Rahman's first association with Ilaiyaraaja. Rahman (then known by his birth name Dilip) who was just 13 years old then, worked as a keyboard programmer in the film. During the background scoring sessions of "Moodu Pani", Ilaiyaraaja fired his old keyboard programmer, due to the person's drinking behaviour. At that time, another one of his troupe members asked Ilaiyaraaja to meet a boy named Dilip, who was already doing keyboard programming for Malayalam films. Ilaiyaraaja agreed and sent for Dilip, whom he instructed regarding the notes and tune he had to play. Dilip, under Ilaiyaraaja's supervision, successfully completed the background score.

The soundtrack was released under the label EMI Records. "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" was written in January 1980, and is set in the carnatic raga known as Natabhairavi. According to Ilaiyaraaja's brother Gangai Amaran, it was one of the hardest songs in the album to write. Mahendra wanted a song depicting Chandru playing the guitar and asked Ilaiyaraaja for a tune; Ilaiyaraaja played the "scratch notes" of "Ilaya Nila", but Mahendra was not pleased and asked for another tune; Ilaiyaraaja gave him the tune of "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae", and this was retained. "Ilaya Nila" was subsequently used in "Payanangal Mudivathillai" (1982). As with "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae", the song "Paruva Kaalangalin" is also set in Natabhairavi. According to A. S. Panneerselvan of "Frontline", the dominant genre of the music used in "Moodu Pani" was "modern jazz with a sprinkling of avant-garde elements." Gangai Amaran was the main lyricist of the soundtrack, except for the English-language number "Sing Swing" (also known as "Swing Swing") which was written by Viji Manuel (credited as Vijaysamuel on the first soundtrack edition, and Vijaymanuel on the second); the lyricist of "Aasai Raja", is not credited. The first soundtrack edition did not feature "Aasai Raja"; the song was, however, included in a 1981 edition of the soundtrack.

Writing for "The Times of India", Deepauk Murugesan praised "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" for showing K. J. Yesudas' versatility as a singer. In July 2011, D. Karthikeyan of "The Hindu" listed the film's background score alongside the composer's other films such as "Mullum Malarum" (1978), "Uthiripookkal" (1979), "Moondram Pirai" (1982), "Nayakan" (1987) and "Thalapathi" (1991). Indo-Asian News Service described "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" as one of Yesudas' "best songs". Jaya Madhavan wrote for "The New Indian Express", "Who can forget [Yesudas'] songs "En iniya pon nilave", "Raja raja chozhan", "Kanchi pattuduthi" to name just a few? Oh! I love his film music." It was also included in "Dinamalar" 2016 list compiling the "Top 300 songs" composed by Ilaiyaraaja.

Elements of "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" were incorporated by Ilaiyaraaja in his song "Baatein Hawa" from "Cheeni Kum" (2007). A remix version of "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" is featured on music artist M. Rafi's album "Aasaiyae Alaipolae". In 2006, Yesudas performed "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" during a programme held at PSG College of Technology, organised by Helpline Arts Academy to sponsor the education of underprivileged children in and around Coimbatore. In March 2010, singer Vijay Prakash performed "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" as part of a medley, at the Star Vijay music show "Kaadhal Unplugged". Singer Srinivas performed the song live the following year in a concert organised by Rotary Coimbatore Central, as did Ajesh, at the Puthuyugam TV music show "Yugam Unplugged" in March 2014, followed by Yesudas' son Vijay in a 2015 concert titled "Yesudas 50".


"Moodu Pani" was released on 6 November 1980. The film was commercially successful, running for over 200 days in theatres. It received critical acclaim, with critics praising the performances of Pothen and Shoba. On 30 November 1980, "Ananda Vikatan" said that half the dialogues in the film were spoken by the camera, and felt that when there was great cinematography, there was no need for screenplay and dialogues. The 1991 book "Indian Cinema" by India's Ministry of Information and Broadcasting states that Mahendra and Pothen "had brought superb craftsmanship to their sensitively told stories" such as "Moodu Pani". English journalist Phil Hardy stated in his 1997 book "The BFI Companion to Crime", "Finally, given the tendency in Indian cinema to remake successful Hollywood films, it is worth signalling Balu Mahendra's remake of "Psycho" in Tamil, "Moodupani" (1980)."

Bhama Devi Ravi of "The Times of India" said in 2008, "With his easygoing manners, Pothan was brilliant as a serial killer, and the last few minutes of the film were rivetting." In February 2014, S. Saraswathi of Rediff.com included "Moodu Pani" in her list, "The Best Films of Balu Mahendra". K. S. Sivakumaran of "Ceylon Today" described the film as "halfway between artistic and merely entertaining." S. R. Ashok Kumar of "The Hindu" described "Moodu Pani" as one of "the [Tamil] industry's best films". "The Telegraph" called it one of Mahendra's "masterpieces", as did U. Tejonmayam, writing for "The New Indian Express".

After "Sigappu Rojakkal", there was a resurgence of the thriller genre in Tamil cinema, as evidenced by films like "Moodu Pani". According to film producer and writer G. Dhananjayan, the film "inspired a generation to take up film-making". M. Suganth of "The Times of India" stated that Mahendra "changed the landscape of Tamil cinema with his distinctive visuals and eclectic films" such as "Moodu Pani". Pothen recalled in January 2015 that it was the simultaneous release of "Moodu Pani" and his other film "Varumayin Niram Sivappu" that made him a star. However, both "Varumayin Niram Sivappu", which depicted Pothen as an eccentric director obsessed with an actress, and "Moodu Pani" led to him being typecast in similar roles. "Both roles caught the public imagination, and I admit I cashed in when I was offered similar stuff. Now, unless I'm offered an unreasonable amount of money, I doubt I'll accept these roles," he said in a 2014 interview.

In "Iruvar Mattum" (2006), Azhagu (Abhay) keeps the skeletal remains of his mother and frequently talks to her; Sify compared this plot detail to that of "Moodu Pani" and "Psycho". Malathi Rangarajan of "The Hindu", in her review of "Julie Ganapathi" (2003) a film about a mentally deranged woman (Saritha) who saves an accident victim (Jayaram) from death, nurses him in her own home and also falls in love with him, but holds him captive there, stated that the film had "shades" of "Moodu Pani". Actor Veera Bahu stated that he watched "Moodu Pani" in preparation for his role as a psychopath in the thriller "Nadunisi Naaygal". Reviewing "Amara Kaaviyam" (2014), Sify praised its cinematographer Jeeva Shankar for "showcasing Ooty in trademark [Balu Mahendra's] way" in the style of "Moodu Pani".

In "Vaaranam Aayiram" (2008), when Suriya's character first sees Sameera Reddy's character and falls in love with her, he takes his guitar and performs "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae". Pothen expressed appreciation for Suriya's version of the song in a May 2015 interview, saying that he had "enjoyed it". In June 2014 during Ilaiyaraaja's 71st birthday, singers Shweta Mohan and Aalap Raju collaborated to make a video in which they performed some of Ilaiyaraaja's songs as a tribute to him; one song was "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae". In May 2015, the FM radio station, Radio City, commemorated Ilaiyaraaja's 72nd birthday by broadcasting the composer's songs in a special show titled "Raja Rajathan" for 91 days. "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" was one of the most requested songs on the show. Although no print of "Moodu Pani" is known to survive, the film is still available on home video.



</doc>
<doc id="35586483" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35586483" title="Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin">
Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin

The Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin, also Hungarian conquest or Hungarian land-taking (: "conquest of the homeland"), was a series of historical events ending with the settlement of the Hungarians in Central Europe at the turn of the 9th and 10th centuries. Before the arrival of the Hungarians, three early medieval powers, the First Bulgarian Empire, East Francia and Moravia, had fought each other for control of the Carpathian Basin. They occasionally hired Hungarian horsemen as soldiers. Therefore, the Hungarians who dwelt on the Pontic steppes east of the Carpathians were familiar with their future homeland when their "land-taking" started.

The Hungarian conquest started in the context of a "late or 'small' migration of peoples". Contemporary sources attest that the Hungarians crossed the Carpathian Mountains following a joint attack in 894 or 895 by the Pechenegs and Bulgarians against them. They first took control over the lowlands east of the river Danube and attacked and occupied Pannonia (the region to the west of the river) in 900. They exploited internal conflicts in Moravia and annihilated this state sometime between 902 and 906.

The Hungarians strengthened their control over the Carpathian Basin by defeating a Bavarian army in a battle fought at "Brezalauspurc" on 4 July 907. They launched a series of plundering raids between 899 and 955 and also targeted the Byzantine Empire between 943 and 971. However, they gradually settled in the Basin and established a Christian monarchy, the Kingdom of Hungary around 1000.

Byzantine authors were the first to record these events. The earliest work is Emperor Leo the Wise's "Tactics", finished around 904, which recounts the Bulgarian-Byzantine war of 894–896, a military conflict directly preceding the Hungarians' departure from the Pontic steppes. Nearly contemporary narration can be read in the "Continuation of the Chronicle by George the Monk". However, "De Administrando Imperio" ("On Governing the Empire") provides the most detailed account. It was compiled under the auspices of Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in 951 or 952.

Works written by clergymen in the successor states of the Carolingian Empire narrate events closely connected to the conquest. The "Annals of Fulda" which ends in 901 is the earliest among them. A letter from Archbishop Theotmar of Salzburg to Pope John IX in 900 also refers to the conquering Hungarians, but it is often regarded as a fake. Abbot Regino of Prüm who compiled his "World Chronicle" around 908 sums up his knowledge on the Hungarians in a sole entry under the year 889. Another valuable source is Bishop Liutprand of Cremona's "Antapodosis" ("Retribution") from around 960. Aventinus, a 16th-century historian provides information not known from other works, which suggests that he used now-lost sources. However, his reliability is suspect.

An Old Church Slavonic compilation of "Lives" of saints preserved an eyewitness account on the Bulgarian-Byzantine war of 894–896. The first "Life" of Saint Naum, written around 924, contains nearly contemporary information on the fall of Moravia caused by Hungarian invasions, although its earliest extant copy is from the 15th century. Similarly late manuscripts (the oldest of which was written in the 14th century) offer the text of the "Russian Primary Chronicle", a historical work completed in 1113. It provides information based on earlier Byzantine and Moravian sources.

The Hungarians themselves initially preserved the memory of the major events in "the form of folk songs and ballads" (C. A. Macartney). The earliest local chronicle was compiled in the late 11th century. It exists now in more than one variant, its original version several times extended and rewritten during the Middle Ages. For instance, the 14th-century "Illuminated Chronicle" contains texts from the 11th-century chronicle.

An anonymous author's "Gesta Hungarorum" ("Deeds of the Hungarians"), written before 1200, is the earliest extant local chronicle. However, this "most misleading" example "of all the early Hungarian texts" (C. A. Macartney) contains much information that cannot be confirmed based on contemporaneous sources. Around 1283 Simon of Kéza, a priest at the Hungarian royal court wrote the next surviving chronicle. He claims that the Hungarians were closely related to the Huns, earlier conquerors of the Carpathian Basin. Accordingly, in his narration, the Hungarian invasion is in fact a second conquest of the same territory by the same people.

Graves of the first generations of the conquering Hungarians were identified in the Carpathian Basin, but fewer than ten definitely Hungarian cemeteries have been unearthed in the Pontic steppes. Most Hungarian cemeteries include 25 or 30 inhumation graves, but isolated burials were common. Adult males (and sometimes women and children) were buried together with either parts of their horses or with harness and other objects symbolizing a horse. The graves also yielded decorated silver belts, sabretaches furnished with metal plates, pear-shaped stirrups and other metal works. Many of these objects had close analogues in the contemporaneous multiethnic "Saltovo-Mayaki culture" of the Pontic steppes. Most cemeteries from the turn of the 9th and 10th centuries are concentrated in the Upper Tisza region and in the plains along the rivers Rába and Vág, for instance, at Tarcal, Tiszabezdéd, Naszvad (Nesvady, Slovakia) and Gyömöre, but early small cemeteries were also unearthed at Kolozsvár (Cluj-Napoca), Marosgombás (Gâmbaș) and other Transylvanian sites.

The "Continuation of the Chronicle by George the Monk" contains the earliest certain reference to the Hungarians. It states that Hungarian warriors intervened in a conflict between the Byzantine Empire and the Bulgarians on the latter's behalf in the Lower Danube region in 836 or 837. The first known Hungarian raid in Central Europe was recorded in the "Annals of St. Bertin". It writes of "enemies, called Hungarians, hitherto unknown" who ravaged King Louis the German's realm in 862. Vajay, Victor Spinei and other historians argue that Rastislav of Moravia, at war with Louis the German, hired Hungarians to invade East Francia. Archbishop Theotmar of Salzburg clearly states in his letter of around 900 that the Moravians often allied with the Hungarians against the Germans.

Porphyrogenitus mentions that the Hungarians dwelled in a territory that they called ""Atelkouzou"" until their invasion across the Carpathians. He adds that it was located in the territory where the rivers "Barouch", "Koubou", "Troullos", "Broutos" and "Seretos" run. Although the identification of the first two rivers with the Dnieper and the Southern Bug is not unanimously accepted, the last three names without doubt refer to the rivers Dniester, Prut and Siret. In the wider region, at Subotsi on the river Adiamka, three graves (one of them belonging to a male buried with the skull and legs of his horse) are attributed to pre-conquest Hungarians. However, these tombs may date to the 10th century.

The Hungarians were organized into seven tribes that formed a confederation. Constantine Porphyrogenitus mentions this number. Anonymous seems to have preserved the Hungarian ""Hetumoger"" ("Seven Hungarians") denomination of the tribal confederation, although he writes of "seven leading persons" jointly bearing this name instead of a political organization.

The "Hetumoger" confederation was strengthened by the arrival of the Kabars, who (according to Constantine) joined the Hungarians following their unsuccessful riot against the Khazar Khaganate. The Hungarians and the Kabars are mentioned in the longer version of the "Annals of Salzburg", which relates that the Hungarians fought around Vienna, while the Kabars fought nearby at "Culmite" in 881. Madgearu proposes that Kavar groups were already settled in the Tisza plain within the Carpathian Basin around 881, which may have given rise to the anachronistic reference to Cumans in the "Gesta Hungarorum" at the time of the Hungarian conquest.

The "Hetumoger" confederation was under a dual leadership, according to Ibn Rusta and Gardizi (two Muslim scholars from the 10th and 11th centuries, respectively, whose geographical books preserved texts from an earlier work written by Abu Abdallah al-Jayhani from Bukhara). The Hungarians' nominal or sacred leader was styled "kende", while their military commander bore the title "gyula". The same authors add that the "gyula" commanded an army of 20,000 horsemen, but the reliability of this number is uncertain.

Regino of Prüm and other contemporary authors portray the 9th-century Hungarians as nomadic warriors. Emperor Leo the Wise underlines the importance of horses to their military tactics. Analysis of horse skulls found in Hungarian warriors graves has not revealed any significant difference between these horses and Western breeds. Regino of Prüm states that the Hungarians knew "nothing about fighting hand-to-hand in formation or taking besieged cities", but he underlines their archery skills. Remains indicate that composite bows were the Hungarians' most important weapons. In addition, slightly curved sabres were unearthed in many warrior tombs from the period. Regino of Prüm noted the Hungarians' preference for deceptions such as apparent retreat in battle. Contemporaneous writers also recounted their viciousness, represented by the slaughter of adult males in settlement raids.

Based on the extant Hungarian chronicles, it is clear that more than one (occasionally extended) list existed of the peoples inhabiting the Carpathian Basin at the time of the Hungarian landtaking. Anonymous, for instance, first writes of the "Slavs, Bulgarians, Vlachs and the shepherds of the Romans" as inhabiting the territory, but later he refers to "a people called Kozar" and to the Székelys. Similarly, Simon of Kéza first lists the "Slavs, Greeks, Germans, Moravians and Vlachs", but later adds that the Székelys also lived in the territory. According to C. A. Macartney, those lists were based on multiple sources and do not document the real ethnic conditions of the Carpathian Basin around 900. According to Ioan-Aurel Pop, Simon of Kéza listed the peoples who inhabited the lands that the Hungarian conquered and the nearby territories.

The Hungarians adopted the ancient (Celtic, Dacian or Germanic) names of the longest rivers in the Carpathian Basin from a Slavic-speaking population. For instance, the Hungarian names of the rivers Danube "(Duna)", Dráva, Garam, Maros, Olt, Száva, Tisza and Vág were borrowed from Slavs. The Hungarians also adopted a great number of hydronyms of Slavic origin, including Balaton ("swamp"), Beszterce ("swift river"), Túr ("aurochs' stream") and Zagyva ("sooty river"). Place names of Slavic origin abound across the Carpathian Basin. For instance, Csongrád ("black fortress"), Nógrád ("new fortress"), Visegrád ("citadel") and other early medieval fortresses bore a Slavic name, while the name of Keszthely preserved the Latin word for fortress "(castellum)" with Slavic mediation.

Besides the Slavs, the presence of a German-speaking population can be demonstrated based on toponyms. For instance, the Hungarians adopted the Germanized form of the name of the river Vulka (whose name is of Slavic origin) and the document known as the "Conversion of the Bavarians and the Carantanians" from around 870 lists Germanic place names in Pannonia, including "Salapiugin" ("bend of the Zala") and "Mosaburc" ("fortress in the marshes"). Finally, the name of the Barca, Barót and other rivers could be either Turkic or Slavic.

According to Béla Miklós Szőke's theory, the detailed description of the Magyars by western contemporary sources and the immediate Hungarian intervention in local wars suggest that the Hungarians had already lived on the eastern territories of the Carpathian Basin since the middle of the 9th century. Regarding the right location of early Hungarian settlements, the Arabic geographer al-Jayhani (only snippets of his work survived in other Muslim authors' papers) in the 870s placed the Hungarians between Don and Danube rivers. Szőke identifies al-Jayhani's Danube with the middle Danube region, as opposed to the previously assumed lower Danube region, because following al-Jayhani's description the Christian Moravians were the western neighbors of the Magyars.

The Carpathian Basin was controlled from the 560s by the Avars, a Turkic-speaking people. Upon their arrival in the region, they imposed their authority over the Gepids who had dominated the territories east of the river Tisza. However, the Gepids survived up until the second half of the 9th century, according to a reference in the "Conversion of the Bavarians and the Carantanians" to their groups dwelling in Lower Pannonia around 870.

The Avars initially were nomadic horsemen, but both large cemeteries used by three or four generations and a growing number of settlements attest to their adoption of a sedentary (non-nomadic) way of life from the 8th century. The Avars' power was destroyed between 791 and 795 by Charlemagne, who occupied Transdanubia and attached it to his empire. Archaeological investigation of early medieval rural settlements at Balatonmagyaród, Nemeskér and other places in Transdanubia demonstrate that their main features did not change with the fall of the Avar Khaganate. New settlements appeared in the former borderlands with cemeteries characterized by objects with clear analogues in contemporary Bavaria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Moravia and other faraway territories. A manor defended by timber walls (similar to noble courts of other parts of the Carolingian Empire) was unearthed at Zalaszabar.

Avar groups who remained under the rule of their "khagan" were frequently attacked by Slav warriors. Therefore, the "khagan" asked Charlemagne to let his people settle in the region between Szombathely and Petronell in Pannonia. His petition was accepted in 805. The "Conversion of the Bavarians and the Carantanians" lists the Avars among the peoples under the ecclesiastic jurisdiction of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Salzburg around 870. According to Pohl, it "simply proved impossible to keep up an Avar identity after Avar institutions and the high claims of their tradition had failed." The growing number of archaeological evidence in Transdanubia also presumes Avar population in the Carpathian Basin at the eve of the 10th century. Archaeological findings suggesting that there is a substantial late Avar presence on the Great Hungarian Plain, however it is difficult to determine their proper chronology.

A charter issued in 860 by King Louis the German for the Mattsee Abbey may well attest that the Onogurs (another people of Turkic origin) were also present in the territory. The charter refers to the "Marches of the Wangars" "(marcha uuangariourum)" situated in the westernmost regions of the Carpathian Basin. The "Wangar" denomination seems to reflect the Slavic form of the Onogurs' ethnonym.
The territories attached to the Frankish Empire were initially governed by royal officers and local chieftains. A Slavic prince named Pribina received large estates along the river Zala around 840. He promoted the colonization of his lands, and also erected Mosaburg, a fortress in the marshes. Initially defended by timber walls, this "castle complex" (András Róna-Tas) became an administrative center. It was strengthened by drystone walls at the end of the century. Four churches surrounded by cemeteries were unearthed in and around the settlement. At least one of them continued to be used up to the 11th century.

Pribina died fighting the Moravians in 861, and his son, Kocel inherited his estates. The latter was succeeded around 876 by Arnulf, a natural son of Carloman, king of East Francia. Under his rule, Moravian troops interved into the conflict known as the "Wilhelminer War" and "laid waste from the Raab eastward", between 882 and 884, according to the "Annals of Fulda".

Moravia emerged in the 820s under its first known ruler, Mojmir I. His successor, Rastislav, developed Moravia's military strength. He promoted the proselytizing activities of the Byzantine brothers, Constantine and Methodius in an attempt to seek independence from East Francia. Moravia reached its "peak of importance" under Svatopluk I (870–894) who expanded its frontiers in all directions.

Moravia's core territory is located in the regions on the northern Morava river, in the territory of present-day Czech Republic and Slovakia. However, Constantine Porphyrogenitus places "great Moravia, the unbaptized" somewhere in the regions beyond Belgrade and Sirmium (Sremska Mitrovica, Serbia). His report supported further theories on Moravia's location. For instance, Kristó and Senga propose the existence of two Moravias (one in the north and other one in the south), while Boba, Bowlus and Eggers argue that Moravia's core territory is in the region of the southern Morava river, in present-day Serbia. The existence of a southern Moravian realm is not supported by artifacts, while strongholds unearthed at Mikulcice, Pohansko and other areas to the north of the Middle Danube point at the existence of a power center in those regions.

In addition to East Francia and Moravia, the first Bulgarian Empire was the third power deeply involved in the Carpathian Basin in the 9th century. A late 10th-century Byzantine lexicon known as "Suda" adds that Krum of Bulgaria attacked the Avars from the southeast around 803. The "Royal Frankish Annals" narrates that the Abodrites inhabiting "Dacia on the Danube" (most probably along the lower courses of the river Tisza) sought the assistance of the Franks against the Bulgars in 824. Bulgarian troops also invaded Pannonia, "expelled the Slavic chieftains and appointed Bulgar governors instead" in 827. An inscription at Provadia refers to a Bulgarian military leader named Onegavonais drowning in the Tisza around the same time. The emerging power of Moravia brought about a rapprochement between Bulgaria and East Francia in the 860s. For instance, King Arnulf of East Francia sent an embassy to the Bulgarians in 892 in order "to renew the former peace and to ask that they should not sell salt to the Moravians". The latter request suggests that the route from the salt mines of the Eastern Carpathians to Moravia was controlled around that time by the Bulgarians.

The anonymous author of the "Gesta Hungarorum", instead of Svatopluk I of Moravia and other rulers known from contemporary sources, writes of personalities and polities that are not mentioned by chroniclers working at the end of the 9th century. For instance, he refers to Menumorut residing in the castle of Bihar (Biharia, Romania), to Zobor "duke of Nitra by the grace of the Duke of the Czechs", and to Gelou "a certain Vlach" ruling over Transylvania. According to historian Ryszard Grzesik, the reference to Gelou and his Vlachs evidences that the Vlachs had already settled in Transylvania by the time the "Gesta" was completed, while the stories about Zobor and Menumorut preserved the memory of the Hungarians' fight against the Moravians. Translating Menumorut's name as "Great Moravian", Grzesik associates him with Svatopluk I and refutes the report of Menumorut's rule in Bihar. Early medieval fortresses were unearthed at Bihar and other places east of the Tisza, but none of them definitively date to the 9th century. For instance, in the case of Doboka (Dăbâca), two pairs of bell-shaped pendants with analogues in sites in Austria, Bulgaria and Poland have been unearthed, but Florin Curta dates them to the 9th century, while Alexandru Madgearu to the period between 975 and 1050.

Three main theories attempt to explain the reasons for the "Hungarian land-taking". One argues that it was an intended military operation, prearranged following previous raids, with the express purpose of occupying a new homeland. This view (represented, for instance, by Bakay and Padányi) mainly follows the narration of Anonymous and later Hungarian chronicles. The opposite view maintains that a joint attack by the Pechenegs and the Bulgarians forced the Hungarians' hand. Kristó, Tóth and the theory's other followers refer to the unanimous testimony provided by the "Annals of Fulda", Regino of Prüm and Porphyrogenitus on the connection between the Hungarians' conflict with the Bulgar-Pecheneg coalition and their withdrawal from the Pontic steppes. An intermediate theory proposes that the Hungarians had for decades been considering a westward move when the Bulgarian-Pecheneg attack accelerated their decision to leave the Pontic steppes. For instance Róna-Tas argues, "[the] fact that, despite a series of unfortunate events, the Magyars managed to keep their heads above water goes to show that they were indeed ready to move on" when the Pechenegs attacked them.

In fact, following a break of eleven years, the Hungarians returned to the Carpathian Basin in 892. They came to assist Arnulf of East Francia against Svatopluk I of Moravia. Widukind of Corvey and Liutprand of Cremona condemned the Frankish monarch for destroying the defense lines built along the empire's borders, because this also enabled the Hungarians to attack East Francia within a decade.

A late source, Aventinus adds that Kurszán "(Cusala)", "king of the Hungarians" stipulated that his people would only fight the Moravians if they received the lands they were to occupy. Accordingly, Aventinus continues, the Hungarians took possession of "both Dacias on this side and beyond" the Tisza east of the rivers Danube and Garam already in 893. Indeed, the Hungarian chronicles unanimously state that the Székelys had already been present in the Carpathian Basin when the Hungarians moved in. Kristó argues that Aventinus and the Hungarian historical tradition together point at an early occupation of the eastern territories of the Carpathian Basin by auxiliary troops of the Hungarian tribal confederation.

The "Annals of Fulda" narrates under the year 894 that the Hungarians crossed the Danube into Pannonia where they "killed men and old women outright and carried off the young women alone with them like cattle to satisfy their lusts and reduced the whole" province "to desert". Although the annalist writes of this Hungarian attack after the passage narrating Svatopluk I's death, Györffy, Kristó, Róna-Tas and other historians suppose that the Hungarians invaded Pannonia in alliance with the Moravian monarch. They argue that the "Legend of the White Horse" in the Hungarian chronicles preserved the memory of a treaty the Hungarians concluded with Svatopluk I according to pagan customs. The legend narrates that the Hungarians purchased their future homeland in the Carpathian Basin from Svatopluk for a white horse harnessed with gilded saddle and reins.

Ismail Ibn Ahmed, the emir of Khorasan raided "the land of the Turks" (the Karluks) in 893. Later he caused a new movement of peoples who one by one invaded the lands of their western neighbors in the Eurasian steppes. Al-Masudi clearly connected the westward movement of the Pechenegs and the Hungarians to previous fights between the Karluks, Ouzes and Kimeks. Porphyrogenitus writes of a joint attack by the Khazars and Ouzes that compelled the Pechenegs to cross the Volga River sometime between 893 and 902 (most probably around 894).

The relationship between Bulgaria and the Byzantine Empire sharpened in 894, because Emperor Leo the Wise forced the Bulgarian merchants to leave Constantinople and settle in Thessaloniki. Subsequently, Tzar Simeon I of Bulgaria invaded Byzantine territories and defeated a small imperial troop. The Byzantines approached the Hungarians to hire them to fight the Bulgarians. Nicetas Sclerus, the Byzantine envoy, concluded a treaty with their leaders, Árpád and Kurszán "(Kusan)" and Byzantine ships transferred Hungarian warriors across the Lower Danube. The Hungarians invaded Bulgaria, forced Tzar Simeon to flee to the fortress of Dristra (now Silistra, Bulgaria) and plundered Preslav. An interpolation in Porphyrogenitus's work states that the Hungarians had a prince named "Liountikas, son of Arpad" at that time, which suggests that he was the commander of the army, but he might have been mentioned in the war context by chance.

Simultaneously with the Hungarian attack from the north, the Byzantines invaded Bulgaria from the south. Tzar Simeon sent envoys to the Byzantine Empire to propose a truce. At the same time, he sent an embassy to the Pechenegs to incite them against the Hungarians. He succeeded and the Pechenegs broke into Hungarian territories from the east, forcing the Hungarian warriors to withdraw from Bulgaria. The Bulgarians, according to Constantine Porphyrogenitus, attacked and routed the Hungarians.

The Pechenegs destroyed the Hungarians' dwelling places. Those who survived the double attack left the Pontic steppes and crossed the Carpathians in search of a new homeland. The memory of the destruction brought by the Pechenegs seems to have been preserved by the Hungarians. The Hungarian name of the Pechenegs "(besenyő)" corresponds to the old Hungarian word for eagle "(bese)". Thus the 14th-century Hungarian chronicles' story of eagles compelling the Hungarians' ancestors to cross the Carpathians most probably refers to the Pechenegs' attack.

 The date of the Hungarian invasion varies according to the source. The earliest date (677) is preserved in the 14th-century versions of the "Hungarian Chronicle", while Anonymous supplies the latest date (902). Contemporaneous sources suggest that the invasion followed the 894 Bulgarian-Byzantine war. The route taken across the Carpathians is also contested. Anonymous and Simon of Kéza have the invading Hungarians crossing the northeastern passes, while the "Illuminated Chronicle" writes of their arrival in Transylvania.

Regino of Prüm states that the Hungarians "roamed the wildernesses of the Pannonians and the Avars and sought their daily food by hunting and fishing" following their arrival in the Carpathian Basin. Their advance towards the Danube seems to have stimulated Arnulf who was crowned emperor to entrust Braslav (the ruler of the region between the rivers Drava and Sava) with the defense of all Pannonia in 896. In 897 or 898 a civil war broke out between Mojmir II and Svatopluk II (two sons of the late Moravian ruler, Svatopluk I), in which Emperor Arnulf also intervened. There is no mention of the Hungarians' activities in those years.

The next event recorded in connection with the Hungarians is their raid against Italy in 899 and 900. The letter of Archbishop Theotmar of Salzburg and his suffragans suggests that Emperor Arnulf incited them to attack King Berengar I of Italy. They routed the Italian troops on 2 September at the river Brenta and plundered the region of Vercelli and Modena in the winter, but the Doge of Venice, Pietro Tribuno defeated them at Venice on 29 June 900. They returned from Italy when they learned of the death of Emperor Arnulf at the end of 899.

According to Anonymous, the Hungarians fought with Menumorut before conquering Gelou's Transylvania. Subsequently, the Hungarians turned against Salan, the ruler of the central territories, according to this narrative. In contrast with Anonymous, Simon of Kéza writes of the Hungarians' fight with Svatopluk following their arrival. According to the "Illuminated Chronicle", the Hungarians "remained quietly in Erdelw and rested their herds" there after their crossing because of an attack by eagles.

The Hungarian chronicles preserved two separate lists of the Hungarians' leaders at the time of the Conquest. Anonymous knows of Álmos, Előd, Künd, Ónd, Tas, Huba and Tétény, while Simon of Kéza and the "Illuminated Chronicle" list Árpád, Szabolcs, Gyula, Örs, Künd, Lél and Vérbulcsú. Contemporaraneous or nearly contemporaraneous sources make mention of Álmos (Constantine Porphyrogenitus), of Árpád ("Continuation of the Chronicle by George the Monk" and Constantine Porphyrogenitus), of Liountikas (Constantine Porphyrogenitus) and of Kurszán ("Continuation of the Chronicle by George the Monk").

According to the "Illuminated Chronicle", Álmos, Árpád's father "could not enter Pannonia, for he was killed in Erdelw". The episode implies that Álmos was the "kende", the sacred ruler of the Hungarians, at the time of their destruction by the Pechenegs, which caused his sacrifice. If his death was in fact the consequence of a ritual murder, his fate was similar to the Khazar "khagans" who were executed, according to Ibn Fadlan and al-Masudi, in case of disasters affecting their whole people.

The emperor's death released the Hungarians from their alliance with East Francia. On their way back from Italy they expanded their rule over Pannonia. Furthermore, according to Liutprand of Cremona, the Hungarians "claimed for themselves the nation of the Moravians, which King Arnulf had subdued with the aid of their might" at the coronation of Arnulf's son, Louis the Child in 900. The "Annals of Grado" relates that the Hungarians defeated the Moravians after their withdrawal from Italy. Thereafter the Hungarians and the Moravians made an alliance and jointly invaded Bavaria, according to Aventinus. However, the contemporary "Annals of Fulda" only refers to Hungarians reaching the river Enns.

One of the Hungarian contingents crossed the Danube and plundered the territories on the river's north bank, but Luitpold, Margrave of Bavaria gathered troops and routed them between Passau and Krems an der Donau on 20 November 900. He had a strong fortress erected against them on the Enns. Nevertheless, the Hungarians became the masters of the Carpathian Basin by the occupation of Pannonia. The "Russian Primary Chronicle" may also reflect the memory of this event when relating how the Hungarians expelled the ""Volokhi"" or ""Volkhi"" who had earlier subjugated the Slavs' homeland in Pannonia, according to scholars who identify the "Volokhi" and "Volkhi" as Franks. Other historians associate them either with the Vlachs (Romanians), or with the ancient Romans. 

King Louis the Child held a meeting at Regensburg in 901 to introduce further measures against the Hungarians. Moravian envoys proposed a peace between Moravia and East Francia, because the Hungarians had in the meantime plundered their country. A Hungarian army invading Carinthia was defeated in April and Aventinus describes a defeat of the Hungarians by Margrave Luitpold at the river Fischa in the same year.

The date when Moravia ceased to exist is uncertain, because there is no clear evidence either on the "existence of Moravia as a state" after 902 (Spinei) or on its fall. A short note in the "Annales Alamannici" refers to a "war with the Hungarians in Moravia" in 902, during which the "land "(patria)" succumbed", but this text is ambiguous. Alternatively, the so-called "Raffelstetten Customs Regulations" mentions the "markets of the Moravians" around 905. The "Life" of Saint Naum relates that the Hungarians occupied Moravia, adding that the Moravians who "were not captured by the Hungarians, ran to the Bulgars". Constantine Porphyrogenitus also connects the fall of Moravia to its occupation by the Hungarians. The destruction of the early medieval urban centers and fortresses at Szepestamásfalva (Spišské Tomášovce), Dévény and other places in modern Slovakia is dated to the period around 900.

According to Anonymous, who does not write of Moravia, the Hungarians invaded the region of Nyitra (Nitra, Slovakia) and defeated and killed Zobor, the local Czech ruler, on Mount Zobor near his seat. Thereafter, as Anonymous continues, the Hungarians first occupied Pannonia from the "Romans" and next battled with Glad and his army composed of Bulgarians, Romanians and Pechenegs from Banat. Glad ceded few towns from his duchy. Finally, Anonymous writes of a treaty between the Hungarians and Menumorut, stipulating that the local ruler's daughter was to be given in marriage to Árpád's son, Zolta. Macartney argues that Anonymous's narration of both Menumorot and of Glad is basically a transcription of a much later report of the early 11th-century Achtum, Glad's alleged descendant. In contrast, for instance, Madgearu maintains that "Galad", "Kladova", "Gladeš" and other place names recorded in Banat in the 14th century and 16th century attest to the memory of a local ruler named Glad.
An important event following the conquest of the Carpathian Basin, the Bavarians' murder of Kurszán, was recorded by the longer version of the "Annals of Saint Gall", the "Annales Alamannici" and the "Annals of Einsiedeln". The first places the event in 902, while the others date it to 904. The three chronicles unanimously state that the Bavarians invited the Hungarian leader to a dinner on the pretext of negotiating a peace treaty and treacherously assassinated him. Kristó and other Hungarian historians argue that the dual leadership over the Hungarians ended with Kurszán's death.

The Hungarians invaded Italy using the so-called "Route of the Hungarians" "(Strada Ungarorum)" leading from Pannonia to Lombardy in 904. They arrived as King Berengar I's allies against his rival, King Louis of Provance. The Hungarians devastated the territories occupied earlier by King Louis along the river Po, which ensured Berengar's victory. The victorious monarch allowed the Hungarians to pillage all the towns that had earlier accepted his opponent's rule, and agreed to pay a yearly tribute of about of silver.

The longer version of the "Annals of Saint Gall" reports that Archbishop Theotmar of Salzburg fell, along with Bishops Uto of Freising and Zachary of Säben, in a "disastrous battle" fought against the Hungarians at "Brezalauspurc" on 4 July 907. Other contemporary sources add that Margrave Luitpold of Bavaria and 19 Bavarian counts also died in the battle. Most historians (including Engel, Makkai, and Spinei) identify "Brezalauspurc" with Pressburg (Bratislava, Slovakia), but some researchers (for instance Boba and Bowlus) argue that it can refer to Mosaburg, Braslav's fortress on the Zala in Pannonia. The Hungarians' victory hindered any attempts of eastward expansion by East Francia for the following decades and opened the way for the Hungarians to freely plunder vast territories of that kingdom.

The Hungarians settled in the lowlands of the Carpathian Basin along the rivers Danube, Tisza and their tributaries, where they could continue their semi-nomadic lifestyle. As an immediate consequence, their arrival "drove a non-Slavic wedge between the West Slavs and South Slavs" (Fine). Fine argues that the Hungarians' departure from the western regions of the Pontic steppes weakened their former allies, the Khazars, which contributed to the collapse of the Khazar Empire.

Some decades after the Hungarian conquest, a new synthesis of earlier cultures, the "Bijelo Brdo culture" spread in all over the Carpathian Basin, with its characteristic jewellery, including S-shaped earrings. The lack of archaeological finds connected to horses in "Bijelo Brdo" graves is another feature of these cemeteries. The earliest "Bijelo Brdo" assemblages are dated via unearthed coins to the rule of Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in the middle of the 10th century. Early cemeteries of the culture were unearthed, for instance, at Beremend and Csongrád in Hungary, at Dévény (Devín) and Zsitvabesenyő (Bešenov) in Slovakia, at Gyulavarsánd (Varşand) and Várfalva (Moldoveneşti) in Romania and at Vukovár (Vukovar) and Gorbonok (Kloštar Podravski) in Croatia.

Hungarian society experienced fundamental changes in many fields (including animal husbandry, agriculture and religion) in the centuries following the "Land-taking". These changes are reflected in the significant number of terms borrowed from local Slavs. About 20% of the Hungarian vocabulary is of Slavic origin, including the Hungarian words for sheep-pen "(akol)", yoke "(iga)" and horseshoe "(patkó)". Similarly, the Hungarian name of vegetables, fruits and other cultivated plants, as well as many Hungarian terms connected to agriculture are Slavic loanwords, including "káposzta" ("cabbage"), "szilva" ("plum"), "zab" ("oats"), "széna" ("hay") and "kasza" ("scythe").

The Hungarians left wide marches (the so-called "gyepű") in the borderlands of their new homeland uninhabited for defensive purposes. In this easternmost territory of the Carpathian Basin, the earliest graves attributed to Hungarian warriorsfor instance, at Szék (Sic), Torda (Turda) and Vízakna (Ocna Sibiului)are concentrated around the Transylvanian salt mines in the valley of the rivers Kis-Szamos (Someșul Mic) and Maros (Mureş). All the same, warriors were also stationed in outposts east of the Carpathians, as suggested by 10th-century graves unearthed at Krylos, Przemyśl, Sudova Vyshnia, Grozeşti, Probota and at Tei. The Hungarians' fear of their eastern neighbors, the Pechenegs, is demonstrated by Porphyrogenitus's report on the failure of a Byzantine envoy to persuade them to attack the Pechenegs. The Hungarians clearly stated that they could not fight against the Pechenegs, because "their people are numerous and they are the devil's brats".

Instead of attacking the Pechenegs and the Bulgarians in the east, the Hungarians made several raids in Western Europe. For instance, they plundered Thuringia and Saxony in 908, Bavaria and Swabia in 909 and 910 and Swabia, Lorraine and West Francia in 912. Although a Byzantine hagiography of Saint George refers to a joint attack of Pechenegs, "Moesians" and Hungarians against the Byzantine Empire in 917, its reliability is not established. The Hungarians seem to have raided the Byzantine Empire for the first time in 943. However, their defeat in the battle of Lechfeld in 955 "put an end to the raids in the West" (Kontler), while they stopped plundering the Byzantines following their defeat in the battle of Arkadiopolis in 970.

The Hungarian leaders decided that their traditional lifestyle, partly based on plundering raids against sedentary peoples, could not be continued. The defeats at the Lechfeld and Arkadiopolis accelerated the Hungarians' adoption of a sedentary way of life. This process culminated in the coronation of the head of the Hungarians, Stephen the first king of Hungary in 1000 and 1001.

The most famous perpetuation of the events is the "Arrival of the Hungarians" or "Feszty Panorama" which is a large cyclorama (a circular panoramic painting) by Hungarian painter Árpád Feszty and his assistants. It was completed in 1894 for the 1000th anniversary of the event. Since the 1100th anniversary of the event in 1995, the painting has been displayed in the Ópusztaszer National Heritage Park, Hungary. Mihály Munkácsy also depicted the event under the name of "Conquest" for the Hungarian Parliament Building in 1893.





</doc>
<doc id="35589999" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35589999" title="What Maisie Knew (film)">
What Maisie Knew (film)

What Maisie Knew is a 2012 American drama film directed by Scott McGehee and David Siegel and written by Carroll Cartwright and Nancy Doyne. Starring Julianne Moore, Alexander Skarsgård, Onata Aprile, Joanna Vanderham and Steve Coogan, it is a modern adaptation of Henry James' 1897 novel "What Maisie Knew". The film finds six-year-old Maisie in the middle of a custody battle between her neglectful parents and their new partners.

Cartwright and Doyne wrote the film's script in 1995 but the project languished in development hell until McGehee and Siegel were hired as directors. It was filmed in New York over seven weeks in 2011 with music scored by DeVotchKa's Nick Urata. The film premiered at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival, and was theatrically released on May 3, 2013, by Millennium Entertainment. It earned $2.7 million at the global box office and received positive reviews from critics.

Six-year-old Maisie (Onata Aprile) lives in a New York apartment with her parents, Susanna (Julianne Moore), a singer in a rock band, and Beale (Steve Coogan), an international art dealer. Susanna and Beale argue with each other viciously and constantly, often ignoring Maisie and leaving her in the care of their nanny, Margo (Joanna Vanderham). Maisie does not always understand her parents' actions, such as when Susanna hires a locksmith to change the lock on the apartment's front door to keep Beale out. When they decide to separate, both parents are granted joint custody of Maisie.

After the separation, Margo moves into Beale's apartment and they get married soon afterwards. In response to the marriage, Susanna impulsively marries Lincoln (Alexander Skarsgård), a bartender whom she barely knows. Maisie bonds with Lincoln, but Susanna quickly grows resentful of how much Maisie warms to him.

Although both Susanna and Beale think they deserve full custody, their desire to keep Maisie is primarily to spite each other, and they are quick to pawn her off onto the other parent when looking after her becomes inconvenient. Maisie's time is split between staying with each of her parents, though her primary caregivers become Lincoln and Margo as Susanna leaves on a tour and Beale disappears on business trips. With his relationship with Margo disintegrating, Beale eventually decides to move to the UK.

With Beale and Susanna gone, Margo, Lincoln, and Maisie begin to spend time together. While Susanna is supposedly on tour, the three run into her in New York. After an angry confrontation in which Susanna accuses Lincoln and Margo of stealing Maisie from her, Lincoln declares that their relationship is over, telling Susanna that she does not deserve Maisie.

When Susanna suddenly leaves the city, Maisie once again ends up in Margo's care. Margo takes Maisie to stay in her cousin's beach house and invites Lincoln to visit, much to Maisie's delight, and Lincoln and Margo kiss. One night, Susanna stops by the beach house unannounced in her tour bus to pick Maisie up, but Maisie chooses to stay with Margo and Lincoln instead. After shouting at her, Susanna realizes that Maisie is scared of her and that it is in Maisie's best interests to stay behind.


"What Maisie Knew" was written by Carroll Cartwright and Nancy Doyne in 1995, based on the 1897 novel "What Maisie Knew" by Henry James. At the time, Cartwright was involved in a legal dispute over the custody of his daughter. Director Scott McGehee later said that Cartwright had used James' novel "as a lens" through which to write about his own divorce and raising his daughter. According to Cartwright, he and Doyne struggled to find producers, financiers and directors interested in making the film because of the challenges of working with a young child at its center. Producer Charles Weinstock was involved in the project for a number of years and was eventually responsible for obtaining financing from Red Crown Productions and hiring McGehee and David Siegel as directors. McGehee and Siegel were initially apprehensive about the script but decided to read it after hearing from their agent that actress Julianne Moore was interested in playing one of the roles; they accepted the directing job after talking to Moore about the story. Although McGehee and Siegel were reluctant to make a film about divorce, they liked that the script focused on Maisie's perspective, noting that it was unusual for a film aimed at adults to have a story told from the perspective of a child.

Casting for the role of Maisie took eight weeks. Casting director Avy Kaufman suggested about 100 young girls to McGehee and Siegel while the directors independently visited New York elementary schools to hold auditions. Six-year-old Onata Aprile auditioned relatively late, and was cast three weeks before production started. She met with two of her adult co-stars, Julianne Moore and Alexander Skarsgård, for a brief rehearsal period before filming began. Moore, who had read the film's script before directors McGehee and Siegel, was anxious about having to sing as part of her role. She prepared by meeting with music producer Peter Nashel, singer Elaine Caswell, and Alison Mosshart, the lead singer of The Kills, whose songs Moore performed in the film.

Steve Coogan was the directors' first choice to play Beale, although the film's producers wanted to cast another English actor. McGehee and Siegel felt Coogan was suited to the role because "no matter what awful things he does and says, somehow there's something sympathetic about him". Joanna Vanderham, the last actor to be cast in the film, secured her role two weeks before production started after talking with McGehee, Siegel and Kaufman on Skype from Glasgow.

"What Maisie Knew" was filmed in New York for 35 days over seven weeks in the summer of 2011. It was shot on 35 mm film using an Arri camera. Filming took place in mainly Lower Manhattan, and scenes at the beach house were shot on Long Island. One scene featuring Maisie and Lincoln taking a day trip together was shot on the High Line. A scene in which Susanna performs at a concert was filmed at Webster Hall using a pre-recorded vocal track, a backing band and a small audience. According to McGehee and Siegel, a significant challenge during filming was the limited time with which they were able to work with Aprile each day due to her early bedtime. While shooting one of the film's final scenes wherein Susanna arrives at the beach house at night to pick up Maisie, Aprile fell asleep and could not be woken up; the shoot had to be postponed until two weeks later.

The film's score was composed by Nick Urata of the musical group DeVotchKa. It was inspired by rock music, to which McGehee and Siegel thought Maisie would have been exposed with a musician mother. McGehee described Urata's score as "us[ing] rock language but in a more childlike way". Julianne Moore's character sings two songs in the film, "Night Train" and "Hook and Line", both written and originally recorded by The Kills.

"What Maisie Knew" premiered at the 2012 Toronto Film Festival on September 7, 2012. Millennium Films purchased the film's U.S. distribution rights soon after its premiere. The film was released in the United States on May 3, 2013. Opening in a single theater in New York, it earned $21,480 on its opening weekend and $31,152 by the end of its first week. It expanded to three theaters in its second week of release, was playing in 27 theaters by its fourth week, and reached its widest release of 122 theaters in its sixth week. It was in release for a total of thirteen weeks and grossed $1,066,471 in that time. In the United Kingdom, the film was released by Curzon Film World in cinemas and through video on demand (VOD) services on August 23, 2013, with £150,000 pledged by the British Film Institute towards the film's £244,000 marketing budget. It earned £330,186 in box office revenue from four weeks of release and £65,832 from VOD rentals in the first six weeks it was available. In other territories, the film performed best in Australia (grossing US$334,651), Spain ($196,668), New Zealand ($140,696) and Brazil ($100,453). It earned a total of $1,644,908 outside of the U.S. for a total worldwide gross of $2,711,379.

"What Maisie Knew" received generally positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a rating of 87%, based on 101 reviews, with an average rating of 7.7/10. The site's consensus states: "It's undeniably difficult to watch at times, but "What Maisie Knew" ultimately rises on the strength of its solidly sourced script, powerful performances, and empathetic direction." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 74 out of 100, based on reviews from 32 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".

In a review for "Variety" magazine, Justin Chang summarized "What Maisie Knew" as a "beautifully observed drama" and wrote that, although the plot was consistently dark, it contained "enough sensitivity and emotional variation to make the experience cumulatively heartrending". "New York" magazine's David Edelstein praised the subtleties in the writing and performances of the adult characters and opined that the cinematography was "as open and graceful as any [he had] seen all year". A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" described the film as a "brilliant, haunting adaptation" of Henry James' novel, praising Aprile's performance as Maisie in particular. The "Los Angeles Times" critic Betsy Sharkey also commended Aprile, Moore and Coogan's acting and felt that the "beautifully rendered film" was able to achieve emotional resonance without becoming melodramatic. "The Boston Globe" Ty Burr, who awarded the film 3.5 out of 4 stars, opined that its success was largely attributable to Aprile's performance. John DeFore of "The Hollywood Reporter" noted the film's "uniformly strong performances" and praised McGehee and Siegel for maintaining a sense of plausibility in spite of the melodramatic plot. For the "New York Observer", Rex Reed wrote of the film's "warmth, intelligence and grace" and concluded his review: "poignant and exemplary, this is one of the best films of 2013".

The "New York Post"s Kyle Smith likened "What Maisie Knew" to a public service announcement about parenting and divorce and felt that the presentation of the story from Maisie's perspective was a "gimmick" (although it is true to James's novel). Chris Nashawaty of "Entertainment Weekly" found the film unoriginal, "pointless and inert" and awarded it a C grade. "Slant Magazine" Chris Cabin felt that the characters were one-dimensional and stereotypical, and described the film as "an abhorrent slice of tasteless familial drama".

"What Maisie Knew" was released on DVD and Blu-ray on August 13, 2013. The Blu-ray edition includes an audio commentary with the directors and a selection of deleted scenes.



</doc>
<doc id="35618944" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35618944" title="Wilhelmina FitzClarence, Countess of Munster">
Wilhelmina FitzClarence, Countess of Munster

Wilhelmina FitzClarence, Countess of Munster ("née" Kennedy-Erskine; 27 June 1830 – 9 October 1906) was a British peeress and novelist. Her mother, Lady Augusta FitzClarence, was an illegitimate daughter of William IV of the United Kingdom; Wilhelmina, also known as Mina, was born the day after William's succession as monarch. She travelled as a young girl throughout Europe, visiting the courts of France and Hanover. In 1855, Mina married her first cousin William FitzClarence, 2nd Earl of Munster; they would have nine children, including the 3rd and 4th Earls of Munster.

The Earl and Countess of Munster lived at Palmeira Square in Brighton. Later in life, Lady Munster became a novelist and short story writer. In 1889, she released her first novel, "Dorinda"; a second, "A Scotch Earl", followed two years later. The year 1896 saw the publication of "Ghostly Tales", a collection of tales on the supernatural which have largely been forgotten today. Lady Munster also produced an autobiography entitled "My Memories and Miscellanies", which was released in 1904. She died two years later.

Wilhelmina "Mina" Kennedy-Erskine was born on 27 June 1830 in Dun House, Montrose, Scotland. She was the second child of the Hon. John Kennedy-Erskine and his wife Lady Augusta FitzClarence, an illegitimate daughter of William IV (who became monarch the day before Mina's birth). Her father, the second son of the 13th Earl of Cassilis, was a captain with the 16th Lancers and an equerry to King William before dying in 1831 at the age of 28. Her paternal grandmother, Anne Watts, was a descendant of the Schuyler family, the Van Cortlandt family (including Stephanus Van Cortlandt), and the Delancey family of British North America.

Mina lived with her widowed mother and two siblings in a "charming brick house" on the River Thames called Railshead, which was next door to a house owned by her paternal grandparents. King William visited the family often and was quite fond of Mina; on one occasion, he visited to comfort his daughter when three- or four-year-old Mina nearly died of a "very dangerous brain fever". The Kennedy-Erskines also often visited Windsor Castle during the king's reign.

Five years after Kennedy-Erskine's death, Lady Augusta married Lord Frederick Gordon-Hallyburton, a decision that displeased her first husband's parents. The decision led to Lady Augusta's departure from Railshead. In 1837 she became State Housekeeper at Kensington Palace after the death of her sister, Lady De L'Isle. Mina lived there until she married. She and her sister Millicent enjoyed music and had a particular love for the Italian soprano Marietta Alboni. The sisters' Italian singing-master secretly arranged for a meeting with Alboni, but the encounter did not go well; the singer discovered that they were the daughters of the "housekeeper", and, assuming that they were not ladies, departed soon after.

In the late 1840s, Mina travelled through Europe with her family so that they might "learn languages and finish [their] education". The trip started in 1847, when Mina journeyed to Dresden due to her mother's desire for her daughters to learn German. From 1847 to 1849, she and her family lived in Paris near the Arc de Triomphe, and were kindly received by the French Royal Family headed by Louis Philippe I and Queen Marie Amelie. They left soon after the king and queen's fall from power, as the city had suddenly become unsafe for those of their rank. In 1850, they visited the court of Hanover and were received by Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover and his family; later that year, they returned to Kensington Palace and Mina and Millicent came out in society.

Mina married her full first cousin William FitzClarence, 2nd Earl of Munster at Wemyss Castle on 17 April 1855 in a double wedding in which her sister Millicent married James Hay Erskine Wemyss. Like Mina, FitzClarence was a grandchild of William IV; at a young age, he had succeeded his father the 1st Earl, who served as a governor of Windsor Castle and constable of the Round Tower until his suicide in 1842. The FitzClarences travelled to Hamburg immediately after the wedding, visiting local "schlosses" and the family of Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein (who later married The Princess Helena). Their first child, Edward, was born within a year. The couple would have nine children, four of whom outlived their mother:

The Earl and Countess of Munster lived at Palmeira Square in Brighton. According to an article in contemporary women's magazine "The Lady's Realm", the Countess lived a very quiet life. In 1897, the magazine reported that she had lived in retirement in Brighton for the past thirty-five years. Her attachment to the city, the article suggested, was due to childhood memories of visiting there with King William. The article also stated that because Lord Munster's health was failing, the Countess was living in "comparative seclusion", though her lifestyle was also attributed to a love of a "quiet, literary, and artistic life". She died on 9 October 1906, having been widowed five years.

Later in life, Lady Munster became a novelist and short story writer, writing under the title the Countess of Munster. At the age of nearly sixty, she published two novels; her first, "Dorinda", in 1889, and her second, "A Scotch Earl", in 1891. The plot of "Dorinda" centred on a young woman who eventually kills herself after stealing works of art from her friends. Oscar Wilde noted Munster's skill in writing "Dorinda"; he compared the "exceedingly clever" novel's eponymous heroine to "a sort of well-born" Becky Sharp, and praised the author's ability "to draw ... in a few sentences the most lifelike portraits of social types and social exceptions". In 1888, an article by Munster about ballad singing appeared in "The Woman's World", a Victorian women's magazine edited by Wilde. "A Scotch Earl", which centred on a vulgar Scottish nobleman named Lord Invergordon, was less well received by contemporaries. "The Spectator" published a critical review soon after its publication which suggested that the novel's showering of "contempt upon the society of wealth and rank" was close to Republicanism or Socialism. The review criticised "A Scotch Earl" for lacking "any merits of construction or style", and added that Lady Munster was "not and never will be a capable novelist".

In 1896, Munster released "Ghostly Tales", a collection of stories "written in a manner similar to accounts of true hauntings". "Lady's Realm" considered her stories to be based on fact. A positive review of "Ghostly Tales" was published in the "Saturday Review" in 1897, in which the stories were described as "entertaining and dramatic", but it was noted that not all were based on supernatural events. Hugh Lamb included the Countess's "surprisingly grim" story "The Tyburn Ghost" in his 1979 edited volume "Tales from a Gas-Lit Graveyard". He wrote at the time that Lady Munster's works had been "completely overlooked by bibliophiles and anthologists since her death". Lamb deemed this regrettable, as he considered "Ghostly Tales" "possibly her best work" and one of the "truly representative collections of Victorian ghost stories". Lamb also included another of her stories, "The Page-Boy's Ghost", in a 1988 anthology. However, modern author and editor Douglas A. Anderson has called the Countess's stories "standard, melodramatic fare", which are "perfectly forgettable".

In 1904, Lady Munster produced an autobiography entitled "My Memories and Miscellanies". In its foreword, she explained that "some valued friends" convinced her to write it, despite her reluctance, because her "long life" had witnessed "not a few interesting events". The book was called her "chief work" in "The Manchester Guardian" at the time of her death in 1906. The Countess wrote the entire book by memory, and expressed regret that she had given up her journal writing as a young girl after someone else improperly read it. The autobiography included several recounted sightings of the female ghost "Green Jean" at Wemyss Castle; Lady Munster claimed that several members of her family, including Millicent, saw the ghost while staying there.



</doc>
<doc id="35625166" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35625166" title="The Amazing Spider-Man 2">
The Amazing Spider-Man 2

The Amazing Spider-Man 2 (internationally marketed as The Amazing Spider-Man 2: Rise of Electro) is a 2014 American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Spider-Man. The film was directed by Marc Webb and produced by Avi Arad and Matt Tolmach. It is the fifth theatrical "Spider-Man" film produced by Columbia Pictures and Marvel Entertainment, and is the sequel to 2012's "The Amazing Spider-Man". It is also the second and final film in "The Amazing Spider-Man" duology. The studio hired James Vanderbilt to write the screenplay and Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci to rewrite it. The film stars Andrew Garfield as Peter Parker / Spider-Man, alongside Emma Stone, Jamie Foxx, Dane DeHaan, Campbell Scott, Embeth Davidtz, Colm Feore, Paul Giamatti and Sally Field.

Development of "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" began after the success of "The Amazing Spider-Man". DeHaan, Giamatti, Jones, and Cooper were cast between December 2012 and February 2013. Filming took place in New York City from February to June 2013. The film was released in 2D, 3D, and IMAX 3D on May 2, 2014, in the United States with two international premieres being held between March 31 and April 10 of that year. It received mixed reviews from critics and audiences and grossed $709 million worldwide, making it the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2014 but the lowest-grossing "Spider-Man" film.

"The Amazing Spider-Man 2" was originally envisioned as the beginning of a shared fictional universe, which would have continued with two sequels and several spin-offs, most notably films centered on Venom and the Sinister Six. Due to its performing below expectations, all subsequent installments were cancelled and a new iteration of the character, portrayed by Tom Holland in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, began with the 2016 film "".

OsCorp scientist Richard Parker records a video message to explain his disappearance. Later, he and his wife, Mary, are aboard a private jet hijacked by an assassin sent to kill Richard and his wife. Richard and Mary fight off the man, but the ensuing struggle causes the plane to crash, killing them both, after he uploads the video.

Years later, Richard's son, Peter, continues to fight crime as Spider-Man in the present day. He pursues and apprehends Aleksei Sytsevich and saves Max Dillion before a taxi hits him. Later, Peter meets with his girlfriend Gwen Stacy at their high school graduation ceremony and, insisting he keep his vow to her late father, ends their relationship. Peter's childhood friend, Harry Osborn, returns to Manhattan to see his terminally-ill father, Norman, CEO of OsCorp. Norman explains his illness is genetic, and Harry is at the age where it first develops. Norman gives Harry a small device he claims contains his life's work. The next day, Norman dies, and Harry is appointed the new OsCorp CEO.

While working in an OsCorp laboratory, Max inadvertently shocks himself and falls into a tank of genetically-engineered electric eels. They attack him, and he mutates into an organic electric generator. Meanwhile, Peter attempts to maintain a friendship with Gwen, but she reveals that she may move to England for schooling. Before they can discuss it, Dillon wanders into Times Square, accidentally causing a blackout, and is apprehended by Spider-Man after a battle. Dillon is taken to the Ravencroft Institute, where he is studied by German scientist Dr. Kafka. Meanwhile, the first symptoms of Harry's illness are showing, and he uses the device Norman gave him to deduce that Spider-Man's blood could help save him. He asks Peter, who has been selling photos of Spider-Man to the "Daily Bugle", to aid him in finding Spider-Man. Peter refuses, unsure of what effects the transfusion would have. Although he later comes to Harry as Spider-Man, he still refuses, and Harry becomes resentful towards Spider-Man. OsCorp vice-president Donald Menken frames Harry for covering up Dillon's accident, removes him as CEO and takes control of Oscorp. Harry's assistant, Felicia Hardy, informs him of equipment that could help him, so he makes a deal with Dillon, who now calls himself "Electro," to get him back inside the OsCorp building. There he finds a suit of armor and other equipment made by Norman, as well as venom from the now-destroyed genetically-altered spiders. The venom accelerates Harry's illness, and transforms him into a goblin-like creature, but the suit's built-in emergency protocol restores his health and keeps the transformation from killing him.

Peter uses information left by his father to locate the video message in an abandoned subway station's hidden lab. Richard explains that he had to leave because he refused to cooperate with Norman's plans to make biogenetic weapons. Peter then hears a voicemail from Gwen, telling him that she was offered the British scholarship for studying medicine at Somerville College, University of Oxford, and is heading to the airport earlier than expected. He catches her and professes his love for her, and they agree to go to England together. Electro causes another blackout, and Peter heads off to battle him as Spider-Man. Gwen follows, and together, they restore power, and overload Electro's body, causing it to explode and kill him.

The transformed Harry, who has now gone insane, arrives equipped with Norman's armor and weaponry. Upon seeing Gwen, he deduces Spider-Man's secret identity and, swearing revenge for being refused the blood transfusion, kidnaps her and takes her to the top of a clock tower. Spider-Man defeats Harry, but Gwen falls to her death, despite Spider-Man's attempt to save her. Mourning her death, the depressed Peter ends his career as Spider-Man.

Five months later, Harry is coping with the aftereffects of his transformation while incarcerated at Ravencroft. His associate, Gustav Fiers, visits Harry and the pair discuss forming their own team. Harry orders Fiers to start with Sytsevich. Later, an unknown team of men break Sytsevich out of prison. Equipped with an electromechanical suit of armor, Sytsevich calls himself the Rhino and rampages through the streets. Peter, inspired by Gwen's graduation speech, resumes his role as Spider-Man, and confronts him.


Felicity Jones portrays Felicia, Norman's assistant at Oscorp, and later Harry's. While Jones was only credited as Felicia in the final film, her surname was revealed as "Hardy" in a marketing video for the film releasing on digital HD formats, in reference to Black Cat's alter ego Felicia Hardy. Marton Csokas portrays Ashley Kafka, the head of Ravencroft Institute, and B. J. Novak appears as Alistair Smythe, Dillon's boss and an Oscorp employee. Kari Coleman, Charlie DePew, Skyler Gisondo, and Jacob Rodier reprise their roles from the first film as Helen Stacy, Philip Stacy, Howard Stacy, and Simon Stacy, respectively, with the latter being uncredited. Chris Cooper, who portrays Norman Osborn, the founder of Oscorp and Harry Osborn's father, and Denis Leary, who reprises his role as George Stacy, appearing as a ghost in Peter's visions, are also in uncredited roles. Spider-Man co-creator, Stan Lee, has a cameo appearance as a guest at Peter and Gwen's graduation ceremony. Michael Massee reprises his role as the "Man in the Shadows" from the first film, with the character now credited as "Gustav Fiers (The Gentleman)". Aidy Bryant appears as a woman dressed as the Statue of Liberty. J.D. Walsh appears as an online instructor demonstrating how batteries work.

The sequel's villain was teased in the 2012 film. Webb stated that the origin story would further unfold in the second installment. In June 2012, Webb said he was unsure whether he would return, though it was confirmed on September 28, 2012, that he would return to direct the sequel. He stated that he "wanted to create a universe that not only can withstand but anticipate future storylines" while also "working in and of itself for one movie." Andrew Garfield had also expressed hope to reprise his role, and in September 2012, it was confirmed that he would do so. Emma Stone was later confirmed to be reprising her role as Gwen Stacy, having signed a contract for two "Amazing Spider-Man" sequels. The original costume and mask from "The Amazing Spider-Man" was altered and has lens in the mask, making the eyes bigger. The web shooters were also modified.

Actor J. K. Simmons expressed interest in reprising his role as J. Jonah Jameson from Sam Raimi's "Spider-Man" trilogy should the studio offer it to him. In October 2012, Electro was rumored as the next villain. Jamie Foxx was given the role. That December, Foxx confirmed that he was cast as the character, and during an interview with MTV, explained that the redesign of the character would be more grounded as well as details of his depiction, which were based upon the Ultimate Marvel incarnation of Electro. On December 3, 2012, Marc Webb revealed that Dane DeHaan was chosen to play Harry Osborn. Paul Giamatti was confirmed as a cast member in February 2013. Felicity Jones confirmed her involvement with the film under an undisclosed role. Giamatti also indicated in an October 2013 interview that he would return in "The Amazing Spider-Man 3" as well. On February 27, 2013, Chris Cooper was cast as Norman Osborn.

By October 10, 2012, Shailene Woodley was in talks for the role of Mary Jane Watson. By March 14, 2013, Woodley had concluded filming her small role. Garfield recalled, "I think all of [those scenes] were in our backyards. We had two or three scenes with me talking over the fence, and there was one with us riding together on a motorcycle that we never got to shoot." By mid-June, Mary Jane was cut from the film, with director Webb explaining it as "a creative decision to streamline the story and focus on Peter and Gwen and their relationship."

On February 4, 2013, Marc Webb posted on Twitter that principal photography had begun and that the sequel was being shot on 35 mm film in the anamorphic format, instead of being filmed digitally as the preceding film was. Sony revealed this would be the first "Spider-Man" film to be filmed entirely in New York State, including a car-chase scene that was filmed in Rochester because the speed laws are less restrictive in upstate New York.
It became the largest film production ever in New York State. The decision to film in Williamsburg, Brooklyn near the Passover holiday caused some controversy, as critics believed that this was culturally insensitive, and would cause problems with parking. The filming company decided to work with the community and then agreed to adjust its production activities for Passover. The producers had assembled a 200-person crew for the 10-day shoot in Rochester, with a total number of 250 local crew members and 150 local extras. The prominent scenes were shot mostly on Main Street of Rochester and were digitally remastered to look like New York City.

On June 25, Webb posted on Twitter that filming was completed. Soundstage work was done at Grumman Studios and Gold Coast Studios, both in Bethpage, New York, and at the Marcy Armory in Brooklyn.

Sony Pictures Imageworks designed the special effects for the film. The digital composition of the film, including the scene where the battle of Spider-Man and Electro in Times Square, took one year to complete. The sets of Times Square were built in Gold Coast Studios with the green screens and most of the scenes were digitally re-designed by computer. The photography and VFX team took over 36,000 photos of the Times Square in order to re-create the location digitally. In addition, the animation team captured over 100 billboards during the photography process.
The film was post-converted from 2D to 3D, in part because the production team wanted to shoot 35 mm film. Dan Mindel used Kodak Vision3 500T 5219 and 200T 5213, while the second unit shot day exteriors on Kodak Vision3 50D 5203. During the production, 20 layers of lightning CGI effects were applied to depict Electro. Jamie Foxx was photographed as Electro by KNB EFX team and the skin colors used to show the moods of the character. A total number of 1,600 visual effects shots of the film was originally filmed in 2K resolution and then converted into 4K resolution with the help of color grading. To give the visual effects a realistic look, sound designers Addison Teague and Eric Norris and re-recording mixers Paul Massey and David Giammarco mixed the background music using Auro 11.1 cinema sound technology and the film's soundtrack was remixed using Dolby Atmos, Auro and Dolby 5.1.

The film was mixed in Auro 11.1 and Dolby Atmos in the converted William Holden Theater. The mix for both was completed by Paul Massey and David Giammarco.

A mid-credit teaser scene from "" was added to the film after its London premiere, due to an existing deal between Webb and 20th Century Fox, in which Fox allowed Webb to direct the film if Sony would promote the X-Men film for free. The scene, set during the Vietnam War, shows Mystique (Jennifer Lawrence), a rogue mutant, trying to infiltrate a military camp led by William Stryker (Josh Helman) in an attempt to recruit fellow mutants Havok (Lucas Till) and Toad (Evan Jonigkeit). The scene's inclusion sparked confusion among some viewers in the United Kingdom, who thought it meant an X-Men–Spider-Man crossover film was being planned, based on how Marvel Studios and Disney use codas within the Marvel Cinematic Universe to promote future films.

On July 20, 2013, Webb announced that Hans Zimmer would be composing the music for the film, replacing James Horner, the composer of the first film. On October 25, 2013, Pharrell Williams revealed to "Billboard" that he would co-compose the score with Zimmer. Webb and Zimmer formed a supergroup with Williams, Johnny Marr, Mike Einziger and former Eurythmic, David A. Stewart, to create the music for the sequel. Eventually, Stewart did not participate in the film's music, and the supergroup, credited as "The Magnificent Six" (a reference to the Sinister Six) was composed of Williams, Marr, Einziger, Junkie XL, Steve Mazzaro and Andrew Kawczynski assisting Zimmer. The soundtrack for the film was released on April 22, 2014 by Columbia Records and Madison Gate Records. Hans Zimmer described his work for this film as different from previous works by him, thus revealing one of the themes for the film, which was first heard on the website.

On March 31, 2014, a track called "It's On Again" was uploaded to SoundCloud. It features vocals by Kendrick Lamar and Alicia Keys. Keys announced the song on Twitter and credited Zimmer and Williams, along with Lamar and herself for the song, indicating the song as a part of the film's soundtrack. Webb described the song as "upbeat and exciting".

The release of the film in the United Kingdom was moved to April 16, 2014, two days ahead of its original April 18 date. Deadline reported that, in addition to the production budget, the film's marketing budget was $180–190 million.
On July 17, 2013, Sony released a clip from the film with the first released footage of Jamie Foxx as Electro to encourage attendance at the panel, at the San Diego Comic-Con International. At the panel they premiered a four-minute trailer, which was not publicly released but eventually leaked on the internet. Viral marketing for the film included a version of the "Daily Bugle" on the blogging service Tumblr, which included references to Kate Cushing, Detective Stan Carter, the "Big Man", Izzy Bunsen, Joy Mercado, Donald Menken, the Vulture, Hydro-Man, Spencer Smythe, Ned Leeds, Anne Weying, J. Jonah Jameson, Shocker, Alistair Smythe, Doctor Octopus, Eddie Brock, The Enforcers, and Puma. Marc Webb posted a photo on Twitter with a message written in Dwarven language revealing that the first trailer would debut prior to 3D screenings of "".

On December 8, 2013, it was announced that new footage from the film would be presented during New Year's Eve festivities at New York City's Times Square. The film was further promoted during the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) "Earth Hour" campaign. The cast was present at the launch of the 2014 event in Singapore. Disney Consumer Products announced a merchandise product line for the film at the American International Toy Fair on February 17, 2014.

In March 2014, Gameloft and Marvel announced the launch of a mobile game of the same name for smartphones and tablets. It was released on consoles afterward. Kellogg's released an application featuring the film. Evian served as a promotional partner of the film. On April 1, 2014, the brand released an advertisement "The Amazing Baby & Me 2" featuring Spider-Man and a baby version of him, as a follow-up to their original "Baby & Me" campaign. The film partnered with NBCUniversal for advertising. Spots for the film appeared on Bravo, E!, USA, Syfy, Telemundo, and mun2. A customized page was created on Fandango. In May 2014, Marvel announced that Spider-Man's costume from the film would be shown within "".

The film has an alternate ending in which Peter Parker's father meets Peter at Gwen's resting place. Creative agency Deckhouse Digital was hired to produce several animated GIFs ahead of the DVD/Blu-ray release as part of a sponsored ad campaign on Tumblr. "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" was released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment for digital download on August 5, 2014 and was released on Blu-ray, Blu-ray 3D and DVD on August 19, 2014. "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" was included in The Spider-Man Legacy Collection which includes five Spider-Man films in a 4K UHD Blu-ray collection, which was released on October 17, 2017. "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" was released on 4K UHD Blu-ray on March 1, 2016, this includes one film only and is the only Spider-Man film in the Spider-Man Legacy Collection to have a solo 4K Blu-ray release until early 2018.

"The Amazing Spider-Man 2" received mixed reviews from critics and audiences. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 52% based on 299 reviews, with an average rating of 5.84/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "While the cast is outstanding and the special effects are top-notch, the latest installment of the Spidey saga suffers from an unfocused narrative and an overabundance of characters." On Metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 53 out of 100, based on 50 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend revealed the average grade cinemagoers gave the film was "B+" on an A+ to F scale, lower than the "A–" earned by its predecessor's. 

Criticism was directed at the script and length. However, the special effects, chemistry between Stone and Garfield, Dane DeHaan's performance, the action scenes, and Hans Zimmer's musical score received praise. Foxx's portrayal of Max Dillon/Electro was met with mixed reviews.

The "Los Angeles Times" said, "[The film is] overstuffed with plot lines, set pieces and villains, although stars Andrew Garfield and Emma Stone do their best to give the movie heart." Tim Robey of "The Telegraph" said, "Marc Webb's Spider-Man sequel is overstuffed with high-voltage villains, but the sparks between Andrew Garfield and Emma Stone save the day". Simon Reynolds of "Digital Spy" said, "Peter's past, present and future all intertwine in a sequel that offers bang for your buck. That said you can't help [but] feel the franchise bean counters at work here thanks to all the ominous foreshadowing and unresolved character arcs. Too many cooks and all that ...". Kim Newman of Empire scored the film three out of five stars, saying: "A few too-broad gags aside—and even these are in the funky spirit of '60s Marvel—this is a satisfying second issue with thrills, heartbreak, gasps, and a perfectly judged slingshot ending." Leslie Felperin of "The Hollywood Reporter" said, "The eponymous hero hits his super-heroic stride here, as does Andrew Garfield in the role, especially when Spider-Man's alter ego Peter Parker learns there's always some fine print in a contract with this many benefits. The plot gets itself tangled up in multiple villain strands, but in the main, this installment is emotionally weightier and more satisfying than its predecessor."

Guy Lodge of "Variety" said, "Redundancy remains a problem, but this overlong superhero sequel gets by on sound, fury and star chemistry." Richard Roeper gave the film a B+, stating that "It's about 20 minutes too long and it's overstuffed with too many characters and too many subplots, but there's enough good stuff in "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" to warrant optimism about the next chapter of the franchise." A negative review came from Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone", giving the film two stars out of four, he said: "Things go wrong quickly with Amazing 2. Am I the only one who hates the word Amazing to describe a movie that isn't? Just asking." IGN reviewer Daniel Krupa gave 6.9/10 and wrote, ""Amazing Spider-Man 2" gets a lot right, yet there's a constant awkwardness to the machinery of its plot; you can almost hear the cogs turning. However, what's worse is that at times it becomes overtly patronising: there are flashing screens and computer voice-overs constantly telling you what something is or what something is doing, just in case the people in the back rows aren't paying attention, which feels at odds with the film's emotional intelligence.

"The Amazing Spider-Man 2" grossed $202.9 million in the United States and Canada and $506.1 million in other countries for a worldwide gross of $709 million. "Deadline Hollywood" calculated the net profit of the film to be $70.38 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film, making it one of the top 20 most profitable releases of 2014.

The film grossed $8.7 million on its early Thursday night showings. It finished its opening weekend in first place with $91.6 million, almost $30 million more than the opening-weekend gross of the first film. In its second weekend the film grossed $35.5 million (falling 61%) and dropped to second at the box office behind newcomer "Neighbors". It was similar to the 61.5% second-week drop of "Spider-Man 3" in 2007.

Outside North America, "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" opened on April 16, 2014 to $2.73 million in the UK and to $190,000 in Belgium, while opening to $1.44 million in Australia and $1.11 million in Germany. The film's release in India was the biggest opening weekend for an American film at that point with . Its final box office collection was $13.44 million there, one of the highest of all time by a Hollywood film. In China, the film played on 11,002 screens, which is the biggest release of any film in history. On its opening day in Hong Kong, the film earned $1.23 million, the highest opening gross in the territory.

Sony had originally intended the film to launch an expansive film universe around Spider-Man to compete with the Marvel Cinematic Universe. In 2013, Sony announced a third "Amazing Spider-Man" film with a release date of June 10, 2016, which Alex Kurtzman, Roberto Orci, and Jeff Pinkner would return to write, and a fourth film with a release date of May 4, 2018. Additionally, the series was to include spin-off films featuring the Sinister Six and Venom, with Drew Goddard writing and directing "Sinister Six" and Kurtzman directing a "Venom" script co-written by himself, Orci, and Ed Solomon. "Sinister Six" had been planned for a November 11, 2016 release. Additionally, by August 2014, Sony had hired Lisa Joy Nolan to write the script for a 2017 film starring Felicia Hardy / Black Cat. In addition, Sony revealed plans for a spin-off based on "Spider-Man 2099" to be released in late 2017.

However, between December 2013 and the release of "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" in May 2014, Garfield and Webb revealed that while they would both return for the third film, neither was certain of their involvement in the fourth, with Webb adding he would certainly not be directing. Following the mixed critical reviews and franchise-low box office performance of "The Amazing Spider-Man 2", the future of the franchise was unclear. By July 2014, Orci had left the third film to work on "Star Trek Beyond", "The Amazing Spider-Man 3", which would have included Chris Cooper returning as Norman Osborn and focused on Peter recovering from Gwen's death, was delayed to an unspecified date in 2018, and "The Amazing Spider-Man 4" was moved to a later, unknown date.

Following the 2014 Sony Pictures Entertainment hack, Sony was revealed to have been in talks to have Sam Raimi return to the franchise to direct a new trilogy for the character and was in discussion with Marvel Studios about including Spider-Man in the Marvel Cinematic Universe film "". Marvel reportedly was unhappy with some of the terms of the proposed arrangement, including the film rights staying with Sony, and both talks allegedly ceased. However, in early 2015, a deal between the studios that allows Spider-Man to be in the Marvel Cinematic Universe was reached. By March 2016, Sony was moving forward with the standalone Venom film with Dante Harper writing the script, Avi Arad and Matt Tolmach producing and Tom Hardy as the titular character; it will not be related to the "Spider-Man" film franchise or the MCU's Spider-Man.

In February 2015, Sony and Marvel Studios announced that a new iteration of Spider-Man would appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, with the character appearing in "" before Sony released a standalone film titled "" produced by Kevin Feige and Amy Pascal on July 7, 2017. Following this announcement, "The Amazing Spider-Man" franchise was cancelled. Sony Pictures will continue to finance, distribute, own and have final creative control of the "Spider-Man" films. Marvel Studios and Sony will explore opportunities to integrate other characters of the MCU into future "Spider-Man" films. Tom Holland stars as the new Spider-Man. Holland reprises his portrayal of the character in "", "", and "".





</doc>
<doc id="35688655" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35688655" title="Nationals (Glee)">
Nationals (Glee)

"Nationals" is the twenty-first episode of the third season of the American musical television series "Glee", and the sixty-fifth overall. Written by Ali Adler and directed by Eric Stoltz, the episode is the second of two new episodes that aired back-to-back on Fox in the United States on May 15, 2012. It features New Directions facing off against Vocal Adrenaline at the Nationals show choir competition in Chicago, and several special guest stars: Whoopi Goldberg as NYADA dean Carmen Tibideaux, Jonathan Groff as Vocal Adrenaline director Jesse St. James, Lindsay Lohan as herself judging the competition and Rex Lee playing a Chicago alderman who is another of the judges.

The episode received mostly positive reviews, both in general and for the musical performances in particular. While reviewers were not impressed with the judging scene and highly critical of the inclusion of Emma and Will's having sex for the first time as part of the post-victory sequence, the overall quality was lauded by many. The musical numbers were widely praised, and although some critics felt that Vocal Adrenaline gave better performances than New Directions, the three main competition soloists—Rachel (Lea Michele), Finn (Cory Monteith) and Unique (Alex Newell)—were especially singled out for encomiums. However, none of the episode's seven songs charted on the "Billboard" Hot 100, though two of the New Directions competition songs, Rachel's "It's All Coming Back to Me Now" and the group number featuring Finn and her, "Paradise by the Dashboard Light", did chart on the "Billboard" Canadian Hot 100.

Upon its initial airing, this episode was viewed by 6.03 million American viewers and received a 2.5/7 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic. The total viewership was down slightly from "Props" in the previous hour, and more significantly down from "Prom-asaurus" the week before.

The New Directions glee club is in Chicago for the national show choir competition, but Mercedes (Amber Riley) is sick in her hotel bed with a bad fever and stomach pains, possibly due to food poisoning. Will (Matthew Morrison) drafts Quinn (Dianna Agron) and Tina (Jenna Ushkowitz) into the Troubletones number to add vocal heft with Mercedes sidelined, and Sue (Jane Lynch) starts medical measures to restore her to health. During final rehearsals, fights break out among the New Directions members, but are easily resolved because the intensity of their focus is on winning.

On the day of the show, Rachel (Lea Michele) is accosted by Jesse St. James (Jonathan Groff), her former boyfriend and current director of rival show choir Vocal Adrenaline. Jesse tries to hurt her confidence by bringing up her failed NYADA audition before Carmen Tibideaux (Whoopi Goldberg), but she realizes his intent and that his own uncertainty is showing.

The Nationals judges are introduced: Lindsay Lohan, Perez Hilton, and Chicago alderman Martin Fong (Rex Lee). New Directions is the first group to compete, and Mercedes arrives just in time to go onstage with the group, healthy again thanks to Sue. The Troubletones lead off with "The Edge of Glory". Rachel then performs "It's All Coming Back to Me Now". Carmen arrives during the number, for which Rachel receives a standing ovation. The finale is "Paradise by the Dashboard Light", which also brings the audience to its feet, and gets an approving whistle from Carmen. Later, in the lobby, Jesse approaches Carmen and recommends Rachel for NYADA.

Mercedes and Kurt go to the Vocal Adrenaline dressing room to wish lead singer Wade "Unique" Adams (Alex Newell) good luck, but he tells them that he that he has chosen not to perform because he can no longer take the pressure of his new celebrity status. Kurt suggests that Unique, Wade's transgender alter ego, might be able to handle what Wade is unable to, and the teen starts to get ready. On stage, Unique and Vocal Adrenaline perform "Starships" and "Pinball Wizard". The judges name Unique the Nationals MVP, but they award the Nationals trophy to New Directions, with Vocal Adrenaline in second place.

Back at McKinley, the glee club members are treated as heroes by the school. Sue is restored as sole coach of the Cheerios, displacing co-coach Roz Washington (NeNe Leakes). At their apartment, Emma (Jayma Mays) and Will have sex for the first time. Principal Figgins (Iqbal Theba) arranges with Finn and Rachel for New Directions to perform the next night at the Teacher of the Year ceremony, which is won by Will. The group congratulates Will and performs "We Are the Champions".

The episode was written by co-executive producer Ali Adler and directed by Eric Stoltz. Shooting of the episode had begun by April 18, 2012, and continued at least through April 27, 2012; the final episode of the season began filming the following Monday, April 30, 2012.

The final day of shooting the Nationals competition scenes, April 26, 2012, was also the day that the show celebrated filming its 400th musical performance.

The New Directions portion of the competition includes three songs: Lady Gaga's "The Edge of Glory" performed by the Troubletones, Celine Dion's "It's All Coming Back to Me Now" sung by Michele, and a group performance of Meat Loaf's "Paradise by the Dashboard Light" with Monteith and Michele as primary leads. These three songs were released as singles for digital download, along with an additional four from the episode: Nicki Minaj's "Starships" and The Who's "Pinball Wizard", both performed by Newell with Vocal Adrenaline, as well as Queen's "We Are the Champions" performed by New Directions featuring Monteith, Michele, Agron, Colfer, Naya Rivera and Mark Salling, and Grouplove's "Tongue Tied", also by New Directions. "The Edge of Glory" and "We Are the Champions" are also featured on the soundtrack album "", with the former song retitled "Edge of Glory" in both single and album releases.

Special guest stars include Goldberg as NYADA dean Carmen Tibideaux, Groff as Vocal Adrenaline director Jesse St. James, and actress Lindsay Lohan and gossip columnist Perez Hilton as themselves, in the role of celebrity judges for the competition. Rex Lee plays Alderman Martin Fong, another judge.

Recurring guest stars appearing in the episode include glee club members Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet), Rory Flanagan (Damian McGinty), Joe Hart (Samuel Larsen) and Sugar Motta (Vanessa Lengies), Principal Figgins (Theba), football coach Shannon Beiste (Dot-Marie Jones), cheerleader Becky Jackson (Lauren Potter), synchronized swimming coach Roz Washington (Leakes), retiring teacher Mrs. Hagberg (Mary Gillis) and Vocal Adrenaline transgender lead vocalist Wade "Unique" Adams (Newell).

"Nationals" was first broadcast on May 15, 2012 in the United States on Fox, as the second hour in a two-hour special evening with "Props" having aired in the first hour at the show's regular broadcast time. It received a 2.5/7 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic, and attracted 6.03 million American viewers during its initial broadcast, slightly lower than the 2.5/8 rating/share and 6.09 million viewers during "Props" in the hour before, but a significant decrease from the 2.7/8 rating/share and 6.67 million viewers of the previous week's episode, "Prom-asaurus", which was broadcast on May 8, 2012.

In Canada, which also aired the episode as the second hour of a two-episode special on the same day as its American premiere, viewership rose significantly, by over 16% to 1.56 million viewers from the 1.34 million viewers for the first hour. "Nationals" was the tenth most-viewed show of the week as compared to "Props", which had been fourteenth most-viewed. "Nationals" viewership was still down by over 5% from the 1.65 million viewers who watched "Prom-asaurus" the week before.

Although the United Kingdom also aired these two episodes together, "Nationals" aired in the show's regular time slot, while "Props" aired an hour earlier than usual. Viewership fell in the second hour, though it remained higher than the previous week. "Nationals" first aired on May 17, 2012, and was watched on Sky 1 by 776,000 viewers. This was down slightly from the 795,000 viewers in the earlier hour, but was an increase of over 4% from the previous week's episode, "Prom-asaurus", which attracted 744,000 viewers.

In Australia, "Nationals" was broadcast on May 24, 2012, a week after "Props" aired, rather than on the same night as in the other three. It was watched by 618,000 viewers, up slightly from the 607,000 viewers for "Props" on May 17, 2012. "Glee" was the seventeenth most-watched program of the night for the second week in a row.

The episode was given positive reviews by most critics. Michael Slezak of "TVLine" described it as a "spectacular hour of jaw-dropping musical numbers and satisfying plot developments", and "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff called it "one of the finest episodes the show's ever done and perhaps the best it's done since the season one finale". He gave it an "A" grade. Jeff Dodge of "BuddyTV" said that episode gave "quality to go along with some great music", and "Entertainment Weekly" Erin Strecker wrote that the evening's two episodes were a "return to form for the show". Rae Votta of "Billboard", on the other hand, said that by having "Props" and "Nationals" air back to back, "they both lose their individual potent high points and come out blander than they deserve", and characterized "Nationals" as "jarring and strange".

Both "Huffington Post" Crystal Bell and "Washington Post" Jen Chaney wanted to "be honest" about Vocal Adrenaline vs. New Directions in the competition: Bell said that Vocal Adrenaline "put on the better show" and Chaney wrote that they were "better than New Directions": "their dance moves were sharper and more in sync, and Unique's Minaj-esque magnetism factor sold the whole thing". VanDerWerff wrote that he "could quibble that Vocal Adrenaline had stronger choreography overall" or that he "found Unique a more engaging performer than Rachel", but that as "New Directions also used its whole ensemble better than Vocal Adrenaline did", he felt that "either outcome seemed reasonable". Dodge simply stated, "We all knew that New Directions would win and they'd get their happily ever after, but it was exciting to see it finally all play out." Bell wrote that "seeing the judges debate behind-the-scenes kind of takes away the entire title", though she appreciated Lohan's "Freaky Friday" reference. VanDerWerff said that the judging scene "wasn't very good", and Votta described it as "mostly waste[d]". Futterman wrote that there was "not really any emotion" in Lohan's lines, though Strecker thought that the "lines they gave her were pretty funny—if not a bit sad".

Reviewers were critical of what Votta called "a really regrettable sequence where Emma leaves a pamphlet about losing her virginity on Schue's desk and then they finally have sex". Bell characterized it as "weird and uncomfortable, and the reasoning was horrendously misogynistic", and VanDerWerff thought that making it part of the post-Nationals victory montage as "a little too creepy, at best". Votta thought that though the victory segment "should feel joyous", it instead feels "awkward and emotion-less". Will's being awarded "Teacher of the Year" was called "surprising" by Strecker, who hearkened back to him having "discovered that he wasn't so good" at teaching Spanish "a few months ago". Bell asked how it was "possible" for Quinn to so rapidly recover her ability to walk and then dance, something also touched on by VanDerWerff, who was again critical of "Fox's rampant abuse of the Twitter hashtag thing" by displaying onscreen hashtags during the episode. Strecker praised Jesse's scenes, and said she "couldn't stop cracking up".

As with the episode, the musical performances were mostly received with enthusiasm by reviewers. VanDerWerff wrote that the "big performances" were "all aces". Of the seven songs, the one that received the fewest comments was "Tongue Tied", which Strecker described as "montage music" and graded a "B". As Chaney noted, it "wasn't a number so much as a musical celebration of New Directions' championship status", but it nevertheless received an "A−" grade from her and from Slezak. "Rolling Stone" Erica Futterman called it a "spirited take on Grouplove".

Of all the songs performed in competition, "The Edge of Glory" was given the most mixed reception. Chaney gave the song a "C" grade, and said that while it "started strong" the energy level was "lacking", a word that Futterman used to describe the performance as a whole, to which she added "emotionless and rushed". A diametric view of the song was evident in the "A−" grades given by both Slezak and Strecker, and the latter also complimented the "different" arrangement while both were enthusiastic about the entire set of three songs: Slezak said New Directions "completely killed it", and Strecker said this song "kicked off what was a truly an all-time great performance".
That performance continued with "It's All Coming Back to Me Now", which was widely praised. Dodge said that it, like the prior song, was "covered to perfection". Although Chaney said she hated that song, she wrote that Michele hit it "out of the park" and gave it an "A", the same grade Strecker gave with the encomium "outstanding", and added that she then "rewatched three times". An "A" was not sufficient for Slezak, who declared that it was "one of Glee's five best vocals ever" and gave it an "A+". Futterman "loved" the song except for its ending, which she described as "an abrupt cliffhanger".

The New Directions set closed with "Paradise by the Dashboard Light". While a number of reviewers, including Chaney and Dodge, questioned the choice of the song for a variety of reasons, they expressed enthusiasm with the final result. Jyll Saskin of MTV called it a "quirky yet catchy song choice" that "was the episode's standout", and both Slezak and Strecker gave it an "A" grade; the latter said it was the "real group number" of the three and added, "The vocals, choreography and energy were all top-notch." Chaney's grade of "A−" came with the declaration that "this may have been Finn at his absolute best" and Futterman said he did "a surprisingly decent Meatloaf"; Futterman added that the "already theatrical song is somehow made better by the show choir arrangement". VanDerWerff described it as "one of the better New Directions group performances".

The two Vocal Adrenaline performances were generally very well received; as noted above, Bell and Chaney used very similar words to explain why they thought Vocal Adrenaline was "better" than New Directions. "Starships", the first number, was also the more praised of the two: "Houston Chronicle" Bobby Hankinson said that it "stole the show" for him, and was the best musical number of the night. Flandez called it "an electric and sassy delivery" by Unique, and Strecker asked "is there anything she can't do" before she gave the performance an "A−". Futterman thought it felt "more subdued than the warp-speed of Minaj's hit" though she added that the "stage acrobatics trump everything anyone else does", and Saskin said it "was fun to watch, but the vocals don't add much to the original version". Slezak gave it an "A" grade and praised the "dazzling" choreography of both numbers. "Pinball Wizard" was called "turbo-charged from beginning to end" by Flandez, and both Strecker and Slezak gave the song a "B+" grade; the former's enthusiasm was tempered by the arrangement, which was not very "different from just karaoke of the original", and the dancing on the pinball machines as "a bit much for my taste". Futterman said that Unique "riffs the hell out the song", but added that "the robot dancers of Vocal Adrenaline make it hard to glean any personality from the performance". Dodge wrote, "This one I'm liking even less than the first", but Saskin said, "Mercedes needs to watch out, because Unique sure can belt it out!"

The episode's closing number, "We Are the Champions", received excellent grades: A from Slezak and Chaney, and an "A−" from Strecker. Saskin wrote that it was "a new "Glee" classic", and Chaney said it "worked wonderfully as an assertion of the New Directions' championship status". Futterman described the performance as "rife with emotion" and added, "It's moments like this that are pure and straight to the show's original appeal", while Strecker complimented the song choice and how "it really showcased the group's harmonies". In December 2012, "TV Guide" listed the rendition as one of "Glee" best performances.

Two of the seven singles released for the episode charted on the "Billboard" Canadian Hot 100: "It's All Coming Back to Me Now", which debuted at number seventy-five, and "Paradise by the Dashboard Light", which debuted at number ninety-four. Neither song charted on the US "Billboard" Hot 100, but two other singles from the episode affected the charting there of songs by the original artists. "Tongue Tied" sold 22,000 copies in the "Glee" version, and did well enough in the Grouplove original to re-enter the "Billboard" Hot 100 at number seventy-four, close to the song's previous chart high of sixty-nine, while "Starships" sold 18,000 in the "Glee" version and 174,000 in the Nicki Minaj original, which moved from six to five on the Hot 100, matching its highest chart position to date. "It's All Coming Back to Me Now" charted at number one at the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles on June 2, 2012.



</doc>
<doc id="35756149" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35756149" title="Amylostereum">
Amylostereum

Amylostereum is the single genus in the fungal family Amylostereaceae. The genus currently comprises four saprotrophic and parasitic species, which live off living or dead wood. The Amylostereaceae cause white rot in the wood by disintegrating the tissue component lignin. They produce crust-like, partially wavy fruit bodies on the surface of infested trees, which are similar to those produced by "Stereum" species.

There are four described species in the Amylostereaceae: "A. chailletii" (the type), "A. areolatum", "A. ferreum" and "A. laevigatum". The species were initially considered part of "Stereum" until mycologist Jacques Boidin found atypical microscopic differences between them. Forty years after his extensive researches from 1958, Boidin reclassified "Amylostereum" into its own family.

Three "Amylostereum" species are symbionts of wood wasps in the genera "Sirex", "Urocerus", and "Xoanon", which infest conifers. The female wood wasps deposit their eggs together with fungal spores and mucus in trees, and the fungus is eaten by the wasp's larva as food. The fungus propagates vegetatively through the formation of asexual spores in newly emerged females that are stored in special structures adapted for the transport of symbiotic fungi. The "A. areolatum"–Sirex woodwasp ("S. noctilio") symbiont complex has been studied extensively because of its potential to cause substantial economic losses in the forestry industry, particularly in non-native regions.

Amylostereaceae species were for a long time classified in the genus "Stereum", based primary on the layered structure of the fruit body and the similar physiological activity. Mycologist Jacques Boidin separated "Amylosterum" from "Stereum" in 1958, justifying this decision by explaining that microscopic differences such as amyloid spores and encrusted cystidia were sufficiently distinct to warrant recognition as a new genus. Although the type species of the genus (today called "A. chailletii") was initially named "Trichocarpus ambiguus", the name "Trichocarpus" had already been used for a genus in the flowering plant family Malvaceae. Boidin thus chose the genus name "Amylostereum", referring to the amyloid spores.

Based on DNA analysis, Boidin in 1998 moved "Amylostereum" into a new, monotypic family, the Amylostereaceae, which he attributed to the Hericiales order. Later studies, however, supported the initial classification in the Russulales.

The classification of the Amylostereaceae is not completely resolved. The next closest relatives might be – depending on the research – either "Echinodontium tinctorium" and most other species of the genus "Echinodontium", or "Artomyces pyxidatus". Most of the previous DNA analysis results suggest a narrow relation to "Echinodontium", but several results of studies partially contradict this conclusion. Only the classification to the Russulales is regarded as correct. Some authors have suggested that "Amylostereum" should be placed in the family Echinodontiaceae.
The similarities between "A. chailletii" and "A. areolatum" have caused some confusion regarding their placement in the genus. As only the size of their fruit bodies differ from each other in appearance, researcher German Josef Krieglsteiner assumed that both are the same species in different age stages. Experiments with pure cultures of the fungi, however, showed that the mycelia of "A. chailletii", "A. laevigatum" and "A. ferreum" were partially compatible to each other, but the mycelium of "A. areolatum" was incompatible to other species. Boidin believes that the common ancestor of all "Amylostereum" fungi used yellowwoods as a host. This genus of conifers was native in Europe until the Paleogene and Neogene Periods (66 million to 2.6 million years ago), but became extinct there, so the "Amylostereum" fungi specialized on other conifers and differentiated into several species. Only "A. ferreum" specialized on yellowwoods in South America.

Compatibility tests as well as molecular analysis indicated that "A. areolatum" separated very early from other "Amylostereum" fungi. The other three species separated later from each other and are thus partially compatible to each other. "A. ferreum" and "A. laevigatum" produced in 59% of all cases a common mycelium, "A. ferreum" and "A. chailletii" only in 44%. There is an undescribed species in "Amylostereum"; according to DNA analysis, it stands between "A. laevigatum" and "A. ferreum". This is remarkable, as these fungi originated from Mycetangae (storing organs of Platypodinae) of a North American wood wasp, while "A. laevigatum" has never been seen as symbiont of wood wasps, neither in North American nor in Europe. The fungus possibly represents a separated species or a subtaxon of "A. laevigatum". As "A. areolatum" and "A. chailletii" mainly reproduce asexually through the symbiosis of wood wasps, the genetic variability within these species is relatively low.

The Amylostereaceae produce crust-like, dry and leathery-corky fruit bodies on the bark of infested trees. The fruit bodies are thick, irregularly shaped and are able to cover a large surface on the bark or otherwise can appear as small spots. They lie directly on the bark. The ochrous, grey or brownish fruit body (hymenium) has a smooth to warty surface texture and is turned outwards. It is bordered by a highly bent and wavy (effuso-reflex) edge on all species except "A. laevigatum", which has a churlish surface (a tomentum) and is usually dirty-brown coloured. In some species, the tomentum stands clearly above and forms a kind of roof above the fruit body; if it completely surrounds this roof, there might appear cuplike shapes.

The Amylostereaceae possess a dimitic trama, meaning that there are in its mycelia two kinds of hyphae. The first type is brownish skeletal hyphae, which provide stability to the fruit body. These hyphae run parallel to the bark and often have hairpin-like turns, so that the loops form thick-walled, cystidium-like structures, the so-called pseudocystidia. The second type is generative hyphae. They are translucent (hyaline) and serve to promote the growth of the fungus. Genuine cystidia arise in the hymenium and the layer directly below, the subhymenium. Both pseudocystidia and cystidia are encrusted, meaning that they feature crystal-like structures on the top.

With the exception of "A. laevigatum", all species have a thin separating layer, the cortex, between the hymenium and the tomentum. A cortex is also present on many "Stereum" fungi (on a broader front) and serves to bend up the fruit body. As this cortex is missing on "A. laevigatum", its fruit body lies flat on the bark.

The basidia are 15–25 × 3.5–5.5 µm and have a slim, club-like shape. Each basidium features four sterigmata, each of which bear one spore. The spores' shape is slimly ellipsoidal or cylindrical. Their surface is smooth and their walls are thin. Although they are colourless and hyaline, the spores are amyloid, meaning they will turn bluish or purple when stained with Melzer's reagent. This characteristic differs from other very similar species, and this gave the genus its name.

The range of the Amylostereaceae originally comprised only Holarctic regions, including North America and Eurasia, and the Neotropics, with Central and South America. The introduction of "A. areolatum" and its symbionts, the "Sirex" woodwasps, saw the spread of the genus to all continents except Antarctica.

"Amylostereum chailletiiz" is common in the temperate regions of North America and Eurasia. "A. laevigatum" can be also found in temperate Eurasia, but it is unclear how broadly this species is distributed in North America. "A. areolatum" is originally native in North Africa and Eurasia; it was however distributed through the 20th century in Australia, New Zealand, Southern Africa as well as in South and North America. Only "A. ferreum" is originally native in the tropics and is common in Brazil and the Caribbean.

Amylostereaceae usually infest only dead or cut down conifer wood. Three species – "A. areolatum", "A. laevigatum" and "A. chailletii" – may also establish a symbiosis with wood wasps ("Siricidae"), which beside freshly logged trees also infest living trees and infect them with fungi. Symbioses have been recorded with several species: "Sirex noctilio", "S. juvencus", "S. nitobei", "S. cyaneus", "S. edwarsii", "S. nitidus", and, in Japan, "Urocerus antennatus" and "Xoanon matsumurae". Wasps of the genera "Sirex" and "Urocerus" store oidia (the hypha of fungi split up to spores) in special abdominal organs. The wood wasps infect trees by splashing a phytotoxic secretion below the bark and at the same time injecting fungal spores into the hole. The secretion weakens the tree and temporarily diminishes its immune system, whereby the fungus can spread along the xylem. The infection with Amylostereaceae fulfill two functions for the wasps: it provides the larvae food, because the white rot softens the wood; at the same time, the mycelia of the fungi serves as food for the larvae. After the larvae pupate, it absorbs the mycelia of the Amylostereaceae into its body to oviposit together with its eggs. The fungus benefits from the symbiosis as it spreads faster and more effectively than through airborne spores and furthermore does not need to develop fruit bodies. "A. ferreum" is the only "Amylosterum" species that has not been associated with any woodwasps.

The host spectrum of the Amylostereaceae comprises several, partially very different genera of Coniferae. "A. chailletii" usually infests Pinaceae such as firs ("Abies") and spruces ("Picea"), but also cedars ("Cedrus") and Douglas firs ("Pseudotsuga"). "A. areolatum" has a similar host spectrum, which uses mainly firs, Japanese cedars ("Cryptomeria"), larches ("Larix"), spruces, pines ("Pinus") and Douglas firs as hosts. While spruces dominate as hosts in the native habitat, this species is more common in pines on other locations. The host spectrum of "A. laevigatum" comprises Cupressaceae such as junipers ("Juniperus") or cypresses ("Cupressus") and the English yew ("Taxus baccata"). "A. ferreum" is, however, only common on neotropic yellowwoods ("Podocarpus").

The Amylostereaceae are white rot pathogens. They disintegrate the lignin of the host wood, whereby the infested wood parts become less stable and take a fibrous structure. The wood bleaches as fungal enzymes break down and remove the brown-pigmented lignin. The distribution in wood takes place mainly along the transport channels in the xylem. If the wood is crosscut, the red rot is vertically positioned, on which bleached, infested areas contrast with intact wood. Symptoms of infestion by the symbiotic partner—wood wasps—include circular exit holes in the crust and acute stress through dryness, common in hanging, falling or tanning needles.

In their native habitat, all "Amylostereum" species have a minor importance as forest pests. The infestation through wood wasps does not assume greater dimensions and is, compared with other pests, almost insignificant. The infection rates are even lower during sexual reproduction via fruit bodies, as the wasps do not play a part in the process. Furthermore, the "Amylostereum" fungi are alone often incapable of infesting healthy trees. They thus mostly act as saprobiontics. Pine monocultures in Australia, New Zealand, Africa and South America were shown to be susceptible to the Sirex woodwasp ("Sirex noctilio"), which was introduced there and which is associated with "A. areolatum". The wasp's phytotoxic secretion, its larvae and the fungus combine very effectively with each other and contribute to forest decline rates of up to 80%. This is mainly owing to the poor water and nutrient supply of the trees, which can poorly reconcile the drought stress caused by infestation. "S. noctilio" was detected in North America in the 2000s (decade); in Canada alone, the total economic loss to the forestry industry caused by the "Sirex"–"Amylostereum" symbiosis could be as high as $254 million per year for the next 20 years.

As a countermeasure, cultures of the nematode "Deladenus siricidicola" have been used as biological control to protect trees since the 1980s. This parasite feeds on the mycelia of "A. areolatum" and is therefore a food competitor of wood wasp larvae. Where "S. noctilio" larvae are present, the parasite infects and sterilizes the eggs of female wasps, causing them to be infertile. These infertile females lay infected eggs into new trees and thus spread the nematode. This control method has proven to be relatively successful to combat the "Sirex"–"Amylostereum" complex. In the Southern Hemisphere, where the technique has been widely employed, reductions of parasitism levels of 70%–100% have been achieved.


</doc>
<doc id="35801379" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35801379" title="Artist's Studio—Look Mickey">
Artist's Studio—Look Mickey

Artist's Studio—Look Mickey (sometimes Artist's Studio, Look Mickey, Artist's Studio – Look Mickey or Artist's Studio No. 1 (Look Mickey)) is a 1973 painting by Roy Lichtenstein. It is one of five large-scale studio interior paintings in a series. The series is either referred to as the Artist's Studio series or more colloquially as the Studios and sometimes is described as excluding the other 1973 painting, reducing the series to four.

The series refers to a set of works by Henri Matisse, with this work specifically referring to "L'Atelier Rouge". The work incorporates several other Lichtenstein works and gets its name from the large portion of Lichtenstein's "Look Mickey" that is included. Lichtenstein used a much more realistic representation of his own works than is standard for most artists. Elements of the work also refer to works from both Fernand Léger and Matisse.

Lichtenstein's studios reference what are known as Matisse's four Symphonic Interiors of 1911 ("The Pink Studio", "The Painter's Family", "Interior with Eggplants", "The Red Studio") and an earlier Matisse "The Dance". "Artist's Studio—Look Mickey" was part of a series that included "The Artist's Studio – with Model", 1974, "Artist's Studio, Foot Medication", 1974, "Artist's Studio, the "Dance"", 1974, "Artist's Studio/A Still Life", 1973. "Artist's Studio—Look Mickey" was the only one of the five to include a corner of the room, like "The Red Studio". Many sources, including Lichtenstein himself only include four works in the series (excluding "Artist's Studio/A Still Life", 1973). In a 1995 lecture in conjunction with the Kyoto Prize, he said "I did a series of four large, about 8' x10', paintings of interiors of artists' studios. They were inspired by Matisse's paintings..." "Artist's Studio—Look Mickey" is regarded as the first of the four Artist's Studio works. From among the Artist's Studio series works, this depicts "the deepest, most plainly articulated interior space."

The work, which is in part a retrospective, "conflated early modernism with emergent postmodernism". Lichtenstein refers to some of his paintings, including "Look Mickey" in this work, which depicts his own studio as the ideal studio and implies that the public consensus ratifies his choice of popular culture subject matter. The series depicts individual Lichtenstein works as well as groups of works in closed room that is devoid of paint brushes or easels. The series served as a review of Lichtenstein's post 1961 work, with objects of his prior works decorating the room as furnishings. In "Artist's Studio—Look Mickey", the couch, door, wall frieze, telephone and fruit all are drawn from earlier works and serve this setting as interior decoration, while "Look Mickey" is almost presented undisturbed in its entirety. Less notable works include the mirror and the Trompe-l'œil painting of the rear side of the canvas. Two other paintings were works in progress at the time of this work and one became a painting within a year after the completion of this work: the gull and the dune landscape. The speech balloon was never produced as a separate work. However, its juxtaposition to the speech balloon from Donald Duck is intriguing. He references his Entablatures works as ceiling molding.

Lichtenstein's approach to presenting his own works within his works was non-traditional. The works were revisited as exact duplicates rather than the more standard distanced revisitation. This choice of exact duplication contrary to popular practice intrigued Lichtenstein. Lichtenstein liked this quality of his paintings within his paintings, saying "I like the combination of a very separate quality that each of my paintings has within the painting, and the fact that everything works as one painting too." In fact, Lichtenstein commented on this as an attempt to eliminate any modulation:

The Studio series was inspired by Matisse paintings, and Diane Waldman claims that this particular effort was modelled upon Matisse's "L'Atelier Rouge" ("The Red Studio"), although the Lichtenstein Foundation website credits two other Matisse works as inspiration as well as Fernand Léger's "The Baluster", 1925, which is represented in the far right corner. Léger was one of Lichtenstein's closest friends. By incorporating Matisse in his own studio setting, Lichtenstein is perceived as presenting himself as Matisse's peer and in so doing repositions pop art as a historical style rather than a contemporary one.

A sketch for this work demonstrates Lichtenstein's original intent to incorporate a "plant-in-vessel arrangement" as well as fruit on the table, but these Matisse references were instead depicted on the floor of the studio. The table instead includes the telephone from Lichtenstein's own "R-R-R-R-Ring!!" with differences from the original that amount to puns. In the original, Lichtenstein depicted sound with motion lines that present a pronounced movement of the object. This contrasts with the same phone in the studio setting in "perfect stasis", which contributes to the pacific still life setting.

According to Janis Hendrickson, "For someone familiar with the artist's oeuvre, the Studios could become mental playgrounds." Waldman notes that "Perhaps the most significant aspect of the work is its retrospective nature and the decision by the artist to reflect on his life, past and present." The small portion of the original that was cropped out was the majority of Mickey Mouse, emphasizing Donald Duck, who Graham Bader sees as Lichtenstein's metaphorical representation.





</doc>
<doc id="35823787" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35823787" title="Golf Ball">
Golf Ball

Golf Ball (sometimes Golfball) is a 1962 painting by Roy Lichtenstein. It is considered to fall within the art movement known as Pop art. It depicts "a single sphere with patterned, variously directional semi-circular grooves." The work is commonly associated with black-and-white Piet Mondrian works. It is one of the works that was presented at Lichtenstein's first solo exhibition and one that was critical to his early association with pop art. The work is commonly critiqued for its tension involving a three-dimensional representation in two dimensions with much discussion revolving around the choice of a background nearly without any perspective.

When Lichtenstein had his first solo show at the Leo Castelli Gallery in February 1962, it sold out before opening. "Golf Ball" was one of the works that Lichtenstein exhibited. Later, Lichtenstein included "Golf Ball" in "Still Life with Goldfish Bowl", 1972, and "Go for Baroque", 1979. The painting exemplifies the novel superimposition of abstraction and figuration. The work also represents abstraction as a result of elimination of three-dimensionality, chiaroscuro and a landscape context.
The use of black and white is regarded as dramatic, and although it may have been influenced by 1940s and 1950s works of Willem de Kooning, Franz Kline and Robert Motherwell, it is more likely a commentary on Mondrian's 1917 "Composition in Black and White". Alternatively, it may have been a reference to another of Mondrian's Pre-World War I black and white oval paintings, such as "Pier and ocean", 1915. This complementary source art was common of Lichtenstein's 1960s work on frequently advertised objects. Lichtenstein describes his sources as Mondrian "Plus and Minus" paintings.

In 1962, Lichtenstein produced several works in which he depicted "...the repetitive regularity of their patterned surfaces..." "Golf Ball" is a depiction of a golf ball using a Mondrianesque set of black and white arcs to depict the three-dimensionality of the subject. However, the neutral background manipulates the image and diminishes the volumetric characteristics by stripping the viewer of his perspective. It is described as a "pure graphic mark on a gray ground" as well as a "totality of abstract marks." Lichtenstein described "Golf Ball" as "the antithesis of what was thought of as having 'art meaning'" because of its lack of perspective.

"Golf Ball" is an example of the emerging "confident authority" of his single-image paintings with its "Rock of Gibraltar-like thereness". The "frontal and centralized presentation"'s directness lacked the sophistication to market the images of household goods for advertising but was considered daring artistically. The black and white painting on a grey background challenges both the natural perception of realism and the boundaries of abstraction. The work "gives us both the impression of space and the fact of surface".

"Golf Ball" was one of the bases by which "critics aligned him with other practitioners of Pop Art", although much is made about the painting's references to abstract painting, especially its likeness to Mondrian's works. Furthermore, the painting leverages tensions regarding three-dimensional representation in two dimensions resulting from spatial ambiguities caused by the lack of cues in the background.

Diane Waldman refers to the subject of "Golf Ball" as a freestanding form. This is one of the figures in which Lichtenstein demonstrates his draftsman experience. This work demonstrated his maturation as an artist with standardized contours that present uniformity and solidified inflections. This is a strong example of presenting the tension of volumetric potential balanced against two-dimensional presentation. It also shows how placement against a neutral background diminishes three-dimensionality. Despite Lichtenstein's techniques to display/minimize dimensionality, the viewer imposes his or her own visualization experiences on the painting, which minimizes the effect of spatial illusion.




</doc>
<doc id="35823796" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35823796" title="I Can See the Whole Room...and There's Nobody in It!">
I Can See the Whole Room...and There's Nobody in It!

I Can See the Whole Room...and There's Nobody in It! (sometimes I Can See the Whole Room and There's Nobody in It! or simply I Can See the Whole Room!) is a 1961 painting by Roy Lichtenstein. It is a painting of a man looking through a peephole. It formerly held the record for highest auction price for a Lichtenstein painting.

The work is based on a William Overgard-drawn comics panel from a "Steve Roper" cartoon. Lichtenstein's derivation augments the presentation of the narrative and expands the use of color in the image. As with the original the image employs the theme of vision, and focuses specifically on mechanized vision as well as monocularity.

Based on a 1961 William Overgard drawing for a "Steve Roper" cartoon story published by the Publishers Syndicate on August 6, 1961, Lichtenstein’s "I Can See the Whole Room!...and There's Nobody in It!" (1961) measures four-foot by four-foot and is in graphite and oil. The painting depicts a man looking through a hole in a door. His finger is extended to open a circular peephole, while simultaneously allowing the artist to present his face. The painting also uses a speech balloon.

It was sold by collector Courtney Sale Ross for $43.2 million, double its estimate, at Christie's in New York City in November 2011; the seller's husband, Steve Ross had acquired it at auction in 1988 for $2.1 million. The painting originally sold for $550 in 1961. It surpassed the $42.6 million record set the previous November by "Ohhh...Alright..." The following May, it was surpassed by "Sleeping Girl", which sold for $44.8 million.

The picture teases the viewer who is given the feeling that they are in a dark room being viewed by the main subject of the painting who is a man that peeks through a hole in the door. The narrative element of the image, which included a speech bubble that presents the caption "I Can See the Whole Room and There's Nobody in It", clarifies that the man can not see anything in the room although he has a good look at it. The work is a satirical reference to abstraction because it can be imagined as a monochrome canvas that is affected by an actor that has inserted his finger as well as a narrative that also violates this imagining. This finger is also regarded as phallic.

The speech bubble makes the entire canvas relevant by broadening the attention to the entire width of the painting and the curves of the bubble unite the narrative with several of the picture's other graphical elements. Lichtenstein has added color, including all of the primary colors, while transforming the original and making reference to mechanical reproduction via Ben-Day dots. Like "Look Mickey", there is reason to describe this image as a self-portrait of sorts. The subject is extending a finger through a circular opening, which is a self-reference because it is representative of Lichtenstein's technique of stenciling Ben-day dots by pressing the fluid onto the painting surface through a screen with a device not too different in size and shape from a finger. An alternative self-representation is interpreted as a singular peephole that represents the monocular subject matter of Lichtenstein's training, while the entire canvas represents a doubt in this training's representation of the physical body, its perception and its actual view. However, the corporeal is depicted quite adequately in the intense phallicism and the dotted coloration of the skin.

The work is an example of Lichtenstein's presentation of the uncertainty of the one-eyed perspective. It is considered to be a work on the subject of "focal vision and blindness", and it is a prominent example of the theme running through Lichtenstein's art relating to vision. He uses the narrative to emphasize this theme, while playing on both the circular peephole and the circular eyes. The depicted mechanical device, a peephole in this case, forces the vision into a monocular format. Monocularity is funnelled through the primitive peephole apparatus that almost mimics a camera lens. In some senses, monocularity of this work is a strong theme that is directly embodied although only by allusion. In addition, the work is considered to be closely related to his later work, "Image Duplicator" (1963), which is regarded as a correction of "I Can See the Whole Room!" with its glaring and aggressive binocularity. The monocularity of "I Can See the Whole Room!" should be viewed as a concentrated form of monocularity, such as "the common experience of closing one eye in order to fix an object in the gaze", but a subordinated form of monocularity that is enhanced by technology.





</doc>
<doc id="35828026" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35828026" title="2012 Chevrolet Detroit Belle Isle Grand Prix">
2012 Chevrolet Detroit Belle Isle Grand Prix

The 2012 Chevrolet Detroit Belle Isle Grand Prix presented by ShopAutoWeek.com was an IZOD IndyCar Series race that was held on June 3, 2012 on The Raceway on Belle Isle in Detroit, Michigan. It was the sixth race of the 2012 IZOD IndyCar Series season. Originally scheduled to run over 90 laps, it was shortened to 60 laps. The race was won by Scott Dixon for the Chip Ganassi Racing team. Dario Franchitti finished second, and Simon Pagenaud clinched third.

Preparations for the race were overshadowed by speculation over IndyCar CEO Randy Bernard's job, after he tweeted that some team owners were trying to get him fired. Dixon claimed pole position for the race, the first IndyCar event in Detroit since 2008, and maintained his lead throughout the race. After 38 laps, James Hinchcliffe hit a dislodged piece of the track and continued straight into the tire wall. Further investigation discovered that the track was disintegrating in various places, and the event was red flagged. After a two-hour break, in which track officials ripped out the damaged sections of track and filled the holes with concrete, the race was restarted, shortened to 60 laps. Rain also started to fall lightly, and shortly after the restart a caution was issued when Hélio Castroneves spun. Dario Franchitti gained four places after the red flag, benefiting from his softer red tires, to finish second behind his teammate.

There were four cautions, totalling 12 laps during the race. It was Dixon's first win of the season and the 28th of his career, which moved him up to second in the drivers' standings. Of the 25 drivers that started, 19 completed the race, two retired after contact and four retired due to mechanical issues. Justin Wilson recorded the fastest lap of the race, completing a circuit in 1:12.0651.

The IndyCar series had not visited Detroit since 2008, when Justin Wilson won the race after taking the lead in the last 20 laps when Hélio Castroneves was penalized for blocking him. The following year's scheduled race was cancelled due to lack of funding, and the failure to secure sponsorship for the event. In September 2011, the Detroit City Council approved plans for the race to be held on the weekend of June 1–3, 2012. A month later, it was confirmed that the race would be run in 2012, sponsored by the Chevrolet arm of Detroit-based manufacturer General Motors.
Roger Penske was one of the main advocates of the series returning to Detroit, and his company provided $6 million to improve the course on Belle Isle Park. Over of concrete was laid down across the paddock and the race course, and the lighting and drainage were both repaired in the lead up to the event. The race was scheduled for the weekend after the Indianapolis 500, a slot that had previously been held by the Firestone 550 at the Texas Motor Speedway. The move created tension with Eddie Gossage, the track director in Texas.

Prior to the race, Will Power was the points leader, with 200 points, while Castroneves and James Hinchcliffe each had 164 points to place second and third respectively. The configuration was the long track used in 2007 and 2008. It is a tight street course on which overtaking is difficult, and previewing the race, Tony DiZinno claimed it had "often been a mundane race." Four racers participating in the 2012 event were previous winners on the course: Castroneves, Dario Franchitti, Tony Kanaan and Wilson. In contrast, 11 of the 25 drivers had not previously participated in an IndyCar race at Belle Isle, and four of the drivers had only competed once: in the 2008 race.

The previous weekend's Indianapolis 500 had, according to an agency report, been "a breathtaking event, the kind that’s certain to be talked about through the years", and provided a boost to the series, with the race receiving its highest Nielsen rating since 2008. The series hoped to maintain that momentum into the Detroit race, but instead focus shifted to off-track issues when the series' CEO, Randy Bernard posted a message on Twitter claiming that some of the team owners were trying to oust him. The coup was based upon the owners' disgruntlement with the increasing cost of the Dallara DW12 chassis, and fines given out for the use of inapproved parts in races earlier in the season. Bernard spoke to the team owners on the Saturday prior to the Detroit race, and reported that the matter was settled, in an attempt to place attention back on the race, but by that stage, the media had spent Friday and Saturday investigating the coup, rather than previewing the race and the track.

Two practice sessions were held on the Friday before the race: each lasted for an hour. A third session, also an hour long, took place on the Saturday morning prior to qualifying. The first session provided limited opportunities to the drivers due to heavy rain and standing water on the course. As a result, only 11 of the 25 entrants participated in the session, of which Takuma Sato set the fastest time. Conditions improved during the second practice, and all 25 drivers set times. Will Power was quickest; marginally over a tenth of a second faster than Wilson. Ryan Briscoe, Simon Pagenaud and Tony Kanaan completed the top five, all recording times within half a second of Power. In the third practice, Scott Dixon recorded the fastest time, trailed by Power and Ryan Hunter-Reay. Briscoe and Wilson also lapped the track in under 72 seconds to finish among the five quickest drivers.

Qualifying took place over three rounds: the drivers were split into two groups for the first round, in which the top six from each group progressed to the next round. Dixon was the fastest from the first group, followed by Pagenaud and Hunter-Reay within half a second of his time. Wilson, Sébastien Bourdais and Sato were the other drivers to advance to the second round. In the second group, Power set the fastest overall time in the first round, and Alex Tagliani was close behind him, also setting a faster time than Dixon. Graham Rahal, E.J. Viso, Hélio Castroneves and Briscoe also qualified for the next stage. Power was once again the fastest driver in the second round, leading Dixon and Tagliani. The top-three drivers were separated by less than a tenth of a second. The other three drivers to continue to the third round, the "Firestone Fast Six", were Pagenaud, Viso and Hunter-Reay. Rahal, who finished in seventh was just four thousandths of a second behind Hunter-Reay.

The top six drivers were split evenly by engine; half running Honda engines, and the other half Chevrolet. It was also the first time in the 2012 season that six different teams were represented in the third qualifying round. Hunter-Reay and Power traded fastest times early in the session before Pagenaud and Viso went quicker. Power and Dixon then set times under 71 seconds, and then improved upon their own laps to finish as the top-two. Dixon set the fastest time; 1:10.3162: just four thousandths of a second quicker than Power. Tagliani was third, joined on the second row by Pagenaud, while Viso and Hunter-Reay qualified on the third row of the grid. Rahal and Simona de Silvestro were both subject to ten-place grid penalties for engine changes made in mid-May, dropping them to 17th and 25th on the grid respectively. Rubens Barrichello was also given a ten-place penalty for changing his chassis between qualifying and the race, placing him 24th.

The race, the sixth of the season, began at 3:30 p.m. EST, and was televised live in the United States on ABC. Scott Dixon held his lead from pole position, with Will Power behind him. Justin Wilson made light contact with a wall during the first lap of the race, and pitted shortly after due to a flat right-rear tire. The team discovered additional damage to the suspension that required lengthy repairs, but he was able to return to the race. During the fifth lap, some teams reported that parts of the track were deteriorating, but it was not felt that any action needed to be taken. Three laps later, Rubens Barrichello, who had gained four places started suffering mechanical problems, which forced him to retire from the race after eleven laps. Wilson set the fastest lap of the race during the ninth lap, completing a circuit in 1 minute 12.0651 seconds. On lap 10, Ryan Hunter-Reay blocked Ryan Briscoe from passing him, drawing a warning from race director Beaux Barfield. Sébastien Bourdais, who, along with Alex Tagliani and Oriol Servia, was running his first street race of the season without a Lotus engine, had made it to seventh before suffering mechanical problems which curtailed his race after 24 laps. James Jakes, who was suffering from problems with his brakes throughout the early part of the race eventually retired on lap 36, having spent ten laps in the pits earlier trying to resolve the issue.
On lap 39, James Hinchcliffe fell victim to the deteriorating track. Going through turn six, he struck a large piece of asphalt that had lifted from the track. After hitting his front wing, it then went under the car and propelled it into the air. With no traction, Hinchcliffe was unable to control his car and was sent into the tire wall. Hinchcliffe was angry after the race, and claimed that the track should have been fixed earlier: "The fact that (race control) let it go as far as they did, essentially waiting for someone to crash as a result of it before they did something, is very unsafe." He said that the track had lifted much earlier in the race, but that the drivers had been forced to keep avoiding the debris, which was on the racing line. On the same lap, Takuma Sato clipped the curb going into turn 12 and lost control of his car before hitting the wall, forcing his retirement. The two crashes drew a full track caution, and the cars drove behind the safety car for six laps before a red flag was given on lap 45.

The track had been patched up prior to the weekend's racing using a synthetic rubber compound, and it had remained secure throughout the practice and qualifying sessions, as well as the Grand-Am and Indy Lights races. However, the Dallara DW12's aerodynamic ground force effects acted to pull the compound out. After assessing the track conditions, the decision was made to attempt to repair the track and restart the race. Marshalls and track workers started to pull the loose strips up from the track, and a quick drying concrete was used to fill the troughs. The repairs were held up for a short time when a crew was despatched to collect more of the concrete, as the on-site resources had been used up, but eventually the race director was happy the race could restart. Kanaan and Power drove around to survey the repairs, acting as driver representatives, and although Kanaan particularly did not sound confident that they would hold up, they agreed to try and continue racing. There was some confusion about the rules of the restart; no repairs were allowed, and the teams could change tires, but had to remain on the same compound. This led to J.R. Hildebrand suffering a one lap penalty as his car required repair work, and a number of drivers being angered at having to stay on the harder tires, which were the slower compound.

After a two-hour delay, the race was restarted. Rahal suffered clutch problems on the restart, which placed him two laps down, while the other drivers ran behind the safety car, during which the marshalls showed the areas in which repair work had been conducted. Just prior to the restart, there was a short rain shower which made the track slightly slippy. Power lost one position on the restart, dropping to third. Franchitti, who was the closest driver to the front to have the softer compound red tires fitted gained two positions on the restart, moving up to fourth. The restart only lasted for six corners, before Castroneves spun in the wet conditions, and was then struck by Ed Carpenter. On the next corner, Josef Newgarden had slid into the wall and stalled, and a full-track caution was again called. The race was restarted with nine laps remaining, and Franchitti once more gained a position, passing Pagenaud to gain second. However, the race was almost immediately under a yellow flag again as E.J. Viso was spun by Marco Andretti, and stalled in the middle of turn four. From the ensuing restart, Dixon managed to maintain the lead from Franchitti, and the two Chip Ganassi Racing drivers completed a second successive one-two finish.

The race, which was moved from ABC to ESPNEWS because of the red flag delay, averaged 843,189 viewers, earning a 0.6 Nielsen rating. The final ten laps were significantly lower, averaging just 157,137 viewers. Bud Denker, the chairman of the Detroit Grand Prix Association announced shortly after the race that the track would be improved and lengthened for 2013. He suggested that most of the track around turn ten would be removed and relaid, and significant work would be carried out in turns five, six, seven, eleven and twelve. The track would be extended between turns two and five, using a long straight which would allow cars to reach 175–180 miles per hour. The result of the alterations would be an additional of track, creating a circuit.

Notes:


</doc>
<doc id="35861237" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35861237" title="Two Birds (Awake)">
Two Birds (Awake)

"Two Birds" is the twelfth episode of the American television police procedural fantasy drama "Awake". The episode premiered on NBC on May 17, 2012. In the episode, Michael learns more about the truth of the accident. He tries to get evidence that Ed Hawkins (Kevin Weisman) tried to kill him, and finds out that Hawkins' commanding officer Carl Kessel (Mark Harelik) was also in on this setup.

The story and concept of the episode was written by Evan Katz, with teleplay by Howard Gordon and Davey Holmes. It was directed by Milan Cheylov. "Two Birds" was well received by critics, who praised its storylines. Commentators noted that the script was well written. Upon airing, "Two Birds" obtained 2.1 million viewers in the United States and a 0.7 rating in the 18–49 demographic, according to Nielsen ratings.

The episode starts with Michael Britten (Jason Isaacs) trying to convince therapists Dr. Jonathan Lee (BD Wong) and Dr. Judith Evans (Cherry Jones) that Ed Hawkins (Kevin Weisman) tried to kill him. The therapists claim that he is imagining the plot to cope. 

Later, Michael tells Rex he must stay with his Aunt Carol, as Michael is working on a case with a dangerous suspect. His partner, Bird, goes to his house, after trying to call him to make sure he is alright, but then looks in the garage and finds Michael's work on his accident and Detective Hawkins. Bird goes to Dr. Judith Evans, who reluctantly advises Bird to check on Michael. Michael goes to Ed Hawkins' house, shoots Hawkins in the leg, and asks him for evidence. Hawkins says heroin was taken from various evidence lockers and sent out for sale through Westfield Distribution, and further evidence is on his laptop. Hawkins tries to overpower Michael, forcing him to kill Hawkins, right before Bird enters the house. Michael takes Bird's gun and handcuffs him. Bird suggests that to get into Hawkins' laptop, they use a hacker they both worked with previously, right before he knocks out Michael, who wakes up in the red reality.

Michael tells his wife to stay somewhere safe, and then tells the red reality Bird to meet him in the park. He tells Bird what he found out in the green reality (where his son is alive and his wife is dead) regarding Hawkins, his accident and the encrypted file and convinces Bird to copy it from Hawkins' computer, though neither of them know Hawkins has been watching them. Hawkins meets immediately with Tricia Harper and Carl Kessel (revealed to be Bird and Hawkins' precinct chief in this reality) and Kessel says they will kill both Michael and Bird and make it look like Michael did it, given his recently unstable behavior. Captain Harper shows doubts and remorse at this idea, but agrees. 

Still in the red reality (where his son is dead and his wife is alive), Michael visits the hacker suggested in the green reality. He gains Hawkins' password and unlocks the file. The files tell Michael that Hawkins and Kessel had a shipping container where they had been storing the heroin. Bird tells Michael that they will meet at his house, but when Michael gets there, Hawkins has killed Bird and tries to kill Michael. Hawkins, however, only manages to injure him. Hawkins calls in that Michael killed Bird and Captain Harper tells her precinct to use deadly force to bring Michael in, much to Detective Vega's surprise. Vega tries to tell Harper that, even deranged, Michael would never kill Bird, but Harper emotionally rebuts him, saying he is showing sympathy for a killer. This leaves Vega confused and suspicious. Michael manages to escape Hawkins, but passes out from his wound and wakes up back in the green reality. 

He finds himself back in his car, handcuffed, but relieved to see that the green reality Bird is still alive. He gives Bird Hawkins' password ("tulip"), and the information regarding Kessel and the shipping container convinces Bird that something is wrong. He takes Michael to Harper still in cuffs but they both tell her what they have learned. Harper approves Bird's plan to send a team to the storage container but sends Michael to a cell, saying that if they do not find any evidence of his accusations, he'll go to jail for killing Hawkins.

The story and concept of the episode was written by consulting producer Evan Katz, with teleplay by executive producer Howard Gordon and co-executive producer Davey Holmes; it was Katz's third writing credit, Gordon's fourth writing credit, and Holmes' second writing credit. It was directed by Milan Cheylov, his first directing credit for the series. 

In January 2012, it was announced that Kevin Weisman would appear in multiple episodes of "Awake". This is Weisman's second appearance on the series as Ed Hawkins. Other guest stars included Laura Innes as Tricia Harper and Daniela Bobadilla as Emma.

"Two Birds" was originally broadcast on in the United States on NBC between 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., and obtained 2.1 million viewers in the United States, slightly down from the previous episode. It acquired a 0.7 rating in the 18–49 demographic, according to Nielsen ratings, meaning that it was seen by 0.9% of all 18- to 49-year-olds.

The episode was met with praise from most critics. "IGN" rated it 9 of 10 as "amazing", and wrote that "it really ramped up the intensity". Alan Sepinwall from "HitFix" complimented parts of the episode, notably the "excellent work from Jason Isaacs, Steve Harris and Laura Innes in both realities", despite claiming that they did not particularly care for the script. "TV Fanatic" rated it 4.6 out of 5, and noted that "Awake works so much better when there’s one unifying case". "Screenrant" praised the episode, claiming that there was "some fantastic editing and writing that allows two conversations between three people to appear as one cohesive interchange, basically setting up the remainder of the episode". "ScreenCrush" claimed that "a conspiracy that saw NBC running this great show off the road, or a simple unfortunate accident.". "The Voice of TV" graded the episode a "A-", despite claiming that it is annoying that he doesn't tell his family members about his new knowledge. The TV.com official blog claimed the episode was "impossible to sustain". "The A.V. Club" graded the episode "B+", claiming that it was "completely entertaining and engrossing", and that "it's just a slight tick down from last week's "Say Hello to My Little Friend", which was the best episode since "Awake" pilot, and the most surreal since the hallucinations of "That's Not My Penguin."



</doc>
<doc id="35870246" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35870246" title="Zaharije Ostojić">
Zaharije Ostojić

Zaharije Ostojić (; 1907 – April 1945) was a Montenegrin Serb military officer who served as the chief of the operational, organisational and intelligence branches of the Chetnik Supreme Command led by Draža Mihailović in Yugoslavia during World War II. He was a major in the Royal Yugoslav Army Air Force prior to the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia, and was involved in the coup that deposed Prince Paul of Yugoslavia on 27 March 1941. After the coup, he escorted Prince Paul to exile in Greece, and was in Cairo at the time of the invasion in April. In September 1941, he was landed on the Italian-occupied Montenegrin coast along with a British Special Operations Executive (SOE) liaison officer and two companions. He escorted the SOE officer to the German-occupied territory of Serbia and introduced him to the Yugoslav Partisan leader Josip Broz Tito then Mihailović. Ostojić soon became Mihailović's chief of staff, and after the German attempt to capture the Chetnik leader during Operation Mihailović in December 1941, brought the Chetnik Supreme staff to Montenegro where they were re-united with Mihailović in June 1942. During the remainder of 1942, Ostojić launched a counter-attack against Ustaše troops of the Independent State of Croatia returning to the eastern Bosnian town of Foča where they were expected to continue their genocidal anti-Serb policies. As many as 2,000 local Muslims were subsequently killed in the town by forces under Ostojić's command. Ostojić later oversaw large-scale massacres of civilians and burning of Muslim villages in the border region between Montenegro and the Sandžak.

While the Chetniks were an anti-Axis movement in their long-range goals and did engage in marginal resistance activities for limited periods, they also carried out almost throughout the war a tactical or selective collaboration with the occupation authorities against the Partisans. The Chetnik movement adopted a policy of collaboration with the Axis powers, and engaged in cooperation to one degree or another by establishing "modus vivendi" or operating as auxiliary forces under Axis control. This was demonstrated in late 1942 and early 1943, when Ostojić planned and oversaw the Chetnik involvement in the large Axis anti-Partisan offensive Case White alongside Italian troops. In 1944, he became a leader of the Chetnik forces in Herzegovina, and along with Dobroslav Jevđević was involved in attempts to come to terms with the Allied forces. In late 1944, as the Partisans tightened their grip on the country and the Soviet Red Army assisted in the capture of Belgrade, he rejoined Mihailović in northeastern Bosnia but they could not agree on what course of action to take. Ostojić, along with Chetnik leaders Pavle Đurišić and Petar Baćović and Chetnik ideologue Dragiša Vasić decided to move west to the area of the Ljubljana Gap in modern-day Slovenia where other friendly forces were concentrating. In early April 1945, faced with attacks by the Partisans and the Armed Forces of the Independent State of Croatia (HOS) along their route, the combined Chetnik force was defeated by HOS forces in the Battle of Lijevče Field, after which Ostojić was captured by the Ustaše in an apparent trap. According to some sources, he was killed in the Jasenovac concentration camp alongside Đurišić, Baćović and Vasić.

Zaharije Ostojić was a Montenegrin Serb, and was born in 1907 in the village of Gluhi Do in the Crmnica district, near the Adriatic seaport of Bar in the Principality of Montenegro. After his schooling, he joined the Royal Yugoslav Army Air Force (VVKJ) and prior to the outbreak of World War II had risen to the rank of major. Little else has been recorded of Ostojić's early life, but his sister was married to Royal Yugoslav Army Brigadier General Ljubo Novaković, another Montenegrin Serb who also became a Chetnik commander during World War II.

After the outbreak of World War II, the government of Regent Prince Paul of Yugoslavia declared its neutrality. Despite this, and with the aim of securing his southern flank for the pending attack on the Soviet Union, Adolf Hitler began placing heavy pressure on the Kingdom of Yugoslavia to sign the Tripartite Pact and join the Axis. After some delay, the Yugoslav government conditionally signed the Pact on 25 March 1941. Two days later a bloodless coup d'état deposed Prince Paul and declared 17-year-old Prince Peter II of Yugoslavia of age. Ostojić was involved in the coup through his close relationship with one of the main instigators, the deputy commander of the VVKJ, Brigadier General Borivoje Mirković. Ostojić escorted Prince Paul to exile in Greece and then traveled on to Cairo. Following the subsequent German-led invasion of Yugoslavia and the Yugoslav capitulation 11 days later, Ostojić remained in Cairo until he was selected to join a combined British–Yugoslav Special Operations Executive team which was to infiltrate into occupied Yugoslavia and make contact with resistance groups. The other members of the team were Captain Bill Hudson, a fellow VVKJ officer, Major Mirko Lalatović, and a radio operator. They flew from Cairo to Malta on 13 September 1941, before being landed from the British submarine HMS "Triumph" on the Montenegrin coast near Petrovac between 20 and 22 September 1941. They quickly came into contact with Montenegrin Partisans, including Milovan Đilas and Arso Jovanović, who escorted Hudson and Ostojić to Partisan-held Užice in the German-occupied territory of Serbia. While Hudson familiarised himself with the Partisans, Ostojić went on to Mihailović's headquarters at Ravna Gora, but after briefing Mihailović went back to escort Hudson to Ravna Gora, arriving there on 25 October. When he first arrived at Ravna Gora, Ostojić had delivered a message to Mihailović from the War Minister of the Yugoslav government-in-exile, Bogoljub Ilić, assuring him of the official support of the government-in-exile, but stating that "a rebellion would not be tolerated". Ostojić also told Mihailović that the communists had taken control of Montenegro. Ostojić and Lalatović then assumed senior staff positions in Mihailović's supreme command headquarters.

After Mihailović went on the run in early December 1941 in the wake of Operation Uzice, Operation Mihailovic and the split with the Partisans, Ostojić maintained a small headquarters consisting mainly of the intelligence staff, which remained close to Mihailović and his small personal staff as he moved around the Rudnik mountain area during the remaining winter months of 1941–1942. Mihailović eventually made his way to Montenegro, where he arrived in June 1942. Ostojić, Hudson and other officers joined him soon after, travelling through Italian-held towns by truck disguised as troops of the Nedić regime, a puppet government in the German-occupied territory of Serbia.

In a directive letter dated 30 July 1942, Ostojić urged all Chetnik commanders to "develop the strongest possible oral and written propaganda". He stated that, "the people must be persuaded that the Chetniks are their only friends and that it is from them that they can expect freedom and a happy life" and instructed the Chetniks to "work day and night and maintain the spirit of the people". He wrote, "the hour of freedom is near. Allied aid for the Chetniks is assured, and the whole world is admiring them." In August, he launched a counterattack against Ustaše troops returning to Foča as the Italians withdrew their garrisons from the hinterland. The Chetniks feared the Ustaše were about to unleash another round of genocidal violence on the Serb population in the area. At least 2,000 local Muslims were subsequently killed in Foča by forces under Ostojić's command.

In November 1942, Ostojić was encouraged by Mihailović to wage a campaign of terror against the Muslim population living along the borders of Montenegro and the Sandžak, and subsequently reported that Chetniks had destroyed 21 villages and killed about 1,300 people. Between 30 November and 2 December 1942, Ostojić represented Mihailović at the Conference of Young Chetnik Intellectuals of Montenegro at the village of Šahovići near Bijelo Polje in the Sandžak, which was also attended by the Montenegrin Chetnik leader Pavle Đurišić. The conference was dominated by Đurišić and its resolutions "expressed extremism and intolerance", as well as an agenda which was focused on restoring the pre-war "status quo" in Yugoslavia implemented in its initial stages by a Chetnik dictatorship. It also laid claim to parts of the territory of Yugoslavia's neighbours.

A few weeks after the conference, Mihailović sent Ostojić to establish a forward headquarters in Kalinovik in south-eastern Bosnia. Ostojić was to command an operation aimed at encircling and destroying Partisan forces in Bosnia, which was to use Chetnik units serving as Italian auxiliaries in Herzegovina and Montenegro, as well as other Chetnik units in the Lika region, northern Bosnia and northern Dalmatia. The plan was predicated on an Allied landing on the Dalmatian coast, which Mihailović believed was imminent. The outline concept was that the Chetniks would set up a corridor through the Italian occupied zone of the NDH as far as the Partisan liberated area in western Bosnia and Lika, neutralising the Italians through a combination of vague promises, encouraging them to surrender, and disarming them if necessary. The plan was finalised by early December 1942 at Mihailović's headquarters in Montenegro, and operations were planned to commence on 5 January 1943. However, the plan assumed that Mihailović's forces were unified, which they were not, and also that his authority extended to many more Chetniks than it did in reality.

However, what transpired instead was that the Chetniks that were preparing for the "march on Bosnia" were drawn into closer collaboration with the Axis during the second phase of Case White that took place in the Neretva and Rama river valleys in late February 1943. During this offensive, between 12,000 and 15,000 Chetniks fought alongside Italian forces, and in one case alongside German and Croatian troops against the Partisans. Despite the fact that the Chetniks were an anti-Axis movement in their long-range goals and did engage in marginal resistance activities for limited periods, their involvement in Case White is one of the most significant examples of their tactical or selective collaboration with the Axis occupation forces. In this instance, the participating Chetniks operated as legalised auxiliary forces under Italian control. Ostojić believed that it was actions such as these that would cost the Chetniks the support of the Allies, and he wrote to Mihailović that the Allies would probably have supported the Chetniks had they been more involved in fighting the occupation. Ostojić told Mihailović that his officers also held this view, and proposed that Chetnik collaboration be reconsidered. However, upon receiving Ostojić's message, Mihailović did not even consider changing his strategy.

The plan that Ostojić drew up called for the Chetniks to remain south of the Neretva to avoid being outflanked by the Partisans. However, this essentially defensive strategy was rejected by Herzegovinian Chetnik commanders such as Dobroslav Jevđević and Bajo Stanišić, who wished to follow the Axis-led offensive strategy. This placed Ostojić in a very difficult position, with some of his key detachment commanders following the orders of the Italians rather than his, while the Chetniks were reliant on Italian air and artillery support, particularly around Jablanica. Ostojić subsequently changed his mind and supported the Italian offensive plans, launching an attack against the Partisans retreating from Jablanica to Prozor on 27 February 1943. The attack was indecisive and Ostojić reprimanded the detachment commanders responsible, particularly Stanišić.

During this phase Ostojić first asked Jevđević to obtain more supplies from the Italians, and then when they refused, threatened to declare war on them. By early March, just as the Partisans were forcing a crossing of the Neretva at Jablanica, Mihailović joined Ostojić. In a letter to one of his other Montenegrin Chetnik commanders, Mihailović stated that he was managing the whole operation through Ostojić, although Mihailović later denied that he was in charge of the operation when questioned during his trial by a Yugoslav court after the war. Mihailović and Ostojić realised that the large concentrations of Chetnik troops in and around Mostar and the nearby bauxite mines were likely to draw German attention, and while they were focused on this issue, the Partisans forced a crossing of the Neretva.

Within a week of Mihailović's arrival the Partisans had successfully crossed the Neretva, and within another week they had forced the Chetniks to withdraw, losing Nevesinje then Kalinovik to the Partisans before the end of March. During the fighting, Chetnik commanders had been ill-disciplined and had failed to cooperate, causing Ostojić to threaten them with courts martial and summary execution. Mihailović ordered Ostojić to pull the Chetniks back towards positions on the line of the Drina–Piva rivers, some southeast of Jablanica. By this point the Chetniks had suffered heavy losses, and the Partisans broke through the combined Italian–Chetnik defence line in early April. In a report dated November 1944, Colonel Bill Bailey, the senior British liaison officer with the Chetniks during the war, stated that both Ostojić and Major Vojislav Lukačević had been very critical of Mihailović's "foolhardy, though brave, tactical handling" of Chetnik forces during Case White, which had "contributed largely to the failure of operations". However, Ostojić himself did not possess the necessary authority with his subordinate commanders, had been unable to cope with the rapidly changing situation, had adopted an unpopular and ineffective defensive strategy, and had then blamed the detachment commanders for the Chetnik failures.

In July 1943, the Montenegrin Partisan leader Đilas contacted both Ostojić and Baćović to establish their willingness to work jointly against the Axis occupiers, given that a new government-in-exile was about to be established without Mihailović. They reported this contact to Mihailović who threatened to exclude them from his Chetnik organisation if they maintained contact with the Partisans.

By September 1944, Ostojić had been promoted to lieutenant colonel, and was the Chetnik area commander in eastern Bosnia. In early September 1944, as Mihailović had been removed as Minister of the Army, Navy and Air Force with the demise of the Purić government-in-exile, Ostojić tried to make contact with Allied forces in Italy, and agreed with Lukačević to issue a proclamation to the people explaining that they were going to attack the Germans. After 12 September 1944, when King Peter called for all in Yugoslavia to rally around Tito, he and Baćović warned Mihailović that their men were losing their will to fight the Partisans. Concerned that the Russians would hand the Chetniks over to the Partisans, he then contacted the United States Office of Strategic Services (OSS) liaison officer with the Chetniks, Colonel Robert H. McDowell, but was unable to arrange for the Chetniks to be placed under American command.

After the fall of Belgrade on 20 October 1944, Mihailović and a force of a few hundred of his Chetniks withdrew from Serbian territory, crossed the Drina and based themselves in the Majevica mountain area north of Tuzla in north-eastern Bosnia. Ostojić, who was commanding Herzegovinian Chetniks, was joined by Đurišić and his Montenegrin Chetniks and together they withdrew towards Mihailović.

From the time he joined Mihailović in northeastern Bosnia, Đurišić was very critical of Mihailović's leadership, and argued strongly for all the remaining Chetnik troops to move to the area of the Ljubljana Gap in modern-day Slovenia. At this point Ostojić and Baćović were also questioning Mihailović's plans. When Mihailović remained unconvinced, Đurišić decided to move to the Ljubljana Gap independent of Mihailović, and arranged for Dimitrije Ljotić's forces already in the Ljubljana Gap to meet him near Bihać in western Bosnia to assist his movement. When he left Mihailović, he was joined by Chetnik ideologue Dragiša Vasić and the Chetnik detachments commanded by Ostojić and Baćović as well as a large number of refugees.

In order to get to Bihać, Đurišić made a safe-conduct agreement with elements of the Armed Forces of the Independent State of Croatia (HOS) and with the Montenegrin separatist Sekula Drljević. The details of the agreement are not known, but it appears Đurišić, Ostojić and Baćović and their troops were meant to cross the Sava river into Slavonia where they would be aligned with Drljević as the Montenegrin National Army with Đurišić retaining operational command. The Chetniks however, appear to have tried to outsmart the HOS forces and Drljević by sending their sick and wounded across the river, but retaining their fit troops south of the river, after which they began moving them westwards. Harassed by both the HOS troops and Partisans, they reached the Vrbas river, which they began to cross. In the Battle of Lijevče Field, north of Banja Luka, the combined Chetnik force was badly beaten by a strong HOS force which possessed German-supplied tanks.

Following this defeat and the defection of one of their sub-units to Drljević, Đurišić was induced to negotiate directly with the leaders of the HOS forces about the further movement of the Chetniks towards the Ljubljana Gap. However, this appears to have been a trap, as he was attacked and captured by them on his way to the meeting. According to the historian Professor Jozo Tomasevich, exactly what occurred after his capture is not clear, but Baćović, Đurišić, Vasić, Ostojić were subsequently killed, along with some Serbian Orthodox priests and others. According to some sources, on 20 April, Đurišić, Baćović, Vasić and Ostojić were taken to the Stara Gradiška prison, near Jasenovac. The Ustaše gathered them in a field alongside 5,000 other Chetnik prisoners and arranged for Drljević and his followers to select 150 Chetnik officers and non-combatant intellectuals for execution. Đurišić, Baćović, Vasić and Ostojić were amongst those selected. They and the others were loaded onto boats by the Ustaše and taken across the Sava River, never to be seen again. It is reported that they were killed either in the Jasenovac concentration camp itself, or in a marsh in its vicinity. The website of the Jasenovac Memorial Site says Ostojić was killed at the camp by the Ustaše in 1945. The location of Ostojić's grave, if any, is unknown. Both the NDH forces and Drljević had reasons for ensnaring Đurišić. The NDH forces were motivated by the mass terror committed by Đurišić on the Muslim population in Sandžak and southeastern Bosnia, while Drljević was opposed to Đurišić's support of a union of Serbia and Montenegro which ran counter to Drljević's separatism.


</doc>
<doc id="35981292" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35981292" title="Paparazzi (Girls' Generation song)">
Paparazzi (Girls' Generation song)

"Paparazzi" is a song recorded in the Japanese language by South Korean girl group Girls' Generation for their second Japanese-language studio album, "Girls & Peace" (2012). It was released as the album's lead single on June 27, 2012. Written by Fredrik Thomander, Johan Becker, and Junji Ishiwatari, and produced by Miles Walker, the track was described as an electropop and R&B song. To promote the single, Girls' Generation appeared on Japanese music programs "Music Station" and "Hey! Hey! Hey! Music Champ", while a music video for the song directed by Toshiyuki Suzuki premiered on June 10, 2012 in order to accompany the release of the song.

Upon its release, "Paparazzi" received mixed reviews from music critics, who compared the song to the group's previous Japanese-language single "Mr. Taxi" in 2011. The track was ranked number 19 on "Spin"'s list of top 20 K-pop songs of 2012. The single was a commercial success in Japan, peaking atop the Japan Hot 100 and at number two on both the Oricon Singles Chart and RIAJ Digital Track Chart. "Paparazzi" was certified Gold in Japan for the sales of the single's digital and physical release, respectively.

"Paparazzi" is a song recorded in the Japanese language, which was described as a hybrid of electropop and R&B. It was written by Swedish songwriters Fredrik Thomander and Johan Becker, while production was handled by American producer Miles Walker. Japanese songwriter Junji Ishiwatari provided additional writing credits. The track was released as the lead single from the group's second Japanese-language studio album, "Girls & Peace" (2012), as part of the group's foray into the Japanese music industry. It was released for CD and DVD sales in Japan by Nayutawave Records, which is affiliated with Universal Music Group, on June 27, 2012. The song was made available for digital purchase globally on the same day. "Paparazzi" was also released in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and South Korea in mid-2012 under license by Universal Music Hong Kong, Universal Music Taiwan, and S.M. Entertainment, respectively.

To promote the single, Girls' Generation performed "Paparazzi" on the Japanese music program "Music Station" on June 22, 2012, where the group wore tuxedos and pink gloves. On July 9, 2012, the group staged their second performance of the song on Fuji Television's "Hey! Hey! Hey! Music Champ", where the members wore tuxedos with black gloves. The accompanying music video for "Paparazzi" was directed by Toshiyuki Suzuki and is almost seven minutes long. In the video, Girls' Generation performs on stage in a theatre, with the set inspired by classic musicals. The video begins with the members wearing trench coats and "whimsically prancing" to Gene Kelly's "Singin' in the Rain". During the main performance of "Paparazzi", the video is intercut with scenes of the members being followed by photographers. They perform in two different outfits – showgirl-inspired costumes and tuxedos with pink gloves. Jeff Benjamin from "Billboard" praised the dance routines for their "perfect nine-piece synchronization" and opined that the pink gloves of the girls resembled those worn by Marilyn Monroe.

Upon its release, "Paparazzi" received mixed reviews from music critics. Jeff Benjamin from "Billboard" named it a "high-energy" track. James Hadfield, writing for the Tokyo edition of "Time Out", compared the song's R&B styles to those of the group's previous 2011 Japanese-language single "Mr. Taxi" and called it a "redux" of the latter single, writing that "you'd struggle to spot many real improvements."

"Paparazzi" was a commercial success in Japan, debuting at number two on the Oricon Singles Chart on the chart issue dated July 9, 2012; the number one position belonged to KAT-TUN's single "To the Limit". The following week, it dropped to number ten. "Paparazzi" became the 58th best-selling physical single of 2012 on the Oricon chart, selling 136,181 copies.

The single debuted at number 31 on the "Billboard" Japan Hot 100 on July 2, 2012. The following week, it rose up to the top position on the chart. On the chart issue dated July 16, 2012, the single dropped to number seven. "Paparazzi" ranked at number 50 on the year-end chart of 2012. The track as well charted at number two on the "Billboard" Japan Hot Singles Sales, number five on the "Billboard" Japan Adult Contemporary Airplay, and number two on the RIAJ Digital Track Chart. According to Nielsen SoundScan, "Paparazzi" has sold 103,000 digital copies in Japan as of July 2012.


Credits adapted from the CD issue's liner notes


</doc>
<doc id="35995429" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35995429" title="2012 Critérium du Dauphiné">
2012 Critérium du Dauphiné

The 2012 Critérium du Dauphiné was the sixty-fourth running of the Critérium du Dauphiné cycling stage race; a race rated as a World Tour event on the UCI calendar, the highest classification such an event can have. The race consisted of eight stages, beginning with a prologue in Grenoble on 3 June, and concluded in Châtel on 10 June. The race was organised by the Amaury Sport Organisation, the same group that organises the Tour de France. It was viewed as a great preparation for July's Tour de France, hence why a majority of the contenders for the general classification of the major tour participated in the Dauphiné. It featured mountainous stages as well as an individual time trial quite similar in length to those that awaited the riders in the Tour.

The race was won for the second successive year by rider Bradley Wiggins, who claimed the leader's yellow and blue jersey after the first stage, extending his race-leading advantage after winning the fourth stage individual time trial, and ultimately maintained that advantage. Wiggins became only the third rider to win the Dauphiné and Paris–Nice – a race that Wiggins had won in March – in the same year after Jacques Anquetil (1963 and 1965) and Eddy Merckx (1971) had previously done so.

Wiggins' winning margin over his team-mate and runner-up Michael Rogers was one minute and seventeen seconds, and 's Cadel Evans completed the podium, nine seconds down on Rogers. In the race's other classifications, rider Cayetano Sarmiento won the King of the Mountains classification, Evans won the green jersey for the points classification, 's Wilco Kelderman won the young rider classification, with finishing at the head of the teams classification by over thirteen minutes, after placing four riders inside the final overall top ten placings.

As the Critérium du Dauphiné was a UCI World Tour event, all eighteen UCI ProTeams were invited automatically and obligated to send a squad. Four other squads were given wildcard places into the race, and as such, formed the event's 22-team peloton. All twenty-two squads that competed in the Dauphiné contested the Tour de France later in the year.

The twenty-two teams that competed in the race were:

The route for the race was announced on 27 March 2012.

The Dauphiné began with its traditional short individual time trial stage, with a near-flat course around the streets of Grenoble; the city was hosting the prologue of the race for the fourth time in fifteen years following prior starts in 1997, 2000 and 2007, the last of which was won by the 2011 race winner Bradley Wiggins, then riding for the team. With rain expected to disrupt the stage, as it had done so in the 2011 prologue, teams decided to spread their time trial specialists across the field in order to maximise their potential of winning the stage. For the first rider to depart the start in Grenoble, 's Lieuwe Westra, weather conditions were dry. Westra ultimately recorded a time of 6' 46" for the stage, which was good enough for a top-12 stage placing after all 175 riders had taken to the course. Westra's time was beaten shortly afterwards by rider Carlos Barredo, who went four seconds quicker around the course, in length.

Barredo held the top spot for around quarter of an hour, as his time was marginally beaten by Andriy Hryvko, a four-time Ukrainian champion in the discipline, riding for the team. Soon after, the eventual stage-winning performance was recorded by the Australian national champion Luke Durbridge, for . Durbridge set a time of 6' 38", in the favourable conditions; he held on to his spot throughout the expected changeable weather that was a factor in the remainder of the running order. Following a rain shower that effected the racing during the middle portion of the stage, the later riders to take to the course did have dry roads to contend with but the wind had picked up and made conditions more difficult than what the earlier riders had for their passages through the parcours. Durbridge's time remained untroubled to the end, despite the best attempts of defending champion Wiggins, who finished just 1.35 seconds in arrears in second place, having started last of the 175 competitors. Thus, Durbridge took his first stage victory at World Tour level, which gave him a clean sweep of the jerseys post-stage, for holding the lead of the overall, points and young rider classifications. Other overall contenders Tejay van Garderen (), 's Tony Martin, Jérôme Coppel (), as well as van Garderen's team-mate Cadel Evans and 2010 winner Janez Brajkovič () all lost time in comparison to Wiggins; Martin placed best in fifth position, although Evans also made the top ten, in ninth place.

With no fewer than six categorised climbs during the parcours, the first mass-start stage was not ideally suited towards the sprinters, but was favourable towards puncheurs, as the final of the six climbs – the third-category "Côte de la Sizeranne" – came just from the stage's finish in Saint-Vallier. Six riders – Giovanni Bernaudeau (), rider Markel Irizar, 's Maarten Tjallingii, Nicolas Edet of , Sep Vanmarcke () and rider Yukihiro Doi – advanced clear of the main field in the early running of the stage; the sextet managed to extend their advantage to a maximum of over thirteen minutes around a quarter of the way through the stage. Around the same point, a crash involving Pierrick Fédrigo () and Samuel Sánchez () brought both riders down. Neither rider returned to the main group, as Fédrigo lost over six minutes and Sánchez almost four times that; losing almost 24 minutes, after reports that he had been suffering with broken ribs. He was taken to hospital after the stage, where he was diagnosed with bruised ribs.

The teams of several of the general classification contenders were prevalent on the front of the peloton as they set about reducing the advantage that the breakaway group of six riders were holding over them. The gap had been reduced to around the three-minute mark with left of the stage to cover. Another big crash happened some later with 's Simon Gerrans, rider Pim Ligthart and Dan Martin of among those to hit the tarmac. moved forward, and pulled the gap under two minutes and caused the breakaway to splinter through pressure. Bernaudeau – who had figured at each of the mountain passes to the point – and Doi failed to stay with their companions as they approached the day's final climb, the "Côte de la Sizeranne". Tjallingii was also dropped by the remaining members of the breakaway, while in the main field, Alexander Vinokourov () and Andy Schleck of  – who had been criticised by team manager Johan Bruyneel for his poor opening half to the season – were both struggling off the back of the group. Both riders lost over three minutes by the stage end.

As the lead group approached the top of the "Côte de la Sizeranne", Irizar attacked from the group of the remaining three breakaway riders, while Vanmarcke and Edet were joined by rider Pierre Rolland, who had escaped the confines of the main group itself. Another three-rider move went forwards from the peloton as Rolland's team-mate Cyril Gautier, 's Luis León Sánchez and rider Philippe Gilbert got clear by several seconds. Irizar held a slim advantage, but overshot a corner and was eventually caught with around to go. As Irizar was caught, Jérôme Coppel of counter-attacked, and was eventually joined by Cadel Evans – a team-mate of Gilbert at  – and 's Andrey Kashechkin, who finished third in the race in 2007. The trio managed to hold off the closing peloton into the finish, where Evans managed to fend off the advances of Coppel and Kashechkin to take the stage win. rider Nacer Bouhanni led home the peloton just four seconds in arrears, and with race leader Luke Durbridge () not featuring in the split peloton, Bradley Wiggins assumed the race lead for ; Evans moved up to second, one second behind Wiggins.


Just like the previous day's stage, the second stage of the race also comprised six categorised climbs, packed into the route through the Ardèche region, with the highest point coming at the summit of the second-category "Col de Montivernoux". The finish in Saint-Félicien came at the end of a climb, which would more or less rule out the sprinters more obviously than the first stage parcours. rider Rémi Pauriol and 's Maxime Méderel broke clear of the peloton in the opening stages, and they were subsequently joined by a group which contained a number of overall race contenders including "maillot jaune et bleu" wearer Bradley Wiggins (), Vincenzo Nibali of and rider Sylvain Chavanel. The group was eventually reabsorbed back into the main group after around of racing.

After a period of stability within the main group, a four-rider move consisting of three French riders – David Moncoutié representing , Blel Kadri of and 's Christophe Kern, who won a stage during the 2011 race – as well as Colombia's Cayetano Sarmiento, riding for the team, advanced clear of the field and quickly established an advantage over them; of those, Kadri was best-placed at just eleven seconds behind Wiggins prior to the stage. marshalled the front of the peloton as a result, not letting the gap over four minutes at any point. Behind, there were several moves in order for riders to bridge a gap between the main field and the leaders; at the "Col de Lalouvesc" with to go, the leaders only held a gap of around half a minute over their chasers. Five riders tried to do so, but only one was able to stay in between the breakaway and the peloton.

's Anthony Roux was the rider in question, and he set off after the quartet up front, and was able to reach them with around remaining of the stage. However, the peloton was not far behind, and the breakaway did not last much longer after that. With the field back together, several riders attempted solo moves off the front of the peloton, including Kadri's team-mate Mickaël Cherel, but all were unsuccessful. The group remained together into the climb towards the finish; and headed the group, protecting their main riders Nibali and Cadel Evans from any potential trouble. World time trial champion Tony Martin tried to get clear within the final kilometre for but could not sustain a gap over everyone else, and rider Daniel Moreno timed his sprint perfectly, to take his third win of the season, ahead of French pair Julien Simon () and 's Tony Gallopin. Wiggins finished ninth to maintain his one-second overall lead over Evans, who was seventh.


With a lengthy individual time trial and three mountainous stages left during the itinerary, the third stage was billed as the sprinters' one remaining chance at a stage victory at the Dauphiné. As such, the parcours of the stage suited them; although there were three categorised climbs during the stage – a third-category climb and two fourth-category passes – they were all within the first half of the stage. Two riders – Spanish pairing Luis Ángel Maté of and rider Egoi Martínez – went clear almost immediately after the start of the stage, making the early breakaway from the field, and the duo managed to extend their advantage over the main field to around five-and-a-half minutes, within the first of the stage. Behind the lead pair, 's Giovanni Bernaudeau was the first rider from the peloton to cross the fourth-category climbs, and regained the lead of the mountains classification from rider Blel Kadri.


Unlike the third stage time trial in 2011, in which the course used in Grenoble largely set the route for the penultimate-day time trial in the Tour de France a month later, the time trial in the 2012 event was held on an independent course, running from west-to-east between Villié-Morgon and Bourg-en-Bresse, with an undulating parcours that only amounted to a difference in altitude from start to finish. As was customary of time trial stages, the riders set off in reverse order from where they were ranked in the general classification at the end of the previous stage. Thus, Arnaud Gérard of , who, in 172nd place – of the 175 starters – trailed overall leader Bradley Wiggins () by thirty minutes and forty-nine seconds, was the first rider to set off on the stage. However, he was not the first to finish as he was passed by the two riders directly behind him on the start order, that started at one-minute intervals, Dan Martin of and 's Travis Meyer.

Meyer recorded a time of one hour, seven minutes and fifty seconds as he was first to reach the line; his time held for around a quarter of an hour, as no rider could get within twenty seconds of his time, until his team-mate Luke Durbridge, the prologue winner and incumbent under-23 world time trial champion crossed the finish line in a time of one hour, four minutes and forty-nine seconds, just over three minutes quicker than Meyer. Durbridge's time held top spot for over two hours, as the majority of the field failed to match his time for the course. It was not until Wilco Kelderman of the team – starting 143rd as opposed to Durbridge starting 19th – had set quicker times at each of the intermediate timing points that Durbridge's time came under threat from another rider, and Kelderman ultimately beat Durbridge's time by twelve seconds, despite almost overshooting the final corner, narrowly avoiding the barriers on the outside of the corner. At the end of the stage, Kelderman stated that his performance came as "a surprise", taking the lead of the young rider classification from Tony Gallopin () in the process.

The first of four riders to start within the final twenty-five riders, Chris Froome got within eight seconds of Kelderman's time, but it was not until another of the team's riders, Michael Rogers, that the lead changed hands. Although he trailed at the first intermediate point, Rogers overhauled the time of Kelderman at the finish by fourteen seconds; he held the lead into the final five starters, where it was then taken by the world time trial champion Tony Martin, riding for the team. Martin bettered the time of Rogers by 37 seconds, but it was not to last as Wiggins was cementing his overall lead. Wiggins made up a deficit of seven seconds to Martin at the first intermediate point, and turned it into a 36-second lead in the space of , eventually taking the stage victory by 34 seconds over Martin. Such was Wiggins' performance, which he later deemed "satisfying", that he was almost catching Cadel Evans () on the road, despite Evans starting two minutes before Wiggins; Evans ultimately finished the stage in eighth position, 1' 43" down on Wiggins' time. rider Andy Schleck, another of the overall contenders for the Tour de France along with Evans and Wiggins, lost over ten minutes to Wiggins on the stage after a crash and a puncture.


The first of three mountainous stages to conclude the Dauphiné, the fifth stage of the race was seen as a precursor to the tenth stage of July's Tour de France, with the majority of the day's route making up the parcours of that stage to be held on 11 July. Three categorised climbs were part of the parcours of the day, notably the hors catégorie "Le Grand Colombier" – making its début in the race – with an average gradient of 6.9%, reaching up to an altitude of , but the summit of the final climb – the "Col de Richemond" – came with remaining of the stage. Mini-attacks set the course of the early running of the stage, which was carried out a quick pace, with the peloton covering in the first hour of racing. After rider Blel Kadri escaped out of the peloton to take the honours at the first summit of the day, the "Côte de Corlier", it was not until the uncategorised "Col de la Berche" several kilometres later that a group of riders managed to get clear.
A total of ten riders went clear, and quickly gathered a five-minute lead over the rest of the field. At the foot of "Le Grand Colombier", another seven riders formed a chase group on the road ahead of the peloton, which was later reduced to just Christophe Kern () and Brice Feillu (), after Kern had upped the pace in the group. At this point, Kern's team-mate Kévin Reza was dropped from the lead group, and the peloton itself had been slimmed to around fifty riders, with Sylvain Chavanel () and David Millar () – both in the top ten of the general classification overnight – along with 's Alexander Vinokourov among those that did not feature within the peloton. On the descent from the climb, a group of riders including Cadel Evans, George Hincapie and Tejay van Garderen broke out from the peloton, in the hope of pulling Evans nearer the overall lead of 's Bradley Wiggins, following his time loss the previous day in the individual time trial.

Having caught Kern and Feillu on the road, the group lost ground to the peloton and with Wiggins later joining up with the group, Evans' efforts were in vain; with the group now back together as a whole, their efforts went back to the original break. Kern was part of another six-rider wave that went clear on the descent from the "Col de Richemond", with the highest-placed rider being ninth-placed Luis León Sánchez of . took up station on the front of the main field, not allowing Sánchez to gain too much ground. The gap peaked out at around the 30-second mark and with nobody looking to help Sánchez with the pace-making in the group, they sat up and allowed to be reabsorbed into the peloton. 's Arthur Vichot attacked out of the lead group with around to go, and soloed away from his breakaway companions to take the victory by 26 seconds from the rest of the group. The peloton crossed the line around one minute down on Vichot, with Wiggins maintaining his 38-second overall lead as he was part of that group.


The queen stage of the 2012 Dauphiné, the penultimate stage consisted of six categorised climbs during its parcours, the first of which coming after only with the first-category "Col de Plainpalais". After a pair of third-category passes, the field tackled another first-category climb, the "Col de la Colombière" coming with remaining of the stage. Inside the final , the day's two remaining climbs were ascented; the third-category "Côte de Châtillon", and the race's second and final hors catégorie climb, with the "Col de Joux Plane" – reaching an altitude of  – being the start of the run-in towards Morzine, with the summit of the climb coming with to go of the stage.
Nineteen riders went clear of the peloton almost immediately after the start of the stage; among those riders were the two combatants for the mountains classification, Blel Kadri of and 's Cayetano Sarmiento. Sarmiento took out maximum points at each of the first two climbs, and thus extended his points advantage that he held over Kadri. With 's Tiago Machado being the best-placed rider of the group at almost six minutes down on overall leader Bradley Wiggins (), Wiggins' team-mates were leading the peloton around four minutes down on the lead group. rider Andriy Hryvko, who had been in the top three earlier in the race, then joined the group after attacking out the front of the peloton. 's Brice Feillu accelerated out of the lead group on the "Côte de Châtillon", and soon picked up a gap of over a minute ahead of his former breakaway companions, while the peloton had fallen a little further away from Feillu, as they were almost four-and-a-half minutes behind on the climb.


Although the stage was relatively short at in length, the parcours still featured five categorised climbs – of which one was to the finish in Châtel – reaching its highest point with the first-category "Col du Corbier". Mini-attacks set the course of the early running of the stage, with the field remaining as a whole for the first hour of racing after the attacks were closed down within minutes. It was not until a third of the way through the stage – some in – that a move was allowed to be established on the road, as rider Pierre Rolland, 's Jérôme Coppel and Lieuwe Westra of accelerated out of the peloton. They were later joined by five more riders as pairing Sylvain Chavanel and Stijn Vandenbergh, 's Dmitry Fofonov, Yaroslav Popovych of and Christophe Le Mével representing the team provided some assistance to the breakaway move.

Coppel was the best-placed rider of the octet, as he was in fifteenth place overall overnight around four-and-a-half minutes down on race leader Bradley Wiggins (); as such, the breakaway's advantage was not allowed to gather momentum and the gap remained between two and two-and-a-half minutes for the majority of the stage. allowed to carry out most of the work in the peloton, with Wiggins keeping an eye on their rider Cadel Evans, who had made a late-race attack the previous day and gained time back to Wiggins. Coppel, Westra and Rolland, the break initiators, then went clear again on the second-category "Côte de la Vernaz", but the peloton were still closing in on them, after chasing down a group that had got clear on the climb. Vincenzo Nibali () remained off the front, and tried to close down the leaders. Rolland and Coppel dropped Westra on the descent from the following "Col du Corbier" climb, where he was eventually joined by Nibali, but the solo move that he had put in was starting to show as he could not stay with Westra, and was eventually caught by the -led peloton with around remaining.

Westra was caught not long after that as the lead duo's advantage was diminishing by the kilometre, as they held a half-minute lead into the final . 's Alexandre Geniez attacked out of the main group, and caught his two countrymen up the road but the breakaway was not to succeed as they were caught with to go. took the front in the hope of a second stage win for Daniel Moreno, but Fabrice Jeandesboz attacked in the final kilometre for but was closed down by Richie Porte, protecting his team leader Wiggins. Moreno and 's Luis León Sánchez battled it out for the stage honours, with Moreno edging out his compatriot for the victory. Wiggins crossed the line ten seconds behind the nine-man lead group, but was sufficient enough for a second consecutive Dauphiné title by 1' 17" over team-mate Michael Rogers. Evans later stated that he was beaten by "the better rider", but remained pleased with his performance of third place, a stage victory and the points classification title.

In the 2012 Critérium du Dauphiné, four different jerseys were awarded. For the general classification, calculated by adding each cyclist's finishing times on each stage, the leader received a yellow jersey with a blue bar. This classification was considered the most important of the 2012 Critérium du Dauphiné, and the winner of the classification was considered the winner of the race.
Additionally, there was a points classification, which awarded a green jersey. In the points classification, cyclists got points for finishing highly in a stage. For the first three mass-start stages – stages 1, 2 and 3 – the win earned 25 points, second place earned 22 points, third 20, fourth 18, fifth 16, and one point fewer per place down to a single point for 20th. For the prologue, individual time trial and final three stages, the win earned 15 points, second place earned 12 points, third 10, fourth 8, fifth 6, and one point fewer per place down to a single point for 10th.

There was also a mountains classification, the leadership of which was marked by a red and white polka-dot jersey. In the mountains classification, points were won by reaching the top of a climb before other cyclists. Each climb was categorised as either hors, first, second, third, or fourth-category, with more points available for the higher-categorised climbs. Hors catégorie climbs awarded the most points, with 20 points on offer for the first rider across the summit; the first ten riders were able to accrue points towards the mountains classification, compared with the first eight on first-category passes and the first six riders on second-category climbs. Fewer points were on offer for the smaller hills, marked as third-category or fourth-category.

The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification, marked by a white jersey. This was decided the same way as the general classification, but only riders born after 1 January 1987 were eligible to be ranked in the classification. There was also a classification for teams, in which the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added together; the leading team at the end of the race was the team with the lowest total time.


</doc>
<doc id="36035016" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36035016" title="The Wedding Dance">
The Wedding Dance

The Wedding Dance (sometimes known as The Dance Village) is a 1566 oil-on-panel painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder. Owned by the museum of the Detroit Institute of Arts in Detroit, Michigan, the work was discovered by its director in England in 1930, and brought to Detroit. It is believed to be one of a set of three Bruegel works from around the same time, "The Wedding Dance", "The Peasant Wedding" (1567) and "The Peasant Dance" (1569).

The painting depicts 125 wedding guests. As was customary in the Renaissance period, the brides wore black and men wore codpieces. Voyeurism is depicted throughout the entire art work; dancing was disapproved of by the authorities and the church, and the painting can be seen as both a critique and comic depiction of a stereotypical oversexed, overindulgent, peasant class of the times.

Pieter Bruegel the Elder completed "The Wedding Dance" in 1566. It is believed to have been lost for many years, until discovered at a sale in London in 1930 by William R. Valentiner, the director of the Museum Detroit Institute of Arts at the time. Valentiner paid $35,075 for "The Wedding Dance" through a city appropriation. It is still owned by the museum.

"The Peasant Wedding" (1567) and "The Peasant Dance" (1569) are also by Bruegel which share the same wedding theme and elements and were painted in the same period in Bruegel's later years. They are considered to be a trilogy of works by Bruegel. In all three of the paintings, there are pipers playing the pijpzak (bagpipes), they also exude pride and vanity, for example in "The Peasant Dance" the man seated next to the pijpzak player is wearing a peacock feather in his hat.

Robert L. Bonn, an author, described these trilogy of works as "superb examples" of anthropological paintings, and states that "in three genre paintings Bruegel stands in marked contrast both to painters of his day and many others who followed." Thomas Craven summarises "The Wedding Dance" as "One of several celebrations of the joys of gluttony painted by Brueghel with bursting vitality". Walter S. Gibson, an art historian, also views the paintings as a "sermon condemning gluttony" and "an allegory of the Church abandoned by Christ."

The popular painting shows a group of 125 wedding guests wearing clothing from the times, presented in the canvas in an apparently chaotic way in an outdoor party surrounded by trees. The brides wore black as it was the Renaissance period and the men wore codpieces, which were an important part of their clothing at the time. Voyeurism (spying on people engaged in intimate behaviours) is shown throughout the entire work amongst almost all of the people.

Each guest's positioning in the painting has its own meaning. In the foreground there is a dancer wearing the colours of that time period and there are many peasants in that area. In the middle there is the bride dancing with an older man, her father. On the right of the work, there is a musician playing on a pijpzak, who is watching the dance from the side. Judging by the writing utensils hanging on his belt, he is a writer or possibly a middle-class painter. Behind him is a hanging tablecloth decorated with a crown and beneath it is the bride's table. Before her table, money collectors can be seen digging trenches while the wedding guests sit down and eat.

The movements of the people show that their behaviour is inappropriate or a caricature of rustic buffoonery, but its representation of fertility and reproduction is presented in a joyful manner. Indeed, the painting reflects a degree of ambiguity in that it can both be seen as an attack on the stereotypical oversexed behaviour of the lower orders as well as evoking a comical picture. In the sixteenth century, when this was painted, dance was subject to a strict code and regarded by the authorities and church as a social evil. People could not swing their arms or legs or laugh too loud, as that would be considered a type of rudeness to many people. The painting therefore "expresses the peasants' liberation from the stricter limits of upper classes" by failing to adhere to the expected social standards of the times.

The author of "The Theme of Music in Northern Renaissance Banquet Scenes", Robert Quist, has said that the painting was part of a series of Seven Deadly Sins and Virtues and that the paintings "attest to [Bruegel's] moral devotions". He says "While dancing may appear innocuous or natural for peasants, it poses a palpable threat to the human soul. Its [dancing] usefulness in characterizing the peasantry as wild and unruly undoubtedly derives from the moral opprobrium in which dancing was held by religious and civil authoriries alike.




</doc>
<doc id="36045303" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36045303" title="2008 Indian Premier League Final">
2008 Indian Premier League Final

The 2008 Indian Premier League Final was a day/night Twenty20 cricket match played between the Rajasthan Royals and the Chennai Super Kings on 1 June 2008 at the DY Patil Stadium, Navi Mumbai to determine the winner of the 2008 Indian Premier League, a professional Twenty20 cricket league in India. It ended as the Royals defeated the Super Kings by three wickets.

The Royals, captained by Shane Warne, topped the group stage table, whereas the Super Kings, led by Mahendra Singh Dhoni, stood at the third position. They had defeated the Delhi Daredevils and the Kings XI Punjab respectively in the semi-finals.

Winning the toss, Royals' captain Shane Warne opted to field first. The Super Kings scored 163 runs in 20 overs with a loss of 5 wickets. Batting at number three, Suresh Raina top scored for the Super Kings with 43 runs. Royals' bowler Yusuf Pathan took three wickets for 22 runs. The Royals failed to build a good opening partnership. However, due to contributions from the middle order, it reached the winning total in the last ball and earned the 2008 Indian Premier League title. Pathan, who was the best performer for the Royals with both bat and ball, was named the man of the match.

The Super Kings started its campaign with four consecutive wins, but lost its next three matches to the Daredevils, the Royals and the Deccan Chargers. It qualified for the semifinals after winning four of its last seven league matches. The Royals lost its first match in the group stage to the Daredevils. However, it won all of its next five matches. Then, it suffered a defeat against the Mumbai Indians, but went on to win its next six matches. It lost the last group stage match against the Kings XI.

The two teams faced each other in two matches of the group stage, both of which were won by the Royals. The Royals had played a match in the tournament before at the DY Patil Stadium; it lost the match by seven wickets. The Super Kings played at the stadium for the first time in the finals.

The Royals played the Daredevils in the first semi-final. The Daredevils won the toss and decided to field first. The Royals got an opening partnership of 65 runs. Its middle-order batsmen Shane Watson and Yusuf Pathan scored 52 and 45 runs respectively to help it amass 192 runs for the loss of 9 wickets. Batting second, the Daredevils lost its first five batsmen for just 55 runs. Tillakaratne Dilshan top-scored for the Daredevils with 33 runs. The Daredevils was bowled out in the 17th over for just 87 runs, and gave its counterpart a 105-run victory. Watson, who took 3/10, had the best bowling figures for the Royals, and was awarded the man of the match for his all-round performance.

In the second semi-final, Super Kings played the Kings XI. The Kings XI won the toss and elected to bat first, but its top six batsman failed and only one of them reached double figures. However, due to significant contributions from the lower-order, Punjab managed to reach a total of 112/8. Super Kings fast bowler Manpreet Gony took 3 wickets by conceding just 14 runs. In reply, Super Kings lost its first wicket when Vidyut Sivaramakrishnan were dismissed for 6 runs. However, both Parthiv Patel and Suresh Raina scored a half century each and took the Super Kings to the target with 31 balls to spare. The Super Kings won the match by nine wickets, and Makhaya Ntini was given the man of the match award.

The match was hosted by Mumbai because the franchise owner of the Mumbai Indians placed the highest bid for acquisition, which was 111.9 million. Before the match, ESPNCricinfo assistant editor Nagraj Gollapudi identified the Royals as the most likely winner. Despite being seen as the underdogs, the Royals finished at the top of the league table, and won 11 matches out of 14 with 22 points. The Super Kings stood third, behind Kings XI, getting 16 points from eight wins. There were two changes in the Royals' playing eleven for the final; Graeme Smith and Mahesh Rawat were replaced by Kamran Akmal and Niraj Patel. Smith was ruled out of the match as he was suffering from a hamstring injury. The Super Kings fielded the same side as in its semi-final win over the Kings XI.

Despite the fact that the home team Mumbai Indians was not playing, the match attracted a huge number of spectators. They were exposed to performances by Amrita Arora, Shamita Shetty, Dia Mirza, Salman Khan and Cirque du Soleil. Then a laser show was organised. The match was a day/night match, and started at 20:18 Indian Standard Time (IST) (). The toss took place at 20:00 IST in the presence of Lalit Modi and match referee Javagal Srinath. Modi flipped the coin, and Royals' captain Warne called heads; the coin turned out to be heads, and Warne won the toss.

Sunil Gavaskar had said in his match report that the batsmen will be required to play more on the front foot because of the inconstant bounce. The pitch was patchy, and Warne chose to field first. The Super Kings lost its first batsman as Sivaramakrishnan went out for 16 runs. He was caught by Ravindra Jadeja when Pathan was up. Sivaramakrishnan pulled a fast ball to deep mid-wicket, and Jadeja took a "well-judged catch". Sivaramakrishnan made 16 runs in 14 balls at a strike rate of 114.28, and played an opening partnership of 39 runs with P. Patel. After that, Raina joined P. Patel, and both of them made 25 runs for the second wicket partnership with a run rate of 6.81. P. Patel was caught in the last ball of the ninth over. Similar to the previous wicket, Pathan bowled a flat and fast ball, P. Patel tried to play it towards the third man. However, the ball edged towards the wicket-keeper Akmal, who initially dropped the ball, but caught it afterwards. P. Patel made 38 runs in 33 balls and hit five boundaries. The next wicket was of Albie Morkel, who made 16 runs out of 13 balls. Pathan again bowled a flat fast ball, which was top edged by Morkel. The ball went into the air, and was eventually caught by Akmal. However this resulted in the collision of Akmal and Mohammad Kaif as both were trying to take the catch, and both of them got injured. Four overs later, Jadeja caught Raina on Watson, breaking a 33 runs fourth wicket partnership between him and captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni. Watson bowled a full length ball outside off stump. Raina played it towards long off, but failed to get enough distance and Jadeja caught the ball at the boundary. Chamara Kapugedera joined Dhoni after the dismissal of Raina, a decision which "punctured" the momentum in the slog overs. Kapugedera made eight runs by acing 12 balls, before being caught by Swapnil Asnodkar on Sohail Tanvir. Tanvir bowled an angling slower ball, which was lofted on the front foot by Kapugedera. The ball was caught by long-on fielder Asnodkar. With the last five balls remaining in the innings, Dhoni and Subramaniam Badrinath together made 15 runs, and Badrinath made six runs off two balls. Dhoni made 29 runs not out, facing 17 balls, in which he hit two fours and one six. Pathan had the best figures with the ball for the Royals, as he took three wickets for 22 runs in four overs. Tanvir and Watson got one wicket each and gave 40 and 29 runs respectively. Warne gave 34 runs in his four overs, but failed to get any wicket. Munaf Patel and Siddharth Trivedi gave 14 and 21 runs respectively in their two overs each.

In reply, the Royals lost its first batsman as N. Patel went out after scoring two runs in 11 balls. Manpreet Gony bowled a full length ball outside the off stump, which hit the leg stump after getting an inside edge as N. Patel opted to pull it. He went out in the first ball of the fourth over, leaving his team at 19 runs with loss of one wicket. The Royals lost its second opener when Raina caught Asnodkar as he hit a full and wide ball by Morkel to point. He made 28 runs facing 20 balls. In the same over, Makhaya Ntini ran out Akmal with a direct hit. Akmal played the ball to mid-on, but Ntini glided downwards and threw the ball at the stumps. After the fall of Akmal's wicket, Watson and Pathan started playing more aggressively, and scored 65 runs for a fourth wicket partnership at a run rate of 8.66; this was also the highest partnership of the match. In the eleventh over, Raina dropped Pathan on Murlitharan at deep midwicket. At the end of the thirteenth over, the Royals reached a score of 100 runs. In the fifteenth over, Muralitharan broke the partnership as he bowled Watson; the ball hit the leg stump. The next wicket was of Kaif, who was caught by Dhoni on Muralitharan. Kaif pushed a flat doosra, and Dhoni took a simple catch at cover. In the next ball, Jadeja went out for a golden duck. Morkel bowled a short ball, and Jadeja tried to pull it. However the ball went to mid-on, and Kapugedera caught the ball after running towards his left. In the same over, Raina ran out Pathan with a direct hit at the stumps. Morkel bowled a full ball which was pushed by Warne to point. He ran for a single, but Raina hit the stumps, running out off-striker Pathan. Pathan went out scoring a half-century; he made 56 runs out off 39 balls with a strike rate of 143.58 and hit three fours and four sixes. The Royals needed 18 runs at the end of the eighteenth over. The second last over was bowled by Ntini, in which he gave up ten runs. In the last ball of the over, Ntini bowled a good length ball, and Warne hit a four by Warne at cover. In the last over, the Royals required eight runs, and Dhoni gave the ball to Lakshmipathy Balaji. Six runs were required from the last three balls, but Balaji bowled a wide outside off stump, which was missed by the wicket-keeper P. Patel. This resulted in two extra runs. In the next ball, Warne hit a full ball for a run. The Royals needed three runs from the last two balls. Tanvir played the fifth legal delivery of the over, which was an angling full toss. Tanvir hit the ball at the long leg, and ran two runs. The Royals needed one more run off the last ball, with Tanvir on strike; Balaji bowled him a short ball. Warne had already covered the half distance of the pitch when Tanvir hit the ball. The two batsmen ran for a single and the Royals won the match. Both of them remained not out with nine runs each. Morkel and Muralitharan got two wickets each, giving 25 and 39 runs respectively. Gony got one wicket, whereas Ntini and Balaji had none.

Pathan received the award for maximum sixes in a match; he hit four sixes in the match. He was also named the man of the Match.


Key

The Royals received and a trophy for being the champions. Royals' players received their medals from Sharad Pawar in the post-match ceremony. Warne said:
It's been a fantastic journey. We're gelled together really quickly. It makes me proud to see so many young guys learning and executing their skills in the middle. I think the crowds all over India have made the atmosphere amazing. Congratulations to Chennai. It's been a wonderful ride for us. Royals' Tanvir was given the purple cap for getting the highest number of wickets in the league. Watson was declared as the man of the series; he scored 474 runs and took 17 wickets in the season. The Super Kings received for being the runners-up. Dhoni said:
I think the standard of our cricket was really good. We were up to the mark in the finals. We lost as a team. There were a few errors in batting and bowling. We're not really unhappy or bogged down by it. We'll go back to our hotel and enjoy it. That's what sport is all about. the response from our team was great. even the guys who didn't get a chance were completely behind the team. So the spirit was great."

Both teams qualified for the 2008 Champions League Twenty20. However, the tournament was cancelled due to the 2008 Mumbai attacks and both teams were given each as compensation.



</doc>
<doc id="36197536" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36197536" title="Sexify">
Sexify

"Sexify" is a song recorded by American singer Leah LaBelle, which was released on May 1, 2012, as part of the sampler album "Pharrell Williams and Jermaine Dupri Present Leah LaBelle" (2012). Written and produced by Pharrell Williams, it was the first song that LaBelle recorded with Williams as part of a joint record deal with Epic Records, So So Def Recordings, and I Am Other. It is an R&B song that features throwback elements to 1990s music. In its lyrics inspired by headlines from the women's fashion magazine "Cosmopolitan", LaBelle instructs a woman on how to draw and keep the attention of a man.

"Sexify" received mostly positive reviews from music critics who praised LaBelle's sound and Williams' production. It did receive some criticism, with one critic questioning whether the throwback nature of the single would negatively affect its commercial potential. The song peaked at number 23 and number 89 on the Adult R&B Songs and the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs "Billboard" charts respectively. It had a large increase in digital downloads after its inclusion in an episode of "".

The song's accompanying music video was directed by Sarah Chatfield and shows LaBelle holding a pizza party with her friends, after giving them advice on how to "sexify" themselves. It features cameos from Williams, So So Def Recording's founder Jermaine Dupri, and American singer JoJo. LaBelle performed the song live during promotional appearances at New York City media outlets.

Initially rising to fame in 2004 as a finalist on the third season of "American Idol", Leah LaBelle found minor success through releasing covers of songs on her YouTube account. American record producer Pharrell Williams discovered LaBelle through her videos and called So So Def Recording's founder and CEO Jermaine Dupri for his opinion regarding her. In 2011, LaBelle was signed to a joint record deal with L.A. Reid's company Epic Records, Dupri's So So Def Recordings, and Williams' label I Am Other. LaBelle said that Williams and Dupri were drawn to her style of performing.

Recorded in Miami, "Sexify" was the first song that LaBelle and Williams completed together; it was written and produced solely by Williams. Additional and assistant engineering was carried out by Beau Villas and Matthew Desremeaux. The track was mixed by Jimmy Douglass, and mastered by Dave Kutch. Andrew Coleman recorded and edited the final product.

On May 1, 2012, "Sexify" was released as part of the sampler album "Pharrell Williams and Jermaine Dupri Present Leah LaBelle"; it also included four other tracks: "So Hot", "Make Me Get Up", "What Do We Got To Lose?", and "Mr. Scissors". LaBelle described the sampler as representative of her overall sound, calling it "that feel-good-texture music" with a "throwback-but-new feel". "Sexify" was released separately as a digital download on the following dates in July depending upon the country: (July 19, July 22, and July 29).

"Sexify" is a three-minute, 28-second R&B song that was inspired by headlines from the women's fashion magazine "Cosmopolitan". According to LaBelle, the song originated from a discussion with Williams about "the Cosmopolitan women of today", and the duo compiled a list of frequently used phrases from the magazine that could be used as lyrics. "Cosmopolitan"'s Korin Miller connected the single's title with a headline from the magazine's November 2011 cover: "Sexify Your Eyes".

The lyrics feature LaBelle offering advice on how to keep a man's attention and sexual interest. LaBelle described the single as an "anthem for women", in which she defined the term "sexify" as a way for women to "make [themselves] feel comfortable and confident and happy and proud" or help their men feel the same way. The chorus is accompanied by a "summery two-step tune", including lyrics such as "I gotta whole bunch of ways" and "He'll come home girl / If you know what I mean." LaBelle continues to instruct women by singing: "I'll sexify you / Have you thinking about my name in the middle of the day."

Bradley Stern of MuuMuse described "Sexify" as a "throwback to classic, feel-good R&B"; LaBelle's vocal performance was viewed as "raspy" by Soulbounce.com. During an interview with "Essence", LaBelle said that she was first introduced to R&B music after her parents emigrated from Bulgaria to the United States. She recounted that she was initially discouraged from pursuing a career in the genre, but later said that she was not concerned with "the clichés surrounding white artists singing R&B". She followed this up saying: "I just want to make good music. I'm here and I'm doing what I love and the music that I love. It's going to reach who it's supposed to reach." LaBelle was identified as a blue-eyed soul singer by "Essence."

"Sexify" received primarily positive reception from music critics, with the single being called a "fun-girl talk anthem" and "a wonderful introduction to Leah's soulful sound" by BET. It was praised for being catchy and radio-friendly by Singersroom and "Complex". Nicole James found the song to be "a much needed dose of late-'90s R&B realness". The single was listed as an example of the female R&B revival in 2012 by MTV's Katherine St. Asaph, who commended it as "retro-sassy" and "improbably great". Alternatively, SoulBounce.com felt that the throwback nature of the song would limit its chances for commercial success.

Critics also positively commented on LaBelle's vocal performance. Korin Miller praised LaBelle's vocals during a live performance, calling the lyrics "so fun and Cosmo-y". "Rap-Up" also complimented LaBelle's voice as powerful, and wrote that the instrumental was an example of a "signature Pharrell production". Nicole James of Fuse wrote that the song had a similar throwback style to that of Brandy, Alicia Keys, and Whitney Houston. The single was determined to be a good match for LaBelle's voice by SoulBounce.com, who called it a "solid enough cut". "Complex"'s Jacob Moore wrote that the single and its accompanying video positively showcased LaBelle's look and sound.

In May 2012, "Sexify" reached a position of number three on the Bubbling Under R&B/Hip-Hop Singles "Billboard" chart. It debuted on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs "Billboard" chart three weeks later, and went on to peak at number 89 in July. It stayed on the chart for a total of ten weeks. "Sexify" later peaked at number 23 on the Adult R&B Songs "Billboard" chart on August 4, and remained on the chart for a total of ten weeks. Following the song's inclusion in "", LaBelle's digital sales increased by over 500 percent. It was featured in the fourth episode of the first season of the series during a scene in which "Scrappy reveals that he and Shay are more than just friends".

A lyric video for the single was released in April. A music video, filmed by director Sarah Chatfield, was completed in Los Angeles in March 2012. In the video, LaBelle instructs her friends over the phone about how to "sexify" themselves while taking a bubble bath and modeling clothing in her wardrobe. The video ends with LaBelle inviting them to a pizza party in her apartment. Close-ups to LaBelle's closet are shown throughout the video, as well as a product placement featuring Qream crème liqueur. It includes cameos by Williams as a pizza delivery boy, Dupri as LaBelle's landlord, and American singer JoJo as one of her friends. The music video premiered on MTV.com, and was introduced by LaBelle, Durpi, and Williams on the music video show "106 & Park". Nicole James complimented LaBelle's hairstyle, and described the video as her new favorite. Prior to the release of the music video, a behind-the-scenes clip was shown as an episode of "Living the Life", which included choreographer Fatima Robinson and LaBelle's mother.

LaBelle first performed "Sexify" during a promotional appearance at the "Cosmopolitan" headquarters, and later promoted the single through performances at "various New York media outlets", such as the "Billboard" and "The Boombox" offices. On May 4, "Cosmopolitan" offered free MP3 downloads of "Sexify" to new subscribers of LaBelle's mailing list, with the single being officially released on ITunes on June 19, 2012. LaBelle later performed the song at the "Essence" Music Festival, and a private benefit concert for the October 2012 issue of "Vanity Fair". During the 2012 International Yardfest at Howard University, she sang "Sexify" as part of a medley with Williams' 2003 single "Frontin'". The following year, she performed the single as a part of a set for BET's Music Matters held on the weekend of the 55th Annual Grammy Awards.

Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Sexify".



</doc>
<doc id="36245078" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36245078" title="1891–92 Sheffield United F.C. season">
1891–92 Sheffield United F.C. season

The 1891–92 season was the third in existence for Sheffield United. This was their first season playing in the recently formed Northern League as the club sought to establish itself as a major footballing force. The Blades had a reasonably successful season, finishing third in the league, and registering some comprehensive victories along the way. They improved on the previous season by reaching the second round proper of the FA Cup and were victorious in the local cup competitions, winning both the Sheffield Challenge Cup and the Wharncliffe Charity Cup for the first time.

Under the stewardship of Joseph Wostinholm, United continued to recruit more experienced players. Bob Cain was signed from Bootle and Harry Hammond arrived from Everton, both players cementing their place in United's first team for several years to come. Most significant however was the emergence of a young Ernest Needham who made his United debut in the early part of the season and would go on to be one of the club's greatest ever players and ultimately captain England. The season did see the first United players to gain international caps with both Harry Lilley and Michael Whitham appearing for England on 5 March, (although in different matches as England played two different games concurrently on that day.)

Football was developing and match referees were introduced for the first time for the 1891–92 season. Previously both sides had provided an umpire who jointly officiated the game and consulted with a third official should they be unable to agree. Penalty kicks were also introduced to penalise fouls made within eighteen yards of the goal, and United used nets in the goals at Bramall Lane for the first time.

The previous season had been a mixed one, with an improvement in the quality of players and increasing attendances for home games, but a mid–table finish in the Midland Counties League had been the result. Under the guidance of club secretary J.B. Wostinholm, the football committee still wanted to improve the standard of matches played by United and so opted to leave the Midland Counties League and seek election to The Football League instead. They were unsuccessful in their attempt, amidst accusations that local rivals The Wednesday had voted against their acceptance and had even petitioned other clubs to vote against their entry. Instead United joined the newly formed Northern League which comprised mainly teams from the north–east, meaning that their nearest away match in the league was at Darlington, some 85 miles away from Sheffield.

Despite now being focussed on league football, the club also arranged a large number of friendly fixtures throughout the season which resulted in a congested fixture list and United playing 75 first team games in the space of eight months. This season also saw the introduction of an official reserve side for United, dubbed The Sheffield Strollers, who played a number of fixtures in addition to those played by the first team.

United dropped the thin red vertical stripes that had been introduced the previous season, reverting to a plain white shirt along with blue shorts and socks. This season saw the introduction of a club crest (or badge) on the shirts for the first time, utilising a red heraldic shield emblazoned with three sheaves of wheat and a lions head, along with the letters SUFC.

United continued with a sizable turnover of playing staff but were now focusing on using their financial position to target experienced professionals rather than relying on the untried talents of previous seasons. Bob Cain and Harry Hammond arrived in August, recruited from Bootle and Everton respectively, while previous stalwarts like Edward Cross, Billy Bridgewater and W. Robertson were allowed to leave. A young Ernest Needham was promoted to the first team and began to feature regularly as the season progressed; he would eventually go on to make over 450 league appearances for the Blades and to captain England during his career.

The league season started well as United registered a 4–2 away victory over Sunderland Albion followed by two comprehensive home wins; beating Darlington 7–1 and South Bank 6–0. It was not until early November that the Blades dropped points, suffering a 3–0 home defeat by Middlesbrough before a 2–0 reverse at the hands of struggling Darlington.

United continued to add to the squad, signing keeper Will Lilley from Staveley, before registering a string of victories until the end of the year, culminating in a 6–0 win over Stockton at the end of December. The league then took a winter break of almost three months, not resuming until almost the end of March. The club continued to strengthen their attacking options by recruiting three additional forwards from Scotland; Sandy Wallace, John Scott and resigning former player James Duncan. William Calder and Harry Munro were both allowed to join Gainsborough Trinity, before United resumed their league campaign with a 4–3 loss away at Newcastle West End who were struggling at the bottom of the table. This signalled a down–turn in form and inconsistent results until the end of the season meant that United lost touch with the top of the table and eventually finished third.

United's growing reputation was such that their players were beginning to come to the attention of the FA and both Michael Whitham and Harry Lilley received an England call–up in March 1892. Both players made their debut on 5 March, Whitham in a Home Championship game against Ireland in Belfast, and Lilley in a friendly against Wales.

The club's organising football committee were still determined to gain entry to The Football League and applied for election for the second year in succession. On this occasion however United were successful and were given entry into the newly formed Second Division for the 1892–93 season. Cross–town rivals The Wednesday had also been accepted into the Football League, but had been placed in the First Division, much to the annoyance of United's board of directors. United asked to review the ballot papers upon which this decision had been based but were told that they had been destroyed, angering the club's directors still further.

As in previous years United had to play a number of qualifying rounds against local opposition before they gained entry to the FA Cup proper. Lincoln City were dispatched 4–1 at Bramall Lane, before much closer games against Grimsby and Gainsborough Trininty saw the Blades reach the first round proper. United travelled to Blackpool in the First Round, coming away comfortable 3–0 winners to secure a place in Round Two for only the second time. They met an experienced Wolverhampton Wanderers side at Molineux Stadium but were to progress no further, losing 3–1 to their Midlands opponents.

As football in the area developed, so the standing of the local cups diminished amongst the area's leading sides. United entered the Sheffield Challenge Cup at the third round stage and comfortably saw off Doncaster Rovers 4–0 at Bramall Lane. The semi-final saw an away trip to Kilnhurst, who the Blades beat by the same 4–0 scoreline to secure a place in the final for the second year in succession. United faced local rivals The Wednesday at Bramall Lane, but the opposition had fielded their reserve side during the competition and as such a largely second–string United side beat the Wednesday Wanderers 2–1 to lift the club's first ever trophy.

The Wharncliffe Charity Cup garnered even less attention this season and United were given an automatic place in the final where they faced Attercliffe at the Olive Grove ground, beating them 2–0 at the end of March to win their second trophy in a month.

As in the previous two seasons, the football committee filled the fixture list by arranging a large number of friendlies and exhibition games throughout the year. The results of these games were mixed and mirrored the team's performance in the league; starting promisingly in the Autumn but tailing off after the turn of the year. United began the programme well, gaining victories against emerging Woolwich Arsenal, and the established Notts County and Bolton Wanderers, in the early part of the season. From October onwards the results became less consistent with the Blades suffering heavy defeats at the hands of Grimsby Town and Birmingham St. George's. It wasn't until February that United's form improved, beating Burnley and Everton twice in consecutive games, running out 5–0 victors over the Merseyside club at Bramall Lane. Another run of poor results followed until the Blades registered their most comprehensive victory of the season at the end of March, beating Burnley 8–1.

For the second season in succession the highlights of the fixture list were the games against local rivals The Wednesday, with a record 22,900 supporters attending Bramall Lane to see the Blades record a 5–0 victory at the end of October. Just under a month later United lost the return fixture at Olive Grove 4–1 in front of a more modest crowd of just under 12,000.

Source:

Source:

Source:



</doc>
<doc id="36255370" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36255370" title="2012–13 York City F.C. season">
2012–13 York City F.C. season

The 2012–13 season was the 91st season of competitive association football and 76th season in the Football League played by York City Football Club, a professional football club based in York, North Yorkshire, England. Their promotion via the Conference Premier play-offs in 2011–12 meant they played in League Two, after an eight-year absence from the Football League. The season ran from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013.

Manager Gary Mills signed eight players before the close of the summer transfer window. Having stood 14th in the league table on New Year's Day, York were on an 11-match run without a win when Mills was dismissed in March 2013. He was replaced by former Northern Ireland manager Nigel Worthington, who led York to safety from relegation on the final day of the season. Having won four of their last five matches, the team finished the season 17th in the table. They lost in their opening round matches in both the 2012–13 FA Cup and the League Cup, and were eliminated in the second round of the Football League Trophy.

36 players made at least one appearance in nationally organised first-team competition, and there were 12 different goalscorers. Goalkeeper Michael Ingham played in all 50 first-team matches over the season. Ashley Chambers finished as leading scorer with 10 goals, all scored in the league. The winner of the Clubman of the Year award, voted for by the club's supporters, was Daniel Parslow, who became the first player to win the award for a third time.

The 2011–12 season was Gary Mills' first full season as York City manager, having taken over the role in October 2010. York finished the season with two major trophies after victories in the 2012 FA Trophy Final and the 2012 Conference Premier play-off Final, both of which were staged at Wembley Stadium. The FA Trophy victory represented York's first piece of silverware in 19 years and was achieved with a 2–0 victory over York's Conference Premier rivals Newport County. With goals from Ashley Chambers and Matty Blair, York beat Luton Town 2–1 in the play-off final to return to the Football League after an eight-year absence with promotion to League Two.

Following the previous season's conclusion Moses Ashikodi, Matthew Blinkhorn, Eugen Bopp and Scott Brown were released, while James Meredith, Adriano Moké and Danny Pilkington departed for Bradford City, Cambridge United and Kidderminster Harriers respectively. Jon Challinor, Chambers, Chris Doig, Jamal Fyfield, Michael Ingham, Scott Kerr and Daniel Parslow signed new contracts with York. New players signed ahead of the start of the season were defender Danny Blanchett from Burton Albion, midfielders Lee Bullock from Bradford City, John McReady from Darlington 1883 and Jonathan Smith from Swindon Town, winger Michael Coulson from Grimsby Town and striker Oli Johnson from Oxford United. Midfielder Tom Platt, the previous season's youth-team captain and Youth Team Player of the Year, entered the first-team squad after agreeing a professional contract.

The team adopted new home and away kits, with the home kit featuring red shirts with white sleeves, light blue shorts and white socks. The away kit comprised light blue shirts with white sleeves, white shorts and light blue socks. This was accompanied by a change in shirt sponsor, with Benenden Health's name becoming present on the team kits.

York started the season away to League One club Doncaster Rovers in the first round of the League Cup. Debutant Coulson gave York the lead with a long-range strike in the 65th minute before Chris Brown equalised for Doncaster, scoring a penalty kick nine minutes later. The match finished 1–1 after extra time and York went on to lose the penalty shoot-out 4–2. York's Football League return ended in defeat, being beaten 3–1 at home to Wycombe Wanderers. Wycombe took a three-goal lead before Jason Walker scored York's consolation in the 54th minute. York recorded their first point of the season after drawing 2–2 away to Morecambe, with Chris Smith and Chambers scoring the team's goals in the second half. This was followed by their first league victory, with Parslow, Chambers and Coulson scoring in the first half away to Barnet in a 3–1 win. Two days before the transfer deadline York signed three new players; defender Clarke Carlisle and striker Scott Dobie signed on free transfers and Charlie Taylor came on loan from Leeds United.

Coulson scored after 15 seconds to give York the lead at home to league leaders Oxford United, and with further goals from Chambers and Paddy McLaughlin the team went on to win 3–1. York won 1–0 away in their first round match of the Football League Trophy against Rotherham United, with Blair scoring an 80th-minute winner. Walker's equaliser in the fifth minute of stoppage time secured a 2–2 draw at home to Chesterfield. There had been three goals scored in a five-minute period in the first half; Chesterfield opened the scoring through Sam Hird and Coulson equalised for York before Craig Westcarr restored the visitors' lead. York drew their next match 1–1 away to Exeter City, having taken the lead through Coulson in the 52nd minute before the home team equalised when John O'Flynn scored in the 83rd minute. The team's first away defeat of the season came with a 3–1 defeat away to Burton Albion; after McLaughlin gave York a ninth-minute lead, Burton went on to win with goals from Lee Bell, Calvin Zola and Matt Paterson. A third draw in four matches came after York drew 0–0 at home to Cheltenham Town. Platt and Liam Henderson were sent out to Harrogate Town and Gainsborough Trinity on three-month and one-month loans respectively, while Dobie was released and Taylor had his loan extended for a second month. York's run of four matches without victory came to an end after a 2–0 win away to Aldershot Town, with Blair and Walker scoring in the second half.

The previous season's Conference Premier champions Fleetwood Town defeated York 2–0 at home, with goals in each half scored by Junior Brown and Steven Gillespie. Peterborough United midfielder Daniel Kearns was signed on a one-month loan and made his debut as a substitute in York's 0–0 home draw with Rotherham. York were knocked out of the Football League Trophy in the second round after being beaten 4–0 at home by League One team Coventry City. Chambers scored the opening goal for York away to Bradford in the first derby match between the teams in 16 years, but with Bradford scoring through Zavon Hines the match finished a 1–1 draw. Chambers and Blair scored as York beat Dagenham & Redbridge 3–2 at home, which was the team's first win in four league matches. York recorded a second successive victory away to Accrington Stanley, with Walker scoring an 83rd-minute winner in a 1–0 win. Bullock was loaned out to Gateshead of the Conference Premier for a month, with his appearances in the team being limited. A 0–0 draw away to Southend United saw York's run of victories come to an end.

Coulson was ruled out for the season with a cruciate ligament injury, while Kearns' loan was extended for a further two months. York conceded an 80th-minute equaliser at home to AFC Wimbledon in the first round of the FA Cup, with Charlie Strutton the scorer, after substitute Jamie Reed had earlier given York the lead. Jonathan Smith was loaned to Conference Premier club Luton until January 2013, having not started a match since September 2012. Blair gave York the lead at home to Northampton Town, and despite playing most of the match with ten men, the away team equalised through Adebayo Akinfenwa. Winger Alex Rodman, who had previously played under Mills at Tamworth, was signed on a two-month loan from Aldershot. He made his debut in York's home league match against AFC Wimbledon, which finished as a 3–0 defeat, with the visitors scoring their goals in the second half.

York were knocked out of the FA Cup after a 4–3 extra time defeat away to AFC Wimbledon in a first round replay. Jamie Reed scored in the 89th minute to hand York a 2–2 draw away to Port Vale, after Rodman had scored his first goal for the club earlier in the second half. Carlisle was loaned to divisional rivals Northampton ahead of a permanent transfer in January 2013, while Henderson joined Gateshead on loan and Bullock had his loan extended. York fell to a second successive home defeat after being beaten 2–0 by Torquay United, the away team scoring in each half through Danny Stevens and Joe Oastler. Despite his loan earlier being extended until January 2013, Kearns was recalled by Peterborough, having made 12 appearances for York.

York recorded their first win in eight matches after defeating Rochdale 3–2 away, with Michael Potts scoring twice and Walker scoring once in the first half. Youth-team defender Tom Allan signed a one-and-a-half-year professional contract with the club, with Mills saying, "Tom has come on unbelievably in the last 12 months and thoroughly deserves his first professional contract". York fell to a 2–0 defeat away to Plymouth Argyle, with Fyfield scoring an own goal in the 45th minute and Nick Chadwick scoring in the 90th minute. Jonathan Smith and Bullock were recalled from their loans ahead of York's home match against Bristol Rovers. York scored four first half goals to beat Bristol Rovers 4–1, with Garry Kenneth scoring an own goal, Chambers scoring twice and Walker scoring once. A second successive away defeat came away to Chesterfield on Boxing Day when York were beaten 3–0, with the home team scoring their goals during the second half. This run ended after a 0–0 draw away to Fleetwood, in which York missed a number of chances to score in the first half.

Jonathan Smith made a permanent move to Luton for a fee of £50,000 shortly after the transfer window opened. York won 3–0 in their New Year's Day home fixture against Burton, with Walker, McLaughlin and Blair scoring. Carlisle completed a permanent transfer to Northampton after the conclusion of his loan, while Henderson signed for Gateshead permanently after an agreement was reached over the remainder of his York contract. York were beaten 2–1 at home to Exeter, with a Rodman own goal giving the visitors the lead in the 14th minute. Potts equalised for York five minutes later, before Exeter scored the winning goal on 53 minutes through Jimmy Keohane. Rodman's loan from Aldershot was extended until the end of the season. Walker scored in the 84th minute to secure York a 1–1 draw away to Cheltenham, who had taken the lead in the 67th minute through Shaun Harrad. Striker Ben Everson, who last played for Breiðablik in the Úrvalsdeild karla, was signed on a contract for the rest of the season. Platt was loaned out for the second time in a season, joining Conference North club F.C. Halifax Town for one month. Everson made his debut as a 71st-minute substitute in a 0–0 draw at home to Aldershot.

Blackburn Rovers defender Jack O'Connell was signed on a one-month loan, while Salford City defender Jameel Ible was signed on a contract for the rest of the season. Blanchett was released after his contract was cancelled by mutual consent. York were leading Gillingham 1–0 away before the home team equalised five minutes from time through Cody McDonald, with York having taken the lead in the 17th minute through a McLaughlin goal straight from a corner kick. Striker David McDaid was signed from League of Ireland Premier Division club Derry City on a one-and-a-half-year contract for a small compensation fee, while defender Curtis Obeng was signed on a one-month loan from Premier League club Swansea City after Lanre Oyebanjo was ruled out for around six weeks with a fractured skull.

York were beaten 4–1 at home to Morecambe, with Walker scoring York's only goal with a first half penalty, before enduring their largest defeat of the season after losing 4–0 away to Wycombe.<ref name="Results/matches: 2012/13"></ref> Jamie Reed was loaned to Cambridge United for the rest of the season, with his opportunities in the team limited. Burton midfielder John McGrath and Aldershot striker Michael Rankine were signed on loan, with the former joining for one month and the latter for the rest of the season. Both started in York's 0–0 draw at home to Gillingham. York opened the scoring against Barnet at home through a David Stephens own goal, although goals from Andy Yiadom and Jake Hyde saw the away team win 2–1. Everson was loaned out to Gateshead for a month, having struggled for opportunities in the team, and Platt returned to Harrogate on loan for the remainder of the season. York drew 0–0 away to Oxford, with the best chance of the match falling to Blair when he headed straight at goalkeeper Luke McCormick. O'Connell's loan was extended until the end of the season. Daniel Nardiello scored a stoppage-time equaliser for Rotherham when York were leading 1–0, after the away team had taken the lead through Blair earlier in the second half. Johnson was released after making seven appearances for the club, having been hindered during the season by stomach and groin problems.

Mills was dismissed after nearly two and a half years in charge on 2 March 2013 after York were beaten 2–0 at home to Bradford, with the team sitting four points above the relegation zone after an 11-match run without a win. Former Northern Ireland manager Nigel Worthington was appointed as his successor two days later, with Fred Barber joining from Bury as his assistant. Mills' remaining coaching staff of Darron Gee, Des Lyttle and Paul Musselwhite left the club. Following his appointment, Worthington indicated the players out on loan would return to the club, saying, "It's only right that contracted players should be in and around the club over the next 10 matches as York City are paying their salaries and they should be part of anything that is going on in the next two months". Worthington's first signing was Sheffield Wednesday goalkeeper Arron Jameson, who joined on an emergency loan for the remainder of the season, while McGrath had his loan extended until the end of the season.

Worthington's first match in charge was a 3–2 defeat away to AFC Wimbledon, in which Chris Smith scored twice, before Harry Pell scored the home team's winner in the 79th minute. York picked up their first point under Worthington after a 0–0 home draw with Rochdale, with both teams having few opportunities to score. Ipswich Town midfielder Josh Carson was signed on a one-month loan, while Bullock was loaned to Stockport County of the Conference Premier for the rest of the season. Carson made his debut in York's 2–0 home defeat to Port Vale, who scored in each half through Jennison Myrie-Williams and Lee Hughes. Former York striker Richard Cresswell, who became the club's record sale in 1999, was signed from Sheffield United on a one-month loan. He scored a penalty in the team's 2–1 defeat away to Torquay, a result that saw York drop into the second relegation spot. Sunderland midfielder Adam Reed was signed on a one-month loan, while Ible was released. Adam Reed made his debut as York drew 0–0 away to Bristol Rovers, in which the home team's goalkeeper Steve Mildenhall made a number of saves.

York recorded their first win in 17 matches after beating Plymouth 2–0 at home, with Chambers and Cresswell scoring in the first half. McGrath, Rankine and Rodman were sent back to their parent clubs, having become surplus to requirements under Worthington. The team were denied a second successive win after Peter Murphy scored a stoppage-time equaliser for Accrington, with the match finishing a 1–1 home draw, after Adam Reed had given York the lead in first half stoppage time. Carson and Kerr were ruled out for the remainder of the season through injury, with the former returning to parent club Ipswich after the expiration of his loan. York recorded a second victory in three matches after winning 2–0 away to Northampton, who had been on a run of ten consecutive home wins, with Chambers scoring in the first half and John Johnson scoring an own goal in the second half. This result saw York rise out of the relegation zone by moving up to 20th place in the table, having occupied 23rd place following the previous four results. Cresswell was recalled from his loan by new Sheffield United caretaker manager Chris Morgan, after making an important contribution for York in their battle against relegation.

York picked up a third win in five matches by defeating Southend 2–1 at home with first half goals from Adam Reed and Blair. They remained in 20th position in the league following positive results for most of the teams surrounding them, meaning their relegation fight would not be concluded until after the last match of the season. Before the Southend match Parslow was named Clubman of the Year, voted for by the York supporters, becoming the first player to win the award on three occasions. York avoided relegation on the final day of the season after beating Dagenham 1–0 away, with Chris Smith scoring the only goal. This meant York finished their first season back in the Football League in 17th place in League Two, four points clear of the relegation zone.

York spent most of the season in midtable, rising as high as seventh place in September 2012 and dropping as low as 23rd in March 2013. The team recorded the second lowest number of wins in the League Two season with 12; bottom-placed Aldershot were the only team to win fewer matches with 11 victories. Ingham was the only ever-present player for York, appearing in all 51 matches. Chambers was top scorer with 10 goals in the league, being the only player to reach double figures, and was followed by Walker with nine goals.

Ahead of the new season, York released Bullock, Challinor, Doig, Everson, Kerr, McDaid, McLaughlin, Potts, Jamie Reed and Walker, while Blair left to sign for Fleetwood. David McGurk, Oyebanjo, Parslow, Platt and Chris Smith signed new contracts with the club. The club signed goalkeeper Chris Kettings on loan from Blackpool, defender Ben Davies on loan from Preston North End, midfielders Craig Clay from Chesterfield and Lewis Montrose from Gillingham, winger Sander Puri from St Mirren and strikers Ryan Bowman from Hereford United, Cresswell from Sheffield United, Wes Fletcher from Burnley and Ryan Jarvis from Torquay. Defender Mike Atkinson and striker Chris Dickinson entered the first-team squad from the youth team after agreeing professional contracts.

League positions are sourced by Statto, while the remaining information is referenced individually.



</doc>
<doc id="36275796" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36275796" title="Vanajan Autotehdas">
Vanajan Autotehdas

Vanajan Autotehdas Oy (VAT) was a producer of heavy vehicles based in Hämeenlinna, Finland. The company was founded as "Yhteissisu Oy" in 1943 by the Finnish government and a number of major Finnish companies with the aim of producing lorries and buses for the Finnish Defence Forces. World War II was over before the company could start series production; it was renamed Vanajan Autotehdas and the marque became Vanaja. Subsequently, the production consisted of outdated lorry models, partly built from military surplus materials. After overcoming initial difficulties, the company modernised its products, became profitable and grew until the mid 1950s. Many major components, including engines, were imported. Diesel engines became widely available in 1955, and in 1959 VAT introduced its most significant innovation, the full load lifting tandem axle mechanism, which improved off-road capability significantly; the system is now used in Sisu vehicles.

The company started producing bus chassis in 1950, and the superstructures were built by a number of Finnish coach builders. The last models were appreciated by a number of bus operators, and missed after production was stopped. All Vanaja bus chassis were fitted with air brakes by 1958, after the failure of hydraulic brakes on a Vanaja bus had led to one of the worst traffic accidents ever to have happened in Finland.

VAT fell into financial difficulties by end of the 1960s; this led to a merger with the other Finnish heavy vehicle producer Oy Suomen Autoteollisuus Ab at the end of 1968. The Vanaja brand ceased to exist in 1971, after which the former Vanaja factory produced Sisu terminal tractors, bus chassis, military vehicles and mobile crane chassis. The factory now belongs to Patriawhich produces Patria AMV armoured personnel carriersand heavy-vehicle axle producer Sisu Axles.

Vanajan Autotehdas was always a small company, employing about 400 people in 1968, and in the 1960s its market share was barely 5% in Finland. Almost all Vanajas were sold for the domestic market; only a few units were exported. Vanaja vehicles became known for their robust construction and high degree of customisation. The number of Vanaja bus chassis and lorries totalled 7,140 units; this consists of 260 lorry and 66 bus chassis models; for 116 lorry models only one or two units were produced. Vanajas had a good reputation and they are nowadays valued by vintage vehicle enthusiasts.

During the winter of 1942–43, the Finnish Defence Forces estimated there was no immediate prospect of a quick end to the Continuation War but there was an immediate need for new vehicles. In the longer term, the army was expected to need at least 7,000 lorries and buses. Neutral countries such as Sweden and Switzerland were willing to sell vehicles to Finland but demanded payment in advance and in their own currencies. As Finland did not have sufficient currency reserves the only option was to develop domestic vehicle production.

At that time, the only Finnish heavy vehicle producer Oy Suomen Autoteollisuus Ab (SAT) was building a new factory in Karis, a location considered less likely than Helsinki to come under attack from Soviet air raids. Company general director Tor Nessling suggested the factory should be larger than originally planned. As another option, Nessling, with extreme reservation, considered building a new factory elsewhere in Finland. SAT was experienced in heavy vehicle production but economic and technical resources were limited. Heavy vehicle importers and some political cliques thought SAT was trying to benefit from the war and to gain a dominant position in the Finnish market.

Defence minister Rudolf Walden called a meeting held on 3 and 4 March 1943 to explore solutions to the acute shortage of vehicles. The meeting was attended by representatives of the government and military leadership, and key personnel from leading Finnish industrial companies. A committee was formed to propose founding a company in which SAT and the state were both involved. The proposal was presented in a meeting on 20 March. The name of the company was "Oy Yhteissisu Ab" ("mutual Sisu"), which meant the intention was joint production of Sisu vehicles. The private owners were A. Ahlström, Ata, Fiskars, Kone, Kymin Oy, Lokomo, W. Rosenlew & Co., Suomen Autoteollisuus, Suomen Gummitehdas, Suomen Kaapelitehdas, Tampereen Pellava- ja Rauta-Teollisuus, Yhtyneet Paperitehtaat and Strömberg. The headquarters was in Erottaja in Helsinki. The company chairman was Heikki H. Herlin and the reluctant Tor Nessling was appointed general manager.

The Defence Forces set strict requirements for the vehicles to be produced. There was not enough time to develop a new model. Although outdated, the best of the available options was the Sisu S-21. Yhteissisu and SAT agreed to transfer Sisu S-21 lorry production to Yhteissisu. The Yhteissisu-produced models were named S-22.

Immediately after the company was founded, production started in the SAT factory in Vallila, Helsinki. The Yhteissisu vehicles were built separately from SAT vehicles. It was clear from the start that vehicles should be produced away from Helsinki; the company sought a suitable location close to good rail, road and waterway connections. The original idea was to build the factory inside caves mined into bedrock; the place would be required to have suitable geology. A suitable area was finally found in Vanaja next to Hämeenlinna. Yhteissisu bought of land on 14 March 1944. A contract for factory construction was signed with a contractor on 30 March. The Railway Administration accepted Yhteissisu's plan to build a railway connection in the area. Quarrying work for the underground workshop began in July 1944. The expense and a shortage of time meant the plan had to be amended, and the entire production area was built above ground. The factory buildings were completed in early November 1944. Alvar Aalto's architectural office designed houses for the factory workers.

The first lorry made in Vanaja was a Sisu S-22 prototype, which rolled out of the factory door on 1 August 1945. After a short and intensive testing period, serial production began on 29 October 1945 but because of a shortage of materials and component quality problems, the first vehicles were not ready until early 1946. The capabilities of the domestic suppliers proved to be very limited and the company was dependent on imported gearboxes, steering components, drive shafts and electrical systems until domestic companies could set up their own production. The Finnish suppliers were unable to meet the requirements with the available materials and experienced severe quality problems. Total production in 1946 was 147 Sisu S-22 vehicles, which was far below the target of 2,000 vehicles. The original, calculated price per vehicle had been 765,000 marks but the eventual cost was 800,000 marks.

The war had ended before series production was started, and the Defence Forces did not need new vehicles. On the contrary, the army had to reduce the number of vehicles according to the Moscow Armistice. The frustrated component suppliers left the business and the Ministry of Trade and Industry terminated the vehicle supply contract from the end of 1946. In early 1946, Yhteissisu had agreed with the Ministry of Trade and Industry that vehicles not bought by the state could be sold on the civilian market. Sisu S-22s became available for sale at 12 SAT locations in Finland. The company presented a lighter, lower-cost model, the S-22K, at the Helsinki Domestic Industry Fair in May 1946.

Tor Nessling resigned from Yhteissisu in February 1947. There was talk of closing the company. Yhteissisu sold only 103 S-22s in 1947, some of which had been produced the previous year. 55 lorries were built by the company in 1947. The company's share capital was reduced from 75 million marks to 7.5 million, then increased to 50 million; the state became the main owner, having a 44% share of the company. The other owners were Yhtyneet Paperitehtaat, A. Ahlström, Strömberg and Tampereen Pellava- ja Rauta-Teollisuus. From September, the new general manager of the company was Eero Kytölä. The company lost two million marks in 1947.

Yhteissisu had the rights to use the Sisu brand until summer 1948. In a general meeting held in 1948, the board decided to rename the company Vanajan Autotehdas and the brand of the vehicles became Vanaja. The factory area was moved from the municipality of Vanaja to that of Hämeenlinna at the beginning of the same year.

When the licence to use the Sisu brand expired in June 1948, Sisu S-22 production was continued as the Vanaja V-48, and its production continued until 1955.

General manager Kytölä travelled to France and West Germany in 1947 and early 1948 to buy military surplus materials from the Western Allies. He bought 425 White Motor Company M2 Half-Track vehicles, 186 lorry engines, 304 Cadillac V8 engines, 4 Mack ED diesel engines, 2 Hercules Diesel DFXE engines, 11,000 GMC wheels and one 45-tonne-capacity trailer. Trading was organised through the Ministry of Supply and the first delivery arrived in March 1948. The White Half-Track vehicles were without armour; Kytölä's idea was to equip them with superstructures for field or forest clearing, or to convert them into Four-wheel drive lorries by replacing the tracks with a conventional rear axle. In total, VAT sold 359 units as half-tracks, and 60 were converted into 4×4 or 4×2 vehicles. These lorries were sold as Vanaja VaWh. Some of the half-track vehicles were scrapped for parts; the last was sold in 1952.

After the original contract with the state was terminated, a new agreement for the production of 650 vehicles to be delivered between 1948 and 1952 was reached. The state helped production with a significant prepayment of 132 million marks. According to the contract, 150 vehicles were scheduled to be built in 1948. The company reached this target and made a further 11 vehicles for private use. 92 were sold under the name of Sisu S-22 or S-22K and 69 were badged as Vanaja V-48. 101 M2 Half-Tracks were sold. In 1948, VAT made a loss of 746,000 marks. In 1949, VAT made another 150 vehicles for the state and 37 vehicles for private operators; it produced 163 V-48s and 24 VaWhs. The company also sold 211 M2 Half-Tracks, allowing it to declare its first profit of 1.208 million marks, which was helped by a devaluation of the Finnish mark.

VAT's positioning in the heavy-vehicle market strengthened in 1950 and the company started producing bus chassis. The same year, VAT introduced a new product familythe VK series. Production was disrupted by a three-month strike, as a result of which completion of some of the 150 state-ordered vehicles scheduled for delivery that year was delayed until the following year. Despite its difficulties VAT posted a profit of almost two million marks. By now, the company employed 106 workers.

Sales and profits grew year-on-year during the early 1950s. The prepayment from the government was repaid in 1952. For a short time, VAT imported and marketed clearing tractors produced by Italian firm Ansaldo-Fossati. Although there was demand for this type of vehicle, they sold poorly because their price was considered inconsistent with their technical quality; only a few units were delivered in 1953.

The development of sales was overestimated; in 1956, 525 Vanajas were sold and in March 1957, the volume for the whole year was estimated to reach about 400 units. VAT employed about 200 workers at the time and changed to a four-day working week. The company blamed the government's import licence bureaucracy for the problemit was difficult to get diesel engines from abroad. In the following month, over 30 Vanajas that were otherwise ready were awaiting diesel engines. The economy improved in 1959.

In 1950, the Finnish government was criticised for ignoring other options and buying only Vanajas, which were said to be overpriced. The state had ordered 650 vehicles, spread over several years, and this tied the state's hands in equipment buying for a long period.

Both VAT and SAT were criticised in 1954 by heavy vehicle importers because the two companies had access to a large share of the limited foreign currency reserves for component supply. The importers' representatives said neither Sisu nor Vanaja were very domestic products and the vehicles the importers represented were actually more domestic because some assembly work was done in Finland. According to the Association of Vehicle Importers, the domestic vehicles cost between 30% and 80% more compared to imported ones. The following year, the government started to investigate possibilities for importing heavy vehicles in kit form to reduce foreign-currency expenditure. VAT and SAT expressed doubts about the viability of such production. In 1957, the government ended restrictions on the import of heavy vehicle chassis. Eventually, the prices of imported vehicles approached those of Sisu and Vanaja vehicles.

The Vanaja petrol engines made by SAT and Tampella were outdated American engines built under licence. Customers wanted diesel engines, which were more powerful. The first Vanaja diesel models were powered by Kämper and Saurer engines. VAT also tested Südwerke's two-stroke diesel engines but only one such vehicle was built. Import licences for diesel engines were difficult to obtain and this constrained vehicle sales. In some cases, customers provided their own enginesfor example Volvo or Mercedes-Benz, which were mounted to their ordered vehicles on the assembly line. In 1955, VAT bought two batches of 6-cylinder 90-hp Leyland 0.350 diesel engines. These proved to be too inefficient, and the following year the company ordered a batch of 300 stronger Leylands made in the Netherlands by van Doorne's Automobilfabriek N.V.

In 1956, VAT became the representative for Ansaldo S.A. and Kämper-Motoren GmbH. Ansaldo offered engines of between 100 hp and 8,000 hp intended for marine and industrial applications. Kämper products delivered between 14 hp and 150 hp. A 6-cylinder, 130-hp Kämper was offered as an option for Vanajas.

The best-known hallmark of Vanaja, the full-load lifting tandem axle, was introduced in January 1957. This invention enabled an additional load of 2.5 tonnes to be carried and the entire load on the tandem could be moved to the fore axle using an electro-hydraulic system. The system improved the traction, offering a significant advantage on slippery surfaces. The innovative lifting tandem was developed under leadership of the company's chief engineer Veikko Muronen. Vanaja became the leader in the Finnish logging vehicle market and maintained this position until production ceased. In forestry work, a layout with a driven front axle and a tandem axle with a driven fore axle, called 4×4+2, became famous in Finland but is seldom seen outside the Nordic countries.

The Finnish Defence Forces carried out a winter test for potential military vehicles in March 1958. 35 candidate vehicles from the two domestic producers and various importers were driven around Finland. VAT sent four vehicles to the test, three of which were 4×4s and one was an ordinary, rear-wheel driven vehicle. During the five days' testing period, all vehicles were continuously fully loaded. For part of the journey, the vehicles had to tow an eight-ton field cannon. The vehicles were tested for off-road capabilities in even, -deep snow. One of the Vanajas was destroyed in an accident. The domestic vehicles performed well in the test; in some cases the rear-wheel driven Sisus and Vanajas outperformed the 4×4-driven foreign competitors. None of the vehicles were clearly better than the others but the result convinced the Defence Forces of the capabilities of the domestic vehicles and led to several deals for SAT and VAT.

In 1960, VAT delivered the first Vanaja VAKS lorries, which were intended for general use in garrisons, to the Defence Forces. The later versions were called AS-33. 155 units were produced. Vanaja NS-47 was the first Finnish 4×4 off-road lorry designed primarily for military use. A few dozen vehicles were ordered between 1962 and 1964, and were used for hauling 35 mm Oerlikon anti-aircraft cannons and heavy artillery.

In September 1958 VAT, together with other Finnish companies, participated in the Thessaloniki International Fair. The vehicles shown were one Vanaja VAK lorry and a mid-engined VLK550 bus chassis. Due to the AEC engines the Vanaja's did not raise interest among the potential Greek customers, as relations between the UK and Greece were bad at the time. The lorry was finally sold in Greece but the bus chassis returned to Finland and was sold to a bus operator which built a tourist bus body on it.

VAT signed a contract to sell 200 lorries to Turkey in 1959. The first two vehicles were shipped from Finland in 1959 but the contract was terminated in an embarrassing way because the Bank of Finland refused to take Turkish liras in payment.

At the end of the 1950s and in the early 1960s, VAT and the French Camions Willème SA had plans for joint production, but only one jointly produced prototype was ever made; the chassis was from Vanaja, the engine was from AEC, and the cabin, which was a forward control type cabin and partly made from glass fibre, was from Willème.

Four Vanaja's were shown at the Barcelona international fair in June 1961. The vehicles were taken to the fair by driving them through Europe. The fair was considered successful, but no vehicle sales resulted from it.

General Manager Eero Kytölä resigned from his position in 1962. DI Ilmari Karttunen, who had previously worked as factory superintendent, was appointed the new head of the company. He led VAT until 1967, when Jaakko Jarimo took the post.
During 1958–1960 VAT focused increasingly on custom-building vehicles according to customer request. Typically a potential customer just walked into the main office in Helsinki or factory in Hämeenlinna and described what kind of vehicle he wanted. The enthusiastic engineers listened carefully to every individual customer's wishes and designed vehicles accordingly, with two or three axles, desired layout, wheelbase and with conventional or forward control cabin. Many vehicle types were only produced for one or two units. The volume model, however, was a nine-tonne variant of the VAK series.

A good example of custom-built vehicles are the VKB series forward-control vehicles, developed for an earthmoving company in Helsinki. The company needed short vehicles with a good grade ability and high payload. The wheelbase of these vehicles was and the total weight was 10.6 tonnes; use of these vehicles on public roads required a special permit.

A typical feature in Vanajas was over-engineered structures which were robust rather than optimised. The main components were sourced from well-established suppliers. VAT also showed progressive thinking in driver ergonomics; the comfortably sprung and hydraulically damped driver's seat was positioned close to the door, to ease reversing. The seat had several ways in which it could be adjusted. Hanging pedals, which were set to the same level, became standard at an early stage. Vanaja's interior heater, which produced 9,000 kcal/h, was possibly the most efficient available in lorries by the 1960s. Many Vanaja drivers valued the particularly soft suspension of the vehicles. Two-axle lorries were available in 4×2 and 4×4 layouts; the three-axle models were produced as 6×2, 6×4, 4×4+2 and 6×6.

VAT celebrated its 20th anniversary in 1963. All press releases and publications ignored the fact that its key competitor, SAT, had had a significant role in its foundation. Yhteissisu was not mentioned in any context.

VAT got a notable order from the Infrastructure and Hydro Engineering Administration in April 1965. The order for 250 vehicles was funded by a loan from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) for development of the road network. Forty vehicles were equipped with a driven front axle. The order was completed in 1966.

The company faced a difficult situation again in 1967 when the total number of vehicles produced was just 381 units. At the beginning of 1968 VAT fired 40 of the 400 employees. Vanaja had its staunch customer base and the vehicles were generally well regarded but the overall market share remained low; in 1963 just 4–5% of the newly registered heavy lorries in Finland were Vanajas. The highly customised production had led to an excessive diversity of models, which made spare part supply difficult. Moreover, the customising presumably took resources away from technical development work. There was no change for the better although the company introduced its modern forward control model B6-76 which was expected to become the next volume model.

The original factory building, officially a warehouse and assembly hall, had a volume of . The facilities were developed over time and by the end of 1953, the floor area was . The warehouse and assembly hall were renamed the main hall; it was now long and wide. Bus chassis production was located at the southern side of the hall and lorries were built at the northern side. This set-up was often changed depending on the product mix and production volume.

At the end of the building was a crane for ironware handling. When the frames were taken in, they were fitted with suspension and axles, and then turned the right way up. The next parts were the engine and transmission components. The final part for lorries was a pre-assembled cabin. Conventional bus chassis were delivered with bonnet and wings, but the forward control types left the factory without any body parts. After being painted, the vehicles left the assembly hall. Finally, every vehicle was tested on a -long test run on different roads and with various loads. The bus chassis were tested in a similar way; because there was no body, the drivers only had warm clothes and driving goggles to protect them against the weather conditions. The vehicles were handed over to the customers after final adjustments.

Construction work on a new subassembly shop began in 1955 and the building was ready in 1957. The new facilities were for machining, heat treatment and sheet metal works. Another end of the building was for a service workshop. A new service workshop with 17 vehicle places was built in 1966.

VAT could offer only petrol engines until 1953. The most common ones were the Hercules engines made domestically under licence by SAT and Tampella. The SAT-made engine was called the Sisu AMG or SA5, and the engine made by Tampella was the Tampella 6000. The second most common engine was the Cadillac V8 1G and the third was the White 160 AX, which Kytölä had bought from Central Europe. Some Bedford petrol engines were used in Defence Forces lorries in the 1960s and Ford V8 engines were used for fire engines. The first diesel Vanajas were powered by Saurer and Kämper engines. The vast majority of diesel engines were supplied by Leyland and AEC. A few Vanajas were equipped with the Perkins R6 or the Ford Trader 510E. In some cases, the engine was provided by the customer; one Vanaja was powered by a Mercedes-Benz diesel engine.

VAT used Valmet gearboxes, which were copied from the transmissions made by the American company Fuller in the late 1940s and the early 1950s. When components became more easily available, VAT started to use genuine Fullers and ZF-made gearboxes. The transfer cases were supplied by Timken and ZF. VAT built the rear axles from gears made by ATA until the company started buying axles from Timken.

The company had several suppliers of lorry cabins; they were produced at the beginning by Tampella, Valmet, Messukylän Autokoritehdas, Auto-Heinonen, Kiitokori and later as a main supplier by Lahden Autokori. VAT itself made cabins for some special, one-off products. In the late 1960s, some Vanajas were equipped with British Ergomatic forward control cabins made by Motor Panels. The cabins were bought via A.E.C.

Bus chassis production began in 1950. VAT made the first prototypes of rear-engined buses in 1956. The company made two prototype chassis, which were designated model VAT-4800; the superstructures were made by coach builders Ajokki Oy and Nummela Oy. The solution caused several technical problems, including proper cooling and transfer of heating to the front end of the body. The cooling problem was finally solved by a large air scoop located at the back of the roof; this was not regarded as an aesthetically pleasing arrangement. As the solution was found, VAT produced ten more rear-engined chassis called type VAT-5200.

By 1958, all VAT bus chassis were equipped with air brakes; later these were also fitted to lorries. The decision was influenced by one of the worst road traffic accidents to happen in Finland; 15 people drowned in Konnevesi when a fairly new Vanaja bus drove through the boom barrier of a ferry slip, sinking in of water. The driver survived and said the bus' brakes had failed; this was confirmed in the following investigation, which found the sealing of one of the hydraulic Lockheed brakes had failed.

VAT delivered its first mid-engined bus chassis to Ajokki Oy coach works in April 1958. It was powered by a horizontally mounted 164-hp AEC diesel engine. The end customer was bus operator Väinö Paunu Oy, which also participated in the development work. In 1960, VAT introduced the VLK500 chassis with air suspension and dual-circuit air brakes. VAT returned to building rear-engined buses in 1966–67, but sales did not reach the level of the mid- and front-engined models. The company conducted a number of experiments with the construction; one example was a bus with a frameless structure in which the beams were replaced by a lighter solution.

The model nomenclature of the early 1950s was as follows:
Letter "B" at the end, for example in model VK-6B, meant forward control cabin and "L" came from extra long springs.

The lorry model names were changed in 1956.

The bus model names changed accordingly.

In addition, the model name "VAT" was used for two rear-engined bus models: the VAT-4800of which two units were produced in 1956, and the VAT-5200BDof which ten units were produced in 1957. The next change came in 1961, when an engine manufacturer's code was included in the model name. For example, the VAK lorry powered by an AEC AVU 470 became the A-47. Correspondingly, the same lorry with a Leyland O.600 diesel became the A-60R; the "R" stood for "raskas" (heavy), meaning it had a stronger front axle. The bus model names changed again in the same manner. For example, a forward control bus with the Leyland O.600 engine was called the VLB-60.

The new model numbering was changed in 1963 because of increased front axle loads; after the letter code a 2 indicated the higher axle capacity. In later models, a 6 means the front axle capacity is 6 tonnes. The "S" in types VAKS, AS and NS meant "sotilas" (soldier); they were intended for military use.

The bus model numbering changed for the last time in 1966; the front-engined VLB became LE6, the mid-engined VLK was changed to LK6 and the rear-engined VLT became LT6. The three-digit numbers on the bonnet sides of the last Vanaja lorries indicate the engine displacement in cubic inches. They are not model numbers, although they are often incorrectly referred to as such.

In 1964, VAT had started to seek a stronger partner when it negotiated with AB Scania-Vabis. The companies planned to use Scania engines in Vanaja vehicles but the plan proved too expensive for VAT. This may have led the major owners of VAT to start discussions about merging VAT and SAT. The chairman of VAT held regular meetings with the SAT manager Tor Nessling. In 1967, AB Scania-Vabis expressed its interest in VAT and German company Klöckner-Humboldt-Deutz AG was interested in co-operation with, or acquisition of, VAT. Valmet is also rumoured to have been interested in VAT but there is no evidence of concrete negotiations.

As well as being a small producer, VAT had problems with unreliable deliveries and quality problems caused by the component suppliers. Semi-finished lorries often waited outside the factory for engines or other key components. The British diesel engines suffered from more quality problems compared with their Swedish and German competitors. The company's owners became increasingly reluctant to fund the unprofitable business.

Speculation about a merger between SAT and VAT began in Swedish newspapers in 1967 and was soon picked up by the Finnish media. The major owner, the state of Finland with its 45% share, suggested a merger to Nessling in December 1967. The financial situation of VAT was unsustainable; the whole year's turnover was 19.5 million new Finnish marks when the company had debts of 14.5 million; 100 old Finnish marks became 1 new mark in 1963. The contract for the merger of Suomen Autoteollisuus and Vanajan Autotehdas was signed on 30 May 1968. VAT was formally discontinued at the end of 1968. After the merger, the state owned 17.2% of the new SAT, becoming the third-largest shareholder of the company.

Customers' reactions to the merger varied. Most of the public understood the need for the merger of two small companies, which were both operating in a very limited market and trying to challenge the mass producers. Some loyal Vanaja customers were astounded at the decision to discontinue the make. Some customers were upset because the last long-nosed Vanajas were equipped with cabins from Jyry-Sisu; they said they would never buy Sisu and moved to imported vehicles. Many proven technical solutions used in Vanajas were soon implemented on Sisus. The drop in the truck market was short-lived and sales soon returned to the levels experienced by Vanaja and Sisu combined in the mid-1960s. The last Vanaja vehicles were mobile cranes produced at the end of 1971; subsequently all vehicles made in the SAT Hämeenlinna works were badged as Sisus.

Combining the strengths of the both companies was not successful in bus chassis production because of strategic mistakes by SAT. The Vanaja LK-series with a large, centrally mounted engine was discontinued, which led to the loss of the main customer, Väinö Paunu Oy. SAT offered Sisu chassis to replace the Vanaja models, but a number of bus operators, including TKL, rejected them.

The number of Vanaja lorries and bus chassis produced totalled 7,140 units. In addition, dozens of trailers and semi-trailers were produced and sold under the Vanaja brand in connection with lorries. In 1955, four Vanaja rail buses made in collaboration with coachbuilding firm Kiitokori were sold to the Finnish State Railways.

About 260 models of lorry were produced, which were fitted with 35 types of engine, 20 different gearboxes, and 15 to 20 types of cabin. Many of the models were produced in small numbers, with 116 types only being represented by one or two units. Most of the differences came from special wheelbases that always needed approval from the authorities. In many cases, it is impossible even for experts to identify different models and years of production. There were 66 types of bus chassis produced, and the number of different body types built on them by various coach builders and operators is unknown.

The merger led to a clash of two organisational cultures. While VAT had a flat organisation, open communication among its workforce and a spirit of togetherness, SAT's organisation was strictly hierarchical. The division of portfolios between Karis and Hämeenlinna was changed after the merger. Lorry production was gradually concentrated at Karis and Sisu-Hämeenlinna focused on producing mobile cranes, bus chassis, terminal tractors and military vehicles. Former VAT personnel had to increase production of the new portfolio and simultaneously adopt new processes, so it was three to four years before the Hämeenlinna factory could deliver results in line with its capacity.

In 1971 and 1981 the factory made tram bogies under licence from DÜWAG. The trams were made by Valmet for the city of Helsinki. Bus chassis production was officially discontinued in 1986, although in 1989 a small batch was made and later fitted with Ajokki coach bodies for delivery to a customer in the Soviet Union.

SAT had planned its first terminal tractor in Helsinki in the 1960s and the production and development was continued in Hämeenlinna in 1969. The Sisu terminal tractors became famous worldwide for their innovative design. Production was moved to Tampere in 1996.

SAT's military vehicle production was moved from the Karis Works to Hämeenlinna in 1970. The Sisu A-45 vehicle was later followed by the introduction of two heavier versions; the Sisu SA-150 and the Sisu SA-240. Production of the armoured personnel carrier Sisu XA-180 "Pasi" started in the early 1980s. Several vehicles were sold to the Finnish Defence Forces and other armies; it was also used in United Nations peacekeeping missions. Other military products were the Sisu NA-140 "Nasu", which was produced from 1985 to 2002, and the mine-clearance vehicle Sisu RA-140 DS "Raisu", 41 of which were produced between 1994 and 2001.

In 1985, the company moved its axle production from Helsinki to a new factory at Hämeenlinna. In 1995, axle production was separated into an independent unit called Sisu Axles; this was sold to investors in 1999. The main factory builds military vehicles; the state separated it from the parent company in 1996 and renamed it Patria Vehicles Oy. Its main products are Patria AMV armoured personnel carriers.

Vanaja was sometimes characterised as "one of the world's best lorries" because of the company's ability to engineer a vehicle ideal for each application in accordance with the customer's wishes. The merger of SAT and VAT has inspired a number of imaginative conspiracy theories. In reality, the acquisition followed a normal process that was initiated by the owners. Experts in the field almost unanimously agree that the merger ensured the Finnish vehicle industry would continue well into the future. Vanajas are valued by vintage vehicle enthusiasts.



</doc>
<doc id="36297249" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36297249" title="Altes Stadthaus, Berlin">
Altes Stadthaus, Berlin

Altes Stadthaus ("Old City Hall") is a former administrative building in Berlin, currently used by the Senate. It faces the Molkenmarkt and is bound by four roads; Jüdenstraße, Klosterstraße, Parochialstraße, and Stralauer Straße. Designed by Ludwig Hoffmann, chief of construction for the city, it was built in 1902–11 at a cost of 7 million marks () to supplement the Rotes Rathaus.

The building has five courtyards and features many sculptures, including 29 allegorical representations of civic virtues and of Greek deities which are mounted on the tower. A Georg Wrba sculpture of a bear, the symbol of Berlin, is located in the central "Bärensaal" (Bear Hall).

Originally called the "Neues Stadthaus" (New City House), it became the seat of the Council of Ministers of the GDR after World War II. The building next to it became the center of administration for East Berlin, and was also called "Neues Stadthaus"; to avoid confusion, Neues Stadthaus became known as "Altes Stadthaus" (Old city house).

During World War II, the Allied bombing campaign and fierce fighting in the Battle of Berlin caused severe damage; the roof was almost completely destroyed as were the statues above the rear entrance, and there was substantial water damage. In the first phase of reconstruction in 1951, the statue of the goddess of Fortuna was removed, and is assumed to have been smelted in 1962. The remaining statues, urns, and other carvings on the exterior were removed in 1976–77 due to rain damage. It was completely refurbished in the 1990s and exterior restoration required replacement of some 180 sculptural elements, including the allegorical figures of the virtues, giant vases, window embrasures and one of the columns. The original mansard roof was reconstructed in 1998–99.

In the 1860s, the population of Berlin was growing rapidly with the influx of around 50,000 people a year, creating a large administrative burden. When construction began on the Rotes Rathaus, the city had around half a million inhabitants, but this grew to 800,000 by the time of its completion in 1869. By the 1880s, the city had offices in ten additional buildings near the Rotes Rathaus and since it could not be extended, it was clear that a second administration building was required.

In 1893, the executive committee of the Berlin city council proposed a site on the banks of the river Spree, roughly corresponding to the current location of the Berlin Finance Department and the offices of the Social Association of Germany. The proposal was rejected by the full city council because it would overshadow the city hall. Further proposals were put on hold for several years. After discussing many locations, in 1898, chief of construction Ludwig Hoffmann became involved and the council agreed on Molkenmarkt. The 32 built-up parcels of land on the site were bought up and cleared.

Based on his participation in the debate and his reputation, Hoffmann received the commission to design the new building. Without any kind of competitive bidding or restrictions, he was commissioned to design it with space for approximately 1,000 employees. In 1900, the prosperous city decided the building should feature a tower. Hoffmann's design was accepted in 1901, and demolition of the existing buildings began. The cornerstone was laid in 1902.

Hoffmann created a monumental building with five courtyards to "once and for all incorporate the offices of the municipal administration which have no place in the city hall; however, it should in addition include the hall for large-scale public events which the city lacks, and also in its exterior be representative of the Berlin of today and thus be [a] magnificent building distinguished in its monumentality," according to the author of a 1914 monograph to him. It is his most important Berlin work.

An imposing external feature of the building is the tower, approximately tall, which rises from a square base over the central bay facing Judenstraße. Inspired by those designed by Carl von Gontard for the French and German Cathedrals on the Gendarmenmarkt, it consists of a double set of cylinders with encircling columns. This structure is surmounted by a dome on which a copper sculpture of the goddess Fortuna, by Ignatius Taschner, stands on a gilded globe. It was originally intended to show that Berlin "is taking an upward path in its development".
The tower is also adorned with many sculptures, including vases and 29 representations of the civic virtues and Greek deities by Taschner, Josef Rauch, Georg Wrba and William Widemann. In the centre of the building is a barrel-vaulted hall three stories high capable of accommodating 1,500 people and decorated in Jugendstil style. The walls over the doorways are inscribed with moral sayings, and the room originally had a floor of red Verona marble, six ceremonial candelabra, and three bronze gates, all by Georg Wrba. In addition, the room contains a bronze bear, the symbol of Berlin, commissioned from Wrba by the city in 1911, giving the hall its name, "Bärensaal" (Bear Hall). Wrba placed the bear in a symbolic setting signifying the bases of European culture; the height of the plinth on which it stands places the viewer at belly level creating a respectful distance, it stands in a triangle signifying the Trinity and in association with a Solomonic saying and depictions of Greco-Roman deities. 

The building has an irregular trapezoidal footprint corresponding to that of the group of buildings that formerly occupied the site presenting some difficulties in symmetry. It was also originally enclosed by other buildings, so Hoffmann's design emphasizes its appearance from close by rather than from a distance. The facades, executed in grey muschelkalk, are articulated with reference to the principles of Palladian architecture and based on the Palazzo Thiene in Vicenza. A rusticated plinth comprising the first floor and half the height of the mezzanine is surmounted by columns and pilasters in Tuscan order comprising two and a half stories, above which is a mansard roof. The lack of alignment with the stories is an intentional variation from the model. The facades facing the Jüdenstraße, Klosterstraße, Parochialstraße and Stralauer Straße are , , and long, respectively. The main entrances are in the centre of projecting bays on the Jüdenstraße (front) and Klosterstraße (rear) facades, with the "Bear Hall" on the axis between them. The side wings forming the facades on the Parochialstraße and Stralauer Straße sides terminate in projecting bays at the ends of these two primary facades. Cross wings and an opening in the main axis between the vestibule on the rear, Klosterstraße side and the "Bear Hall" create five courtyards within the building. The vestibules at the main, Judenstraße entrance and the rear entrance on Klosterstraße are lined with the same stone as the exterior to create a sense that the grand public rooms were also part of the city outside; in the latter, Hoffmann placed a large wall fountain also of Verona marble.

Construction lasted for nine and a half years, from April 1902 until October 1911, with the tower construction alone taking three years (1908–11). Different departments of the city administration moved in at different times with some, such as the police department, moving in as early as March 1908. The building was formally opened by Mayor Martin Kirschner on October 29, 1911.

Until the 1920s, there were no significant changes to the building. Neither World War I nor the November revolution of 1918 caused damage to it. In 1920, the administrative burden was considerably increased by the incorporation of several outlying towns and villages into the city of Berlin in the Greater Berlin Act. As a result, some departments and units had to be housed outside the building. In 1929, the Magistrat commissioned the city planning division to develop a concept for a new administrative building encompassing two city blocks that would also link the Stadthaus to the City Hall. This plan also included the existing main city library and the city savings bank. It would have been part of a wideranging plan to redevelop the area of the Molkenmarkt, including replacement of the old and substandard housing along Am Krögel, an alley leading to the Spree. These plans had to be abandoned in 1931 because of the political and economic situation of Berlin after World War I.

After the Nazis came to power in 1933, the Magistrat revived the urban renewal plan as an appropriate contribution to the "program of national renewal". However, the Ministry of Transportation was charged with developing a new canal that would require replacing the Mühlendamm bridge and removing a number of buildings. A plan was developed to create an "administrative forum" around the Molkenmarkt, which would include a new centralized mint, the Fire Society Building that today is the Neues Stadthaus, and a residence for a City President but retain the Stadthaus flanked by two large new wings. This plan superseded the former housing concept. The Krögel block was demolished in 1936 and the Fire Society Building was completed in 1938. By the outbreak of war in 1939, the Mint and one other government building had also been completed.

In World War II the building suffered some damage during the Allied bombing campaign, but was later severely damaged during the Battle for Berlin towards the end of the war. The roof was almost completely destroyed by fire and there was substantial water damage. The statues above the rear entrance, on Klosterstraße, were also destroyed. Assessments estimated that 50% of the building had suffered damage.

Shortly after the official surrender of the Wehrmacht on May 8, 1945, the Soviet military administration, headed by Nikolai Berzarin, looked for capable anti-fascists to form a new public administration. On 19 May Berzarin appointed a new 19-member Magistrat under Arthur Werner as acting Governing Mayor. However, both the Rotes Rathaus and the Stadthaus were so damaged that the Fire Society Building adjacent to the Administration Building became the new seat of the Magistrat, and became known as "Neues Stadthaus". Since then, the former "new" building has been known as Altes Stadthaus, to distinguish it from that building.

The Department of Construction was developing schemes for the building as early as 1948. The most urgent need was for a new roof. Two alternatives emerged: an accurate reconstruction of the mansard roof, or a flat pitched roof. Timber was in short supply, so a pitched roof requiring of timber was chosen, instead of a mansard roof requiring . Issues of landmark preservation played featured little in the decision and starting from 1948 the roof was partially replaced with a pitched roof.

By 1950, 45% of the necessary repairs had been made to Altes Stadthaus by a few simple expedients such as emergency roofing. In the immediate post-war years, neither manpower, supplies, nor financing was available to undertake repairs on a larger scale. The reconstruction took place between 1950 and 1955 in five phases; the first focused on building up the courtyard wing on the Stralauer Straße side while the second phase, completed in early 1952, focused on the Stralauer Straße/Judenstraße wing and included construction of additional offices on the fourth floor and a 300-person dining hall with kitchen. However, for a number of reasons most significant of which was that the building was not the seat of government, the remaining three phases were not carried out. In addition, the reconstruction of Wilhelmine architecture was not a high priority, where as housing was and so funding for the restoration work was not included in the economic plan.

In effect, the building had become the "third city hall"; it housed some government departments, such as planning and housing. Although the office space was fully occupied, the "Bear Hall" and the tower rooms remained unused except for some exhibits of plans by the City Construction Supervisor, Hans Scharoun, and so were left unheated leading to damp and mould damage. The tower was eventually used by the Stasi.

In 1955, after five years of reconstruction, the Rotes Rathaus was fully operational and departments were able to move back into it from both administration buildings and from other more remote locations. Early in the same year, it was announced that Altes Stadthaus was to be transferred from the Magistrat (now of East Berlin, West Berlin having established the separate Berlin Senate) to the Council of Ministers of the GDR, which had been established in 1949, to house the significantly increased workforce. Altes Stadthaus was planned to be only an interim solution to this problem. Prime Minister Otto Grotewohl moved his offices into the building later that year, after renovation work to create appropriate accommodations that included furnishings for various official rooms, the planned expansion onto the fourth floor, upgrading of the stairways, ventilation equipment, and electrical work had been completed. Red carpets were laid in hallways and stair landings, and eventually paper shredders were placed in all offices. Between 1958–61, the building was extensively altered. The inner courtyard was covered and the "Bear Hall" was converted into the chamber of the Council of Ministers. The hall capacity was reduced from 1,500 to 300 people, the windows and arcades on the long sides were closed off, wood wall moldings and a suspended ceiling installed to create a modern room within the space. The candelabra, bronze door grilles, and marble flooring were removed. In 1959, the bear statue was also removed and installed in the newly opened East Berlin zoo in Friedrichsfelde. A security zone was created at the front of the building. The public entrance to what was now the "Building of the Council of Ministers" was now on Klosterstraße. The main entrance facing Jüdenstraße, over which the GDR national emblem, the hammer and compass, was installed in place of the arms of the City of Berlin, was only opened on special occasions. The alterations demonstrated the negative opinion in the GDR of Wilhelmine architecture, and cost 2 million marks.

The statue of the goddess Fortuna on the dome was removed in the first phase of reconstruction in 1951 and replaced by a antenna for broadcast transmissions. After the Television Tower came into service in 1969, this was in turn replaced by a flagpole flying the national flag. The statue was stored inside the dome until the 1960s but is last mentioned in the records in 1962 and is assumed to have been melted down. The remaining statues, urns, and other carvings on the exterior of the building remained in place until 1976/77, when they were also removed and placed in storage in Friedrichsfelde and other locations, as they had been seriously damaged by rain and frost.

In 1974–75, the reception and meeting rooms were further upgraded with extensive use of imported goods from the West. However, over time, Altes Stadthaus became less important to the GDR government. Important events, celebrations and ceremonies took place in the Rotes Rathaus, the Palace of the Republic or the State Council Building. The historical high point in the use of the building under the GDR came in its final phase, when the only freely elected government of East Germany, under Lothar de Maizière relocated there. The provisions of the agreement on German reunification were therefore negotiated there.

The GDR emblem was removed from over the main entrance in 1990, the year of reunification, leaving a dark patch. Following reunification, the Berlin offices of the German Chancellery and the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs moved into the building. In January 1993, after a legal decision, the Federal Government returned the building to the Federal State of Berlin, which wished to use it for its original purpose of city administration. However, it first urgently required refurbishment; under the GDR, upkeep had been neglected and the plumbing facilities, for example, dated in part to the 1920s. Access also needed to be provided for the handicapped.

Renovation began in 1994 under the direction of architect Gerhard Spangenberg, with the objective of returning the building so far as possible to its original condition while not ignoring the events of the more recent past. The first priority was the removal of iron girders, particle board, and chipboards. Relics of the GDR period deemed worthy of preservation were placed either in the Museum of German History in the former Prussian arsenal or in the House of History in Bonn. The original murals and reliefs, painted over and enclosed during the GDR period, were then restored. The fountain in the Klosterstraße vestibule was accurately recreated. Four bronze bear sculptures by Ignatius Taschner were returned from the Märkisches Museum and reinstalled on replacement stone columns in the Judenstraße vestibule. Exterior restoration of the building required either restoration or replacement with replicas of some 180 sculptural elements from the tower, including the allegorical figures of the virtues, giant vases, window embrasures, and one of the columns, which had bomb damage and had merely been patched. In addition, the original mansard roof was reconstructed in 1998/99 on the west, main facade facing Jüdenstraße. The technical facilities were also updated, including ventilation equipment, elevators, lighting, and plumbing. It proved impossible to use the tower for offices because it lacked the second exit required by safety regulations. This was later rectified by the addition of office space in the roof cavity.

A replacement statue of Fortuna was created by restoration expert Bernd-Michael Helmich based on a model made by Joost van der Velden from a miniature. On September 2, 2004, it was hoisted to the top of the dome using a tower crane. The replacement of the Fortuna statue was financed by entrepreneur and art patron Peter Dussmann at a cost of €125,000. The restoration of the statues to the tower was delayed by a dispute with one of the contracted companies, which had gone bankrupt.

The renovation also included restoration of the "Bear Hall", which reopened on June 21, 1999. After the zoo in Friedrichsfelde had requested and received a copy at a cost of 30,000 marks, the bronze bear was transported back to the building in June 2001. A replica plinth had been constructed for it.

The restoration of the building, estimated in 2001 to cost 150 million marks, was largely paid for by the federal and Berlin state governments. Some financing was contributed by British mobile phone company Vodafone, which paid 100,000 marks for a giant red advertising banner that concealed the scaffolding around the tower for a year.

The building is again the location of the Berlin Senate Department of Internal Affairs, which moved in during 1997. The registry office for the Borough of Mitte was also located in the building for a while, but has exchanged quarters with the Department of Historic Monuments. The parliament of the borough of Mitte also met there. In 2008, plans were announced for the Constitutional Protection Division of the State Department of Internal Affairs to also move to the building, after which all divisions of the department would be housed there. , these plans are still being considered in the city council.




</doc>
<doc id="36297532" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36297532" title="Dave Shannon">
Dave Shannon

David John Shannon, DSO & Bar, DFC & Bar (27 May 1922 – 8 April 1993) was an Australian bomber pilot of World War II, known for his part in the "Dambusters" raid on the night of 16/17 May 1943. Born in South Australia, Shannon joined the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) in 1941 and learned to fly under the Empire Air Training Scheme. After further training in the United Kingdom he was posted to No. 106 Squadron RAF, operating Avro Lancaster heavy bombers, and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) in January 1943.

In March 1943, Shannon was selected by No. 106 Squadron's commanding officer, Wing Commander Guy Gibson, to join the newly formed No. 617 Squadron for Operation Chastise, the attack on the dams of the Ruhr valley. Awarded the Distinguished Service Order (DSO) following the raid, Shannon continued to fly with No. 617 Squadron until October 1944, during which time he earned bars to his DSO and DFC. He was then assigned to transport duties, first with No. 511 Squadron and then, in March 1945, with No. 246 Squadron. Ranked squadron leader, Shannon was demobilised after the war and remained in England, becoming an executive with Shell. He died in South London in 1993, aged seventy.

David John Shannon was born on 27 May 1922 at Unley Park, South Australia. His father, Howard Huntley Shannon, served as a South Australian state parliamentarian from 1933 to 1968. Shannon gained his Leaving Certificate at Unley High School. He was working for an insurance company when he joined the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) Reserve in Adelaide on 5 July 1940, aged eighteen. On 4 January 1941 he transferred to the RAAF as an air cadet under the Empire Air Training Scheme. He received his instruction in Western Australia at No. 5 Initial Training School in Pearce, No. 9 Elementary Flying Training School in Cunderdin, and No. 4 Service Flying Training School in Geraldton. Following graduation as a pilot officer in September 1941, he was posted to the United Kingdom.

Promoted to flying officer in March 1942, Shannon underwent conversion to Armstrong Whitworth Whitley bombers at No. 19 Operational Training Unit in Kinloss, Scotland. He was then posted to No. 106 Squadron RAF, operating Avro Lancasters, and flew the first of his thirty-six sorties over Occupied Europe with the unit in June. On at least four occasions his aircraft was struck by flak. He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross on 12 January 1943 for "attacks on industrial targets in enemy territory". In March he was selected by No. 106 Squadron's former commanding officer, Wing Commander Guy Gibson, to join the newly formed No. 617 Squadron for Operation Chastise, the "Dambusters" raid on the dams of the Ruhr valley. Shannon was one of four Australian pilots in the squadron—the others being "Micky" Martin, Robert Barlow, and Les Knight—and, at twenty, the youngest captain from among all the crews. He cultivated a moustache in an attempt to add maturity to his baby face.
On the night of Operation Chastise, 16/17 May 1943, Shannon was among a group of Lancasters led by Gibson in assaults on the Möhne and Eder Dams. After five of the aircraft had dropped their bouncing bombs on the Möhne, Shannon was preparing to make his attack on the dam when it gave way, so he carried on to the Eder with Gibson and three other Lancasters, captained by "Dinghy" Young, Henry Maudsley, and Les Knight. Detailed for the first bombing run at the Eder, Shannon took several attempts to familiarise himself with the area and line up his aircraft, so in the meantime Gibson ordered Maudsley to make his attack. Shannon went in next, delivering his bomb on target. Knight then dropped his bomb, and the dam broke.

Shannon landed back at RAF Scampton feeling "terribly elated". His bomb was believed to have caused a crack in the dam's wall, while Knight's completed the breach. Speaking later of the severe losses suffered by the squadron—eight out of nineteen planes—Shannon contended, "I suppose we had become hardened to loss – we could shrug it off. We had to, otherwise we could never have flown again." He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his part in the mission, one of several decorations awarded to the aircrew of No. 617 Squadron for the dams raid and promulgated in the "London Gazette" with the citation:

No. 617 Squadron remained active as a special-duties unit operating against high-value targets, and Shannon took part in attacks on the Dortmund-Ems Canal and V-weapon sites with bombs in the second half of 1943. The squadron made two attempts to destroy Dortmund-Ems, the first on the night of 14/15 September, aborting the mission with the loss of a Lancaster piloted by David Maltby. On the second operation the following night, in which five out of eight aircraft were shot down, Shannon hit the target in spite of poor weather, causing some damage. He married Section Officer Ann Fowler of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force at St Mark's parish church in London on 21 September. The couple had met at Scampton before the dams raid; Shannon proposed after returning from the mission and Ann accepted on the condition that he first shave his moustache. He was promoted to flight lieutenant two days later, and awarded a bar to his DFC on 12 November for a "low level attack in adverse weather against heavy opposition".

Shannon again participated in raids against V-weapon sites in January 1944. The following month, No. 617 Squadron undertook its first sortie under the leadership of Wing Commander Leonard Cheshire. The unit began flying low-level target-marking missions using de Havilland Mosquito light bombers as well as Lancasters. Shannon converted to the Mosquito and started flying it operationally in April. He returned to the Lancaster on 5 June to drop "Window" as a part of the Allies' diversions ahead of the D-Day landings the following day, before again flying Mosquitos against V-weapon sites and in support of the Normandy invasion forces.

Though "outwardly nerveless", according to military historian Patrick Bishop, Shannon was not immune to dread feelings. As they prepared to depart on one of their night missions, Cheshire commented on the beautiful sunset, to which Shannon replied, "I don't give a fuck about that, I want to see the sunrise". Having been raised to acting squadron leader, he was awarded a bar to his DSO on 26 September 1944 for "courage of high order on numerous sorties". The full citation in the "London Gazette" read:
In October 1944, after a total of sixty-nine sorties, Shannon was taken off bomber operations and transferred to transport duties, initially with No. 511 Squadron, which flew long-range missions with Avro Yorks. His promotion to squadron leader became substantive on 1 January 1945. Three months later he was assigned to No. 246 Squadron, which operated Yorks and Consolidated Liberators.

Shannon was discharged from the RAAF as a squadron leader on 15 December 1945. He stayed in England and joined Shell, taking part in its drilling operations in Asia, Africa and South America. Having been employed as a trainee, he had gained promotion to refining coordinator with the company's East African subsidiary by the time he resigned in September 1961 to farm in Suffolk. Seven years later he joined Offshore Marine, a Trafalgar House company, taking over as managing director in November 1973. He became managing director of Geoprosco Overseas in 1978, and retired in September 1984. Shannon no longer flew after the war, but did like to drive fast cars. He also served as chairman of the No. 617 Squadron Association, helping to raise funds for the Dambusters memorial at Woodhall Spa near RAF Scampton. His wife Ann died in 1990, and he married artist Eyke Taylor in a civil ceremony at Camberwell, London, on 19 July 1991. On 8 April 1993, shortly before a planned fiftieth anniversary reunion of surviving Dambusters, Shannon died at Denmark Hill, London, following a stroke, and was buried beside Ann at Clifton Hampden, Oxfordshire. The last of the nine pilots who took part in the first wave of the dams raid, he was survived by his second wife and his daughter by Ann.

On 17 May 2008, the sixty-fifth anniversary of the Dambusters raid, a memorial to Shannon and two other South Australians who took part in the mission, bomb aimers Fred Spafford and Bob Hay, was unveiled in Adelaide in the presence of the airmen's families. In July 2009 Shannon's daughter Nikki made his medals, uniform, and logbook available to the Australian War Memorial (AWM) in Canberra, for long-term display. The AWM also holds Shannon's portrait by Sir William Dargie. Shannon is further commemorated by a street in Glenelg North, South Australia.



</doc>
<doc id="36315763" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36315763" title="Love Somebody (Maroon 5 song)">
Love Somebody (Maroon 5 song)

"Love Somebody" is a song recorded by American pop rock band Maroon 5. The song was released on May 14, 2013, as the fourth and final single from their fourth studio album, "Overexposed" (2012). It was written by Adam Levine, Nathaniel Motte, Ryan Tedder, and Noel Zancanella; the latter two are also the producers. "Love Somebody" is a dance-pop song that lyrically equates love and physical intimacy and explores "salvation on the dance floor".

Upon release, the song was a respectable success on the charts and became the fourth top ten hit from the album on the "Billboard" Hot 100. Despite its success, the single received mixed reviews from music critics who praised its composition, linking it to the works by Coldplay, but criticized its production and Levine's vocals. Following the release of the album, due to strong digital downloads, the song peaked at number nine on the singles chart in South Korea.

In mid-2011, Maroon 5 started working on their fourth studio album. One of the members of the band, James Valentine spoke to "Billboard" and revealed their plans to release their fourth studio album in early 2012. On March 22, 2012, the band posted a video on YouTube featuring numerous scenes from the band in the studio, recording the album. On June 26, 2012, the album was released under the title "Overexposed".

The band's lead singer Adam Levine co-wrote "Love Somebody" with 3OH!3 singer Nathaniel Motte, Noel Zancanella and OneRepublic's Ryan Tedder. The latter two also produced it and provided programming and keys. Tedder and Zancanella also co-wrote and co-produced another song for "Overexposed" titled "Lucky Strike". "Love Somebody" was engineered by Smith Carlson at the Patriot Studios in Denver and Noah "Mailbox" Passovoy at the Conway Studios in Los Angeles; Eric Eylands served as the engineering assistant. Serban Ghenea mixed the song at the Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach. John Hanes served as engineer for mix, while Phil Seaford as mixing assistant.

"Love Somebody" is a dance-pop song with a length of three minutes and forty-nine seconds. It is set in the key of C major and its instrumentation consists of piano and guitar. Rob Sheffield of "Rolling Stone" described the song's synth hook as the Sly Stone-meets-Eurythmics. According to Chris Payne of "Billboard", Tedder and Zancanella's influence is all over the song and inches through the verses "before bubbling over just before the chorus kicks in." Adam Markovitz of "Entertainment Weekly" in a review of the album, wrote that the song together with "Daylight" have "thickly" produced choruses. Lyrically, "Love Somebody" equates love and physical intimacy, with Levine singing: "I really wanna love somebody [...] I really wanna touch somebody". Nate Chinen of "The New York Times" described the lyrical theme of the song as "a plea for salvation on the dance floor or some other horizontal surface".

Suzanne Byrne of RTÉ.ie wrote that "Love Somebody" alongside "Daylight", "The Man Who Never Lied" and "Lucky Strike" are potential single releases. Brittany Frederick of StarPulse called the song "earnest", while Cameron Adams of "Herald Sun" described it as Coldplay "trying to be" Katy Perry. Similarly as Adams, PopMatters' Evan Sawdey wrote that "Love Somebody" is the group's "sky-scraping Coldplay moment". Jeremy Thomas of 411 Mania labeled the song as one of the more emotional tracks on "Overexposed" and a "rare moment where the overhanging production tricks ease up just enough to make for an honest-to-God song with emotion and not just a laser scope aimed at the "Billboard" charts.

In a review of the album, Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music wrote that the band had left "the strutting cockerel heat" of their 2004 single "This Love" for the "saturated rave bliss" of "Love Somebody" or "The Man Who Never Lied". According to him that’s an effect of the market they have chosen to contribute on. "Billboard"'s Chris Payne thought that the song fades into the background of the other stronger tracks on "Overexposed". Adam Markovitz of "Entertainment Weekly" was more critical towards Levine's vocals on "Love Somebody" and wrote that the singer's voice is processed in a high disaffected whine — "like a male Rihanna or an android castrato", which according to him, it's ideal for tracing the contours of a pop hook.

Upon the release of "Overexposed", due to strong digital downloads, "Love Somebody" debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number eight on June 24, 2012, with sales of 35,892 digital copies. The next week, it fell to number 15 and sold an additional 16,752 copies. It stayed on the chart's top 100 for total of eight weeks. The song debuted at number 54 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, and peaked at number 10, making "Overexposed" Maroon 5's first studio album to produce four Top 10 singles. As of June 2014, the song has sold 1,694,000 copies in the US.

The music video was shot on January 16, 2013 and released on Vevo on May 21. Directed by Rich Lee, the video features Levine and Emily Ratajkowski as his love interest, as well as the Maroon 5 members are covered in grey paint. Levine initially paints himself out of a purely white background and then paints Ratajowski in front of him. The last scenes feature the band member's instruments spraying paint when played continually, a girl dancing seductively, and Levine and his love interest passionately embracing - all while covered in grey paint. In the very last scene, Levine reverses what he has done, removing all the paint from the scene, leaving no trace of them behind.

Maroon 5 performed "Love Somebody" for their Overexposed Tour (2012–2014) and the 12th Annual Honda Civic Tour (2013). The band also performed live with "The Voice", "The Today Show" and the 2013 New Year's Eve Concert at the Mandalay Bay Events Center in Las Vegas, Nevada.

Engineering and mixing

Personnel


Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Overexposed", A&M/Octone Records.


</doc>
<doc id="36346376" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36346376" title="Donn Cabral">
Donn Cabral

Donald "Donn" Cabral (born December 12, 1989) is an American cross country and track runner from Connecticut who went on to star at Princeton University. He has been most successful in the steeplechase, but has also been a National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) All-American in cross country and the 5000 meters, as well as the Ivy League champion at the 3000 meters. He is the current American collegiate steeplechase record holder and was the 2012 NCAA steeplechase champion. He competed in the 2012 Summer Olympic Games and 2016 Summer Olympic Games in the steeplechase. At Princeton, Cabral was an eight-time NCAA All-American and ten-time individual Ivy League champion. He was a long distance running champion in high school for Glastonbury High School, winning two Class LL championships as a sophomore and then open state and New England championships as a junior and senior.

Early on, Cabral showed interest in Olympic competition and high caliber racing. After watching patriotic flag waving during the 1996 Summer Olympics, Cabral requested that his father wave the American Flag during one of his swim meets as a six-year-old. In his first Manchester Road Race at age 12, Cabral's parents placed him in the starting position with the runners who run at an 8–9 minute per mile pace, but he complained, "How am I going to win from back here?"

At Glastonbury High School in Glastonbury, Connecticut, Cabral excelled in track and cross country. He was a two-time State Open and New England cross country champion. He was also the indoor track Connecticut 2 mile champion. He ran the fastest high school 1500 meters in the country during his senior year. He also established state records in the 5,000 m (14:32.60) and the 2 mile run (8:56.35).

As a freshman, Cabral was the second slowest runner on the soccer team. He tried out for track to work on his speed. At first he ran the 400 meters in 68 seconds. By the end of the spring, he broke 10 minutes in the 2 mile and was considering joining the cross country team instead of participating in his usual fall sport, soccer. In the summer of 2005, the cross country coach sent him a letter of encouragement.

During his sophomore year, he won the boys Connecticut Interscholastic Athletic Conference (CIAC) class LL indoor track two mile run and placed third in the New England Championships. He finished third in the CIAC Cross Country Open Championships and 19th in the New England Championships. His cross country performance earned him the Class LL championship that year.

As a junior, Cabral won the CIAC Cross Country Open Championships. He also won the 72nd New England Cross Country Championships at Ponaganset High School with a 5K race time of 15:29. Glastonbury finished second to Danbury High School in the team competition. At the Foot Locker National Cross Country Championship, Cabral finished 21st with a time of 15:57.

In his senior season, Cabral won the 2007 boys CIAC State Open Cross Country Championships. He also won the New England Cross Country Championships. At the Foot Locker National Cross Country Championship at Balboa Park in San Diego, Cabral finished 8th with a time of 15:19, which tied the best ever finish by a Connecticut runner. In May, his 4:09.80 became the best mile time of the school year for an American high schooler. Cabral placed second in the 10,000 meters (30:50.28) at the 2008 USA Junior Track & Field championships, qualifying him for the at the IAAF World Junior Championships in Poland.

During his Princeton running career, Cabral was a three-time NCAA All-America in the steeplechase, two-time outdoor NCAA All-America in the 5000 meter, two-time cross country NCAA All-America, and one-time indoor NCAA All-America in the 5000 meter. As a senior, Cabral became the 2012 NCAA champion in the steeplechase after having been the runner-up to Matt Hughes in the two prior NCAA steeplechase championships.

As a freshman, Cabral endured a plantar fascia tear while waterskiing and did not compete in cross country. He did not compete in the steeplechase until his sophomore season at Princeton. In his second time running the event, he won at the 2010 Penn Relays. That year he was the Ivy League outdoor 10,000 meter and steeplechase champion and the indoor runner-up in the 3000 meters and 5000 meters. He finished second at the NCAA championships with a time of 8:38.90.

As a junior in 2011, he repeated as the Ivy League outdoor 10,000 meter and steeplechase champion and became the indoor champion in the 3000 meters and 5000 meters. He was selected as the most outstanding performer at both the indoor and outdoor Heps meets. That fall, he had been the 2010 Ivy League cross country champion. He finished second at the NCAA championships with a time of 8:32.14. At the NCAA national outdoor 5,000 meter race, he established a school record of 13:40.62 that would stand for less than a year.

He spent the summer of 2011 training in Park City, Utah. During his senior season, Cabral purchased a high-altitude tent on craigslist that he used in his dormitory room for five months leading up to the 2012 Olympic Trials. This enabled him to sleep and study at a simulated altitude of with the goal of making his body more efficient by depriving himself of oxygen. He spent 10–12 hours per day in the tent. In 2012, he won his third consecutive Ivy League outdoor 10,000 meter and steeplechase championships. He also repeated as the indoor champion in the 5000 meters. He won at the NCAA championships with a time of 8:35.44.

On May 18, 2012, while running in the OXY High Performance meet in California, Cabral completed the 3000 m steeplechase in 8:19.14, surpassing Farley Gerber's American Collegiate record of 8:19.27, set for Weber State University in 1984 and smashing his own personal best time of 8:32. The previous Ivy League record of 8:29.01 had been set by Michael Fadil of Dartmouth College in 1985. Cabral also holds the Ivy League record for the indoor 5000 meters.

Cabral became the 2012 NCAA steeplechase champion on June 8, 2012, winning by five seconds and capping an undefeated season in the event. Cabral is Princeton's first individual track event NCAA champion since William Bonthron's 1934 championship in the mile run in 1934. This does excludes field event champions such as Tora Harris (2002 high jump) who had been Princeton's last NCAA Outdoor Track and Field champion. When combined with the men's squash team and epeeist Jonathan Yergler, it marked the first academic year that Princeton had three national champions since 2003. Harris had also been the last track and field Olympian, although no Princeton distance runner had qualified for the Olympics since class of 1906 Princetonian John Eisele earned a silver medal in the steeplechase and a bronze medal in the three-mile at the 1908 Summer Olympics. No Princeton runner had made the Olympics since Bill Stevenson went to the 1924 Summer Olympics.

Because athletes in Ivy League competition only have four years of athletic eligibility, Cabral could not participate in NCAA competition for Princeton to use his final year of cross country eligibility. As a result, he intended to enroll in business school at the University of Colorado, where he would continue training with Billy Nelson coach Mark Wetmore. He opted to turn pro rather than attend Colorado.

Cabral finished 17th in the 10,000 meters at the 2008 World Junior Championships. In the 2010 NACAC Under-23 Championships, he won the steeplechase with at time of 8:52.67.

Although a competitive collegiate runner, Cabral has focused his training on the Olympics. On June 28, 2012, Cabral qualified for the 2012 United States Olympic team as a steeplechase participant by finishing second to Evan Jager with a time of 8:19.81 in the 2012 United States Olympic Trials and surpassing the Olympic A standard time of 8:23.10. In an August 3, 2012 Olympic heat, Cabral finished 4th with a time of 8:21.46 in his 13-man heat, earning the last automatic berth to the August 5 finals. Cabral's time was 10th fastest of the 15 advancing runners (and of all 39 entrants), slower than all six qualifiers from heat 1 and faster than all 4 qualifiers from heat 2. In the finals, he led at the 1000 meter split with a time of 2:52.70, but he finished in eighth place with a time of 8:25.91.

Instead of continuing his collegiate career at another institution, he decided to go pro as a runner in the summer of 2012. After graduating from Princeton University in 2012, he signed with Nike; Following the 2012 Olympics and a little time off, Cabral moved to Bellingham, Washington, where he trained with former coach Peter Oviatt. In 2017 he signed with Hoka One One. He currently trains with the HOKA New Jersey*New York Track Club.

At the 2015 World Championships in Beijing, China, Cabral placed 10th in the 3000 m steeplechase with a time of 8:24.94.

Donn Cabral placed third in the steeplechase in a time of 8:26.37 at the 2016 United States Olympic Trials behind Team USA teammates Hillary Bor and Evan Jager to qualify to represent the United States at Athletics at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Brazil. He placed eighth in the steeplechase at the 2016 Olympics.

His parents are John Cabral and Deborah Hadaway. His father coached him in soccer. At Princeton, Cabral earned his Bachelor of Arts degree in economics.




</doc>
<doc id="36387686" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36387686" title="All in the Family (Body of Proof)">
All in the Family (Body of Proof)

"All in the Family" is the seventh episode of the first season of the American medical drama "Body of Proof". It was originally broadcast in the United States on ABC on 3 May 2011. The episode was directed by John Polson and written by Sam Humphrey.

In this episode, Megan Hunt (Dana Delany) and Peter Dunlop (Nicholas Bishop) investigate when a stay at home father is found by his wife Jen (Molly Price), stabbed to death at their house. With the help of Detectives Bud Morris (John Carroll Lynch) and Samantha Baker (Sonja Sohn) they investigate, with all the evidence pointing towards the victims son, Mike (Jake O'Connor). Whilst the case is on-going, Megan receives flashbacks to her childhood. Meanwhile, Kate Murphy (Jeri Ryan) is asked by Megan's lawyer ex-husband Todd Fleming (Jeffrey Nordling) to help him with a case.

The episode received positive reviews, and was watched by 10.20 million viewers, according to Nielsen ratings, on the Tuesday night it aired in the United States. Critics called the episode both "dishearting" and "engaging" saying that "these characters and this episode was a winner for "Body of Proof"". They also praised the partnership between Kate and Curtis Brumfield (Windell Middlebrooks), calling the scenes "hysterical" and "funny".

Megan Hunt (Dana Delany) and Peter Dunlop (Nicholas Bishop) arrive at the scene of Ed Russell (David Shumbris), a stay at home father, who is found by his wife Jen (Molly Price) stabbed to death at their house, whilst their baby daughter Sophie is at home. When Detective Bud Morris (John Carroll Lynch) goes to tell Ed's son Mike (Jake O'Connor) about his father’s death, Megan stops him, telling Bud to let his mother tell him. Megan has a flashback to when she was younger, focussing on when a young Megan (Madeline Milne) receives the news of her father’s death from a policeman, as the police did not know where her mother, Joan (Joanna Cassidy), was at the time. Jen admits that she cleaned up some footprints; she thought they were Mike's. The attack on Ed was personal and after Detective Samantha Baker (Sonja Sohn) concludes that the attack on Ed was personal after she finds evidence to suggest Mike did indeed kill his father, such as negative emails. Mike protests his innocence, and Ethan Gross (Geoffrey Arend) finds evidence which makes Mike innocent. Throughout the day, Megan tries to rebuild her relationship with Lacey (Mary Mouser), carpooling Lacey and her friends, Sarah (Teresa Celentano) and Betsy (Anna Friedman).

Megan's lawyer ex-husband Todd (Jeffrey Nordling) arrives at Megan's work, needing forensic testing for evidence that his client Manny Santos (Carlos Apostle), is a juvenile. Kate Murphy (Jeri Ryan) greets him, and she asks Curtis Brumfield (Windell Middlebrooks) to help examine him. Curtis finds evidence which suggests Manny has received recent trauma to ribs and other body parts, suggesting that he’s being abused. Curtis explains to Todd that Manny is a juvenile, but he will not be able to be released back to his former home, as he is being abused there. Meanwhile, the evidence for the murderer fits a partial match to Mike, so Megan concludes that Ed is not Mike's father. She goes to visit Jen; however she slams the door in her face. Megan walks into her house and finds Mike's real father Tim (Timothy Devlin), holding Ed's and Jen's baby daughter hostage. Tim takes Jen into the garden when the police arrive, so Bud shoots him in the leg and arrests him and Jen is reunited with Sophie and Mike.

"All in the Family" was written by Sam Humphrey and directed by John Polson, most known for founding "Tropfest", the world's largest short film festival, which first took place in Australia. Daniel Licht who has worked on the series since its inception, returned to compose the music for the episode. Actress Molly Price – best known for her role in "Third Watch" as Faith Yokas – guest starred in the episode as Jen Russell. Although Joanna Cassidy, who plays Megan's mother Joan Hunt, does not appear, she is mentioned in flashback scenes. These flashback scenes show a young Megan, played by child actress Madeline Milne. Recurring cast members Jeffrey Nordling and Mary Mouser returned in this episode, with this being Mouser's first appearance since season one's fourth episode "Talking Heads" and Nordling's first appearance since seasons one's first episode, "Pilot".

"All in the Family", along with the eight episode's from "Body of Proof"s first season, were released on a two-disc DVD set in the United States on September 20, 2011. The sets included brief audio commentaries from various crew and cast members for several episode's, a preview of season 2 and a 10-minute "featurette" on the making of the show, with commentaries from the medical consultants who helped with the script, as well as a "Contaminated Evidence" blooper reel.

In its original American broadcast on 3 May 2011, "All in the Family" was seen by 10.20 million viewers, according to Nielsen ratings. Among viewers between ages 18 and 49, it received a 2.0 rating/9 share. This means that it was seen by 2 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds, and 9 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds watching television at the time of the broadcast. This episode achieved a much lower number of viewers than the previous episode, "Society Hill", but a higher number than subsequent episode "Buried Secrets". "Body of Proof" came fifth in the ratings on Tuesday night, it was outperformed by two episodes of CBS's "NCIS" and an episode of "The Good Wife" and NBC's "The Voice". "All in the Family" was watched by 1.73 million viewers upon its airing on Channel 5 in the United Kingdom.

This episode received positive reviews. Christine Orlando from "TV Fanatic" said she found the episode both "dishearting" and "engaging", as well as later adding that it was "sad" and "frightening" when Jake O'Connor was accused of murdering his father. Writing about the final scene which shows Megan enter the Russell’s house, she said that she wanted to "smack" Megan for doing so, saying "What was she thinking? She knew Scanlon had committed the murder and that Jen was acting strangely when she wouldn't let her in. Yet, she went back to find the door open and walked right in. Megan's intelligent enough to know that something wasn't right but she's unarmed and untrained to handle the situation. For some reason she seemed incapable of making the smart decision to wait for the real police". Orlando said of the flashback scenes that she hopes in future episodes they "delve deeper" into Megan's father's death, saying that it was "certainly a turning point for the character and I'd love to know more". She said it was "nice" to see scenes between Peter and Megan and said of the carpooling storyline, "Snacks for carpool didn't seem like a bad idea but they could have used a couple of healthier options to go with the chocolate". Of Curtis and Kate's examining Manny Santos, she said that their expressions were "hysterical" and "funny" when they decided whether Manny was a juvenile, adding that it gave "a much needed moment of comic relief in an otherwise heavy episode". She finished in saying that the episode "grabbed her attention", finishing, "These engaging characters and this episode was a winner for "Body of Proof"". In the carpooling storyline it featured Tastykake's products, a line of snack foods based in Philadelphia. Such products which were mentioned were Krimpets and KandyKakes, with the ABC saying they were the "best".



</doc>
<doc id="36393662" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36393662" title="History of Brasenose College, Oxford">
History of Brasenose College, Oxford

The history of Brasenose College, Oxford, stretches back to 1509, when the college was founded on the site of Brasenose Hall. Its name is believed to derive from the name of a bronze knocker that adorned the hall's door. The college was associated with Lancashire and Cheshire, the county origins of its two founders – Sir Richard Sutton and the Bishop of Lincoln, William Smyth – a link that was maintained strongly until the latter half of the nineteenth century. The first principals navigated Brasenose, with its Catholic sympathisers, through the reformation and continuing religious reforms. Most of Brasenose favoured the Royalist side during the English Civil War, although it produced notable generals and clergy on both sides. The library and chapel were completed in the mid-seventeenth century, despite Brasenose suffering continuing financial problems.

The post-1785 period would see an era of prosperity of the college under Principal William Cleaver. The college began to be populated by gentlemen, its income doubling between 1790 and 1810, and academic success considerable. Efforts to reconstruct Brasenose were not completed, however, until the second half of the century with the addition of New Quad between 1886 and 1911. Brasenose's financial position remained secure, although under the tenure of Principal Edward Hartopp Cradock Brasenose's academic record waned greatly, with much of its success focussed on sports – where it excelled most notably in cricket and rowing. The mid-Century Royal Commissions were navigated – although they were opposed in form, their recommendations welcomed including the submission of accounts. The election of Charles Buller Heberden as Principal in 1889 led to a reversal in Brasenose's academic failures, although its sporting performance suffered. Heberden was the first lay Principal, presiding over an increasingly secular college, opening up the library to undergraduates, instituting an entrance exam for the first time and accepting Rhodes scholarships.

Brasenose lost 115 men in the First World War (including a quarter of the 1913 year), with its undergraduate numbers greatly reduced. Lord Curzon's post-war reforms were successfully instituted. The inter-war period was defined by William Stallybrass, who as fellow and eventual Principal (until 1948) dominated college life. Brasenose once again produced top sportsmen – cricketers, rowers, and others. This came at the cost of falling academic standards and poorly performing finances, which would see Stallybrass' authority challenged. He died in a railway accident before he could be forced out, however. After the war, sporting achievements waned (although there were notable exceptions) but academic success did not improve significantly, in what was now one of Oxford's largest colleges.

The 1970s saw considerable social change in Brasenose: the admission of women beginning in 1974, more post-graduate attendees and fewer domestic staff. There was also considerable construction work to ensure that undergraduates could be housed for the entirety of their degree on the main site and on the Frewin site; this task was only completed in 1997 with the opening of the St Cross Building and Frewin extension. Law continued to be a strong subject for Brasenose (following on from Stallybrass, through Principals Barry Nicholas and Herbert Hart) as was the emerging subject of Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE), starting with the fellowship of Vernon Bogdanor. Brasenose's finances were secured, and it thus entered the twenty-first century in a good position as regards financial, extracurricular and academic success – the last having significantly recovered from its lows, helped by PPE.

The first reference to a "Brasenose Hall" is found in the forged charter of 1219, occupying at that time only one small part of the current site. It was recorded in 1278 as having four scholars, although over the next fifty years it was to acquire some corporate strength. The name "Brasenose" is thought to originate from a brass–lead door knocker in the shape of leopard (or lion) head; the nose-shaped door knocker of which one version now hangs above the high table of the main hall of Brasenose College. An alternative theory is that the name is a corruption of "brasenhuis" (brewhouse), but this is not widely accepted, although the college did have its own brewhouse up until 1889. This theory is believed to date back only to 1837.

During the 1333 disturbances in Oxford, a group of clerks from Brasenose Hall left the ongoing violence and made their way to Stamford, Lincolnshire. The Brasenose knocker was taken with them as a symbol of continuity, and only believed returned in 1890. Although Edward III intervened, ordering the students to return, some persisted in Stamford and acquired a second "Brasenose Hall" there. In 1381, Brasenose Hall, Oxford, acquired a lease from University College for parts of the current site. The Stamford establishment was considered a rival, and candidates for degrees at Oxford, were required to swear that they would not give or attend lectures in Stamford as late as 1827. Between 1480 and 1509 the Hall was responsible for supplying a vice-chancellor of the University and two of its proctors. Throughout this period, Brasenose appears to have aligned itself with Oxford's "Northerners" during periods of Northerner–Southerner violence in Oxford. In 1890 the college purchased Brazenose House in Stamford and removed the knocker to Oxford.

The College is traditionally considered to have been founded in 1509 by a lawyer, Sir Richard Sutton, of Prestbury, Cheshire, and the Bishop of Lincoln, William Smyth. It was on 1 June 1509 that the foundation stone for Staircase I was laid. It was not until 15 January 1512 that a royal charter was obtained from Henry VIII. It was on 20 October 1508 that Smyth and eight other members of the college leased the site for the college – Brasenose Hall and neighbouring Little University Hall – from University College for ninety-two years at the cost of £3 a year, provided that they spend £40 improving the site within a year. William Smyth has risen quickly through the ranks of the Church – albeit as a more able administrator than prelate – to become Bishop of Lincoln in 1496, Chancellor of the university between 1500 and 1503 and Lord President of the Marches in 1501, assisted by the influence of Lady Margaret Beaufort. The transition between hall and college was not clear-cut; rather, the hall was left standing whilst the new buildings for the college were completed. Matthew Smyth, last principal of the hall, became first principal of the College, although he was referred to as "Principal of the College and Hall of Brasen Nose" as late as September 1514. It was in 1523 that Sutton transferred the lease formally over to the Principal and Fellows of the new college.

The Abbey of Oseney leased several halls to the new college, including Haberdasher, Glass, Black and Little St. Edmund, in 1530, and in 1556 Lincoln College let Staple Hall to Brasenose on a nominal rent of twenty shillings a year. These complemented other halls which had been taken on as Brasenose Hall had grown, including St Thomas's Hall, Shield Hall, Ivy Hall, St Mary's Entry, Salissury Hall and Broadgates Hall. The early college was governed by the statutes laid down by the formal charter of foundation in 1511–12 (altered by a revised code of Sutton after Smyth's death) which was prefaced with the words:
In the name of the Holy and undivided Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and of the most blessed Mother of God, Mary the glorious Virgin, and of Saints Hugh and Chad confessors, and also of St. Michael the archangel: We, William Smyth, Bishop of Lincoln, and Richard Sutton, Esquire, confiding in the aid of the Supreme Creator, who knows, directs, and disposes the wills of all that trust in him, do out of goods which in this life, not by our merits, but of the grace of His fulness, we have received abundantly, by royal authority and charter found, institute and establish in the University of Oxford, a perpetual College of porr and indignant scholars, who shall study and make progress in philosophy and sacred theology; commonly called "The King's Haule and College of Brasennose in Oxford"; to the praise, glory, and honour of Almighty God, of the glorious Virgin Mary, Saints Hugh and Chad confessors, St. Michael the archangel and All Saints; for the support and exaltation of the Christian Faith, for the advancement of holy church, and for the furtherance of divine worship.
Smyth had planned for a college of a Principal and sixty bachelor fellows; however, Sutton lowered this to only twelve. The Principal was required to be over thirty, a graduate and priest, and have the support of the Visitor, the Bishop of Lincoln. He was entitled to take up ecclesiastic office or duties that did not interfere overly with his job as principal; the fellows were required to be resident for ten months of each year. Entrants to the college would have been only 11 or 12 years old, with an intake both from those whose income was very low, alongside those from gentlemanly backgrounds. Fellows had a high degree of autonomy, but received only board and lodging as reward.

The college remained associated with Lancashire and Cheshire, with a particular preference for those from Prestbury and Prescot, the founders' birthplaces. This was also reflected in early benefactors. These included the donation of John Port, serjeant-at-law, for two fellowships for natives of Chester in 1522; that of William Clyfton, the sub-dean of York, for residents of York, Lincoln and Nottingham in 1538; and for the Brian Higden, Dean of York, who sponsored a fellowship for those in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire in 1549. Another notable benefactor during this period was John Claymond, the first President of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, who in 1538 gave funds to maintain six scholars at Brasenose, provided that their lectures on humanity and Greek take place at his own college. Only in 1572 was a Lectureship in Greek established at Brasenose, symptomatic of a conservatism that attached Brasenose to a monastic teaching style that was increasingly problematic during the reformation. By the end of the sixteenth century, however, the college did boast lectureships ("public readerships") in the new disciplines of logic and natural philosophy. By 1547, the income of the college had increased to almost £200 yearly, with an endowment that placed it squarely in the midst of other colleges in size; it did, however, make a yearly loss.

The original buildings took some time to finish; only the original gateway was lavished upon from the beginning. The buildings were only of a modest splendour: the hall was not completed until the end of the seventeenth century; the rooms economically decorated without wood panelling; the main quadrangle only of one storey and garrets. Although an earlier chapel is suspected, the area above Staircase 1 – now the Senior Common Room – was in use by 1521. It appears that the ecclesiastical furnishings promised by Smyth never arrived, and have been presumed taken by the College's first Visitor, Cardinal Wolsey. Although the chapel (or perhaps oratory) was plain, two chalices and two patens survived from the original three of each and have been identified as older than those of Corpus or Trinity, dating to the late fifteenth century. Similarly the Old Library, now staircase IV, room 4, was completed in 1520–1, was not intended to be permanent but kept a considerable collection of books, most attained from benefactors, of which the most valuable were those donated by Henry Mason during the reign of James I. The library remained in that location until 1663.

The first two principals of the college, Matthew Smyth and John Hawarden, successfully navigated the college through the reformation period. The college retained strong Catholic tendencies, and support for the reforms of Henry VIII and Edward VIII was minimal. The Chapel's Dean, Thomas Hawarden, was opposed to the reforms, and was once called to the King's Privy Council to answer for his actions. Eventually, though, the continuing reforms were carried through; in particular, despite an exception for the University from the Act of Uniformity in 1549 for services other than mass, the enforcement of the Book of Common Prayer severely limited the ability of the college to maintain the old Catholic services whilst outwardly adopting the new reforms. The careful, and generally slow, path trod was exposed under Queen Mary, when five Fellows the left the college over its failings to reinstate the full Catholic mass quickly enough. Under Thomas Blanchard and Richard Harris the college finally accepted the reglious reforms, and, moving into the later sixteenth century the college was responsible for housing several important figures of Protestantism: John Foxe, publicist, Christopher Goodman, protégé of Peter Martyr, Nicholas Grimald and Alexander Nowell. Despite producing several Anglican and evangelical sympathisers, the college retained many Catholic sympathisers. Six Brasenose fellows were executed for their loyalty to the pope: John Shert, Thomas Cottam and Laurence Johnson at Tyburn in 1582, and Robert Anderson, Francis Ingleby and George Nichols thereafter, only smaller in number than St John's.

The chancellorship of Archbishop William Laud, beginning in 1630, was a calm and profitable time for the University as a whole, dominating as it did the city of Oxford. The Parliamentarian occupation during the Civil War in 1642, and the subsequent Royalist siege ended this, however. Although the Parliamentarian army was careful to protect the University's buildings and freedoms upon regaining the city following its surrender in 1646. These events, and the plague that came to Oxford in 1643, did not escape Brasenose. Brasenose produced members of both sides of the war, although in generally leant in favour of the Royalists: the Protestation of 1641 was met with reservation and ingenious mechanisms to avoid reply on the part of many members of the college. Members of Parliament William Brereton, Humphrey Salway, Henry Brooke and John Cartwright, James Chaloner, Colonel Thomas Croxton, major general and MP William Jephson and commandant John Bingham all fought for parliament; James Bradshawe and Peter Ince, among Brasenose's many clergy, also supported the Roundheads. On the Royalist side stood Sir Alexander Radcliffe, Major Peter Leicester, MP Sir Edward Littleton, Edward Fischer (author of "Appeal to the Conscience"), Francis Newman and the majority of Brasenose's clergy. Some Royalists stayed in the college during the civil war, including Sir William Le Neve (Clarenceux King of Arms), Dr Edward Lake, and the Duchess of Buckingham; two, Sir John Spelman and Sir Henry St George (Garter King of Arms) died during their stay.

Following the war, three visitations reformed the University of Oxford in the Parliamentarians' preferred style, including purging Brasenose of its remaining loyalists. Sir William Petty, a former student, was among those promoted to fellow of the college. Samuel Radcliffe, Principal, was to be replaced with Dr Daniel Greenwood, a long-term fellow of the college of Puritan sympathies by order of the visitors. However, the college held out repeatedly against efforts to expel or remove its fellows and principal, most through deliberate inactivity. Radcliffe was ill and continued to personally oppose handing over control of the college to Greenwood, particularly the college archives and treasury. The fellows, also opposing Greenwood, instead elected Thomas Yate to replace Radcliffe upon his death, although owing to the visitors' choice of Greenwood he would not take up his post fully for twelve years. Over this period, thirteen of Brasenose's sixteen remaining fellows were expelled, but the college survived.
Radcliffe was also responsible for the institution of four lectureships, philosophy, humanity, Greek, and Hebrew, although not all were new to Brasenose. However, Radcliffe's Principalship continued the mismanagement of Brasenose's finances, which had sunk into debt by the start of the seventeenth century: battels had gone unpaid, debts to tradesmen run up. Radcliffe's sale of two college leases landed the College in unsuccessful litigation with Radcliffe's family. A "draconian" visitation took place in 1643, when the college owed £1,750. By 1646, after the civil war, Brasenose still owed £1,214 8"s" 0"d". During the war, the college had loaned the King £600, which it would not get back. However, the post-civil war period saw Brasenose receive support from both current members and those expelled; Greenwood and the bursar, John Houghton, continued the building work started by Radcliffe. Finances were gradually improved, with assistance from the government, up to the Restoration.

The seventeenth century saw a second wave of building at Brasenose, started under the Principalship of Samuel Radcliffe. Under his leadership an attic story was added to Old Quad in the 1630s, and the current chapel and library both constructed between 1656 and 1666. The chapel, in particular, was a mix of architectural styles – Gothic revival and baroque – and thus not without criticism. The work totalled some £4,000, achieved eventually despite Brasenose's previous money problems; by 1680, college income was a sustainable £600 a year. A Senior Common Room, believed to be Staircase 2, Room 3, had been added by 1682.

Throughout the second half of the century, Brasenose remained around the fourth largest college of the University behind Christ Church and Exeter; the proportion of students and Fellows from lower income groups was much higher than most other colleges, having improved during the second half of the century. Entrants were also heavily biased towards those from Cheshire and Lancashire: two-thirds of Oxford entrants from those counties went to Brasenose in the first half of the century; three-quarters by its end. Indeed, by that time, the majority of Brasenose student hailed from one of those two north-western counties, assisted by the localised scholarships. In 1679, the college received an endowment from Sarah Seymour, Duchess of Somerset to fund four "Somerset" scholars, to be drawn from a free school of Manchester. She also donated further money for additional scholarships (drawn alternately from Manchester, Marlborough, and Hereford) upon her death in 1686.

The Restoration, along with a return to the pre-war Laudian church and the passing of the Act of Uniformity in 1662, posed few problems for the sympathetic and quickly reformed Brasenose; only one fellow left without agreeing. For some, nominal allegiance to the new regime was the order of the day, supported by a weary college. The Restoration period was one of disciplinary laxity across the university; Brasenose was no different, with some of its students taking part in riots. Yate was instituted as successor – and somewhat retrospectively as predecessor – to Greenwood; six of the thirteen fellows that had been expelled returned; other personnel in the college were replaced. The period saw a rejuvenation of teaching in the University as a whole and a new cache of new thinkers, including Brasenose's Petty.

During this time, French physician Samuel de Sorbière and English contemporary Samuel Pepys were among visitors. Alumni of the period included James Alban Gibbes, George Clarke and Elias Ashmole, although only Petty formed part of the emerging mathematics and sciences.

Upon William III and Mary II's rise to the throne in 1688, Oxford became an established centre of the new regime. The revolution itself was smoothly accepted by Brasenose, with the exception of only a handful. Brasenose, however, remained fairly small, with only six senior fellows, although among colleges it retained some power. The College itself remained loyal to the church above the king and allegiance to oaths and ceremony was enforced, even if college members themselves were not always devout Anglicans. William Hulme gave lands in the then county of Lancaster for the maintenance of "four exhibitioners of the poorest sort" in 1691, drawn from the selections of the Warden of Manchester, the Rector of Prestwich and the Rector of Bury.

Throughout the Georgian period, Brasenose remained "tactically Hanoverian but Jacobite by instinct", and a strong bias towards Lancashire and Cheshire, and lesserly towards the north of England as a whole, from where over half of members of the college would come in the 1690–1799 period. Admissions were predominantly from the lower orders – either in terms of class or wealth. John Meare, Principal since 1681, was himself a commoner and a supporter of the Glorious revolution; his election to the Vice-Chancellorship of the University in 1697 was greeted angrily by Tories.

At Brasenose, in 1710, Meare was replaced by Robert Shippen, a prominent crypto-Jacobite in Oxford. Shippen, a Tory, was personally despised. He mounted several campaigns for further power, acquiring several advowsons in East London, including the rectory of Whitechapel. Shippen wanted it for himself and ejected the incumbent at the cost of much personal animosity from parishioners. He then went on to become Vice-Chancellor of the University, and to continually interfere in the institutions of Oxford – the Ashmolean, the Bodleian and other colleges. He was responsible for the much-need purchase of seven sites on the High Street, the completion of a new common room for fellows. However, he had much grander plans for both Brasenose and Oxford – ostensibly to put Brasenose at the centre of a new "forum" for the University – that were not completed, despite some considerably time and money spent on them. In this regard he worked alongside Dr George Clarke, sometime Brasenose student and more recently designer of several colleges and library buildings, and Nicholas Hawksmoor. Brasenose, and Shippen and his allies, did, however, play a crucial role in formulating and completing the plans for the Radcliffe Camera. Shippen's own Jacobitism appeared to subside – perhaps adjudicating on the mood of the time – but Brasenose's did not; ale verses were sung to "our true "English" king" (rather than the Hanoverian George I). A panegyric for James II was even said yearly for at least ten years from 1701, at the bequest of Sir Francis Bridgeman (married 1673). The Jacobite rising of 1715 caused a riot in Oxford, and not without Brasenose involvement.

Little changed in the century up to 1785; the average age of fellows, mostly "youthful clerics", remained a little under thirty, having been elected to the fellowship at 23, on average, to serve for around fifteen years. Helped by the Duchess of Somerset's bequest, Manchester Grammar School supplied up to a sixth of Brasenose's intake, and proportionately far more of its fellows. Despite this, the college resisted the growing cause of Methodism.

Towards the second half of the century, Brasenose began to lose its reputation for ignorance; it also became wealthier. Its social ranking improved, and it attracted more members. The accounts were much improved: from a deficit of £444 in 1761 to a surplus of £476 in 1781. This must have been helped by the introduction of Arabic numerals (rather than Roman numerals) as late as 1773. The Radcliffe Camera was opened in 1749, assisting the college's attempts at self-improvement. Social barriers were broken down – both by the reduction in the duties of the lowest groups and the privileges of the richest, and the increasing wealth of entrants to the college generally. The college remained far from the most elite or exclusive of colleges; nor, by the standards of wealthier colleges, did its members misbehave. Among the 1774 intake, 20 were gentlemen, but it was one of the remaining seven – Henry Addington – who would achieve most fame as Brasenose's first prime minister. It was into this setting that William Cleaver was made Principal in 1785, the principals of the previous eighty years – Francis Yarborough, William Gwyn, Ralph Cawley, and Thomas Barker– being without real note. Yarborough oversaw improvements to library and hall, the former guided by the addition of his own considerable collection of books. It was also set upon that improvements to accommodation were needed; two properties on the High Street were bought, to be turned into the Principal's residence, the lodgings above the Lodge becoming accommodation for bursar and fellows. This was overseen by Gwyn, but he too did not live to see its completion. It would continue to be the Principal's residence until 1886. Barker was a man of modest means; thus, it was Cleaver who would take Brasenose into a new age of prosperity.
Wholesale reform of Oxford examinations began in the late eighteenth century, proposed by, among others, Brasenose's John Napleton in his pamphlet "Considerations on the Public Exercises for the First and Second Degrees in the University of Oxford". It was Cleaver and his successor Frodsham Hodson that would continue the reforms and apply them to Brasenose itself. Cleaver was from the minor gentry and set out from the start to make Brasenose the place of rich men. Unable to secure the librarianship of the Bodleian whilst fellow, he had instead become tutor to his patron George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, 1st Marquess of Buckingham – a position which he used to lead two of the Duke's sons and other members of the family to Brasenose; the sons' uncle, Baron Grenville, became the University's Chancellor. Under his leadership into the early nineteenth century, numbers improved dramatically and so did the class of people coming: Brasenose began to be dominated by gentlemen like the Egertons, the Grenvilles, and of Richard Rainshaw Rothwell I. Its income over doubled between 1790 and 1810 to £9,200 per annum, with the college maintaining its links to the north-west. Among the other acquisitions of Cleaver was the services of Hodson, a Liverpudlian.

The Phoenix Common Room (the oldest dining club in Oxford) was founded at Brasenose in 1782, and certainly in place by 1786. It came to have a uniform, code of practice, and extensive wine cellar. It also took part of the role of the modern Junior Common Room in respect of social activities – although membership was limited to 12, it was elected on rotation.

Cleaver and Hodson made another attempt to redesign the High Street frontage of Brasenose, securing first the services of James Wyatt and later approaching John Nash when Wyatt failed to deliver. No plans were ever laid down, however. Three sets of designs were produced eventually by John Soane, but rather too expensive for the college. The next years would see only temporary buildings on the High Street site. Hodson was made principal in 1809 following Cleaver's resignation. A year before, and under Hodson's guidance, the exiled Louis XVIII had visited Brasenose; in 1814, the royal families of the United Kingdom, Russia, and Prussia dined in the Radcliffe Camera – food and pre-dinner arrangements organised by Brasenose. In 1815, in the first inter-collegiate boat race, Brasenose went to the head of the river. Brasenose's academic record was good, with seven of thirty-seven first class degrees awarded across Oxford between 1808 and 1810. Among these was that of William Gregson (later draughtsman of the Great Reform Bill) – deemed the best the examiners had ever seen. The 1810–20 period contained several academic reforms, particularly to the nature of examinations – the institution of terminally collections, including in mathematics and natural philosophy, something of a break from the focus of the past. Brasenose went into the regency one of only three colleges – the others being Christ Church and Oriel – to be both fashionable and academically successful; it ran a waiting list whilst other colleges had spare places.

Alongside the Phoenix Common Room ran the Alfred Lodge (founded in 1769), The Club (1790) and the Apollo; together they made Brasenose central to Oxford socialization in this period. Between 1818 and 1837, however, life at Oxford was changing: it became far more "diligent and orderly", less boisterous. Brasenose maintained its reputation for some time longer (there were still stories of excess, particularly drink). In 1840, several members of the Phoenix resigned, and Sunday meetings and Satanic toasts abolished, after John Woodhouse's death in a meeting – according to tradition, dragged through the bars of a window ovelrooking Brasenose Lane immediately upon toasting the devil. It ushered in a period of Victorian morality for Brasenose.

Ashurst Turner Gilbert was elected Principal in 1822, aged only 35; he had secured the fellowship in 1809 on the strength of a first. He disliked teaching – although he admitted it paid the bills – and much preferred being Principal. There, he would be eventually made Vice-Chancellor of the University and later Bishop of Chichester. Gilbert committed Brasenose to a cause of neutral politics and mainstream Anglicanism, strongly rejecting Tractarian and Evangelical ideas including supporting the censure of Dr. Renn D. Hampden. His time was spent pre-occupied with the religious tensions of the University, having spent time opposing changes to religious services in Oxford on behalf of Oxford Tories.

Despite an intake dominated by commoners at Brasenose, Oxford had become a university dominated by the independently wealthy; the "Edinburgh Review" decried it as "simply a great public school".

Gilbert's successor in 1842 was Richard Harrington, who inherited a college in good shape: income was around £15,000; only Christ Church was significantly bigger in size. Academic reforms, particularly with regard to examinations – which were to be administered by the university, rather than the college – were instituted across Oxford in the first half of the century. Brasenose's proportion of first-class degrees fell sharply from its previous peak. By 1850, no matriculation exam was instituted at Brasenose, as at other colleges, although the other examinations were altered: responsions moved forward and moderations instituted. Brasenose, like the University, was yet to truly reform the range of subjects studied, however. It was only in 1849 that modern sciences were only given a separate School (and thus examination) in 1849; law and modern history a year later.

Edward Hartopp Cradock (known as "Chief") became Principal in 1853, and would lead the college until 1886; most notable in his tenure was the introduction of organised sports and the resulting public image of Brasenose as a sporting college. This included the membership of oarsman Walter Bradford Woodgate, founder of Vincent's Club, and sometime president of the club Tom Edwards-Moss. It produced many blues rowers, seven in 1860–1867 alone. Between 1870 and 1872, the Oxford varsity cricket team was similarly dominated by Brasenose men, including Conrad Wallroth. One, Arthur Heath, went on to become a Conservative Party politician, although legal and careers in the church still dominated. Brasenose was also very well turned out in rugby and football – including Cuthbert Ottaway and Heath – but cricket and rowing defined its success.

Among other pursuits, amateur dramatics flourish (even though Brasenose was an all-male college). Overall, the intake and careers of undergraduates remained dominated by the Church (up to half), drawn from a range of backgrounds. The college remained largely independent of the large public schools. Brasenose's academic record remained solid, if unremarkable; its strengths lay in classics, although one of its most prominent academics – Arthur Evans – studied modern history.

Brasenose was staunchly opposed to the establishment of the first Royal Commission of 1850–51 into standards at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, claiming that it lacked authority and served an "ignorant" purpose. The college believed that if it were to support the commission, it might "at all future times be exposed to fluctatuions of political parties, attacks and influences very injurious to the peace and to the steady performance of its duties". It instead petitioned the crown to abandon the commission, citing certain freedoms under the Bill of Rights 1689. However, the commissioners were granted the authority to force cooperation and the petition rejected.

As it turned out, the college was happy to pursue many of the commission's aims: the restriction of the preference for candidates from the north-west (although the Somerset scholars remained), and the reduction of living expenses – something for which new buildings offering cheaper living and even union with Lincoln College were considered but ultimately rejected. More problematic were reforms to the distribution of power and funding between senior and junior fellows – although in 1855–7 ordinances were put in place giving junior fellows the same role in governance as their seniors. Thus the situation began to improve for junior fellows as the older fellows were gradually replaced. The changes made by the second Royal Commission (brought to "inquire into the property and income" of Oxford and Cambridge colleges) to the running of the accounts and the system of university-wide finances were unopposed by Brasenose. The accounts which the college submitted reveal an income of £16,000, of which nearly £10,000 came from land, other property, stocks and shares. Expenditure was around £13,600, which left Brasenose in a secure financial position. Although the university as a whole was hit hard by the agricultural crisis of the latter quarter of the century, Brasenose's income from agrarian sources was already low, and increasing yields from urban holdings made up most of the fall. Brasenose's response to the weakening economy was to increase its student intake by 1875 to three times what it had been in 1860, almost levelling that of the mid-regency period. This did, however, increase considerably the proportion of applicants from public schools.
Between 1859 and 1860, Frewin Hall housed the future Edward VII whilst he attended Christ Church. The chapel and old kitchen were planned to form part of a new, third, quadrangle for Brasenose. The valuable rents that the shops on the south side of Brasenose earned the college provided the most significant reason for the delay in further expansion, which only began in 1886 when work on the west side was started. It was finally completed in 1911, the last work having been done to the High Street frontage. Frewin Hall was reconstructed between 1887 and 1896, as were the chapel and antechapel. It had been in 1886 that Cradock had died and was replaced by Albert Watson.

Walter Pater, a writer, was sometime fellow of Brasenose; his writing would later be accused of being "immoral" and inappropriate letters to a student at Balliol, Walter Hardinge, got Pater into trouble. He survived, however, and continued to form part of the literary scene in Oxford and London, tutoring poet C. L. Shadwell and writer Humphrey Ward, lecturing Oscar Wilde and dining with Simeon Solomon and Oscar Browning. Another alumnus of this period was Frederic Weatherly, sometime lyricist and lawyer. It was Weatherley, Brasenose's coxswain, who threw himself out the boat in 1868 and thus invented the coxless four – although Brasenose won the race, they were disqualified. In 1880, the future Earl Haig entered Brasenose, although he was among very few statesmen to come through its ranks during the century.

Charles Buller Heberden became principal in 1889. He saw sporting as a means to the institution of civility than an end in itself; together with Richard Lodge, it was this spirit that dominated his tenure as principal. Academic rigour was reintroduced to the college, and the staff of Brasenose were increasingly successful in maintaining discipline. Until the end of the century, however, the number of students achieving blues outnumbered those attaining firsts. Author John Buchan joined in 1895, a man of this new era – although his work continued to portray Brasenose as its previous muscular stereotype. Heberden was also the first lay principal, although he was personally committed to the church – purchasing an organ for the chapel out of his own personal funds. Brasenose was frequently represented as boasting no academic prowess at all. Three of the ten fellows were set aside for non-classicists; a Junior Common Room (JCR) was created in 1887; in 1897 the library was opened up to undergraduates; in 1899, Fellows were granted a right to sabbatical leave. The fellows themselves were increasingly secular; only four of fourteen fellows were clergy.

In the pre-War period, the shift in focus to academia continued. Brasenose's rowing sides sunk down the tables. In 1901, the college introduced an entrance exam, and new Rhodes Scholarships were created in 1904. The Pater Society was founded in 1907, in memory of the fellow.

Like much of the UK, Brasenose suffered a considerable number of casualties in the First World War: 661 members served, with 114 killed, for the Allies; four members served in the German military, of whom two were killed. Canadian Talbot Mercer Papineau, who had attended Brasenose on a Rhodes Scholarship, was among those to support the war. Over a quarter of the 1913 year were killed, in a college that was considerably smaller than it had been. Some members were decorated: Arnold Jackson became the British Army's youngest Brigadier, and received the Distinguished Service Order with three bars. By 1918, Brasenose had just eight undergraduates.

The inter-war period saw Brasenose adapt to changing conditions within the university: the abolition of Greek as a compulsory language; the admission of women to degrees; and the acceptance of the first government funding. Across the university, these were spearheaded by Chancellor Lord Curzon (appointed in 1907), who wished to avoid another Royal Commission. There were also attempts to broaden the University's intake of students from poorer backgrounds, but living costs of £400 across a three-year degree made this difficult. Curzon was supported by his Vice-Chancellor, now Brasenose's Heberden. Within Brasenose, however, he was opposed by Brasenose's youngest fellow, William Teulon Swan Sonnenschein (who in 1917 took the surname "Stallybrass").

Charles Henry Sampson, Principal between 1920 and 1936, did little more than "keep the ship on an even keel": it was Stallybrass as Vice-Principal (1914–36) that defined Brasenose between the wars. Stallybrass was a keen sportsman, although like Heberden he saw it only as a means to an end – albeit a plethora of laudable ends. Brasenose had a middling income of £24,000 a year, with a similarly average 180 undergraduates. Religious attendance was relaxed, and fees for returning to college between 9 and 11PM abolished. Brasenose's collegiate link with Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge was established. Staircases XIV and XV were created, the only significant changes to the college buildings; the twenty fellows gradually replaced in Stallybrass' own image. Brasenose went back to the head of the river in 1928, rising from 22nd in 1922. Although Oxford's performance in rowing was poor, Brasenose was central to its few successes against Cambridge. It would sink to sixth in 1934 – although notable among its members was John Gorton, future Prime Minister of Australia. Success in rowing was matched in rugby and cricket – with Brasenose producing players such as Alexander Obolensky and Ian Smith. Brasenose rugby only reached its peak after the Second World War, with players such as Brian Boobbyer and Philip Moore, Baron Moore of Wolvercote. In cricket, Geoffrey Legge and Greville Stevens were early players; Ian Peebles Gerry Chalk and Roger Kimpton followed them: between 1934 and 1938 at least five members of the University team came from Brasenose. it may have been Brasenose's attachment to sport that meant it was slow to phase out Pass men. The effect on academic success was considerable; Brasenose slumped in performance except in law, where it excelled. In the 1930s Brasenose recorded no more than six firsts in a year; a total assisted by seven firsts in 1937–9 in law, out a total of 13 across the University. The future Lord Scarman (Lord of Appeal in Ordinary) was among undergraduates; two contemporaries and aspiring students, Richard Holdsworth and Michael Peacock were killed in the Second World War.

In terms of intake, by 1937 there were 201 undergraduates; it was a uniform selection that was almost completely middle class, like the rest of the University. Over 60% of entrants came from independent schools, perhaps because of the £250 a year cost of reading towards a degree. It had, unlike some other college, students from several other nations: Muhammad Aslam Khan Khattak and Abbas Khaleeli from British India among them. Students were varied: Baptist Thomas George Cowling became an astronomer and member of the Royal Society, in contrast, Jew Paul Dehn went on to become a film critic and screenwriter. Other alumni of this period include Charles Langbridge Morgan, Edward Atiyah and William Golding.

Brasenose was a smaller community during the war, but it kept going. Once again, union with Lincoln College was discussed: but in other areas, temporary merger was more appropriate; thus, Brasenose and Christ Church fielded single sports teams. The College hosted military personnel as it had in the First World War; a Nissen hut was even set up in Deer Park. Brasenose sent a flood of undergraduates into the forces; in particular, the college's sporting, masculine ethos meant many joined the Royal Air Force. This would contribute significantly to a high death total – 123 for the Allies and 1 for the Germans – more than in the First World War, although proportionately less. Many of Brasenose's sporting heroes died; among survivors were future Archbishop of Canterbury Robert Runcie and cricketer Pieter van der Bijl.

The immediate post-war period once again reform on the agenda with, in particular, the passing of the Education Act 1944. The effect was dramatic: state support, through bursaries and central grants, was hugely increased; the proportion of state school entrants increased considerably; for the first time in over a hundred years, there was considerable competition over places. Stallybrass, made Vice-Chancellor of the University in 1947, was sceptical about state education. It was not the quality of the students, but rather the means of state control that worried him. Annual grants from government were made to the University, not colleges, and might yet replace endowments as Brasenose's primary source of income, making it dependent on University support and increasing "federation" of colleges in a University superstructure. Stallybrass worried over this loss of college autonomy, although it was matched with a doubled grant from the government and huge sums set aside for capital spending. The right of Brasenose to choose its own students might be under threat, he thought; as it happened, the Labour government decided against corporate admission and threats to Stallybrass' power mostly resided within Brasenose.

Some members of the governing body, returning in some cases from the war, wished to realign the College with the new national spirit. The Principal's considerable role in admissions – which Stallybrass had used to elevate sportsmen – was the subject of criticism and accusations of financial under-performance and over-spending were made. A challenge was made directly in the bringing of a motion calling for a review of Brasenose's financial performance since 1922. However, before it could be debated, Stallybrass was killed, having apparently fallen from a train whilst returning to Oxford from a University meeting in London. Although the possibility of suicide was considered, the coroner ruled the case one of "death by misadventure". Hugh Last was elected in his place, although reluctantly: he had been told by his doctor that he was terminally ill, but the fellows were insistent.

Brasenose's finances entered the second half of the century in poor shape, and considerably worse than the period between 1930 and 1931, slipping relative to other colleges from 3rd to 8th. But they were improved during Last's tenure, along with undergraduate admissions; the college showed a surplus in 1952–53, and income in 1957 (£104,000) was double what it had been in 1938. Pay for fellows was still poor, and they were small in number compared to other colleges. There was a sizeable entertainment budget, however, something which, combined with the long hours, may have contributed to short lifespans. Only in 1987 did a sitting fellow reach retirement age. Last resigned as Principal in 1956, dying shortly after. Turnover was considerable, although some fellows stayed on: Maurice Platnauer became Principal in 1956, and retired in 1960; he was replaced by Sir Noel Hall. Hall's tenure was troubled, not externally, but rather from Hall's patchy knowledge of the college and staff; his selection, "faute de mieux", was sometimes questioned, although he remained well-liked. However, the college, which had thus far stayed assured, found itself in a changing environment. Herbert Hart, however, Principal between 1973 and 1978, was the first to be elected from outside Brasenose. Lord Windlesham, made principal in 1989, was the first to hold Cabinet Office.

Brasenose's reputation for law remained, under firstly Ron Maudsley – a Tutorial Fellow in the Stallybrass mould – and Roman and Civil law lecturer and tutor Barry Nicholas, then Peter Birks, another Roman lawyer and sometime Regius Professor of Civil Law at All Souls, Harry Lawson, the first Professor of Comparative Law, and Sir Otto Kahn-Freund, an employment law specialist. There was also a growing reputation for English literature – staff Ian Jack and Alastair Fowler among them. Other notable staff included Robert Shackleton, tutor in French, sometime librarian and Senior Dean; Sir Ronald Syme, Camden Professor of Ancient History (the chair previously held by Last, with whom he would continue a personal dispute). It would all mean the Brasenose's fellows in 1970 were dominated by Britain's top academic minds, however disjunct from academic success that would become. One subject to develop after 1970, however, was Politics, Philosophy and Economics (PPE). Bogdanor continued to lead a formidable group of fellows and undergraduates: Peter J.N. Sinclair, Michael Woods, John Foster, and Tony Courakis; Lord Robin Janvrin, Kate Allen, Catharine Hill, and British Prime Minister David Cameron.

In the history department, Syme was succeeded by Peter Brunt. In the sciences, Dr John Baltrop was sometime Bursar; Bryan Birch, Professor of Arithmetic and co-author of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture; and Nicholas Kurti, Vice-President of the Royal Society. Overall, although the immediate post-war staff remained traditional – if not overly conservative in nature – with a third drawn from Brasenose itself, the late sixties signalled a change on this front. Then, a wave of new face emerged: among them, Laszlo Solymar (later Professor of Applied Electromagnetism), Vernon Bogdanor (Professor of Government), Robert Evans (Regius Professor of Modern History) and Graham Richards, Oxford's Chairman of Chemistry.

During Last's tenure, Brasenose had a very high number of undergraduates: a peak of 104 in 1949, second in the University. Results, however, were poor: two firsts in 1950, placing the college 18th. It was only near the end that things picked up, perhaps a result of Last's stern manner; there were 13 firsts in 1955. However, until 1970, they remained poor, with only a small increase on the pre-War years. Brasenose sat twenty-first in the Norrington Table in 1968, twenty-sixth in 1975, and twenty-seventh in 1980. It was into this that Hart made his reforms, to bring students closer to the governing body and make them responsible for more of their own care – cleaning and washing, for example. By 2001, Brasenose had climbed the tables once again, coming in third place in the Norrington Table with 30 firsts.

There were still sportsmen, though: A. W. Ramsay (future RFU President), Kenneth Spence and Pete Dawkins among a dwindling set of rugby players; Colin Cowdrey among the college's cricketers. There were no Brasenose men in the Varsity cricket team between 1972 and 1989, certainly a slide on previous times. In rowing, the decline was even more significant: sixteenth among colleges in 1964; twentieth in 1976. It was only in the 1990s that rowing would return to success, firstly with the women and then with the men. Outside sport, a young Jeffrey Archer successfully invited The Beatles to Brasenose, the peak of a fundraising campaign for Oxfam.

In the 1960s onwards, there was a certain progressiveness in the air, and the first women guests were admitted in 1964. Women members were first admitted to the 1974–5 year. The college's first comprehensive-schooled student (Paul Barker) had arrived in 1955. It was also almost completely secular – with the exception of the chaplain and his deputies; the chaplain's role itself dominated by pastoral work. The students themselves concentrated more and more on the exams – marks improved across the university – but this left a class gulf between some staff and undergraduates, most visible in "gentlemanly" sports. Michael Palin and Robert Hewison were among new creative talent. Since the 1950s, over 70% of students were state-assisted, half of undergraduates drawn from state or direct grant schools, a figure very close to the University average. Brasenose merged entrance and scholarship exams in 1961, abolished closed scholarships in the decade after, and open entrance awards in 1984. Brasenose's traditional link with the north-west also floundered, although it is perhaps surprising that it lasted until the 1970s. In its place, there were more entrants, paying higher fees, from elsewhere in the world.
The expectation had been since the 1920s that undergraduates would spend at least one of their years living in College; however, post-war expectations grew and Brasenose began another construction programme to ensure it could house students for longer. Designs were drawn up by Philip Powell and Hidalgo Moya, in a then-modern style. The new buildings cost £76,000 to design, housing 32 rooms, and forming staircases XVI, XVII and XVIII. The architecture, which has since come to be thoroughly disliked, was praised. The rather more popular rooms on the Frewin site were also constructed, at a total cost of £3 million, including commercial units. In 1996, the St Cross annexe was finished; in 1997 the final extensions to Frewin were completed, allowing the college to house all undergraduates for the duration of their course. Finances had been secured with a late revival, and accounts early in the twenty-first century showed a 6% surplus and a ranking of 13th out of 36th in endowment income.

Professor Roger Cashmore, a particle physicist, became Brasenose's first scientist Principal in 2003. He was replaced in 2011 by Alan Bowman, former Camden Professor of Ancient History. The area around the kitchen was rebuilt in 2010–12, along with other changes to dining and some living rooms, in a series of building works known as the quincentenary building project or "Project Q".



</doc>
<doc id="36395209" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36395209" title="Styx (moon)">
Styx (moon)

Styx is a small natural satellite of Pluto whose discovery was announced on 11 July 2012. It was imaged along with Pluto and Pluto's other moons by the "New Horizons" spacecraft in July 2015. A single image was returned.

Styx is the second satellite of Pluto by distance and the fifth discovered. It was discovered one year after Kerberos. Styx is approximately across its longest dimension, and its orbital period is 20.2 days.

Styx was discovered by a team led by astronomer Mark R. Showalter, using fourteen sets of images taken between 26 June and 9 July 2012 by the Wide Field Camera 3 fitted to the Hubble Space Telescope. The discovery was announced on 11 July 2012. Styx is about half as bright as the dimmest previously known object in the system, Kerberos, and about one hundred thousandth as bright as Pluto. It was designated S/2012 (134340) 1, and informally referred to as P5.

The survey work leading to the discovery of Styx was in preparation for the mission of the unmanned "New Horizons" spacecraft, which flew by the Pluto system on 14 July 2015. The discovery of another small Plutonian moon heightened concerns that this region of space may harbor more bodies too small to be detected, and that the spacecraft could be damaged by an uncharted body or ring as it traversed the system at a speed of over 13 km/s; tiny moons, such as Saturn's moon Pallene, tend to be associated with tenuous rings or arcs, because their gravity is unable to hold on to material ejected by meteoroid impacts; such diffuse material represents the chief navigational hazard. However, the "New Horizons" spacecraft did not detect any smaller moons or rings, and passed through the Pluto system safely.

The unexpectedly complex moon system around Pluto may be the result of a collision between Pluto and another sizable Kuiper belt object in the distant past. Pluto's moons may have coalesced from the debris from such an event, similar to the early giant impact thought to have created the Moon. The orbital resonances may have acted as "ruts" to gather material from the collision.

Styx was originally estimated to have a diameter of between . These figures were inferred from the apparent magnitude of Styx and by using an estimated albedo of 0.35 and 0.04 for the lower and upper bounds, respectively. After measurements made by "New Horizons", it turns out that Styx (albeit not surprisingly) is very irregularly shaped, measuring approximately . It is thought to have formed from the debris lofted by a collision, which would have led to losses of the more volatile ices, such as those of nitrogen and methane, in the composition of the impactors. This process is expected to have created a body consisting mainly of water ice.

Styx orbits the Pluto–Charon barycenter at a distance of 42,656 km, putting it between the orbits of Charon and Nix. All of Pluto's moons appear to travel in orbits that are very nearly circular and coplanar, described by Styx's discoverer Mark Showalter as "neatly nested ... a bit like Russian dolls".

It is in an 11:6 orbital resonance with Hydra, and an 11:9 resonance with Nix (the ratios represent numbers of orbits completed per unit time; the period ratios are the inverses). As a result of this "Laplace-like" 3-body resonance, it has conjunctions with Nix and Hydra in a 2:5 ratio.

Its orbital period of 20.16155 days is about 5.0% from a 1:3 mean-motion resonance with the Charon–Pluto orbital period of 6.387 days. With the other moons Nix, Kerberos and Hydra, it forms part of an unusual 1:3:4:5:6 (period ratio) sequence of near resonances. In contrast to its orbit, Styx's rotation is very chaotic; like the other small Plutonian moons, Styx's rotation is not tidally locked, and it varies rapidly over short timescales (with a rate of about 3.239 days at the time of the "New Horizons" flyby).

Upon discovery, Styx received the minor planet designation S/2012 (134340) 1 because it was the first satellite (S) discovered orbiting minor planet (134340) in 2012. It is known informally as "P5", meaning the fifth Plutonian moon to be discovered.

The convention for naming Plutonian moons is to use names associated with the god Pluto in classical mythology. To decide on names for P4 and P5, Mark Showalter and the SETI Institute, on behalf of the discovery team, conducted a non-binding internet poll in 2013, in which the general public was invited to vote for their favorite names. The public could choose from a selection of Greek mythological names related to the god Pluto, or could propose their own names. After the initial announcement, William Shatner, the actor who plays Captain James T. Kirk in the "Star Trek" franchise, proposed the names Vulcan and Romulus, ostensibly referring to the fire god Vulcan (a nephew of Pluto), and to Romulus the founder of Rome, but also alluding to the fictional planets of Vulcan and Romulus in the "Star Trek" universe. The 'Romulus' suggestion was discounted, as there is already an asteroid moon of that name, but Vulcan won the poll after Shatner tweeted about it, with Cerberus (the dog that guards Pluto's underworld) coming second and Styx (the goddess of the river of the same name in the underworld) coming third. The winning names were submitted to the International Astronomical Union.
However, "Vulcan" was unacceptable to the IAU because it was not the name of an underworld figure and had already been used for a hypothetical planet inside the orbit of Mercury, as well as having given its name to the vulcanoids.

On 2 July 2013, the IAU announced that it had formally approved the names "Styx" for P5 and "Kerberos" for P4.

Author Edmond Hamilton referred to three moons of Pluto in his 1940 novel "Calling Captain Future", naming them , , and .



</doc>
<doc id="36407681" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36407681" title="Aaron Loup">
Aaron Loup

Aaron Christopher Loup (born December 19, 1987) is an American professional baseball relief pitcher for the San Diego Padres of Major League Baseball (MLB). He previously played for the Toronto Blue Jays and Philadelphia Phillies. He stands and weighs . Born in Raceland, Louisiana, Loup played baseball at Hahnville High School and Tulane University, where he led his teams to several state playoff appearances and recorded a five-hit shutout. He was drafted by the Blue Jays out of Tulane in the ninth round of the 2009 draft.

After playing for three years with minor-league affiliates for the Toronto Blue Jays and even being chosen for the 2012 Eastern League All-Star Game, Loup was called up to the Blue Jays as a replacement for Luis Pérez and retired all six batters he faced. He was later voted the 2012 Toronto Blue Jays Rookie of the Year by the Toronto chapter of the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA). Loup pitched 1 innings on Opening Day in 2013, and would go on to win his first major league game on April 10 against the Detroit Tigers. He recorded his first two major league saves on April 12 and June 2, and led the Blue Jays to a win in an 18-inning game on June 8 after a pair of groundouts.

Loup is a southpaw whose pitching drastically improved after coaches told him to become a sidearm pitcher. His fastball has been noted as particularly effective against both left- and right-handed batters, but he continues to struggle with a changeup. Manager John Gibbons does not view Loup as a long reliever, but rather as a "situational, one-inning guy." He is known for his "relaxed" personality, which has improved after spending time with his teammates.

Loup was born December 19, 1987, in Raceland, Louisiana. His father and grandfather influenced his baseball interest the most when he was young, and he says that it was "just all baseball all the time", with "a little football". Loup said that when he was thirteen, "My dad had me in the backyard almost every day—or at least it seemed that way. I was always doing something, whether it was pitching off the mound or hitting in the cage. I wanted to play baseball and knew that I needed to work hard to get there. As a kid, I needed to be reminded of that sometimes." His baseball role models growing up were Greg Maddux, John Smoltz, and Tom Glavine.

Loup played baseball at Hahnville High School, where he led the Hahnville Fighting Tigers to four state playoff appearances. As a sophomore, he threw a complete-game no-hitter against Terrebonne High School. He then attended Tulane University, where he majored in digital design and played for the Tulane Green Wave from freshman year until his junior year, when he was drafted by the Toronto Blue Jays. As a freshman for the Green Wave, he held a 4.37 earned run average (ERA) and 36 strikeouts in 35 innings. As a sophomore, he held a 5.66 ERA in 47 innings, as well as pitching a perfect inning of relief on April 26, 2008. Before being drafted in his junior year, he had thrown 57 innings.

The Blue Jays drafted Loup in the ninth round of the 2009 Major League Baseball Draft. Loup had shown a strong performance when he was playing for the Tulane Green Wave and was the second Green Wave player to be drafted. Loup said of the event, "I had 20 people text message me before I even heard anything and then my phone rang and I got the call. It's exciting. They told me they would call me as soon as the draft was over and we would discuss details, so hopefully everything will shake out."

After the draft, Loup played for the Gulf Coast League Blue Jays in 2009. In the 2009 season, he held a 3.86 ERA and 19 strikeouts in 16 innings. In 2010, he was moved up to the Lansing Lugnuts, one of the Class A affiliates of the Blue Jays, where he held a 4.54 ERA and 73 strikeouts in 73 innings. On June 22, 2010, Loup was chosen a Mid-Season All-Star. He missed the last two months of the season with an unknown injury and began 2011 on the disabled list. In 2011, he was moved to the Dunedin Blue Jays, the Class A-Advanced Blue Jays affiliate, where he held a 4.66 ERA and 56 strikeouts in 65 innings.

In 2012, Loup joined the New Hampshire Fisher Cats, the double-A affiliate of the Toronto Blue Jays. There, he boasted 36 Eastern League appearances, a 2.84 ERA, and 43 strikeouts in 44 innings. After his teammate Sam Dyson was promoted to the Blue Jays, Loup was Dyson's replacement for the Minor League Baseball 2012 Eastern League All-Star Game.

Loup began 2012 with the Fisher Cats. In the 2012 season, the Toronto Blue Jays used 32 different pitchers due to frequent injuries, and Loup was among these. He was called up to replace Luis Pérez on July 14 after Pérez tore his ulnar collateral ligament. In his debut, Loup retired all six batters he faced.
On August 3, Loup became the first pitcher in Blue Jays history to bat in an American League game, grounding out to begin the top of the 15th against the Oakland Athletics. Loup closed out the season posting a 0-2 record with a 2.64 ERA and 21 strikeouts in 30 innings. The Toronto chapter of the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA) named him the Toronto Blue Jays 2012 Rookie of the Year that November.

Though he was considered one of the front-runners, there was still much competition for one of the limited 2013 bullpen spots as a relief pitcher. His main competition was seen as Brett Cecil and J. A. Happ. John Gibbons said, "How it best fits the team, how it all stacks up down there is really what it's going to come down to. But we're going to go with the best guy, not because guys are out of options." Reportedly, Loup learned that he had acquired one of the bullpen spots when Gibbons walked by his locker and said, "Oh, hey Loup—you made the team."

Loup pitched 1 innings of relief for the Blue Jays against the Cleveland Indians on Opening Day. On April 10, in a game against the Detroit Tigers, Loup recorded his first career win. On April 12, Loup recorded his first major league save in a game against the Kansas City Royals. He would later record a second major league save in a game against the San Diego Padres on June 2. On April 20, Loup committed a two-run throwing error in the eleventh inning against the New York Yankees. During the first two months of the Blue Jays' lackluster 2013 season, Loup and other relief pitchers helped to keep the Blue Jays from more defeats. Loup was the ninth and final pitcher in an eighteen-inning game against the Texas Rangers on June 8. The game, which was the longest in Blue Jays history, resulted in a win after Loup gained a pair of groundouts. In another game against the Rangers on June 14, Loup pitched in the eighth inning and participated in a shutout. Loup ended the 2013 season with a 4–6 record, 2.47 ERA and 53 strikeouts in 69 innings.

Loup was one of eight pitchers in the bullpen for the Blue Jays' 2014 opening day. On April 20, Loup walked three consecutive batters for the first time in his career, and took the loss as the Blue Jays fell to the Cleveland Indians 6–4. On May 3, the Blue Jays announced that Loup would replace Sergio Santos as the team's closer until Casey Janssen returned from injury. After walking as many batters in three months as he had the entire last season, Loup regained confidence after pitching the last few innings of a game on June 4 that went from a 3–2 lead to an 8–2 win against the Detroit Tigers.

Loup took the loss in the Blue Jays' second game of the 2015 season. Entering with a 3–1 lead against the New York Yankees in the eighth inning, he loaded the bases without recording an out. All three runners would come in to score and Toronto would lose, 4–3. On April 12, Loup pitched 1 perfect innings against the Orioles, taking the win by a score of 10–7. Loup experienced ineffectiveness throughout the season, posting an ERA over 5.00 into August. Following a 3–1 win over the Yankees on August 16, Loup was optioned to the Triple-A Buffalo Bisons. He was recalled on September 1.

On January 15, 2016, Loup and the Blue Jays avoided salary arbitration by agreeing to a one-year, $1.05 million contract. Loup began the 2016 season on the disabled list with a left forearm flexor strain. He began a rehab assignment with the Dunedin Blue Jays on May 14. On May 21, he was moved up to the Buffalo Bisons to continue rehabbing the injury. Loup was recalled on August 21. On August 27, Loup was placed on optional waivers. He accepted a minor league assignment the following day.

On January 13, 2017, Loup agreed to a one-year, $1.125 million contract for the 2017 season. He finished the season with a 2–3 record and a 3.75 ERA in 70 games. On January 12, 2018, Loup signed a one-year, $1.8125 million contract. For the 2018 season, Loup logged innings for the Blue Jays in 50 appearances before being traded to Philadelphia.

On July 31, 2018, Loup was traded to the Philadelphia Phillies in exchange for Jacob Waguespack.

On February 17, 2019, Loup signed a one-year contract with the San Diego Padres.

Due to his non-ideal size as a pitcher, some have seen issues in Loup's stamina and durability. His pitches can also come across as "a bit too hittable." He is, however, especially effective when pitching against left-handed batters. In 2013, Loup was viewed by the Blue Jays' manager John Gibbons as "not necessarily a long guy; he's more a situational, one-inning guy." Despite his shortcomings, Loup has the lowest walk rate among all major league pitchers who have pitched at least seventy innings since 2012, having walked only 2.6% of the batters he has faced. His consistency and endurance have made Loup the Blue Jays' most-used reliever, and he says "I'm one of those guys that if my body would let me, I would pitch every day."

The Baseball Cube's player ratings, which are based solely on statistics on a scale from 0-100, gave Loup a 69 for control, a 62 for "K-rating", or strikeouts compared to batters faced, a 62 for efficiency, and a 52 for "vsPower", or home runs compared to batters faced.

Loup is a left-handed pitcher, or southpaw. He struggled at first with pitching until minor league pitching instructor Dane Johnson and Dunedin pitching coach Darold Knowles told him to lower his arm and become more of a sidearm pitcher. Now, as he pitches, he tracks a plane from his ear to his shoulder, which also helped his effectiveness against left-handed batters. His slider and fastball improved drastically, but his changeup continued to struggle, and Loup says that he is still a little inconsistent with it. He can throw a low-90s "breaking" fastball that is just as effective against right-handed batters as left-handed batters. John Farrell, a previous Toronto Blue Jays manager, said that it was "[Loup's] poise and his presence that allows him to maintain not only composure, but the ability to execute." Blue Jays' bullpen coach Pat Hentgen says that Loup "keeps things simple, he doesn't over-think. He stays aggressive. He's got a lot of guts, goes right after hitters and you combine all those things and you're going to have the success that he's had." One reporter compared Loup to Bran Flakes, stating that "[y]ou know exactly what you're going to get from him every time he takes the mound and he's not going to add any excitement to any situation."

Loup married his high school sweetheart Leigh Ann. The couple have one child, a daughter named Sophie Harper Loup, born the weekend of August 24, 2013. Loup went on the paternity list for the Blue Jays on August 23, 2013, but was called back on August 26 due to the three-day paternity list limit. Loup and his wife spend the off-season at Loup's Louisiana home. An avid bowhunter, Loup prefers hunting deer with a compound bow. He has also been known to fish and hunt with a gun in the off-season. He is known for having a more quiet and reserved personality, but he says that he has become "a little more comfortable" with his teammates by spending time and "connecting" with them, which he says contributes to his success.


</doc>
<doc id="36436514" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36436514" title="Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn">
Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn

Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn is a military science fiction web series set in the universe of the "Halo" franchise. "Forward Unto Dawn" consists of five 15-minute episodes released weekly starting on October 5, 2012, and was later released as a single film on DVD and Blu-ray and was later put on Netflix in 2013. The series was produced as a marketing effort for the video game "Halo 4" intended to widen the audience of the "Halo" series and as a stepping stone to a potential "Halo" film. It was written by Aaron Helbing and Todd Helbing, and directed by Stewart Hendler. "Forward Unto Dawn" was shot in Vancouver over 25 days in May 2012 on a budget just under . It has just under 500 shots with computer generated imagery, approximately a quarter of what a feature film would have, but the visual effects received praise from reviewers.

A coming-of-age story, "Forward Unto Dawn" follows a cadet, Thomas Lasky, at a twenty-sixth century military training academy as it is attacked by the Covenant, a religious alliance of aliens. Lasky is unsure of his future within the military but feels pressured to follow in the footsteps of his mother and brother. Lasky and his surviving squad mates are rescued by the Master Chief and, after the death of his romantic interest, Chyler Silva, Lasky is inspired by the Chief to take initiative and aids him in saving the remaining cadets.

"Forward Unto Dawn" received a Streamy Award and several of the crew received awards for their work editing, producing and filming of it. The series also won a Motion Picture Sound Editors Golden Reel Award for sound editing. Reviewers were impressed by the special effects and action-packed second act, but found that the plot was too slow in the first half and most of the characters were under-developed. The series was also nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for main title design.

After the success of previous live-action promotional shorts, "Landfall" and "The Life", 343 Industries, the studio in charge of development for the "Halo" franchise, wanted to use a live action series to appeal to an audience of people unfamiliar with the "Halo" games. The director of franchise business management at 343 Industries, Matt McClosky, explained the intended audience by saying that, "You see something that looks like a video game, you're going to get the same crowd you always get." The live-action format was also chosen for its ability to better develop characters; the series is used to introduce the character Thomas Lasky to the "Halo" universe before his role in the video game "Halo 4". The developers wanted a protagonist with more emotion than Master Chief (whose face is never seen), to not only convey an understanding of the universe, but to better engage unfamiliar viewers.

Microsoft considers the series "the next step" between advertising material and a full-length film after the failure of a previous effort, and aimed to produce a standalone series that could be enjoyed without necessarily playing the games. The budget for the series was almost USD $10 million, Microsoft's largest investment in a live-action promotion. Director Stewart Hendler said "We're either the best-funded web series of all time, a sort of mid-road healthy TV pilot, or a super-low-budget movie." When the idea of directing a video game based web series was pitched to Hendler he declined, saying he was not interested in video game adaptions unless the subject was "Halo". Hendler was already a fan of the series, having read the novels and played the games.

Potential writers were interviewed by 343 Industries, and some were selected to write a draft of a script. Aaron and Todd Helbing wrote a pitch set on Harvest, the first planet to be attacked by the Covenant (see ""). Although 343 Industries decided not to use it, the Helbing brothers' script was the most complete and demonstrated the best understanding of the "Halo" universe so they were chosen to write "Forward Unto Dawn". The final plot was developed by 343 Industries, Frank O'Connor, and the Helbings with the intention of introducing a new character to tie into "Halo 4", which their Harvest script did not, and to explore "the least-well-known part of the "Halo" universe". In addition to providing input on the script, 343 Industries had a representative on set at all times to ensure that the series did not break canon.

The series was shot over twenty-five days in May 2012 in the forests around Vancouver, at Simon Fraser University and at additional stages in Burnaby. The Herzog and Company production team was in Vancouver for three months with set design by Legacy Effects, the same company that worked on the previous shorts.

The Warthog (a 4WD off-road vehicle with a mounted minigun) that appears in "Forward Unto Dawn" is the same one that was produced by Weta Workshop and used in "Landfall". Stunt driver Johnathon Kralt found that the prop "handles the roads extremely well for something that size and that height", and the four-wheel steering was an advantage for drifting. Many chase shots were made using a Mercedes-Benz ML 55 pursuit vehicle with a camera boom mounted to the roof. Another rig involved towing the Warthog on a low trailer so that cameras could focus on an actor while the vehicle was being "driven".

The visual effects supervisor, John Sullivan, hired Arc Productions to create just under 500 shots with computer generated imagery, between a quarter and a third of what a blockbuster film would feature. The Covenant that appear are all completely computer generated, as is the academy's space elevator, weapons' muzzle flashes and a few shots of Master Chief. Hendler felt that the visual effects were the area that needed particular focus and spent a much larger percentage of the budget on the Master Chief costume and computer generated imagery than is normal for a production.

One scene involves a Covenant Elite stalking the cadets in the armoury. The geometry of the Elite already exists for the "Halo" video games but it couldn't be directly transferable to the Mental Ray renderer so it had to be re-topologized in ZBrush and Maya. The outdoor attack on the academy was filmed at Simon Fraser University and required photogrammetric reconstruction and laser measurement to add the aliens and weapons lighting effects in a convincing manner. A later scene in the forest was too complex to use the same techniques, lacking the geometric shapes of the university campus. Instead, Arc visual effects supervisor Terry Bradley scattered LEDs on the set. By measuring the distance between LEDs the studio could model the area with software, and then used SketchUp and Maya to add the weapons fire. The shattering of the pink "needles" fired by the Covenant was rendered in Houdini as the shots hit concrete and Master Chief's armour.

The opening sequences of each episode show Cortana, an artificial intelligence, aboard the spaceship "Forward Unto Dawn" as she malfunctions. The five sequences were entirely computer generated by Polynoid, the animation team of Blacklist, a production company.

"Forward Unto Dawn" takes place on a fictional planet, Circinius-IV, one of many that humans have colonized outside of the solar system. The protagonist, Thomas Lasky, is aboard a spaceship named "Infinity" in 2557. "Forward Unto Dawn" portrays his memory of the events on Circinius-IV in 2526, when he is a cadet at the Corbulo Academy, a training facility for the children of high-ranking UNSC officers. The UNSC is training the cadets for war with insurrectionists on various colony planets.

A Covenant army attacks the academy causing confusion and panic. Although not made clear in "Forward Unto Dawn", the Covenant are a theocratic collection of alien species that are religiously offended by Humanity and seek to eradicate it. The events portrayed in "Forward Unto Dawn" are some of the earliest encounters with the Covenant, and the characters other than Master Chief were unaware of their existence.

The production team was responsible for casting, but Microsoft maintained a final say. The decision to use Alex Puccinelli instead of Steve Downes, the previous voice artist of Master Chief, was approved by Microsoft. The actors playing the cadets attended a boot camp before shooting to raise their fitness and accustom them to assault courses and rifle drills in their armour costumes. Cast members drove themselves to overexertion in the training, causing some to vomit, which they saw as a bonding experience.

Tom Green plays the protagonist Thomas Lasky, a cadet at Corbulo Academy and Ty Olsson plays the adult rendition. Lasky is "ambivalent about his role in the military", considering diplomacy a better option to warfare. Lasky is from a military family; his mother is a colonel and his brother Cadmon (played by Max Carver) was an ODST (Orbital Drop Shock Troopers - a special forces unit in the "Halo" universe), but Thomas is uninterested in becoming an officer. Green portrayed Lasky as a "regular teenager", unsure of his future. As research for the role, Green was required to watch the previous shorts and read the ""Halo" encyclopedia" that 343 Industries uses to preserve the "Halo" canon. Executive producer Josh Feldman considers Lasky an important character in the "Halo" universe beyond just "Forward Unto Dawn" and "Halo 4".

Daniel Cudmore was cast to play the role of Master Chief largely due to his height and physique. The director, Stewart Hendler, wanted to contrast the size of Master Chief to that of the teenage cadets; Cudmore is 203 centimetres (6'8") tall whereas the actors playing the cadets were deliberately chosen to be "short, scrawny freshmen". In order to accurately portray Master Chief, Cudmore watched the "Landfall" shorts by Neill Blomkamp and read the "Halo" novels for the history of the character, having already played the games. Cudmore expressed interest in the history of Master Chief, the character's view on war and his role as a soldier, as he was only required to portray a utilitarian character in the series. Cudmore thinks the character is torn between aiding the cadets and completing his mission, but Master Chief's confidence and actions inspire the cadets.

Legacy Effects took a body scan of Cudmore, then overlaid a 3D model provided by Microsoft and edited it to get proportions correct. A prototype was 3D printed and then used to make moulds for the final suit. The majority of the suit is rubber over a foam bodysuit, similar to a wetsuit, with a fibreglass helmet. Cudmore compared wearing it to walking through water, although he had to perform stunts in the suit as it was made only for his body. Cudmore repeatedly watched the video of his movements immediately after they were shot to ensure that they were deliberate but without appearing robotic, "trying to make his movements a little larger than life, but still with a sense of humanity to them." Both Hendler and Frank O'Connor praised Cudmore, not just for his physique but for moving in a fluid manner in the cumbersome suit.

Anna Popplewell plays Chyler Silva, a cadet who, contrary to Lasky's beliefs, is a full supporter of the war against the insurrectionists. Popplewell portrays Silva as a competent cadet who has been hardened by her childhood surrounded by insurrectionist violence. She had a romantic connection with Lasky that was interrupted by the Covenant attack. Popplewell was new to the "Halo" series when cast for the role but thinks that the characters and aesthetic of the series have the potential to draw in a new audience.

Other characters include cadets April Orenski, a senior cadet and squad leader, played by Enisha Brewster, Junjie Chen, played by Osric Chau, who is the only cadet without a military family and has gained entry to the academy through his own achievements, Dimah Tchakova played by Kat de Lieva, Walter Vickers played by Iain Belcher and Michael Sullivan, played by Masam Holden.

On April 30, 2012, Microsoft Studios announced that "Forward Unto Dawn" would play on Machinima Prime and Halo Waypoint (a marketing website for the Halo series) during the weeks leading up to the release of "Halo 4". The series' first episode attracted five million views on YouTube within two weeks and, as of March 2013, has eleven million views. The second episode attracted three million views within two weeks and six million views by March 2013; however, these statistics do not include views on Halo Waypoint.

The series consists of five 15-minute shorts, the first released on October 5, 2012, with subsequent episodes released weekly. A 90-minute extended version is included with the Limited Edition version of "Halo 4", and became available on Blu-ray, DVD, Xbox Video, iTunes and video on demand services on December 4, 2012. The Blu-ray and DVD versions contain bonus features including audio commentary from Stewart Hendler and 343 Industries, a live-action Red vs. Blue PSA entitled Sleeper, as well as vignettes and making-of documentaries. On January 18, 2013, Content Media Corporation announced that they had international distribution rights for "Forward Unto Dawn" for television.

McFarlane Toys produced 500 units of a collectible statue to tie-in with "Forward Unto Dawn" in December 2012. The statue is a thirty-six centimetre (14") tall model of Master Chief fighting a Hunter, as depicted in "Forward Unto Dawn". On November 6, 2012, to coincide with the release of "Halo 4", Mega Bloks released a model of the UNSC spaceship, "Forward Unto Dawn". The model is approximately one metre (3') long and has scenes from both the video game and the web series.

Reviewers were divided on what standard to expect of the series and what to compare it to; the budget was beyond that of other web series but not on par with a film.

IGN reviewer Jesse Schedeen considered the cadets other than Lasky and Silva to be "ready-made cannon fodder," having received minimal development. This detracted from the quality of the third episode, as a betrayal by cadet Tchakova had little impact due to her shallow development. However, Schedeen did appreciate Green's acting in the last episode, noting that "[Silva's] death scene was handled very well, particularly as it forced Tom Green to shed his calm exterior and react much more emotionally." In his later review of the Blu-ray, Schedeen complimented the audio and video quality, as well as the inclusion of many vignettes, documentary featurettes and commentaries.

James Plath of "Movie Metropolis" also found the characters lacking in the first half, but noted that in the second half, the characters of Lasky and Silva "actually move beyond the clichés and pick up a personality along the way". Plath was impressed by the soundtrack, thinking it "worthy of any big-screen action flick" and also complimented the special effects saying "the CGI work is enhanced by high definition, not exposed by it." Overall however, he thought that despite the action being exciting, the "pedestrian" first half and "only adequate acting" would prevent "Forward Unto Dawn" appealing to an audience beyond existing gamers.

"Official Xbox Magazine"s reviewer, Edwin Evans, appreciated the direction of the series; "Stewart Hendler's well-judged editing keeps the script from sinking under the weight of its own melodrama, and his close-ups never overstay their welcome, hiding the weaknesses of the inexperienced (but talented) cast." He also echoed Plath's thoughts on the slow first half and exciting second half.




</doc>
<doc id="36437575" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36437575" title="Mortimer Grimshaw">
Mortimer Grimshaw

Mortimer Grimshaw (1826 – 22 December 1869) was an English political activist, strike leader and cotton weaver. He briefly attained national fame in the 1850s due to his part in the Preston strike of 1853–54. A large man whose face was marked by smallpox, he was renowned for his oratory, which earned him the nickname of the "Thunderer of Lancashire".

The son of a radical public speaker and orator, Grimshaw's early campaigns were centred on the improvement of working conditions for the mill-workers in the village of Royton and enforcement of the Factory Acts. He was an outspoken critic of the Whig Party and an advocate of the Chartist movement, in particular of their anti-Whig alliance with the Tory Party. Strikes among mill-workers began to break out during the early 1850s and Grimshaw was one of the leaders, along with George Cowell, of the strike in Preston in 1853. The strikers were fruitless in their demands for a ten per cent wage increase, and Grimshaw found himself with no further role in the workers' unions. He and his fellow conspirators were charged with conspiring to prevent people working in the mills, although the charges were later dropped.

Following the defeat in Preston, Grimshaw emigrated to the United States, where he became a supporter of the Confederacy. In 1861, he and Cowell attempted to intervene in a strike in Clitheroe but were branded "notorious scoundrels" by the weavers there for their parts in the Preston strike. The following year he joined a small group of Lancashire men who unsuccessfully attempted to rally support for the Confederates in northern England. After a period as a freelance industrial mediator, selling his services to mill owners and working against the unions he had once aligned with, he returned to his job as a power-loom weaver until his death from tuberculosis in 1869. Grimshaw and his activities were the basis for two of the author Charles Dickens' characters.

Grimshaw was born in or around Great Harwood, Lancashire, in 1824 or 1825 and was one of six children brought up in a working-class family. His father, Thomas, had a reputation as a radical public speaker in the early part of the 19th century. Grimshaw initially worked as a cotton weaver before becoming a full-time activist and agitator. He first came to prominence in the village of Royton, near Oldham, in 1852 as a campaigner for the improvement and enforcement of the Factory Acts, to improve the working conditions of those employed in the cotton mills. In the same year he became editor of the anti-Whig broadsheet, the "Royton Vindicator". He criticised the suppression of local political activists and supported the alliance of the Chartist movement with the Tories against the Whigs.

Mill workers in England became increasingly disenchanted with improper practices by factory owners, long working hours and unsatisfactory conditions. During the early 1850s workers throughout the country began to campaign for higher wages and strikes were held in several towns and cities; brickmakers in Manchester struck in January while woollen mill operatives in the West Riding of Yorkshire went on strike two months later. Grimshaw himself was involved in a strike in Stockport, where workers were demanding a ten percent wage increase, in March 1853.

When cotton weavers in Preston struck in September of that year, again demanding a wage increase of ten percent, he and fellow activist George Cowell became the most prominent leaders at the mass meetings of the workers. Grimshaw would often wear a white hat at meetings in the style of politicians Henry Hunt and William Cobbett. According to local journalist Charles Hardwick, he was a strong advocate of the liberation of oppressed "factory slaves" but it was noted that his judgement in arguments could often be overpowered by his enthusiasm and emotions. In the seven months that Grimshaw was involved with the Preston strike he travelled throughout Lancashire and Yorkshire, speaking at more than 60 public meetings.

At one meeting in October 1853, he shared the platform with John B. Horsfall and Chartist leader Ernest Jones, whose Labour Parliament Grimshaw was involved in the following year as one of the two delegates from Preston, along with Wallace Beever. The Labour Parliament was partly a response to a lock-out of around 20,000 mill workers by the employers in Preston; its aim was to organise a levy on wages to support operatives who went on strike or were locked out. Those paying the levy were to elect a committee to buy and look after land and factories and the Parliament would meet on a yearly basis. However, the plan did not gain support among all Chartists and the plans never materialised.

The Preston strike ended in defeat for Grimshaw, Cowell and the operatives and as a result there were no suitable jobs for him in the unions; his characteristics would not have lent themselves to a secretarial role. On 10 August 1854, the pair were indicted along with nine other men for conspiring to "prevent certain persons working in the mills in [Preston]". Although the charges were dropped by the prosecution, the judge presiding implied he would otherwise have felt compelled to pass down a severe sentence and expressed his hope that none of the 11 would engage in such conspiracy again. Two years later, Grimshaw and Horsfall raised funds to enable them to emigrate and he subsequently spent some time living in the northern United States. Upon his return to England, Grimshaw, Cowell and two other weavers were involved in a dispute between mill-owners and workers in Clitheroe, Lancashire, in 1861. However, due to their lack of success in Preston the group were branded a "gang of notorious scoundrels" by strike leader John O'Neil and were treated with hostility by the gathered crowds of weavers.

During his time in America, Grimshaw had developed pro-Confederacy tendencies. In general, there was some support for the Confederacy among people who were affected by the shortage in cotton from America caused by the American Civil War, such as traders and mill-owners. On a personal level, Grimshaw was opposed to the growth of capitalism in the United States and described the notions of American freedom and liberty as "farce and humbug". In 1862 he became part of a small group of working-class Lancashire men, all of whom had been involved in various strikes in the 1850s, assembled by Liverpool-based tin plate merchant James Spence. The group held meetings with the intention of rallying support for the Confederates within northern England, particularly in Lancashire and Cheshire. However, when a vote regarding the support of British mediation in America was taken at one meeting in Blackburn, only 12 out of more than 4,000 workers voted in favour of Grimshaw. The local Weavers' Association consequently declared themselves in favour of Abraham Lincoln and his Union. Ultimately, the group's efforts were handicapped by an inability to maintain activity throughout the duration of the Civil War; by 1864 only two of the original company remained.

By the end of his career, Grimshaw had become a freelance political adventurer, industrial mediator and anti-union agitator selling his services to mill-owners and employers. In an 1864 letter to George Wilson, former president of the Anti-Corn Law League during the 1840s, he described himself as "destitute and pennyless " and begged the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway chairman for money or employment. This was the last public record of Grimshaw; he returned to work as a power-loom weaver until his death in Rishton from the lung disease tuberculosis on 22 December 1869.

Two of Charles Dickens' characters, Gruffshaw in the article "On Strike" and Slackbridge, the "unscrupulous demagogue" from the novel "Hard Times", were based on Grimshaw.


</doc>
<doc id="36449968" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36449968" title="The Stones in the Park">
The Stones in the Park

The Stones in the Park was a free outdoor festival held in Hyde Park on 5 July 1969, headlined by The Rolling Stones and featuring Third Ear Band, King Crimson, Screw, Alexis Korner's New Church, Family and The Battered Ornaments, in front of a crowd estimated at between 250,000 and 500,000 fans.

It was the Stones' first public concert in over two years, and was planned as an introduction of new guitarist, Mick Taylor, though circumstances inevitably changed following the death of former member Brian Jones two days earlier. The band rehearsed at the Beatles' studio in the basement of Savile Row, and Jagger and Richards came up with a 14-song set; the Hyde Park concert would be the first time many of the songs had been played before a public audience. The PA system was supplied by Watkins Electric Music, who had already handled amplification at previous Hyde Park shows.

Fans started to arrive at the park with candles on 4 July in tribute to Jones, and by the morning of 5 July, 7,000 people had already gathered. Mick Jagger read a short eulogy on stage before the Stones' set began, reading two stanzas of Percy Bysshe Shelley's poem on John Keats's death, "Adonaïs", from a calf-bound book. After this recital, several hundred cabbage white butterflies were released. The setlist for their performance was "I'm Yours & I'm Hers", "Jumpin' Jack Flash". "Mercy Mercy", "Down Home Girl", "Stray Cat Blues", "No Expectations", "I'm Free", "Loving Cup", "Love in Vain", "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction", "Honky Tonk Women", "Midnight Rambler", "Street Fighting Man" and "Sympathy for the Devil". During the 18-minute-long rendition of "Sympathy for the Devil", a number of African tribal drummers joined the band.

While the event is considered a memorable one by several critics, they also agree that it was not one of the Stones' best performances, and the guitars played during the concert were out of tune. In a 1971 interview with "Rolling Stone" magazine, Keith Richards evaluated their performance, "We played pretty bad until near the end, because we hadn't played for years ... Nobody minded, because they just wanted to hear us play again." The Stones' portion of concert was filmed by Granada Television and broadcast that September. It has since been released on DVD and Blu-ray. In April 2013, the band announced their intention to play two return concerts on 6 and 13 July, although the performances were not free.

The festival was an important one for the Stones. They had not performed a public concert since their 1967 European Tour, and in 1968 had only performed at the NME Poll Winners Concert and at their television project "The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus". In interviews, Mick Jagger stated that he felt the band's forte was performing live, rather than in the studio, and was keen to return to the stage. Blackhill Enterprises, which had already managed several successful concerts in Hyde Park, including a festival headlined by Blind Faith in June 1969 attended by 150,000 people, were contacted to organise one at the next convenient date after the organiser-compère of that concert, Sam Cutler, had met Jagger in the VIP area at the concert and later at the Royal Albert Hall. When asked why the festival would be free, Jagger noted that they had not made much money from previous concert tours anyway, and that he felt the audience would have a better time if they did not have to pay although he ensured that the cost of the concert would be covered by selling exclusive television rights to Granada Television.

However, the gradual estrangement of Brian Jones and his decreasing musical contributions – he had only appeared on two tracks on the then in-progress "Let It Bleed" — made a return to touring problematic. They had shelved "The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus" after having been upstaged by The Who. By June 1969, matters had finally come to a head and it was decided that Jones should be replaced for the gig.
Mick Taylor, who had by this time obtained a reputation for himself by playing with John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers, was invited to work on "Let It Bleed". The band enjoyed his contributions and decided to make him an offer to join full-time. After considering this for a few days, he accepted, and his position was officially announced at a press conference in the park's bandstand on 13 June. The single "Honky Tonk Women," recorded on 1 June with Taylor, was rush-released to tie in with the festival date. The Hyde Park concert would be Taylor's first gig with the band, and as they had barely had any time to rehearse with him he was understandably nervous, though he later stated that he felt the others, who were far closer to Jones than him, would feel more emotionally drained. Jagger, too, was nervous, unsure whether Jones's fans would take to Taylor and indeed whether they would boycott the concert; he did not expect the crowd to match the 150,000 who had come to the Blind Faith gig. In addition, the hot summer had sent the pollen levels soaring and Jagger suffered from hay-fever and laryngitis in the days leading up to the concert.

Jones died on 3 July, two days before the festival. The Stones were in Olympic Studios when they were told of his death by Ian Stewart, and, although grief-stricken, decided they would go ahead with the gig and dedicate their performance to him. Keith Richards later wrote:
The band rehearsed at the Beatles' studio in the basement of Savile Row, and Jagger and Richards came up with a 14-song set; the Hyde Park concert would be the first time many of the songs had been played before a public audience.

The performers at the festival included Third Ear Band, Screw, King Crimson, Alexis Korner's New Church, Roy Harper, Battered Ornaments, Family and The Rolling Stones.

Fans started to arrive at the park with candles on 4 July in tribute to Jones, and the police allowed the park to be opened late so they could stay. By the following morning, there were already 7,000 people.
As with the Stones' performance at the infamous Altamont Free Concert later that year, the Hells Angels were hired as stewards to protect the stage and equipment, something suggested by the Grateful Dead's manager Rock Scully, who was used to the Angels performing this service at free festivals in California. According to Cutler, Jagger said that he was keen on doing a similar free concert in California at some time in the future. At Hyde Park, fifty Angels patrolled the vicinity of the stage, though there was little resemblance other than a superficial one to their American counterparts. They performed their duties in exchange for a cup of tea. In the event, there were only twelve arrests on the day and a subsequent police report claimed that the Angels were "totally ineffective".

King Crimson at this point still consisted of the original line-up of Robert Fripp, Greg Lake, Ian McDonald, Michael Giles and lyricist Peter Sinfield. They had not yet released an album, and were invited to play on the strength of word of mouth after their live performances in venues such as the Marquee Club. Sam Cutler introduced them on stage, stating the "new band is gonna go a long way".
The band's setlist was "21st Century Schizoid Man", "The Court of the Crimson King", "Get Thy Bearings", "Epitaph", "Mantra", "Travel Weary Capricorn" and "Mars".

Three of the tracks appeared in studio form on the band's debut album, "In the Court of the Crimson King", albeit with different lyrics compared with the performance here. The band's set has since been released on CD, with some bonus material. Recalling the event, Fripp remembers the sense of community at the event and the good weather, particularly noting a sense of goodwill backstage.

Alexis Korner's involvement with Blues Incorporated had been a key ingredient in the Stones forming in 1962, and he had played onstage with several group members during this time. New Church had been formed with guitarist Peter Thorup after the demise of Blues Incorporated.

Roy Harper had been regularly appearing at a number of Hyde Park festivals since 1968 and saw his popularity increase as a result of these. This eventually resulted in Blackhill's Peter Jenner managing him, leading to a contract with Harvest Records. For 5 July gig, he contributed a one-song set between equipment changes.

The Battered Ornaments had been the backing band for Cream collaborator Pete Brown. They performed without Brown for the festival, who had been fired from the band the previous day. Guitarist Chris Spedding took over lead vocals. The band supplied the armoured personnel carrier that carried the Stones from their hotel to the park.

The band met at the Londonderry Hotel on Park Lane, overlooking the park, where they had booked a tenth-floor suite, and proceeded to the park in the armoured personnel carrier, together with their two official photographers, Michael Cooper and Spanish Tony Sanchez. They alighted from the carrier into a caravan-trailer behind the stage. Jagger, his face heavily made up and with a studded leather collar around his neck, was clad in a white dress. He had borrowed the dress, which had been made for Sammy Davis Jr. at the Mr. Fish boutique, and wore it to Prince Rupert Lowenstein's white ball, where he had shown it to Princess Margaret. Jagger was only to wear it for half-an-hour at the Hyde Park concert, after which he tore it off to reveal a violet T-shirt and white loon pants.
Before the Stones opened their set, Jagger addressed the crowd, asking them to be quiet so he could read something as a tribute to Jones. He then read two stanzas of Percy Bysshe Shelley's poem on John Keats's death, "Adonaïs", from a calf-bound book. After this recital, several hundred cabbage white butterflies were released, despite the Royal Parks authority having stipulated before the concert that any butterflies released by the Stones should be sterilised and should certainly not be of the voracious cabbage white genus ("Pieris" spp.). 2,500 butterflies were due to be released, but due to the hot weather, many of them died from lack of air in storage. Watts later said that the butterflies "were a bit sad, there were casualties. It was like the Somme".

The Stones then launched into "I'm Yours and I'm Hers", which, according to Philip Norman, was an ironic choice given that Marianne Faithfull and Marsha Hunt, both of whom Jagger was alleged to be having relationships with at that time, were in the audience.

The setlist for their performance was "I'm Yours & I'm Hers", "Jumpin' Jack Flash", "No Expectations", "Mercy Mercy", "Stray Cat Blues", "I'm Free", "Down Home Girl", "Love in Vain", "Give Me a Little Drink", "Midnight Rambler", "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction", "Honky Tonk Women", "Street Fighting Man" and "Sympathy for the Devil".

During the 18-minute-long rendition of "Sympathy for the Devil", a number of Ginger Johnson's African tribal drummers joined the band. After the concert ended, the volunteers who cleared up the 5,000 tonnes of rubbish were each given a copy of "Honky Tonk Women".

Though park keepers feared that the crowd would cause damage to the park, an official estimate suggested the cost was only around £100 (now £). Park superintendent John Hare reported the most serious damage was to a silver birch tree planted the previous year. He praised the concertgoers, many of whom helped clear up after the concert and were awarded with a free Stones LP if they returned a full sack.

Blackhill Enterprises provided a high stage, with the speakers being housed in a thirty-foot-high tower so that people at the far end of the park would be able to hear the music. The stage was flanked by palm trees in pots and behind the performers there was a blowup of the cover of the "Beggars Banquet" album. Richards had started experimenting with open tunings by this point in the band's career, particularly after hearing Ry Cooder, and the Hyde Park gig was the first chance audiences got to hear them. He played a Gibson ES-330 tuned to open E tuning with a capo on the fourth fret, and a Gibson Flying V. Taylor, meanwhile, played a Gibson Les Paul for the opening number, followed by an SG for the majority of the set. The PA system was supplied by Watkins Electric Music, who already handled amplification at previous Hyde Park shows. Company founder Charlie Watkins recalls it was the largest PA he had assembled to that point and, unable to provide enough gear himself, he was forced to borrow extras from other groups, later saying, "I didn't have many columns, but I wanted to put 1500W up. I borrowed some from T-Rex. They all chipped in — that's what we used to do."
In 1971, in an interview with "Rolling Stone" magazine, Richards said, "We played pretty bad until near the end, because we hadn't played for years ... Nobody minded, because they just wanted to hear us play again."

"The Guardian"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Richard Gott stated that the show was "a great and epoch-making event in British social history", although he added that "most of the music ... was indifferent". According to Norman, "the band's underpreparedness was painfully obvious. Keith and Mick Taylor's guitars, so harmonious at first meeting, turned into a pair of pneumatic drills fighting a grudge match to the death. Charlie's drumming and Bill's bass each seemed to have melted into jelly." The "Daily Telegraph"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Iain Martin stated that the Stones were "under-rehearsed and quite possibly nervous, not having performed live in front of an audience in more than two years. The guitars were badly out of tune and half the songs were approached at the wrong tempo", adding that Jagger appeared to be "trying to cover up for the shortcomings of his bandmates". Retrospectively reviewing the DVD release of the Stones' set, Film 4 commented: "It isn't the greatest film about the band and it isn't their greatest performance, but for fans it captures the band at a significant moment."

The DVD, released on 25 September 2006, includes the same concert footage as the TV broadcast of 25 September 1969. The DVD includes three previously unseen songs which were filmed at the concert – "Mercy, Mercy", "Stray Cat Blues" and "No Expectations". The latter two are incomplete but are included here due to their uniqueness (HD). Also included is news footage of their early fame from 1964, footage of Mick Jagger discussing his arrest for drugs possession in July 1967 and his subsequent press conference on his release from prison, and a 1971 interview with Bill Wyman and Charlie Watts about their tour of France.

Eagle Rock Entertainment later issued reissued the special on DVD and Blu-Ray as "From the Vault – Hyde Park – Live in 1969" in 2015.



On Richard Bacon's BBC Radio 5 Live show on 3 April 2013 it was announced that the Rolling Stones would hold a concert in Hyde Park as part of their 50th anniversary celebrations on 6 July. Mick Jagger quipped, "I'll try and keep the poetry to a minimum", and remarked, in respect of the white dress that he wore for the 1969 concert, "I can still just about get into the zippers." On 9 April it was announced that they would hold a second concert, on 13 July. Several celebrities, including David Walliams, Gemma Arterton, Chris O'Dowd, Noel Fielding, Simon Fuller and Bobby Gillespie attended 6 July gig.




</doc>
<doc id="36451734" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36451734" title="A Town Called Mercy">
A Town Called Mercy

"A Town Called Mercy" is the third episode of the seventh series of the British science fiction television series "Doctor Who", transmitted on BBC One in the United Kingdom on 15 September 2012. It was written by Toby Whithouse and directed by Saul Metzstein.

The episode featured alien time traveller the Doctor (Matt Smith) and his companions Amy Pond (Karen Gillan) and Rory Williams (Arthur Darvill) visiting the Wild West, where they encounter a town which is cut off from the rest of the frontier until they hand over Kahler-Jex, an alien doctor, to a cyborg called the Gunslinger. However, the Gunslinger is a product of experiments by Jex to win a civil war on his planet, and the Doctor is unsure of what is the right thing to do.

Showrunner Steven Moffat pitched the Wild West theme to Whithouse when thinking of ways to give each episode a distinct theme. Whithouse further developed the theme, including classic Western tropes and a sympathetic villain. "A Town Called Mercy" and the previous episode "Dinosaurs on a Spaceship" were the first to enter production for the seventh series. Much of the episode was filmed in March 2012 in the desert area of Almería, Spain, in Mini Hollywood and Fort Bravo, locations used for many Western-set films. Reviewers noted that the episode addressed a moral debate. "A Town Called Mercy" was watched by 8.42 million viewers in the UK. Critical reception was generally positive to mixed, with some critical of the Doctor's actions and pacing.

A prequel to "A Town Called Mercy" was released exclusively onto iTunes, and titled "The Making of The Gunslinger". It depicts the actual making and formation of the Gunslinger, from a normal humanoid body. It also has an explanation of the making of the Gunslinger in voice-over by Kahler-Jex.

The Doctor, Amy, and Rory arrive at the American Frontier town of Mercy. They find that no one has been able to leave or enter town due to actions of "The Gunslinger", who demands they turn over Kahler-Jex, an alien scientist that crashed to Earth years earlier. The townspeople rescued him, and in exchange, he provided them with primitive electricity and the means to stop a cholera outbreak. The town's marshal, Isaac, is hesitant of turning over his friend to the Gunslinger, despite being near the end of their supplies. 

The Doctor sneaks out to get the TARDIS but finds Jex's crashed ship and discovers he was one of several scientists that did inhumane experiments to create cyborgs on their war-torn homeworld. The Gunslinger arrives, and confirms the Doctor's theory that he is one of Jex's experiments. He has sought vengeance and killed all but Jex. Though he cannot harm innocents by his programming, the Gunslinger warns that Jex must be brought to him or he will take more drastic measures.

The Doctor returns to town, and angrily drags Jex to face the Gunslinger. Amy asserts that the Doctor has changed for the worse from months of travelling on his own. Jex pleads that he has atoned, but the cyborg prepares to kill him. Isaac pushes Jex out of the way and takes the lethal shot. As he dies, Isaac gives the Doctor his marshal badge and has him promise to protect Mercy. The Gunslinger departs, warning he will return for Jex at noon tomorrow.

Jex tells the Doctor he is remorseful for all those deaths his work has caused. The townsfolk demand the Doctor turn Jex over, but he reminds them that Isaac's death will be for naught if they do so, and has come up with a plan from learning about Jex's society. When the Gunslinger arrives the next day, residents wearing facial markings similar to Jex race through town, confusing the cyborg and allowing Jex to flee to his ship. However, instead of taking off, Jex tells the Doctor he is ready to face justice in the afterlife, and causes the ship to self-destruct.

The Gunslinger with no further purpose prepares to travel a distance to self-destruct, but the Doctor suggests a new resolve. As the Doctor, Amy, and Rory leave, the Gunslinger stands watch over Mercy as its new marshal.

In looking to give each episode of the series a distinct feel, showrunner Steven Moffat pitched the Wild West theme to writer Toby Whithouse, suggesting that the episode could be about a town terrorised by a robot. Moffat was keen on putting Matt Smith in a Western setting, who he called one of the last people one would expect to replace Clint Eastwood. Whithouse had previously written the "Doctor Who" episodes "School Reunion" (2006), "The Vampires of Venice" (2010), and "The God Complex" (2011). Moffat had been planning for the first five episodes of the series to have "movie marquee" themes. Whithouse noted that it was a genre he had not written before, but he "absolutely [loved] it". The Wild West has not been a setting for a "Doctor Who" episode since the 1966 third season serial "The Gunfighters". Whithouse was advised not to watch "The Gunfighters" by the other writers, who said it was "not exactly the jewel in the crown". Whithouse felt obliged to include common Western tropes, such as the Doctor riding a horse and a face-off. He stated the hardest scene to write was where the Doctor is forced to use a gun; the Doctor is a pacifist and he would need "the right sort of emotional journey".

Whithouse preferred the cyborg villain to be three-dimensional and sympathetic, which would require it to have a "living consciousness" rather than simply be a "soulless automaton". He wanted its look to be reminiscent of Frankenstein's monster, and later called the design "fantastic". It took about three and a half hours for Andrew Brooke to have all the make-up applied. Due to the costume, Brooke had to act with just his left eye. Smith had praise for guest actors Ben Browder, who he said "[made] a good cowboy" with "that great drawl", and Adrian Scarborough, who he said "steals the whole episode". Browder was offered the role and gladly accepted; he was aware of the show as his children had watched it, and he also wanted to do a western. Whithouse was "thrilled" with Browder's performance, as it was how he imagined the character.

"A Town Called Mercy" and the previous episode, "Dinosaurs on a Spaceship", were the first episodes to be produced for the seventh series, and both were directed by Saul Metzstein. The two episodes are Metzstein's first "Doctor Who" credits. Much of the episode was filmed around the desert area of Almería, Spain, where studios have built Wild West-style streets that have been used in the making of over 100 Western-set films, such as "A Fistful of Dollars". Filming the episode in Spain was cheaper than constructing a set in the UK. Moffat stated, "We knew from the start we need some serious location shooting for this one, and given the most iconic American setting imaginable, there was only one place to go – Spain." They reportedly filmed there from 8 March to 17 March 2012. Filming took place at Oasys/Mini Hollywood, and Fort Bravo/Texas Hollywood. While Smith was allowed to try riding the horse, most of the action shown in the episode was done by his stuntman. Composer Murray Gold mimicked Western-style scores when creating the music for the episode.

James F. McGrath of the religious website Patheos found that "A Town Called Mercy" had strong religious themes and moral messages, writing that it "really is about mercy, about forgiveness, about war crimes, about vengeance, and about justice". He interpreted Amy's comment about how the Doctor's behaviour was due to his being alone for too long to mean that "when we loosen our ties to other human beings, we can begin to treat matters of mercy and justice, and the fate of other persons, differently, impersonally". McGrath also noted a "take-home religious message" in the scene near the end where the town gathers in the church while the Gunslinger and the Doctor face off; he felt that it emphasised the importance of valuing human life.

Gavin Fuller of "The Daily Telegraph" wrote that the Western concept was "effectively window-dressing for Toby Whithouse's powerful morality tale, where not everything was quite as it seemed and went on to explore issues of morality, ethics, conscience and justice". "The A.V. Club" reviewer Keith Phipps noted that the "never-ending struggle between order and chaos" was common in Westerns, and the episode represented this with the question of "what should win out: Lawless revenge or civilized justice?". Ian Berriman of "SFX" interpreted the border around Mercy as a metaphor for the Doctor nearly "crossing [the] line" and "[breaking] his own moral code". He likened the Doctor's debate to that of the Fourth Doctor (Tom Baker) in "Genesis of the Daleks" (1975) and the Fifth Doctor (Peter Davison) in "Resurrection of the Daleks" (1984). In addition, reviewers noted that the episode presented its characters with "shades of grey", rather than black-and-white villains typically seen in the show.

"A Town Called Mercy" was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One and BBC One HD on 15 September 2012 and on the same date on BBC America in the United States. Overnight ratings showed that it was watched by 6.6 million viewers live, the highest overnight figure of the seventh series thus far. It was the third most-watched programme of the day, and was also the most popular programme the next day on BBC iPlayer. It later came in third on the iPlayer chart for September with 1.4 million requests, behind the first two episodes of the series. When final consolidated viewers were taking into account the figure rose to 8.42 million, also beating "Asylum of the Daleks" to be the highest rated of the series. It also received an Appreciation Index of 85, considered "excellent".

"A Town Called Mercy" received generally positive to mixed reviews from critics. IGN's Matt Risely rated the episode 8.5 out of 10, calling it "a weighty, progressive, sumptuous and entertaining adventure". He praised Whithouse and Metzstein for setting the right mood and found the highlight to be the Doctor's moral uncertainty. Dan Martin of "The Guardian" described it as "a complex morality dilemma fizzing with sharp dialogue". He wrote that it was Karen Gillan who "emerged as the real star of the episode", citing Amy's conversation with the Doctor about how travelling alone had affected him. "The A.V. Club" reviewer Keith Phipps gave the episode a B+, enjoying that it spent most of the time discussing the morality issue.

"The Telegraph" Fuller awarded "A Town Called Mercy" four out of five stars, calling it "an absorbing, thoughtful, adult piece of drama". He praised Smith's toned-down performance and his conversations with Jex. Though he also praised the "well-crafted" scene between the Doctor and Amy, he felt that the episode was "a waste of Gillan and [Arthur] Darvill's talents" as the two did not feature much. Digital Spy's Morgan Jeffery also gave it four stars, commending the Western atmosphere and the way the Doctor's darkness was handled. He also found Browder to bring an American authenticy to his role that a British actor would not have accomplished. However, like Fuller, he called Amy and Rory's sidelined role "one of the few downsides".

"Slant Magazine" reviewer Steven Cooper described it as "a very enjoyable episode", though he noted that "the conclusion of the story is a slight let-down after the excellence of what has preceded it" because the issues between the Doctor and Jex were left unresolved. Neela Debnath, writing for "The Independent", praised the "brilliant twist" in having Kahler-Jex be the villain rather than the Gunslinger. She found the Doctor holding Jex at gunpoint as "completely uncharacteristic", but interpreted it as foreshadowing Amy and Rory's departure. Likewise, Charlie Jane Anders from io9 felt that the Doctor's decision to let Jex die was "out of character". She criticised the Gunslinger for neither simply using its presumably advanced targeting systems to kill Jex or making the townspeople leave so that he would not have human shields. Additionally, according to her, the episode in general "felt [...] like a "" episode transplanted to the Wild West".

"SFX" reviewer Ian Berriman gave "A Town Called Mercy" three and a half out of five stars. He commented that the ethical debate made it "a surprisingly mature story", but otherwise the Western tropes made it "occasionally feel a little over-familiar". He also felt it was missing "another twist or two", as most of the episode was dedicated to figuring out what to do with Jex rather than discovering more about him. Berriman also had two "nitpicks" that arose with the plot; the Gunslinger could just walk into the town and take Jex away, or the Doctor could take Jex away in the TARDIS. Dave Golder of the magazine labelled "A Town Called Mercy" as a "disappointing" science fiction Western episode, writing, "There are some great things about this episode ... But in a show that usually has a lot of fun reinventing TV tropes, too much of "A Town Called Mercy" feels a bit been-there, done that." Patrick Mulkern of "Radio Times" was more critical, writing that he did not "believe" or "feel" it. He felt that Westerns and "Doctor Who" were two things that "never quite gelled" and also criticised the "languorous pace" the fact that Rory had little to do. However, he did praise the "gorgeous" set and the "cleverly constructed a morality play".



</doc>
<doc id="36488534" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36488534" title="Ímar mac Arailt">
Ímar mac Arailt

Ímar mac Arailt (died 1054) was an eleventh-century ruler of the Kingdom of Dublin and perhaps the Kingdom of the Isles. He was the son of a man named Aralt, and appears to have been a grandson of Amlaíb Cuarán, King of Northumbria and Dublin. Such a relationship would have meant that Ímar was a member of the Uí Ímair, and that he was a nephew of Amlaíb Cuarán's son, Sitriuc mac Amlaíb, King of Dublin, a man driven from Dublin by Echmarcach mac Ragnaill in 1036.

Ímar's reign in Dublin spanned at least eight years, from 1038 to 1046. Although he began by seizing the kingship from Echmarcach in 1038, he eventually lost it to him in 1046. As king, Ímar is recorded to have overseen military operations throughout Ireland, and seems to have actively assisted the family of Iago ab Idwal ap Meurig, King of Gwynedd overseas in Wales. After Echmarcach's final expulsion from Dublin 1052, Ímar may well have been reinstalled as King of Dublin by Diarmait mac Maíl na mBó, King of Leinster. Whatever the case, Ímar died in 1054. He may have been an ancestor or close kinsman of Gofraid Crobán, King of Dublin and the Isles, the progenitor of a family that ruled in the Isles until the mid thirteenth century.

Ímar was probably the son of Aralt mac Amlaíb, a man whose death at the Battle of Glenn Máma is recorded by the seventeenth-century texts "Annals of Clonmacnoise" and "Annals of the Four Masters", the fifteenth- to sixteenth-century "Annals of Ulster", and the twelfth-century "Chronicon Scotorum". If this identification is correct, Ímar's paternal grandfather would have been Amlaíb Cuarán, King of Northumbria and Dublin, and a paternal uncle of Ímar would have been Sitriuc mac Amlaíb, King of Dublin.

Ímar's probable uncle, Sitriuc, ruled Dublin for almost fifty years between 989 and 1036. There is reason to suspect that the latter's realm included Mann by the second or third decade of the eleventh century. His reign in Dublin was finally put to an end by Echmarcach mac Ragnaill, who drove Sitriuc from the coastal town and claimed the kingship for himself. Previously, Sitriuc seems to have been closely aligned with Knútr Sveinnsson, ruler of the kingdoms of England, Denmark, and Norway. Knútr's apparent authority in the Irish Sea region, coupled with Sitriuc's seemingly close connections with him, could account for the remarkable security enjoyed by Sitriuc during Knútr's reign. It is possible that Echmarcach had been bound from taking action against Sitriuc whilst Knútr held power, and that the confusion caused by the latter's death in 1035 enabled Echmarcach to exploit the situation and seize control of the Irish Sea region. Although there is no direct evidence that Echmarcach controlled Mann by this date, Sitriuc does not appear to have taken refuge on the island after his expulsion from Dublin. This seems to suggest that the island was outside Sitriuc's possession, and may indicate that Mann had fallen into the hands of Echmarcach sometime before. In fact, it is possible that Echmarcach used the island to launch his takeover of Dublin.

Echmarcach's hold on Dublin was short-lived as the fourteenth-century "Annals of Tigernach" records that Ímar replaced him as King of Dublin in 1038. This annal-entry has been interpreted to indicate that Ímar drove Echmarcach from the kingship. There is reason to suspect that Þórfinnr Sigurðarson, Earl of Orkney extended his presence into the Isles and the Irish Sea region at about this period. The evidence of Þórfinnr's power in the Isles could suggest that he possessed an active interest in the ongoing struggle over the Dublin kingship. In fact, Þórfinnr's predatory operations in the Irish Sea region may have contributed to Echmarcach's loss of Dublin in 1038.

It is conceivable that Ímar received some form of support from Knútr's son and successor in Britain, Haraldr Knútsson, King of England. The latter was certainly in power when Ímar replaced Echmarcach, and an association between Ímar and Haraldr could explain why the "Annals of Ulster" reports the latter's death two years later. Ímar's reign lasted about eight years, and one of his first royal acts appears to have been the invasion of Rathlin Island within the year. The fact that he proceeded to campaign in the North Channel could indicate that Echmarcach had held power in this region before his acquisition of Mann and Dublin.

In 1044, the "Annals of Tigernach" records that Ímar penetrated into the domain of the Uí Fhíachrach Arda Sratha and killed their chief. The annal-entry also indicates that Ímar stormed the church of Armagh, and burned "" (the "Shrine of Patrick") in the attack. The following year, he again invaded Rathlin Island, and his subsequent slaughter of three hundred noblemen of the Ulaid, including a certain heir apparent named Ragnall Ua Eochada, is documented by the "Annals of Clonmacnoise", the "Annals of Inisfallen", the "Annals of Tigernach", and the "Annals of the Four Masters". This remarkable action may indicate that the Dubliners and Ulaid were battling for control of Rathlin Island. If so, it could be evidence that Ímar enjoyed the possession of Mann by this date. The domain of the Ulaid is certainly the closest Irish territory to Mann, and the control of the Manx fleet could account for the Dubliner's ability to challenge the Ulaid. Whatever the case, within the year Niall mac Eochada, King of Ulaid is recorded to have attacked Fine Gall—Dublin's agriculturally-rich northern hinterland—in what may have been a retaliatory raid.

The following year, the "Annals of Tigernach" states that Echmarcach succeeded Ímar. The "Annals of the Four Masters" specifies that Ímar was driven from the kingship by Echmarcach, who was then elected king by the Dubliners. After this point in Ímar's life, all that is known for certain is that he died in 1054, as recorded by the "Annals of Ulster" and the sixteenth-century "Annals of Loch Cé". Nevertheless, since these sources style Ímar in Gaelic "rí Gall" ("king of the foreigners"), there may be evidence to suggest that, when Diarmait mac Maíl na mBó, King of Leinster drove Echmarcach from Dublin in 1052, Diarmait reinstalled Ímar as king.

After Ímar's death, Diarmait appears to have appointed his own son, Murchad, control of Dublin later that decade, as the "Annals of the Four Masters" accords him the title "tigherna Gall", meaning "lord of the foreigners" in 1059. In 1061, Murchad invaded Mann and seems to have overthrown Echmarcach. The record of Murchad's actions against Echmarcach could indicate that the latter had seated himself on the island after his expulsion from Dublin. Another possibility is that Echmarcach had only reestablished himself as king in the Isles after Ímar's death in 1054. Whatever the case, both Diarmait and Murchad were dead by 1072, and the "Annals of Tigernach" describes Diarmait on his obituary as King of the Isles ("rí Innsi Gall", literally "king of the isles of the foreigners"), a declaration which seems to indicate that, by the eleventh century at least, the kingship of the Isles was contingent upon control of Mann.

The principal Welsh monarch during Ímar's reign was Gruffudd ap Llywelyn. One of the latter's main rivals was Iago ab Idwal ap Meurig, King of Gwynedd, a man who had killed Gruffudd's father in 1023, and thenceforth ruled Gwynedd until his own demise in 1039. Gruffudd himself may have been responsible for Iago's slaying, and certainly succeeded to the kingship of Gwynedd after his death. It was likely in the context of Iago's fall and this resulting regime change that the latter's son, Cynan, fled overseas and sought refuge in Dublin.

According to the thirteenth-century "Historia Gruffud vab Kenan", the mother of Cynan's son was Ragnailt ingen Amlaíb, a paternal granddaughter of Sitriuc. Further revealed by this source is the fact that this woman's father, Amlaíb mac Sitriuc, built and commanded a Welsh fortress called "Castell Avloed". Although it is unknown how long the Dubliners possessed the fortress, in 1036 another son of Sitriuc was slain in Wales by an apparent kinsman, an event which could be evidence of a struggle for control of the site. Echmarcach's aforesaid expulsion of Sitriuc from Dublin in the same year could in turn indicate that this exiled monarch sought refuge in Wales.

Despite the uncertainty of its specific location, Castell Avloed appears to have been situated in territory formerly controlled by Iago, and there is reason to suspect that—after Iago's fall and Cynan's flight—Ímar oversaw military actions against Gruffudd. Three years later, for example, the thirteenth- and fourteenth-century "Brut y Tywysogyon" and the "B" and "C" versions of the eleventh- to thirteenth-century "Annales Cambriæ" report that this Welsh king was captured by forces from Dublin. The episode is further elaborated upon by a sixteenth-century text compiled by David Powell and a seventeenth-century text by compiled by James Ware. According to these admittedly late versions of events, Gruffudd was captured by the Dubliners in the context of them supporting the cause of Cynan. The accounts further state that Gruffudd managed to escape his captors when the Dubliners were counterattacked by Welsh forces before they could return to Ireland. The evidence of Cynan cooperating with the Dubliners against Gruffudd suggests that, not only was Ímar personally involved as king, but that the Welsh fortress of Castell Avloed was still controlled by the Dubliners.

Another conflict that could have involved Ímar and the military forces of Dublin was Gruffudd's final defeat of Hywel ab Edwin, King of Deheubarth. According to "Brut y Tywysogyon" and the "B" version of "Annales Cambriæ" this last stand of Hywel took place at the mouth of the River Tywi—perhaps in the vicinity of Carmarthen—and included Vikings from Ireland who supported Hywel's cause. It is apparent that Gruffudd's adversaries generally utilised foreign military support from Ireland's Viking enclaves. Certainly, the twelfth-century "Book of Llandaff" declares that Gruffudd struggled against English, Irish, and Vikings during his career.

Ímar may have been the father, uncle, or possibly even the brother of Gofraid Crobán, King of Dublin and the Isles. In 1091, the "Annals of Tigernach" reveals that Gofraid possessed the kingship of Dublin in an annal-entry recording his patronym as "... ". The thirteenth- to fourteenth-century "Chronicle of Mann", on the other hand, gives Gofraid's patronym as "... ". Whilst the former source identifies Gofraid as the son of a man named Aralt (Old Norse ), the latter identifies Gofraid as the paternal grandson of a man so named.

In the aforesaid record of the military actions conducted in 1044, Ímar is merely named as the son of Aralt, a fact which could indicate that this was how he was known to his contemporaries. If correct, the patronym preserved by the "Chronicle of Mann" could merely be a garbled form of this style.

The patronym given by the "Chronicle of Mann" states that Gofraid's father was from "", a place which could refer to either Iceland, Islay, or Ireland. Other than this passage, there is no evidence hinting of a connection between Gofraid and Iceland. The chronicle elsewhere states that Gofraid died on Islay, although the island's name is rendered "" in this case. If "" instead refers to Ireland, the spelling could be the result of influence from a source originating in England, or a source written in Mediaeval French.



</doc>
<doc id="36508702" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36508702" title="Köllnischer Park">
Köllnischer Park

Köllnischer Park is a public park located near the River Spree in Mitte, Berlin. It is named after Cölln, one of the two cities which came together to form Berlin; the park location was originally just outside it. Approximately in area, the park came into existence in the 18th and 19th centuries on the site of fortifications. It was redesigned as a public park in 1869–73 and was further modified in the 20th century with the addition of first a bear enclosure, the Bärenzwinger, and later a permanent exhibition of sculpture, the Lapidary. The park is a registered Berlin landmark.

The park contains five buildings, the first of them being the Märkisches Museum, a complex of buildings. The complex was built between 1907 and 1907, and was designed by Ludwig Hoffmann. The second was the Bärenzwinger, next to the south entrance to the park. This was built between 1938 and 1939 on the site of a former sanitation depot, and was designed by Ludwig Hoffmann. The Bärenzwinger has contained up to five bears at once, however no longer contains any following the death of Schnute, Berlin's last official city bear in 2015. At the east end of the park there is the Landesversicherungsanstalt building, a large office building designed by Alfred Messel, to be the headquarters of the Landesversicherungsanstalt, an insurance company. The fourth building is the AOK building, a six-storey steel-framed office building built from purplish brick, on the south side of the park, opposite the Bärenzwinger. The final building is the Volksbadeanstalt, on the western side of the park. It was built in 1888 as a public bath.

The park lies between Wallstraße on the north side, the Straße am Köllnischen Park on the east side, Rungestraße on the south side and Inselstraße on the west side. Its boundaries are not clearly delimited; on the west side there are some buildings between the park and the street, including the former building of the "Köllnisches Gymnasium", built in 1865–68 and now used as a music school, and on the north side, facing the river, is the Märkisches Museum. The western edge is dominated by a large office building built in 1903/04 as the headquarters of the Landsversicherungsanstalt, which has been used for the past few years by the Department of Urban Development of the Senate of Berlin, and the southern by the 1931/32 building of the German health insurance group Allgemeine Ortskrankenkasse, which under the German Democratic Republic was the Parteihochschule Karl Marx.

The park is accessible via the Märkisches Museum U-Bahn station on line U2 and bus number 147. It is also close to the promenade which has been created along the bank of the Spree south of the Jannowitzbrücke.

The site of Köllnischer Park was just outside Cölln in the Middle Ages. Until the mid-17th century, it was undeveloped low-lying, swampy land prone to flooding by the Spree. Following the decision by Frederick William, the 'Great Elector' to encircle Berlin with fortifications, this became the location of Bastion VII, which was known at the time as "the bulwerk in the morass'. The work required the creation of large embankments and lasted until 1683; the swampland around the bastion was not fully drained until 1687. After such lengthy construction, the works were already out of date militarily, and after 1700 served only to control the comings and goings of visitors and residents, prevent desertion, and enable the collection of tolls on those entering the city. By 1700, Mulberry trees had been planted on the walls, but only 'persons of rank' were permitted to promenade along them. After Berlin had grown considerably and the Customs Wall had been built around it, King Frederick William I (1688–1740) ordered the defensive walls to be demolished. Civilian buildings had already grown up on the bastions; a windmill and a house for the miller were built on Bastion VII, and these caused the eastern portion to be left standing longer than other parts of the fortifications. Some of the rubble from the demolished fortifications was used to build up Wilhelmstraße; the rest was thrown into the defensive ditch outside the walls.

In 1736, Frederick William I gave the site of the park and the Märkisches Museum to one of his generals, Friedrich Sebastian Winnibald Truchseß, Count of Waldburg, who built a house there and laid out an extensive garden. After his death in the Battle of Hohenfriedberg, David Splitgerber, a merchant and banker, bought the land and was also given the remaining eastern bastion section; from 1750 onwards, he operated Berlin's first sugar processing plant on the site, and also enlarged and improved the garden. In 1779, the baroque garden was mentioned by the bookseller and author Friedrich Nicolai: "It has very charming areas, in particular it includes an open pavilion on a rise, which is small, but has tall trees growing upon it". The sugar plant was forced to close in 1788. The buildings on the site were then used in succession as tobacco storage, a hospital, a workhouse, and a men's lunatic asylum. The Märkisches Museum was later built there. Splitgerber's heirs sold the garden and in 1799 it was acquired by a Freemason lodge, the "Große National-Mutterloge zu den drei Weltkugeln" (Grand National Mother Lodge of the Three Globes). The Freemasons built a lodge building which opened in December 1800, and developed the remainder into a landscape garden, one of the most attractive gardens in Berlin.

In 1858/59 Inselstraße was extended through the garden to connect Köpenicker Straße to the city centre, and the Lodge was forced to sell the larger, eastern portion of the site to the city. The "Köllnisches Gymnasium" was then built there. How to use the remainder of the site was discussed for years; a desire to preserve the trees led to the rejection of several commercial proposals. On 15 April 1869, the Assembly of City Deputies ("Stadtverordnetenversammlung") decided to establish a public playground (probably one of the first in the city) and 'promenade location' there on plans drawn up by the first city director of gardens, Gustav Meyer, dedicated the necessary funds, and urged rapid execution of the plan. The plan involved some new plantings, fencing, and benches. This renovation was completed in 1873. The park reached its current dimensions in 1883 after the ditch was filled in. Ludwig Hoffmann, the architect of the Märkisches Museum (completed in 1907), then made some changes including creating views across the park to the new museum. The last major modification of the park took place in 1969–71 to designs by Eberhard Jaenisch, Stefan Rauner and Roswitha Schulz: a mound which remained on the site of the bastion was levelled, a children's playground was added, a terrace was built behind the museum, and the Lapidary was created.

The Lapidary is an open-air museum of primarily stone artworks, both originals and copies, which formerly decorated buildings that no longer exist. Some are set into the walls around a 1969 terrace, while others are freestanding at various locations in the park. For example, in the walls of the terrace there are fragments of five carved heads from the keystones over windows, supposed to be from the Old City Hall of Berlin in Spandauer Straße and attributed to Georg Gottfried Weiyhenmeyer; two allegorical reliefs; 17th- and 18th-century building signs; a late Gothic vault keystone; and a 16th-century sandstone relief from the Stadtschloß.

The freestanding sculptures include amongst others:
Modern and thus atypical of the sculptures in the park is the bronze statue of the artist Heinrich Zille, which was created in 1964–65 by Heinrich Drake for an exhibition in the Treptower Park and afterwards moved to Köllnischer Park. It is listed as a landmark by the City of Berlin.

At the Rungestraße corner of the park there is a historic fountain from a private garden in Hirschgarten. Moved to the park in 1971, it was made in about 1860 and is known as the Neo-Renaissance Fountain. It is currently enclosed for repairs.

The Wusterhausener Bär (or Wusterhausischer Bär) is a small round tower, with tiled walls and a helmet-shaped sandstone cupola topped with a carved trophy display of weaponry, which was formerly part of a weir regulating the water level in the ditch that formed part of the wall defences. "Bär" in this case derives from the Latin "berum", meaning "weir", and it was apparently named for Wusterhausen because the road to that town passed by its original location at Bastion VII. It was moved to the park in 1893 and is now incorporated into the Lapidary. It is listed as a Berlin landmark.

The Märkisches Museum was built between 1901 and 1907. It was designed by Ludwig Hoffmann as a complex of buildings representing architecture of the Mark Brandenburg and North Germany in general in the Romanesque, Gothic, and Renaissance periods.
Next to the south entrance to the park is the Bärenzwinger (bear pit). This was built in 1938–39 on the site of a former sanitation depot, also designed by Ludwig Hoffmann and already decorated with more than 50 plaques by Otto Lessing depicting bears, and a public lavatory, and opened on 17 August 1939. It consists of indoor sleeping quarters and outdoor exercise areas which have held as many as five bears (the armorial animal of Berlin) who are the official bears or mascots of the city. The impetus for building the Bärenzwinger was a letter to the newspaper "Berliner Zeitung am Mittag" (now "B.Z.") from Wilfried Bade which appeared the day after the end of the celebration of the city's 700-year anniversary, and the Lord Mayor, Julius Lippert, had it completed despite objections from some Nazi functionaries that there were more important things to be done in what proved to be the run-up to World War II. Two of the original bears were gifts from Bern, which also has a bear on its arms. It remains largely unchanged, although it had to be reconstructed after the war; it reopened in 1949 with two new bears, again from Bern; one of these, Jente, produced 33 cubs (including 4 sets of triplets and 9 pairs of twins) before being retired to the zoo. The last official city bear, Schnute, lived there until her death in 2015; her daughter Maxi also lived there until her death in August 2013. The Bärenzwinger is a listed Berlin landmark. It was threatened with closure in 1990 due to lack of funds for needed modernisation, but after public protest, the Berlin Senate undertook to pay for the project. Underfloor heating in the cages and a skylight dome were added, and the electricity supply was overhauled. The facility reopened in 1993 and celebrated its 70th anniversary in 2009. Some animal protection advocates, including the city's own animal protection officer, have called for it to be closed as old-fashioned and inhumane.

East of the park at Am Köllnischen Park 3 is a large office building which was designed by Alfred Messel as the headquarters of the Landesversicherungsanstalt Berlin, the social insurance for Berlin within Bismarck's old age and disability insurance system. Built in 1903/04, the building echoes the Märkisches Museum, which was built at the same time, in the use of red brick on its façade and is in Expressionist-Baroque style, with giant pilasters which rise uninterrupted from the street to the roofline, between which are limestone decorative elements in the form of similated balustrades, allegorical figures, and cartouches with craft symbols, such as an iron between pairs of scissors. Over the southern entrance is a sculpture of a group of men in classical style with the motto "Einer für alle—alle für einen" (One for all—all for one). The building originally had a tower, which was destroyed in World War II. After the war it was the headquarters of the East German Social Security Administration. It now houses offices of the Berlin Senate Department of Urban Development, and one of the courtyards has been roofed over and houses a permanent exhibition of plans for the redevelopment of the city. It forms part of an ensemble of buildings to either side of the Märkisches Museum which are registered as a city landmark.
The 6-storey steel-framed office building in purplish brick on the south side of the park at Rungestraße 3–6 and 7, opposite the Bärenzwinger, was designed by Albert Gottheiner (his last work before he was forced to leave Berlin) and built in 1931–32 as the headquarters of the Berlin affiliate of the Allgemeine Ortskrankenkasse (AOK) insurance group. The façade is "an outstanding example of late Expressionist architecture", featuring decorative brickwork and pillars, of which the six on the flanking staircase sections are emphasised by terracotta statues. Under the German Democratic Republic, the building housed the Party Academy of the governing Socialist Unity Party from 1955 onwards; a modern extension was built in the mid-1970s, designed by an architectural team led by Friedrich Kalusche. During this period the building was renamed the "Haus am Köllnischen Park". In summer 1990, after German reunification, the institution closed and the building reverted to the possession of the AOK. , it houses their legal division. It is a registered city landmark.

On the western side of the park is the "Volksbadeanstalt", which was designed by Ende und Böckmann and built in 1888 as a public bath. The Berliner Verein für Volksbäder erected it and another in the Gartenstraße with assistance from the city, for the purpose of "enabling the less prosperous inhabitants of Berlin to receive the benefit of a warm bath in every season of the year, at the most economical price conceivable". The buildings had an "English-industrial" appearance and were horizontally organised with a taller central section giving an impression of "importance, balance and pragmatism" and ornamented with round arches over doors and windows and an acorn motif.




</doc>
<doc id="36520563" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36520563" title="Death of Abdulredha Buhmaid">
Death of Abdulredha Buhmaid

Abdulredha Mohamed Hasan Buhmaid (or "Buhamaid", ) was a 28-year-old Bahraini protester shot by a live bullet in the head on 18 February 2011. He died in hospital three days later, the seventh death in the Bahraini uprising.

Buhmaid was among a group of protesters who on 18 February marched toward the Pearl Roundabout following the funeral procession of protester Ali Abdulhadi Mushaima, who was killed four days earlier. When the protesters neared Pearl Roundabout, the army opened fire. Buhmaid collapsed to the ground, and blood poured from his head after it was hit by a bullet. The army opened fire twice more. Protesters regrouped after each round of shooting. Riot police finally intervened and dispersed protesters. Over one hundred protesters were injured, some seriously. Buhmaid was taken to Salmaniya hospital where attempts to revive him failed over the course of three days. He died on the afternoon of 21 February.

Several witnesses including journalists and medics accused authorities of shooting directly at protesters, preventing some ambulances from reaching the site and firing at others. The government however, denied those statements. It stated that warning shots were fired in the air and accused protesters of faking injuries. An investigation by a government-appointed commission of inquiry blamed the army for Buhmaid's death. The incident marked the first time that the Royal Bahraini Army was used to confront civilians, and at the time was considered "the bloodiest" incident since protests erupted.

Following the incident, the government offered dialogue which the opposition said they will only take part in after the withdrawal of the army. The general labor union called for a general strike. Internationally, the attack on protesters was condemned by Barack Obama and Human Rights Watch. High Representative of European Union expressed her deep concerns and called for restrain and immediate dialogue. Britain revoked over forty arms licenses to Bahrain after an earlier announcement that it would review them and German president canceled a planned visit to the country. Buhmaid is remembered by the opposition as a martyr, leader and symbol of peacefulness.

Buhmaid (or "Buhamaid", 28) was married and had three children. He lived in Malkiya, south west of Manama. According to his wife, he had strong ties with his brothers. In an interview with the Bahraini newspaper "Al Wasat", she said he used to take part in any political event in his area. "He was hoping to be Malkiya's first martyr and so he became", she added.

Inspired by the successful uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia, protests erupted in Bahrain on 14 February. During the day named as the Day of Rage, over 6,000 people participated in fifty-five demonstrations and political rallies in twenty-five different locations throughout Bahrain. Security forces responded to protests by firing tear gas, rubber bullets, sound bombs and birdshot. More than thirty protesters were injured and Ali Mushaima died as a result of birdshot injury in his back. The following day, during the deceased funeral, another protester was killed the same way. Angry protesters marched to and occupied Pearl Roundabout. By nightfall, their numbers had swelled to over 10,000. On 16 February, thousands of protesters continued to occupy Pearl Roundabout.

On 17 February (later referred to as the Bloody Thursday), police launched a pre-dawn raid on sleeping protesters. Four protesters were killed and more than 300 were injured bringing the number of those killed in the events to six. Health workers and a journalist were allegedly attacked by security forces. The army was deployed following clearance of Pearl roundabout which then set up checkpoints and barriers. The Interior Ministry issued a warning to stay off the streets, and the army warned that it was ready to take "punitive measures" to restore order. Protesters resorted to Salmaniya Hospital's car parks where thousands of them protested against the government. All 18 Members of Parliament from Al Wefaq, the only opposition political party represented in Parliament, submitted their resignations.

On 18 February, over 50,000 participated in the funerals of crackdown victims. One was held in Al Daih, another in Karzakan. The largest however, was in Sitra. At about 4:46 in the afternoon, about a thousand protesters, most of them young men who participated in Al Daih funeral of Ali Abdulhadi Mushaima marched toward Manama, defying the government ban on gatherings. By 5:18 they had reached a road junction; to the right was Salmaniya hospital and to the left Pearl Roundabout. They turned left after a short pause. On their way, they clashed with riot police who withdrew from the site. Protesters continued their march removing barriers set by police a day ago.

By 5:30 protesters were 80 to 200 meters away from army forces stationed in Pearl Roundabout which "were armed with M16 assault rifles, Dilmun rifles and Browning .50 calibre machine guns mounted on top of armoured vehicles". The protest was peaceful and protesters were "holding their hands in the air and chanting 'peaceful, peaceful'". Some were holding flowers. As protesters continued marching, army troops opened fire.

Abdulredha Buhmaid was among the protesters. He was shot by a bullet in the head, collapsed to the ground and in the words of a witness, "blood was rushing from his head". Others sustained severe injuries inflicted by gunshots, two of whom also fell to the ground. Several eyewitnesses said army troops "gave no warning", but one witness said he heard them issue a warning several minutes after the initial shooting. Another witness said they heard a "faint voice of someone over a loudspeaker in the distance but could not make out what the speaker was saying".

Most protesters ran after hearing gunshots and a helicopter chased them. After shooting stopped, protesters regrouped. One youth picked a rock and headed toward the army, only to be stopped by four other protesters. A witness interviewed by Physicians for Human Rights said that he and other protesters moved closer to army forces following the initial shooting. According to him he asked "Why do you shoot us? We had our hands up. We are peaceful. What do you want from us?", one soldier replied "I want you to leave. If you do not turn back, I have orders to shoot". Arriving ambulances started evacuating the injured when army opened fire again.

When the shooting stopped, about fifty protesters started praying on the road, and few stood in front facing the army with their hands in the air. The army opened fire for a third time. The period of each shooting was short, because "people immediately started running away", witnesses said. After that, riot police intervened, firing tear gas and birdshot to disperse protesters, inflicting more injuries among them.

A cameraman working for the Associated Press said he saw "army units shooting anti-aircraft weapons, fitted on top of armored personnel carriers, above the protesters in apparent warning shots and attempts to drive them back from security cordons". Bahraini photojournalist Mazen Mahdi said that the army shot "live fire from machine guns" and that paramedics were blocked from helping the wounded. "The first was a warning shot in the air. But after that, they just opened fire at the people ... They shot at the ambulances when they came in", he added.

A senior emergencies researcher and medics interviewed by Human Rights Watch confirmed that some of the twelve ambulances sent were prevented by security forces from reaching the site. "The Daily Telegraph" said ambulances and paramedics "were shot at" and that "several were detained and at least one ambulance was impounded". Michael Slackman of "The New York Times" reported that he and a colleague were "shot at from a helicopter" shortly after army opened fire on protesters. Associated Press witnesses, "The Daily Telegraph", and "The New York Times" mentioned that army personnel positioned in high buildings and helicopters fired on protesters. Jalal Firooz, resigned MP of Al Wefaq, Bahrain's main opposition party, said he saw soldiers fire on protesters. A report by three local rights groups mentioned that "photos of the injuries suggest that army aimed at the upper body area".

Riot police chased down protesters who fled to Salmaniya, Bahrain's main hospital. Security forces backed off after initially advancing toward the hospital and firing tear gas into it. That night, over seven thousand protesters staged an anti-government sit-in in hospital parks, described by "The Guardian" as "the only place in Manama where they now feel safe to gather in numbers". The incident marked the first time that the Royal Bahraini Army was used to confront civilians, and at the time was considered "the bloodiest" incident since protests erupted.

At least 120 people were injured according to medical officials. Salmaniya hospital was "overwhelmed" with casualties, some of whom were taken to private hospitals. Doctors said that nine of the thirty-two casualties who reached Salmaniya hospital were in critical condition. Some medics cried while treating the injured, some of whom had bullets still lodged into their bodies, X-rays showed. A doctor interviewed by Al Jazeera English pleaded for help from "all countries in the world". Describing the situation in hospital as a war, Dr. Ghassan said, "They are shooting at people's heads. Not at the legs. People are having their brains blown out". Two doctors said they treated patients who "seemed to be [injured by] live bullets rather than shotgun pellets, judging by the entry and exit holes".

Buhmaid was taken to Salmaniya hospital. Blood was still "pouring from his head and he was unconscious". He was "clinging to life" in intensive care unit where doctors "struggled to stop his bleeding". "This is a bullet, gunshot wound, direct to his head and he's bleeding profusely from his nose, from his ear, his brain is shattered into pieces", said a doctor. Buhmaid's "brain was destroyed, but his body was still alive". His clinical death prompted a nurse on 20 February to smash a glass-framed image of the Prime Minister. Remaining in ICU for three days, Buhmaid was medically declared to be dead early in the afternoon of 21 February, becoming the seventh victim of the uprising.

Listing him under "Deaths Attributed to Security Forces", the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry appointed by King Hamad to investigate the events stated that Buhmaid's death "may be attributed to the BDF [army]" while also referring to the contrary result of the military investigation.

On the night of 18 February, Fasial al-Hamar, then the Minister of Health, issued a press release aired on the national TV which denied there had been any deaths. He said the situation at Salmaniya hospital was calm and that only seven people were being treated for minor injuries. He also warned against what he called "rumors" spread in some satellite channels and websites. Bahrain's ambassador to the United States said that if army forces did fire live ammunition, "Probably they were warning shots only". "The forces that were used were proportional according to the law, they were legal, they were necessary because they were stopping the shops. The economy was hurting, the national economy. We had to take action and action was taken by the law," he added. However he admitted protesters did not use live rounds and promised that "Investigations will happen. And they will continue".

The army said that protesters defied its orders to evacuate the area. According to its statement, after at least fifteen minutes of repeating the same orders, soldiers fired warning shots to the air. It also alleged that protesters were accompanied by "a line of ambulances" out of which they took blood bags to "feign that they had been injured". Military prosecutors carried out an investigation and concluded that the trajectory of the bullet that killed Buhmaid were inconsistent with the bullet having been shot by the BDF, on the basis of an ordnance expert's report that concluded the shot was fired from a high elevation.

Following the incident, the government offered dialogue with opposition and ordered army to withdraw from Pearl Roundabout. On 19 February, army troops were replaced by riot police. Hundreds of protesters moved to the site from different locations. A standoff between protesters and riot police was created, until the latter suddenly moved away. Thousands of protesters re-occupied the site following police withdrawal.

Buhmaid's funeral was held on 22 February in his village, Malkiya. Over 9,000 participated in the funeral procession which started from roundabout 13 in Hamad Town and ended in Malkiya graveyard. At the same day during afternoon, over 100,000 participated in a protest dubbed "March of loyalty to martyrs" in honor of the seven victims of the uprising.

In May 2011, 47 doctors, nurses, and dentists were charged for their actions during the uprising. One of the charges was conducting unnecessary operations to Buhmaid, which led to his death. In a press conference, Minister of Justice said "Buhmaid was shot in the head and he underwent a surgery in the presence of the media. His head had been open in an exaggerated manner, which led to his death".

Buhmaid's family said they were sad for his death, but their pride had overcome it. Appearing on the national TV, the crown prince authorized by his father, the king, offered unconditional dialogue with opposition. He offered "condolences to the people of Bahrain for the painful days they are living" and asked them to remain calm. Opposition activists demanded withdrawal of army and resignation of government for the dialogue to begin. "[There is no] serious will for dialogue because the military is in the streets", said Matar Matar, resigned MP of Al Wefaq. The general labor union called for an indefinite general strike "unless the army is pulled out from the streets and peaceful demonstrations are permitted".

Barack Obama criticized the government actions. In reference to government of Bahrain and Yemen, he said "The United States condemns the use of violence by governments against peaceful protesters in those countries and wherever else it may occur". Catherine Ashton, the High Representative of European Union demanded "restraint" from all parties and said that report of violence "deeply concerned" her. She called for dialogue to begin "without delay". The United Kingdom revoked forty four arm licenses to Bahrain, twenty of them open licenses. Foreign Office Minister Alistair Burt said "We are deeply concerned about the situation in Bahrain and the events which have led to the deaths of several protesters".

German president canceled a planned trip to the country. "Freedom of assembly and freedom of speech in Bahrain have to be fully guaranteed", a spokesman quoted him saying. Lawrence Cannon, then Canada's Foreign Minister called the Bahraini government to "exercise restraint" and lunch an investigation into protesters' deaths. "Canada urges Bahrain to respect its citizens' rights to freedom of expression and assembly, and to engage in peaceful dialogue with its people to address their concerns", he added.

Human Rights Watch condemned the attack. "The Bahraini army has done what the Egyptian army did not do and exactly what the United States and its other partners urged it not to do -- it has opened fire on its own people," its Washington director said. Fareed Zakaria, CNN's international affairs analyst, said that the crackdown on protesters was a "rash move that will enrage many of its people and cost the regime international prestige". "This is a terrible mistake and they will pay a heavy price for it. The regime in Bahrain is doing something very rash and unwise; it is trying to respond by using force and punitive measures. This is not going to work in the end", he added.

Buhmaid was the first person named a "field commander" by February 14 Youth Coalition, which also named their attempt to reoccupy Pearl Roundabout in the first anniversary of the uprising, "operation of the martyr leader Abdulredha Buhmaid". His death was described by the online opposition newspaper, "Bahrain Mirror", as a "legendary scene that will remain forever in the conscience of humanity". A poster found in two articles of the aforementioned newspaper described Buhmaid as "the martyr who brought down an army with his peacefulness".

Speaking to participants of a sit-in front of United Nations building in Manama on 22 February 2012, Ahlam al-Khuza'e of Al Wefaq said that shooting scene of Buhmaid was "the top manifestation of peacefulness". On 29 February, opposition parties organized a gathering in Malkiya to honor Buhmaid. Thousands participated in the gathering including Isa Qassim, Bahrain Shias' top religious figure.



</doc>
<doc id="36557538" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36557538" title="Terry Bywater">
Terry Bywater

Terrance "Terry" Bywater (born 28 February 1983) is a British wheelchair basketball player. He participated in the 2000 Summer Paralympics, where his team came in fourth place; in the 2004 Summer Paralympics, where he won a bronze medal and was the highest scorer for Great Britain; the 2008 Summer Paralympics, winning another bronze medal; and the 2012 Summer Paralympics, where his team again came in fourth place.

Bywater was born on 28 February 1983 in Dormanstown, England and currently lives in Cleveland, North Yorkshire. , he weighs and is tall. He was born without a tibia and a fibula in his left leg, which was amputated when he was two. He has a son, Benjamin Bywater.

Bywater began playing wheelchair basketball at the age of 13 at an open day in Middlesbrough with the Teesside Lions. He later played with them. After playing for a year, he was selected for the Great Britain Under-23 team and began training. He made his debut at the Sydney 2000 Summer Paralympics, and finished fourth. He participated in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing, where he won a bronze medal, and was the top Great Britain scorer in the event. He currently plays for the Sheffield Steelers. He once played for C. D. Fundosa in Spain, along with many other European clubs. Bywater returned to England so he could play with the Super League Club Sheffield Steelers throughout the 2011—12 season. He is a 4.5 point player.

His first championships were the 2001/2002 European Championships in Amsterdam, Netherlands, where he finished fourth. In 2002 he went to the World Championships in Kitakyushu in Japan, where he finished second (silver). He participated in the 2003 European Championships in Sassari, Italy, and won bronze. He competed in the 2005 European Championships in Paris, France, and won silver. He competed in the 2006 World Championships in Amsterdam and was fifth place, and in 2007 he participated in the European Championships in Wetzlar, Netherlands, and received a silver medal. Two years later, he won bronze in the European Championships of Adana in Turkey. In 2010, for the first time, he participated in the World Wheelchair Basketball Championships in Birmingham, and was fifth place. He won gold in the 2011 European Championships in Nazareth, Israel. At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, the wheelchair basketball team lost to the United States, and finished in fourth position, after losing to Canada, missing out of the finals. He said that not winning a medal at the Paralympics was the "worst moment" of his career.


</doc>
<doc id="36599717" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36599717" title="Albanian revolt of 1432–1436">
Albanian revolt of 1432–1436

The Albanian revolt of 1432–36 was a series of conflicts between Albanian rebels and the Ottoman Empire during the early period of Ottoman rule in the region. Prompted by the replacement of large parts of the local nobility with Ottoman landowners, centralized governance and the Ottoman taxation system, the population and the nobles, led principally by Gjergj Arianiti, revolted against the Ottomans.

During the early phases of the revolt, many land (timar) holders were killed or expelled. As it spread, the nobles, whose holdings had been annexed by the Ottomans returned to join the revolt and attempts to form alliances with the Holy Roman Empire were initiated. While the leaders of the revolt were successful in defeating successive Ottoman campaigns, they failed to capture many important towns of the sanjak of Albania. Protracted sieges like that of Gjirokastër, capital of the sanjak, gave the Ottoman army time to assemble large forces from other parts of the empire and to subdue the main revolt by the end of 1436. Ottoman forces conducted a number of massacres in the aftermath of the revolt.

After the revolt had largely been suppressed, those who accepted Ottoman suzerainty were initially allowed to retain their holdings and partial autonomy. Many timars were also granted to local Albanians holding high posts of the administration, especially during the rule of Yakup Bey Muzaka and Skanderbeg. Throughout the pacification process, various primarily rural areas were still in revolt and new rebellions erupted, like that of Theodor Corona Musachi in 1437. As the empire further extended its area of rule in the Balkans, centralization attempts and the replacement of local timar holders with Ottoman landowners resumed. These policies would lead in part to the formation of the League of Lezhë under Skanderbeg in 1444, and a new era in the Ottoman–Albanian wars.

Gradually in the late 14th and early 15th century the Ottoman Empire defeated local Albanian principalities, forming the sanjak of Albania as an administrative division of the empire. As part of the Timar system the local feudal lords were largely replaced with Ottomans from Anatolia. The cadastral survey (defter) of 1431–1432 indicates that about 75% to 80% of the timars were granted to Ottoman Muslim spahis (feudal cavalry), while the remainder and especially remote areas, which were not under full Ottoman control, were granted to Albanian spahis, both Christian and Muslim. The replacement of the existing nobility with the timar system led to conflicts, as a result of which many rural areas were not under complete Ottoman rule.

Under the previous taxation code, farmers were required to pay a tenth of their seasonal agricultural output, 1 ducat and 4 groshe (two-ninths of a ducat) to their lords. The Ottoman system aimed towards revenue increase to support military expenses, thus new taxes were imposed and existing ones were altered. In addition to 1/10 of agrarian production Muslim convert families were required to pay 22 akçe (~0.6 ducats) to the timar holders, while non-Muslim families had to pay 25 akçe (~0.7 ducats). Both groups were subject to additional taxes including the avarız, an annual cash tax that affected households registered to the cadasters. Non-Muslims were also required to pay 45 akçe (~1.3 ducats) as part of the jizya and had to supply regularly the Ottoman state with young recruits in accordance with the devşirme, which required the enlistment of young males in the Ottoman army and their conversion to Islam.

Consequently, the changes in property rights, relations between feudal lords and peasants, the taxation system and the enactment of devşirme resulted in further resistance. As changes affecting both nobles and peasants were principally implemented through registration in the cadastral survey, many families tried to avoid becoming registered in the 1431–2 survey and took refugee in mountainous areas, while the nobility prepared for armed conflict.

The revolt began in 1432 when Andrea Thopia defeated a small Ottoman force in central Albania. His victory encouraged the other leaders and the revolt spread throughout Albania. Later that year the Ottomans lost control of the central seaport of Vlorë. Gjergj Arianiti, who was living at the Ottoman court as a hostage, was called by rebels to lead the revolt in his family's domains. In response, he fled from Edirne and returned to Albania. In the winter of 1432, Sultan Murat II gathered around 10.000 troops under Ali Bey, who marched along the Via Egnatia and reached the central valley of Shkumbin, where he was ambushed and defeated by forces under Gjergj Arianiti. His victory prompted the Albanians in the area of Gjirokastër to call upon Depë Zenebishi, who had settled in his estates in Corfu after the Ottoman conquest of the Principality of Gjirokastër, to lead the rebels in the south. After spreading the revolt in nearby areas including Këlcyrë, Zagorie and Pogon his forces besieged the southern city of Gjirokastër, capital of the sanjak of Albania. At nearby Këlcyrë the rebels captured the castle, but the concurrent siege of Gjirokastër was prolonged and Turahan Bey attacked and defeated the troops that surrounded the city in early 1433. Zenebishi himself was captured and executed.

In the summer of 1433 an army led by Sinan Pasha, beylerbey of Rumelia, pillaged the areas of Kanina and Yannina and moved northwards, where they subdued the rebels in the domains of Gjon Kastrioti, who was reduced again to vassal status, while his son Skanderbeg, who was also called to join the revolt, remained in Ottoman service in Anatolia. In August 1433, the senate of Venice convened to evaluate the situation and deemed that the revolt posed a threat to the Venetian territories in the region too. However, by the end of October they reevaluated the crisis and rejected the deployment of a war galley to the Venetian colonies. In northern Albania Nicholas Dukagjini captured territories of the pre-Ottoman Principality of Dukagjini and besieged and captured Dagnum. Dukagjini then tried to ally himself with Venice by offering to accept Venetian suzerainty and granting them control of Dagnum. However, Venice refused any kind of involvement in his plan and the revolt in general. Dukagjini was not aware that Hasan Bey, the Ottoman governor of Dagnum, had requested Venetian assistance after his defeat. As Venice did not want to provoke Ottoman hostility, the captain of Shkodër (Scutari) was ordered to assist Hasan Bey in recapturing Dagnum. Arms were subsequently sent to the garrison of Lezhë (Alessio) and by 1435 the fort had been returned to Ottoman control. In central Albania, Andrea Thopia unsuccessfully besieged the castle of Krujë, while in the region of Vlorë the siege of the fort of Kaninë began. Vlorë was lost to the rebels as early as May 1432, but must have been recovered by May 1434 as contemporary Venetian documents mention an Ottoman official (subaşi) stationed there at that time.

Another Ottoman army was assembled in Manastir in the summer of 1434. Again under the command of Sinan Pasha, this Ottoman expedition was defeated by Gjergj Arianiti in south-central Albania in August 1434. After his defeat, all beys of the territories bordering Albania were ordered to gather their forces and attack the rebels. In December 1434 Ishak Bey, sanjakbey of Üsküb marched into south-central Albania but was defeated by Gjergj Arianiti. Contemporary sources from the senate of Ragusa mention that many Ottoman soldiers were captured, while Ishak Bey escaped with a small group. In April 1435, Arianiti defeated another Ottoman campaign and hostilities virtually ceased until the beginning of 1436, as Murat II's military efforts were focused against Ibrahim of Karaman in Anatolia. At the end of 1435 reports of the Ragusan senate assessed the situation as calm and noted that the belligerents had retreated to their respective territories.

During the revolt many attempts were made to form an anti-Ottoman coalition including the Holy Roman Empire. Pope Eugene IV requested troops to be sent to assist the revolt and tried to gather funds. In 1435, Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund of Luxemburg sent Fruzhin, a Bulgarian nobleman, and in early 1436 Daud, a pretender to the Ottoman throne, to negotiate the possibility of a coalition with the rebels. However, by mid-1436 a large force under Turahan Bey had been assembled. Despite the military victories the rebel leaders acted autonomously without a central leadership, the lack of which contributed greatly to their final defeat. Turahan's forces eventually subdued the revolt and marched through Albania, committing widespread massacres of civilians.

In order to stabilize Ottoman authority, Murat II appointed native Albanians like Yakup Bey Muzaka and Skanderbeg to high positions within the sanjak of Albania. The nobles who accepted Ottoman overlordship were granted their pre-Ottoman holdings and border estates as well as a degree of autonomy, while others were exiled or continued warring. In 1436–37, rebels were active in the regions of Gjirokastër and Vlorë and Theodor Corona Musachi led a revolt in the region of Berat. As many rebels used Venetian territories like Shkodër and Parga as bases to launch raids into Ottoman territory, representatives of Mehmed II asked the Venetians to outlaw their activity in October 1436.

As Ottoman rule in the Balkans expanded, Albanian timar holders and officials were once again replaced with Anatolian ones. The "status quo ante bellum" policies of the Ottomans gradually led to the formation of the League of Lezhë under Skanderbeg in 1444 and the beginning of a new era in the Ottoman-Albanian wars.



</doc>
<doc id="36619573" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36619573" title="Cyclone Dina">
Cyclone Dina

Intense Tropical Cyclone Dina was a cyclone that caused record flooding across parts of Réunion. Originating from a tropical disturbance on 15 January 2002 near the Chagos Archipelago, the precursor to Dina quickly developed within a region favoring tropical cyclogenesis. By January 17, the system had developed enough organized convection as it moved southwestward to be declared a tropical depression. Rapid intensification occurred shortly thereafter, with the system attaining winds in excess of 120 km/h (75 mph) on January 18. Dina achieved its peak intensity on January 20 as an intense tropical cyclone winds of 215 km/h (130 mph). Hours after reaching hits strength, the storm bypassed Rodrigues Island about to its north. On January 21, the storm brushed Mauritius and Réunion as an intense tropical cyclone before turning southward. Once on a southward course, steady weakening ensued and the system eventually transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on January 25. The remnants of the storm accelerated southeastward and were last noted on January 28 before being absorbed into a polar trough.

Across Mauritius and Réunion, torrential rains and destructive winds from the cyclone resulted in extensive to "catastrophic" damage. The entire island of Mauritius lost power during the storm and widespread structural damage took place. Agricultural and property damage amounted to US$47 million and US$50 million respectively in the republic. Nine fatalities were attributed to the storm in Mauritius: five off the coast of Rodrigues Island and four on the main island. More extensive damage was seen on Réunion where up to of rain fell over three days. Record to near-record flooding destroyed many homes, washed out roads, and caused catastrophic agricultural damage. Destructive winds, measured up to also crippled communications. In all, six people died on the island and losses were estimated at €200 million (US$190 million).

On January 15, a tropical disturbance began organizing near the Chagos Archipelago in the South Indian Ocean convergence zone, which is an extended area of convection connected to the monsoon. The thunderstorms gradually organized, associated with a weak circulation and located within an area of moderate wind shear. A distinct low pressure area developed on January 16, about east of Diego Garcia. The thunderstorms were primarily located along the western periphery due to continued shear, and ordinarily would prevent significant development. The system moved to the southwest along the north side of a ridge, and despite the shear it developed into a tropical disturbance late on January 16. Subsequently, the system rapidly organized, developing rainbands as the convection increased.

At 0000 UTC on January 17, Météo-France (MFR) upgraded the disturbance to a tropical depression, and six hours later upgraded the system further to Tropical Storm Dina. Shortly thereafter, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert, and later that day initiated advisories about 425 km (265 mi) south of Diego Garcia. Dina quickly intensified, and its T-numbers using the Dvorak technique increased by 0.5 every six hours during the storm's development phase. An eye began developing late on January 17, and at 1200 UTC on January 18, MFR upgraded Dina to a tropical cyclone, or the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. This was only 36 hours after it was first classified as a tropical disturbance, which is much less than the five days most tropical cyclones take. About three hours earlier, the JTWC had also upgraded the storm to tropical cyclone status.

The small eye of Dina, only in diameter, quickly became well-defined, although it became obscured by the central dense overcast on visible satellite imagery. On January 19, the cyclone slowed as it turned to the west-southwest, after the ridge to its south intensified. The intensification rate briefly slowed, before Dina rapidly intensified late on January 19, becoming an intense tropical cyclone early the next day. Surrounded by an eyewall of deep convection, Dina intensified to reach its peak intensity on January 20. Based on satellite intensity estimates between , the JTWC estimated peak one-minute sustained winds of 240 km/h (150 mph), about north-northeast of Rodrigues Island. At around the same time, MFR estimated peak ten-minute winds of 215 km/h (130 mph). While at its peak, Dina had a very symmetrical structure, and gusts were estimated to have reached .

On January 20 while near peak intensity, Dina slowed its movement further and moved more toward the west. After previously being in the projected track of the cyclone, Rodrigues Island was bypassed by the cyclone passing about to its north. After passing by the island, Dina underwent an eyewall replacement cycle, which resulted in an outer eyewall forming and replacing the previous, smaller one. This resulted in the cyclone weakening slightly, although it retained much of its intensity while tracking toward Mauritius and Réunion. Late on January 21, Dina passed about north of Cape Malheureux in Mauritius, with 10-minute winds estimated at 185 km/h (115 mph); however, the strongest winds remained offshore. At the time, the storm's eye became asymmetric with a diameter of . Late the next day, Dina also passed about off the north coast of Réunion, and although the island was in the forecast track, the cyclone accelerated to the west in the final hours and spared the island from the strongest winds. This abrupt shift in tract took place as the cyclone interacted with the high terrain of Réunion. Additionally, Doppler weather radar showed the highest reflectivity values to be from the center. On January 23, Dina weakened below intense tropical cyclone status while it accelerated to the southwest; the change in movement was due to the ridge moving further to the southeast. Increased wind shear due to an approaching trough contributed to the weakening, and by late on January 23 the eye dissipated. The next day, Dina weakened into a tropical storm, after the convection diminished around the center. Late on January 24, the JTWC discontinued advisories, and about 24 hours later, MFR classified Dina as an extratropical cyclone. The system accelerated to the southeast and was absorbed by a polar trough on January 28.

Less than a day prior to Cyclone Dina's arrival in Mauritius, officials in the nation closed schools, government offices, businesses, and ports. A state of alert was issued for the entire country, meaning that those at greatest risk should seek shelter. All flights to and from the nation were canceled "until further notice." Across the island, 259 people sought refuge in shelters. According to NASA, there was potential for a storm surge as the cyclone moved over the region.

The first island to be affected by the storm was Rodrigues. There gusts reached . Rainfall was light on the island, reaching at Roche Bon Dieu. The cyclone killed five fishermen offshore Rodrigues. Numerous areas across Mauritius recorded hurricane-force winds. On the republic's main island, gusts reached at Le Morne Brabant. A station near the capital city of Port Louis reported a gust of . Torrential rainfall affected much of Mauritius during Dina's passage, with a maximum of falling in Pierrefonds. This was more than the average monthly rainfall, and most of the precipitation fell in about 24 hours. A barometric pressure of 935.9 mbar (hPa; 27.64 inHg) was recorded in Vacoas-Phoenix. Flooding and mudslides greatly disrupted the public water system, with most people losing running water.

Power and communications across Rodrigues and the island of Mauritius were crippled by the storm, with the entirety of the former and 90 percent of the latter losing electricity. For approximately ten hours, the country was cut off from the outside world, with all communications disrupted. About 50,000 of the nation's 280,000 telecommunication lines sustained serious damage, resulting in prolonged power outages. Repair crews estimated that it would take until January 27, nearly a week after the storm's passage, for power to be fully restored. Widespread areas also lost water on Mauritius. Schools across the region sustained significant damage and as a precautionary measure, all classes were canceled until January 29. Agriculture sustained considerable losses as a result of the storm. Approximately 15 metric tons of flour and 20 metric tons of rice were damaged and preliminary estimates for sugarcane losses across the island reached US$47 million. Property damage from the storm amounted to US$50 million, and there were four deaths on the island; three were caused by traffic accidents, and the other was a man who died while making storm preparations.

In the wake of the storm, a special mobile force was dispatched by officials to assist in relief operations. Red Cross distribution centers were set up on Mauritius and served food and clothing to more than 500 by January 25. Despite the severity of damage, government officials declined to appeal for international aid. Although no requests for aid were made, the Government of Norway provided US$10,000 worth of funds to the nation. Owing to the effects of Cyclone Dina and several other meteorological factors, the economy of Mauritius suffered significantly in 2002 as a whole. Annual growth dropped to about 1.9 percent from approximately 5 percent in 2001. The sugarcane industry suffered greatly from the storm, experiencing a 19.3 percent decrease.

Due to the storm's close passage to the island, much of Réunion experienced hurricane-force winds. The strongest observed gust was on Maïdo; however, based on the destruction of Meteo-France's Doppler weather radar, winds could have exceeded . Plaine des Cafres reported gusts of over for at least 15 hours. These winds caused extensive damage, crippling communications, devastating infrastructure, and left more than 160,000 families, about 70 percent of the island's population, without power. Some areas were without power for nine days. Additionally, about 25 percent of the island was left without running water. Damaged transmitters interrupted radio and television broadcasts for several days. In Saint-Denis, two people were seriously injured after a wall collapsed on them. Although winds were strong, the majority of damage was limited to broken windows, removed sheet metal, broken gutters, and removed siding. The most severe damage took place in exposed areas at higher elevations or where tunneling of the wind occurred.

Heavy rains produced by Dina triggered flash flooding and many landslides, further crippling travel and forcing at least 2,500 people to seek refuge in public shelters. Some areas recorded more than in a 24‑hour span, notably the Bellecombe resting place (a volcano lodge) which measured in 24 hours as well as a two-day total of . The heaviest rainfall was measured in La Plaine des Chicots at . With the ground already saturated from previous rain events, the torrential rains caused numerous rivers across the island to burst their banks. The Ravine des Cabris reached an all-time record flood while three other rivers reached their second-highest levels, behind the flood event caused by Cyclone Firinga in 1989. Heavy rains occurred in the typically dry western portion of the island, which resulted in significant flooding. Many ecosystems suffered from these floods with water quality greatly degraded and flow disrupted. However, in post-storm surveys in July 2002, it was found that the impact was not catastrophic and the ecosystems would eventually recover. Significant runoff also prompted fears of algae blooms that would damage coral reefs. Numerous roads were damaged or washed out by the floods, leaving approximately €42.9 million (US$37.6 million) in losses. In Lengevin village within the Saint-Joseph department, 35 families were forced to evacuate. Many landslides took place in addition to flooding, further hampering travel and isolating hundreds of residents.

Catastrophic agricultural damage occurred across the island, with losses reaching an estimated €76 million (US$66.7 million). The entire fruit and vegetable crop was lost during the storm while the vanilla and geranium crops sustained heavy damage. Additionally, about 15 – 20 percent of the sugarcane crop was destroyed. Horticulture sustained about 50 percent losses; however, much of this resulted from lost work hours. Poultry farms suffered about 70 percent losses, from lost animals and destroyed buildings. Along the coast, large waves measured up to caused moderate damage. Additionally, an estimated storm surge of impacted the island. Some buildings were flooded, roads washed out, and other roads were left covered in debris.

In all, about 15,000 damage claims were filed across Réunion, with a total of 3,251 homes damaged and about 850 condemned or destroyed. Property damage from the storm amounted to €95 million (US$83.4 million). Collectively, losses on the island were estimated at €200 million (US$190 million). Although there were no fatalities directly related to the storm, six people died in various events indirectly caused by Dina.

In the wake of Cyclone Dina's devastation on January 23, then French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin ordered a relief team of 200 personnel to be dispatched to the island. He also expressed "deep personal sympathy" to the residents of Réunion. The following day, the Catholic Relief Services released immediate funds of €16,000 (US$14,000). An estimated 50,000 tonnes of debris was cleaned up across the island, the majority of which was in the Northwest Department, and cost waste management crews approximately €4.5 million (US$4 million) to process. Initially, the national disaster program was slow to react, with funding first being available on February 5. The first payments were made starting a month later. In the five months following the storm, the Government of France provided about €10.6 million (US$12 million) in aid to farmers, accounting for an overestimation of about 20 percent in needs. Based on meteorological statistics regarding wind speed and rainfall, Cyclone Dina was regarded as a 1-in-30 – 50 year event in Réunion.




</doc>
<doc id="36650585" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36650585" title="Implosion of Radio Network House">
Implosion of Radio Network House

The implosion of Radio Network House in 2012 was the first implosion used in New Zealand to demolish a building, and was a "test case" for the potential to use such a demolition method on similar buildings in Christchurch Central City that had been damaged in the 2011 earthquake. Like most other large buildings in central Christchurch, Radio Network House was damaged beyond repair in the 2011 earthquake, and the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) added it to the demolition list in August 2011. In July 2012, it was announced that the building was going to be imploded, involving a specialist company from the United States with considerable experience in this type of work.

The right to push the button for the implosion was put up for auction on Trade Me, and became that website's third most viewed auction. The winning bid of was made by a consortium of demolition contractors, who allowed the Child Cancer Foundation to nominate a six-year-old boy from Queenstown to trigger the event. The implosion, which was carefully monitored to assess the suitability of this demolition method for potential future applications, went without any problems and it is anticipated that this will have paved the way for many more implosions in New Zealand in general, and in Christchurch in particular. But as of 2016, only one further implosion has been carried out.

Radio Network House was a 14-storey office tower constructed in 1986. The building was located at 155 Worcester Street, on the north side of the street and in the block between Manchester Street and Latimer Square. For its last twelve years Radio Network House was owned by Greg Hedges through his company Nor West Arch No.4 Ltd.

The building was first operated as the Christchurch studio for Television New Zealand (TVNZ), who displayed their logo on the building. Shows such as "What Now", "After School", Simon Barnett's quiz show "Face the Music" and later "The Son of a Gunn Show" were filmed in the tower block. TVNZ vacated the building in late 1998 following a decision to move all of their Christchurch-produced shows to Wellington. In the late 1990s, Telstra New Zealand, the telecommunications company of Telstra in New Zealand, owned the naming rights to the building. After Clear Communications was acquired in December 2001 to form TelstraClear, the Clear logo was prominently displayed on the building. The building's naming rights were sold to The Radio Network and it was renamed to Radio Network House during the ownership of Nor West Arch No.4 Ltd. At the time of demolition the logo of Newstalk ZB, a subsidiary of The Radio Network, was displayed on the building.

The Canterbury region was hit by a series of earthquakes, and the 22 February 2011 Christchurch earthquake damaged the office building beyond repair. About 400 people worked in the building before the earthquakes. Following the earthquakes, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) was set up to manage the recovery process.

On 30 August 2011, CERA added Radio Network House to the list of buildings to be demolished. On 17 July 2012, the local Canterbury newspaper "The Press" reported that implosion of Radio Network House had been approved by CERA. The same day, a press conference was held, where representatives of the demolition companies involved and of CERA addressed the media. The main contractor for the demolition was Naylor Love, who engaged Ceres New Zealand for the implosion. Ceres in turn partnered with Controlled Demolition, Inc., an American company based in Phoenix, Maryland, that has a track record of 9,000 implosions and is considered a world leader in the field. The implosion of Radio Network House was a test case, as the technique had not been applied in New Zealand before, and there are still many more tall buildings to be demolished in Christchurch. The implosion was challenging for Controlled Demolition, Inc., as New Zealand buildings are designed to withstand earthquake loading and thus have much more reinforcing in them than the buildings they usually deal with.

Before demolition, buildings are stripped of their contents, including internal plasterboard linings. As the fees for dumping demolition waste have risen since the earthquakes, it is more economical for demolition contractors to produce 'clean' demolition material. Holes were drilled into support columns of the building and filled with a total of some of explosives, which when set off, would destroy the support structure and cause the collapse of the building. A challenge for the demolition contractor was that explosives available in New Zealand are low-velocity and low-energy.

A representative from Ceres stated that the implosion would shorten the demolition process by some six weeks and would save money. Costs were around NZ$1m for the implosion, compared to some NZ$1.2m for a conventional demolition, with the owner's building insurance covering the costs. The owner of the building, however, stated that the implosion was not a cheaper option for his company than a conventional demolition, but it "would save others thousands". He likened the consent process to Christopher Columbus wanting to sail to America, with everybody telling him that it could not be done.

The owner of the Westende building, on the corner of Manchester and Worcester Street and some away from Radio Network House, threatened to seek a court injunction against the implosion. He raised concerns about potential seismic activity, possible damage to his new building, and noxious contaminants transferred by dust. The original Westende building had been destroyed in the first earthquake in 2010 and was one of the very few new buildings in the centre of Christchurch to have been rebuilt already. The concerns were dismissed by the demolition contractors and the threatened court action did not eventuate.

Soon after the announcement was made that the implosion had been approved, it was reported that the demolition contractors considered putting the right to push the button for the implosion up for auction, with the proceeds going to charity. "I've seen them go for $6,000" is how one of the company representatives was quoted, but the issue of liability needed to be worked through. The auction was set up on the internet auction website Trade Me and went live on Tuesday, 24 July, at 11 am. It was set up with a $1 reserve (meaning that theoretically, the right to push the button could have been sold for just $1). The auction was hugely popular and within one hour, bidding had reached $6,000. Bidding reached $30,000, but some bids were considered illegitimate and Trade Me staff removed them, and in other cases, bidders themselves requested to be removed.

When the auction closed, it had received the third highest number of viewers of Trade Me auctions, at 459,420 views. The winning bid was $26,000, placed by a consortium of eight demolition contractors who currently undertake demolitions in the Christchurch Central City (D Construction, Dormer Construction, Jurgens Demolition, March Construction, Pro Tranz Contracting, Clampet Developments, Shilton and Brown Demolition, and Ward's Demolition). They gave the right to choose a person to push the button to the Child Cancer Foundation, who nominated a six-year-old boy from Queenstown.

The charity chosen to receive the proceeds of the auction was the Canterbury Earthquake Heritage Buildings Fund, who passed the funds to the Isaac Theatre Royal in Gloucester Street, a heritage building registered as Category I by the New Zealand Historic Places Trust (since renamed to Heritage New Zealand). The Government of New Zealand pledged to match donations towards the restoration of heritage buildings dollar for dollar, so the final amount received by the Isaac Theatre Royal was NZ$52,000. The restored Isaac Theatre Royal reopened in November 2014.

The demolition companies, on the day prior to the implosion, advised the public to stay away for health and safety reasons, and watch the proceedings on TV or the internet. Several television stations had live streams of the event, and "The Press" announced that they would post a video on their website shortly after the implosion. An exclusion zone was put in place to ensure that nobody would be within approximately of the building. Despite the advice, thousands of onlookers filled the street on the morning of 5 August, a Sunday. Punctually at 8 am, a series of short explosions were heard, followed by another series a couple of seconds later. The building collapsed towards the north as planned, and the implosion manager from Controlled Demolition, Inc. said that it went a bit further than he had hoped, so he was lucky. The explosions were heard around Christchurch.

One of CERA's objectives in approving the implosion was to find out how the soil behaved, as Radio Network House was built on one of the worst soils in Christchurch. Seismograph readings showed ground velocity of 12 mm/s, which is comparable to a large truck slowly driving across the demolition site. With any residual concerns about the performance of poor soils during building implosions removed, it will be much easier for other building owners to obtain consent from CERA. Further implosions are likely, with a representative from Controlled Demolition, Inc. describing the Christchurch market as a "target-rich environment". So far, only the Christchurch Central Police Station has since also been demolished by implosion in early 2015; this happened in May 2015.

The implosion attracted global attention, with media in Australia, Canada, Ireland, South Africa and the United States covering the event.



</doc>
<doc id="36687454" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36687454" title="Ralph Patt">
Ralph Patt

Ralph Oliver Patt (5 December 1929 – 6 October 2010) was an American jazz-guitarist who introduced major-thirds tuning. Patt's tuning simplified the learning of the fretboard and chords by beginners and improvisation by advanced guitarists. He invented major-thirds tuning under the inspiration of first the atonal music of Arnold Schoenberg and second the jazz of John Coltrane and Ornette Coleman.

He graduated with a degree in geology from the University of Pittsburgh. After his career as a guitarist, he worked as a geologist and as a hydrologist, often consulting on projects related to the U.S. Department of Energy.

Patt was born in Kittanning, Pennsylvania on 5 December 1929 and studied geology at the University of Pittsburgh.

While in Pittsburgh, Patt studied guitar under Joe Negri. Patt played rhythm guitar in the style of Freddie Green, who played a Stromberg in the Count Basie Orchestra. Having earned his baccalaureate degree, he joined the United States Army and played guitar in an Army band. Following his 1955 discharge from the Army, Patt played with touring bands, for example, Neal Hefti, Frankie Carle, Les Elgart, Benny Goodman, Richard Maltby, and The Glenn Miller Orchestra.

After touring for five years, Patt settled in New York City, where he worked as musician both at ABC and on Broadway from 1960 to 1970; during this period he regarded Barry Galbraith as his mentor. He studied under George Russell, whose (1959) "Lydian Chromatic Concept of Tonal Organization" Patt edited. Patt also studied with Gunther Schuller, who himself was a student of Arnold Schoenberg and who used Schoenberg's twelve-tone technique for atonal composition. Patt wanted to be able to play and then to improvise twelve-tone music.

Patt was inspired by the jazz of Ornette Coleman and John Coltrane and the atonal music of Schoenberg. Seeking a guitar-tuning that would facilitate improvisation, he introduced major-thirds tuning by 1964, perhaps in 1963. Patt's tuning is a regular tuning in the sense that all of the intervals between its successive open strings are major thirds; in contrast, the standard guitar-tuning has one major-third amid four fourths. Patt used major-thirds tuning during all of his work as a session musician after 1965 in New York.

Major-thirds tuning packs the chromatic scale (the consecutive twelve-notes of the octave) onto four consecutive frets of three consecutive strings, an arrangement that reduces the extensions of the little and index fingers ("hand stretching"). Major and minor chords are played on two successive frets, and so require only two fingers; other chords—seconds, fourths, sevenths, and ninths—are played on three successive frets. For each regular tuning, chord patterns may be moved around the fretboard, a property that simplifies beginners' learning of chords and that simplifies advanced players' improvisation. In contrast, chords cannot be shifted around the fretboard in the standard tuning E-A-D-G-B-E, which requires four chord-shapes for the major chords; standard tuning has separate chord-forms for chords having their root note on the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth strings.

Having exactly three pitch classes for its open notes (for example {C,E,G}), each major-thirds tuning repeats every note in a higher octave, because guitars have six strings. Being regular, M3 tunings repeat each note after two strings: this repetition simplifies the learning of chords and improvisation. Chord inversion is especially simple in major-thirds tuning. Chords are inverted simply by raising one or two notes three strings. The raised notes are played with the same finger as the original notes.

Major-thirds tuning has a smaller scope than standard guitar-tuning, and so Patt started using seven-string guitars, which enabled major-thirds tuning to have the E-e' range of the standard tuning. He first experimented with a wide-neck Mango guitar from the 1920s, which he modified to have seven strings in 1963. In 1967 he purchased a seven-string by José Rubio. Patt used major-thirds tuning when he performed as a session musician in New York City after 1965.

Later, he purchased six-string archtop hollow-body guitars that were then modified by luthiers to have wider necks, wider pickups, and eight strings. Patt's Gibson ES-150 was modified by Vincent "Jimmy" DiSerio, a luthier who worked in the firm of John D'Angelico, circa 1965. Luthier Saul Koll modified a sequence of guitars: a 1938 Gibson Cromwell, a Sears Silvertone, a circa 1922 Mango archtop, a 1951 Gibson L-50, and a 1932 Epiphone Broadway; for Koll's modifications, custom pick-ups accommodated Patt's wide necks and high G (equivalently A); custom pick-ups were manufactured by Seymour Duncan and by Bill Lawrence.

Besides these guitars, Patt regularly played other stringed instruments as a recording musician: classical guitar, 12-string guitar, 6-string bass guitar, mandolin, banjo, and oud. Patt stated that "the only guys that didn't have to double on dates were the Tony Mottolas and the Johnny Smiths"; Tony Mottola and Johnny Smith were famous jazz-guitarists, and "doubling" refers to a musician's switching from one instrument to another, particularly within a family of instruments. Patt worked primarily as a studio musician from 1970 to 1975.

Patt developed a webpage with extensive information about major-thirds tuning. This webpage was part of a website with extensive information for jazz guitarists. Patt's website published his "Vanilla book", which contains the chord progressions for four-hundred jazz standards, from "After you've gone" to "Zing! went the strings". Its title refers to "Just play the vanilla changes", advice to young pianists from Lester Young. It was updated in 2008.

His website followed earlier contributions to guitar scholarship and instruction. In 1962, Patt wrote his "Guitar chord dictionary" (1962). Living in New York City in the 1960s, he studied with Chuck Wayne, with whom he wrote "The guitar appreggio dictionary" (1965), one of the bestselling titles from the music-publishing firm of Henry Adler.

As a studio musician in the 1970s, Patt had to play less jazz and more rock and roll, and so he changed careers. He returned to geology while continuing to pursue jazz as an avocation. Around 1975 he began working on his doctoral degree in hydrogeology. Employed by the US Department of Energy, he specialized in ground-water contamination from nuclear waste; as a research hydrogeologist, he accepted assignments worldwide and had extensive travels in Ukraine and Russia.

He was employed by Oregon's Department of Water Resources, where he served as its expert on the risks to the Columbia River from the Hanford Site. As a hydrological geologist (hydrologist), he was appointed to a panel of outside experts that reviewed and then "slammed" the U.S. Department of Energy's report on the safety of the underground storage of high-level nuclear waste at Hanford.

In 2002 and 2010, Patt's hometown was listed as Canby, Oregon, near Portland. Having been diagnosed with kidney cancer in 2007, Ralph Oliver Patt died at the age of 80 on 6 October 2010 in Canby at home. To honor his memory, the Ralph Patt Memorial Scholarship provided full tuition, room, and board for a college student to attend the Mel Brown Jazz Camp in 2011.




</doc>
<doc id="36687789" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36687789" title="Abu Taghlib">
Abu Taghlib

Fadl Allah Abu Taghlib al-Ghadanfar ʿUddat al-Dawla (), usually known simply by his "kunya" as Abu Taghlib, was the third Hamdanid ruler of the Emirate of Mosul, encompassing most of the Jazira.

His reign was troubled, being marked by conflicts with some of his brothers, antagonism with the various branches of the Buyids for influence in Baghdad, and attacks by the Byzantine Empire under John I Tzimiskes. His relations with the Buyid emir of Iraq, 'Izz al-Dawla Bakhtiyar, were initially hostile, but the two later concluded an alliance. In 978, the Jazira was occupied by the Buyids of Shiraz under 'Adud al-Dawla, and he fled to the Fatimid-controlled parts of Syria, where he tried to secure the governorship of Damascus, and became involved in local rivalries which resulted in his defeat in battle and execution on 29 August 979.

Abu Taghlib was the eldest son of al-Hasan, better known by his "laqab" of Nasir al-Dawla, who had established the Hamdanids as masters of a practically independent emirate encompassing the Jazira and centred on Mosul. Nasir al-Dawla engaged in repeated attempts to gain control over the Abbasid caliphs at Baghdad, but in the end was forced to concede defeat to the more powerful Buyids, recognize their suzerainty and pay them tribute. At the same time, Nasir al-Dawla's younger brother Ali, better known as Sayf al-Dawla, managed to establish his control over northern Syria from his two capitals Aleppo and Mayyafariqin, and through his clashes with the Byzantine Empire quickly overshadowed his brother. However, the last decade of Sayf al-Dawla's rule, until his death in February 967, was marked by heavy military defeats at the hands of the Byzantines, who occupied much of his domains, and internal turmoil.

It was in this context that Abu Taghlib is first mentioned in 964, when his father had once again been embroiled in a conflict with the Buyids. The army of the Buyid Mu'izz al-Dawla occupied Mosul and Nasir al-Dawla was once again forced to flee to the hill country of the northern Jazira. Abu Taghlib led the resistance against the Buyids, who, unable to maintain themselves there, evacuated Mosul and reached a new agreement with the Hamdanids. Consequently, Nasir al-Dawla was now increasingly eclipsed by his sons, and was deposed outright and exiled in 967, dying in captivity shortly after.

Abu Taghlib, surnamed "al-Ghadanfar" ("The Lion"), succeeded his father as emir and head of the Jaziran branch of the Hamdanid family, but almost immediately his authority was contested by a younger half-brother, Hamdan. Nasir al-Dawla had entrusted the latter with the governance of Nisibis, Maridin and Rahba shortly before his deposition, and may have intended to name him as his heir over Abu Taghlib. Hamdan was indeed the only son of Nasir al-Dawla to protest his father's deposition, and refused to recognize Abu Taghlib. With the aid of the new Buyid emir of Iraq, 'Izz al-Dawla Bakhtiyar, Abu Taghlib prevailed over Hamdan, who fled to Baghdad. In addition, Abu Taghlib used the conditions of near-anarchy prevailing in Syria at the time and after Sayf al-Dawla's death to expand his territory at the expense of his cousin, Sa'd al-Dawla. Upon Sayf al-Dawla's death, Abu Taghlib seized Raqqa and Rafiqa, and by 971 he had extended his control over all of Diyar Bakr and Diyar Mudar, once part of Sayf al-Dawla's domain, uniting the entire Jazira under his rule. Sa'd al-Dawla, deprived of his own capital and lacking any power to offer any resistance, tacitly accepted these losses as well as his cousin's suzerainty. As ruler of the Jazira, Abu Taghlib was one of the richest rulers of the region; Ibn Hawkal's descriptions attest to the wealth derived from the many Hamdanid estates, and Ibn Miskawayh, who was tasked with inventorying the family's mountain strongholds after the Buyid dissolution of the Hamdanid emirate in 979, writes of the immense cash reserves stored there.

Relations with the Buyids were initially good, as Abu Taghlib, unlike his father, had no direct claim on Baghdad, and Bakhtiyar himself was too preoccupied with affairs in Iraq and elsewhere to focus his attention on the Jazira. However, the Buyid prince offered refuge to Hamdan and other disgruntled members of the Hamdanid clan (including another of Abu Taghlib's brothers, Abu Tahir Ibrahim) and intervened in the Hamdanid family quarrels. Thus in 970 Hamdan was restored in Rahba thanks to Buyid pressure, only to be chased away again in 971. The exiled prince now urged Bakhtiyar to make war on Abu Taghlib: in 973 the Buyids once again occupied Mosul, while Abu Taghlib with his army outflanked them and threatened Baghdad. The conflict ended in a negotiated settlement in 974 that included in its provisions the award of the "laqab" of "ʿUddat al-Dawla" ("Instrument of the Dynasty") to Abu Taghlib by the caliph and the restoration of Hamdan to his domains. During the same period, Abu Taghlib also faced the attacks of the Byzantines, who under Emperor John I Tzimiskes penetrated deep into the Jazira, forcing the Hamdanids to pay tribute. The devastating raids of 972 were partly avenged through the defeat and capture of the Domestic of the Schools Melias at Amid in 973, but in 974 Tzimiskes himself raided the Jazira in retaliation.
In 973–975, Abu Taghlib supported Bakhtiyar in his own struggles to safeguard his power. Thus he once again marched on Baghdad during the rebellion of the Turkish military commander, Sabuktakin, although it was the intervention of the Buyid emir of Shiraz, 'Adud al-Dawla, that decided the conflict for Bakhtiyar. As a result of his assistance, in 975 Abu Taghlib secured a revision of the earlier treaty which freed him from the payment of tribute. In 976, following the death of Tzimiskes, Abu Taghlib agreed to support the bid for the Byzantine throne of the rebel general Bardas Skleros, with whom he concluded a treaty whereby the Hamdanid ruler supplied Skleros with light cavalry in exchange for an unspecified marriage agreement.

In 977, as Bakhtiyar found himself driven from Baghdad by the ambitious 'Adud al-Dawla, he turned again to the Hamdanids for aid. Abu Taghlib agreed to support him in exchange for the handing over of Hamdan, who was promptly executed. Although this secured Abu Taghlib's position in his family, it also brought him to the attention of 'Adud al-Dawla. In May 978, Bakhtiyar and Abu Taghlib were defeated in a battle near Samarra by 'Adud al-Dawla. Bakhtiyar himself was captured and executed at the orders of 'Adud al-Dawla, who then advanced on Mosul. Unlike earlier Buyid expeditions against the Hamdanids, that had failed chiefly because they were unable to sustain themselves in the Jazira, this was far better organized, as 'Adud al-Dawla brought along experienced administrators familiar with the area. The Buyids took Mosul and forced Abu Taghlib to flee to Mayyafariqin and then to the mountains of Armenia; while the Buyids laid siege to Mayyafariqin, he even visited Skleros in Byzantine territory in Anzitene, trying to secure his assistance, but in vain, for Skleros too was hard-pressed by the loyalist general Bardas Phokas. After the fall of Mayyafariqin in 978, Abu Taghlib fled to Rahba, from where he tried in vain to negotiate with 'Adud al-Dawla.

With the Buyid troops completing their conquest of the Jazira, and unable to seek aid from his cousin Sa'd al-Dawla, who had already acknowledged 'Adud al-Dawla's suzerainty and was under orders to arrest him, Abu Taghlib with his remaining followers crossed the Syrian Desert to the Fatimid-controlled south of Syria. There he became embroiled in the complex power struggles between the Fatimid government and local elites. He endeavoured to gain recognition by the Fatimids as governor of Damascus, but the rebel general al-Qassam, who held the city, repulsed him. Under attack by the Damascenes, and with members of his family starting to desert him, Abu Taghlib moved further south to the region of Lake Tiberias. Abu Taghlib's ambitions and his contacts with the Fatimids now came to threaten the position of Mufarrij ibn Daghfal ibn al-Jarrah, a Tayy chief and ruler of Ramla. Hoping to sow dissension among the Arab tribes of the area and strengthen Fatimid authority, the Fatimid general Fadl now promised Ramla to Abu Taghlib, who openly allied himself with Mufarrij's rivals, the Banu Uqayl, and attacked Ramla in August 979. Fadl's troops, however, came to the aid of Mufarrij, and in the ensuing battle on 29 August Abu Taghlib was taken captive and executed.

The Jazira remained under Buyid control until 989, when Abu Taghlib's brothers Abu Abdallah Husayn and Abu Tahir Ibrahim, who had submitted to the Buyids, were installed as governors to oppose the power of the Kurdish chieftain Badh, who had taken control of Mosul. In this fight, the two brothers relied upon the Uqaylis; after the defeat of Badh, the Banu Uqayl turned on the Hamdanids and deposed and killed Abu Tahir Ibrahim, establishing the Uqaylid Dynasty as the rulers of the Jazira.



</doc>
<doc id="36712959" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36712959" title="Ocean Village Marina, Gibraltar">
Ocean Village Marina, Gibraltar

The Ocean Village Marina is one of three marinas in the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar, at the southern end of the Iberian Peninsula. Formerly Sheppard's Marina, it is located in the Bay of Gibraltar, between the North Mole of Gibraltar Harbour and the runway of Gibraltar International Airport. Both Ocean Village Marina and the adjacent Marina Bay have been incorporated into the Ocean Village Project, a luxury resort.

Ocean Village Marina and the adjacent Marina Bay together have 330 berths, with a draft (or draught) of . The marina can accommodate vessels up to to in length. There are three residential towers with blue glass balconies overlooking the marina: Grand Ocean Plaza, Imperial Plaza, and Majestic Plaza. On 4 June 2012, Ocean Village Marina hosted 161 vessels which formed the Gibraltar Diamond Jubilee Flotilla, celebrating sixty years of the Queen's reign.

Gibraltar has three marinas: Marina Bay, Ocean Village Marina, and Queensway Quay Marina. Ocean Village Marina is located on Gibraltar's Westside, outside the northern end of Gibraltar Harbour, in the Bay of Gibraltar, next to the airport runway. It is adjacent to Marina Bay which is just to its north. The marina forms part of the Ocean Village Project or Ocean Village Marina Complex, often referred to as just Ocean Village. Ocean Village Marina is the former Sheppard's Marina or Sheppard's Yard. Both Marina Bay and Ocean Village Marina have been incorporated into Ocean Village, between the North Mole and the airport runway. The strategic location of the marina offers protection from moisture-laden Levanter winds.

Ocean Village Marina was formerly Sheppard's Marina, owned by H. Sheppard & Co. By 2004, the marina had been sold to Ocean Village Investments Ltd and demolition had commenced. The marina retained its original name, at least informally, for several years after the sale. The sale of Sheppard's Marina was not without controversy, as some residents of the marina were eventually evicted from their berths by the new owners. After Ocean Village Investments acquired the adjacent Marina Bay in 2006, both marinas were incorporated into Ocean Village, a resort with residential, retail, and leisure facilities.
On 4 June 2012, the Ocean Village Marina hosted 161 vessels which formed the Gibraltar Diamond Jubilee Flotilla, celebrating sixty years of the Queen's reign. The flotilla took place one day after a similar event in London up the Thames. The festivities started officially with greetings from Gregory Butcher, founder of Ocean Village, and Ros Astengo, event organiser of Ocean Village. The Gibraltar Port Authority addressed those assembled on the topic of safety, and made recommendations regarding precautions which ranged from sunscreen to the distance between vessels. The flotilla departed from the marina at midday, sailing from the western side of the runway, passing Europa Point, and returning after reaching the eastern side of the runway. Boats up to participated in the flotilla. Small boats led the flotilla, followed by power boats over , and, finally, sailing vessels. The "General Elliot", a Gibraltar Port Authority vessel, was at the head of the flotilla, and was supported by other official vessels.

Ocean Village Marina and the adjacent Marina Bay together have 330 berths, with a draft of . The marina can accommodate vessels up to to in length. The marina now offers premier berths, the majority of which are between and , although the largest can accommodate vessels up to in length. The Yacht Reporting Berth for Gibraltar closed in 2005 and customs clearance of vessels is now performed by the individual marinas. Each berth at Ocean Village Marina offers utilities which include metered water and electricity, as well as access to satellite television, telephone, fax, and Wi-Fi. Other amenities include laundry and concierge services. Gasoline and diesel are available at the quayside.

In addition to the marina, the Ocean Village resort features three residential towers, with blue glass balconies, that also have commercial space: Grand Ocean Plaza, Imperial Plaza, and Majestic Plaza. Construction of a new World Trade Center in Ocean Village was scheduled to begin in 2012. The development has a variety of restaurants, bars, and retail outlets, as well as executive office space. Leisure Island, on reclaimed land, has a business centre and casino, among other facilities.

Sheppard's of Gibraltar, the former owner of the marina which was established in 1961, still has a presence there. The business provides support services for yacht owners from both their chandlery and shipyard departments. Their chandlery shop on the ground floor of Marina Court at Ocean Village has a variety of products for yacht equipment and maintenance. Their shipyard on Coaling Island near Queensway Quay Marina performs repair services such as engine rebuilds, rigging, welding, and painting. Sheppard's attends to yachts at all three of Gibraltar's marinas, and also has a 40-ton lift when haul-outs are needed. Their haul-out work includes hull cleaning, replacement of anodes or transducers, and slurry blasting, among other services. Haul-outs are performed at both Coaling Island and the North Mole.




</doc>
<doc id="36721026" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36721026" title="Woodstock Library">
Woodstock Library

The Woodstock Library is a branch of the Multnomah County Library in southeast Portland, Oregon, United States. The library's origins date back to 1908, when the people of the Woodstock neighborhood established a reading room at the Woodstock Fire Station, which soon became one of fifteen "deposit stations" (packing crates that turned into two-shelf bookcases and could hold up to 50 books each). The Woodstock collection began as an assemblage of children's books and was housed within a public school. In 1911, the station was replaced by a "sub-branch" library offering more books for adults and children, but without the reference works and services available at regular branches. The collection moved into a larger facility in 1914, which became a full branch in 1917, offering additional resources and services.

The library occupied a series of temporary locations during the 1920s–'40s. Construction began on Woodstock's permanent library building in 1959. It was dedicated on June 1 the following year, the fourth community library built by Multnomah County. Until the mid-1990s the library was maintained as-is with only regular maintenance, though capacity strained as public use grew and new technologies demanded additional shelf space. In 1995, the City of Portland's Bureau of Planning released the "Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan", which included a policy to improve the branch and its services. In 1996, the county adopted a $28 million bond measure to renovate some branches and upgrade technology throughout the system. Given multiple issues with the existing building, including structural problems and non-compliance with building codes, Multnomah County Library determined reconstruction was necessary. The library was demolished in January 1999.

The current Woodstock Library building was completed in 2000. It has a "lantern-like" quality and has received multiple awards for its design. In addition to offering the Multnomah County Library catalog, which contains two million books, periodicals and other materials, the library houses collections in Chinese and Spanish and employs Chinese-speaking staff.

In 1906, the Multnomah County Library began distributing books to neighborhoods outside downtown Portland. A reading room was established in the Woodstock neighborhood's fire station building in 1908; later that year it was recognized as a branch of Multnomah County Library. Deposit stations, containing packing crates that turned into two-shelf bookcases holding up to 50 books each, were often set up within fire stations or private homes. Woodstock received its deposit station, a collection of children's books housed within a public school, in 1909, becoming one of fifteen outlying service areas. On May 16, 1911, the Woodstock deposit station was replaced by a sub-branch library, supplying more reading material for adults and children but without the reference works and other library services offered at regular branches. The collection was moved to a larger storefront facility, west of SE 44th on SE Woodstock Boulevard, on September 12, 1914. The library achieved full branch status in 1917, offering a collection and services comparable to other branches. In 1918, the Woodstock branch and several others were threatened with closure after employees received a $10 per month salary increase, but funding sources helped to defray the additional expense. Along with other county libraries, the branch closed between November 1 and November 16 in response to the 1918 flu pandemic.

During the 1920s–'40s the library occupied a series of temporary locations within rented storefronts. Library resources and services were used heavily by unemployed residents during the Great Depression as well as during and after World War II, as people requested information ranging from foreign locales to victory gardens to jobs. In the 1950s, responding to population changes and the rise in automobile use, Multnomah County Library divided the county into six regions, each of which had a single "Class A" branch offering extended operating hours and full services. Deposit stations and smaller branch libraries were to be eliminated or merged to house larger collections.

Multnomah County Library decided to consolidate the Woodstock and Sellwood-Moreland branches, both of which had struggled to operate in rented spaces for years. Construction of Woodstock's first permanent library building, located at 6008 SE 49th Avenue, began in 1959. The new library, measuring , was dedicated on June 1 the following year, the fourth community library built by Multnomah County. The president of the Library Association of Portland wrote in the organization's annual report: "Community response to this fine example of an adequate extension agency has been gratifying. This accelerated use fortifies the principle that excellent, strong book collections, strategically placed, provide economical and satisfactory extension [branch] service."

The library received regular maintenance and refurbishment from the 1970s through the mid-1990s, including repairs following a small fire. Capacity became strained as video and audiobook collections demanded additional shelf space and public use continued to grow. In 1995, the City of Portland's Bureau of Planning released the "Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan", which included a policy to enhance the branch. Objectives included promoting its use, upgrading the facility and its services, improving cyclist and pedestrian access, and strengthening its cultural and educational role within the community. In May 1996, Multnomah County voters passed a $28 million bond measure to renovate some branches and upgrade technology throughout the system. Multnomah County Library determined building reconstruction was necessary given multiple issues including electrical, lighting, mechanical, plumbing and structural problems, mold growth within the walls and underneath flooring, and non-compliance with earthquake engineering and Americans with Disabilities Act codes. Cost analysis revealed reconstruction was more effective than repairing the existing structure; additional factors included data and communications upgrades and the need for meeting space. Woodstock Library closed on January 17, 1999 and was demolished soon after. Many of its building materials were recycled or salvaged for reuse.

The current Woodstock Library building is at the intersection of one commercial street (SE Woodstock Boulevard) and one tree-lined residential street (SE 49th), which links to the Woodstock School and Woodstock Park. Measuring , it opened on March 14, 2000, the first branch within the Multnomah County Library system to undergo complete reconstruction. Architects were Folger Johnson and Donald Mayer as well as Thomas Hacker and Associates P.C. (also referred to as Thomas Hacker Architects Inc. or THA Architecture). Becca Cavell served as project architect, project manager and construction administrator. Some of the building's architectural features were designed by the engineering firm Degenkolb Engineers. Contractor services were provided by McCarthy Building Companies, Inc.

Designers had in mind a "lantern-like" quality for the library, "open, light and inviting". THA said the goal was to create a "feeling of openness and availability", with a focus on "books and people". Most of the library's collection is housed within a single large room level with the sidewalk outside. The building has an exposed gridded steel roof high, supported by six pairs of slender steel columns and lined with windows. From several column options, Degenkolb chose cantilevered columns designed in a cruciform shape, built from four steel angles measuring . The columns taper from the top and provide even distribution of loads, protecting the structure against wind and earthquakes without lateral bracing (or the need for supporting walls). The library features a 32-person capacity meeting room for hosting community events at no charge on a first come, first served basis. The building houses original artwork, including a work by Margot Voorhies-Thompson and, at the entrance, a 15-line poem by Kim Stafford titled "Open This Door of All Doors". The exterior includes 36 stainless steel panels etched with words depicting the history of books.

Kari Hauge became the first librarian of the new facility. In addition to offering the Multnomah County Library catalog of two million books, periodicals and other materials, the Woodstock Library houses collections in Chinese and Spanish and employs Chinese-speaking staff. Self-checkout stations and radio frequency identification gates were installed in July 2010.

The current building has received several design awards. In 2000, the American Institute of Steel Construction awarded Degenkolb with the I.D.E.A.S. Merit Award for quality structural engineering. Thomas Hacker Architects was presented with the 2002 AIA Regional Honor Award by the Northwest and Pacific Region of the American Institute of Architects through its Design Awards Program; jurors noted the library's "rigorous but poetic" structure and its "outstanding tectonic harmony, from the smallest scale of details to the basic design concept". The building also received the 2000 AIA Portland Chapter Honor Award, the 2000 Portland General Electric EarthSmart Award, the 2001 AIA American Library Association Award of Excellence (for its "simple and elegant design") and the 2002 Chicago Athenaeum American Architecture Award. The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America presented an award for the library's quality lighting design. Ginnie Cooper, director of libraries for Multnomah County, said of the recognition: "Library users love this building and we're pleased with how much the architectural community has applauded it as well."

The Woodstock Library became a model project for library branch reconstruction in the region. Other libraries designed and built by Thomas Hacker include the Beaverton City Library, the Belmont Library, the Bend Library and the Penrose Library (Whitman College).

Over the years both Woodstock Library buildings have hosted numerous activities, clubs, events and programs. According to the "Adopted Woodstock Neighborhood Plan", the Woodstock Library and Woodstock Community Center enhance the Village Center's role within the community as a "gathering place". Recent examples include appearances by actors and authors, a clown show, "conversation circles" for non-native English speakers, crafting, cultural celebrations, knitting groups, a mobile zoo, and neighborhood organization meetings and storytelling. The library has also hosted town hall meetings and served as a ballot drop-off site during elections.

Works cited



</doc>
<doc id="36804508" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36804508" title="Tricholoma vaccinum">
Tricholoma vaccinum

Tricholoma vaccinum, commonly known as the russet scaly tricholoma, the scaly knight, or the fuzztop, is a fungus of the agaric genus "Tricholoma". It produces medium-sized fruit bodies (mushrooms) that have a distinctive hairy reddish-brown cap with a shaggy margin when young. The cap, which can reach a diameter of up to wide, breaks up into flattened scales in maturity. It has cream-buff to pinkish gills with brown spots. Its fibrous, hollow stipe is white above and reddish brown below, and measures long. Although young fruit bodies have a partial veil, it does not leave a ring on the stipe.

Widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere, "Tricholoma vaccinum" is found in northern Asia, Europe and North America. The fungus grows in a mycorrhizal association with spruce or pine trees, and its mushrooms are found on the ground growing in groups or clusters in late summer and autumn. Although some consider the mushroom edible, it is of poor quality and not recommended for consumption. The ectomycorrhizae of "T. vaccinum" has been the subject of considerable research.

The species was first described in 1774 by German mycologist Jacob Christian Schäffer as "Agaricus vaccinus". According to MycoBank, synonyms include August Batsch's 1783 "Agaricus rufolivescens", Jean-Baptiste Lamarck's 1783 "Amanita punctata" var. "punctata", and Lucien Quélet's 1886 "Gyrophila vaccina". Marcel Bon described the variety "T. vaccinum" var. "fulvosquamosum" in 1970, which has squamules (minute scales) arranged in a concentric fashion on the cap; Manfred Enderle published this taxon as a form in 2004.

According to the infrageneric classification of "Tricholoma" proposed by Rolf Singer in 1986, "Tricholoma vaccinum" is placed in the section "Imbricata", subgenus "Tricholoma" in the genus "Tricholoma". "Imbricata" includes species with a dry cap cuticle, with a texture that ranges from roughened or squamulose (resembling suede) to almost smooth. The specific epithet derives from the Latin word "vaccinus" and means "cow-colored". The mushroom's common names include the "russet scaly tricholoma", "fuzztop", and "scaly knight".

The cap of "T. vaccinum" is initially broadly conical, then convex and finally flattened; its diameter is usually between . The cap margin is initially curved inwards, and shaggy from hanging remnants of the partial veil. The partial veil is cotton-like, and does not leave a ring on the stipe. The fibrous to scaly cap surface ranges in color from reddish-cinnamon to brownish-orange to tan. The gills have an adnate to sinuate attachment to the stipe, and are crowded closely together. There are between three and nine tiers of lamellulae—short gills that do not extend completely from the cap edge to the stipe. The gills are dingy white, and frequently stain reddish brown. The stipe is long and thick, and becomes hollow in age. It is roughly equal in width throughout its length and ranges in color from whitish to the same color as the cap, but lighter, and sometimes with reddish-brown stains; it is lighter in color near the apex. Like the cap, the stipe surface is fibrous to scaly. The odor of the fruit bodies is unpleasant.

The mushrooms produce a white spore print, and the spores are broadly elliptical, smooth, hyaline (translucent), inamyloid, measuring 6–7.5 by 4–5 μm. The basidia (spore-bearing cells) are four-spored, without clamps, and measure 17–32 by 6.0–7.5 μm. The hymenium lacks cystidia. The arrangement of the hyphae in the cap cuticle ranges from a cutis (with hyphae that run parallel to the cap surface) to a trichoderm (hyphae perpendicular to the cap surface); these hyphae are roughly cylindrical, and measure 3.5–8.0 μm wide, with roughly cylindrical to club-shaped ends that are 6.0–11.0 μm wide. There are no clamp connections in the hyphae of "T. vaccinum".

Although the fruit bodies are considered edible, they are of low quality, and generally not recommended for consumption due to their resemblance to and potential for confusion with toxic brown Tricholomas. Orson K. Miller, Jr. considers them "bitter and not edible". The fruit bodies can be used to create yellow dyes to color wool or other fibers.

With its reddish-brown wooly cap, white gills, and hollow stipe, "Tricholoma vaccinum" is a fairly distinct mushroom and is unlikely to be confused with other "Tricholoma". "Tricholoma imbricatum" somewhat resembles "T. vaccinum", but has duller brown colors, is less robust in stature, and has a solid (not hollow) stalk. Another lookalike, "T. inodermeum", has a less woolly cap texture and flesh that turns bright pinkish red when injured. It associates solely with pine species and prefers calcareous soil. Other brownish "Tricholoma" species include "T. fracticum", "T. dryophilum", and "T. muricatum". The scaly and fibrous cap surface of "T. vaccinum" might be confused with "Inocybe", but species in this genus can be distinguished by their brown spore prints.

"Tricholoma vaccinum" is a mycorrhizal species, and grows in association with coniferous trees, especially pine and spruce. It forms ectomycorrhizae that have been called "Medium-Distance fringe exploration type", indicative of the ectomycorrhiza's ecological role in space occupation in the soil, their possible reach regarding nutrient acquisition and their demand of carbohydrates that have to be invested by the trees for their fungal partners. Fruit bodies usually appear in groups or clusters on the ground, sometimes with moss. The fungus fruits in late summer and autumn. It is found in northern Asia, Europe, and, in North America, is widely distributed in the United States and Canada, and has also been recorded in Mexico. It is one of the most common species of "Tricholoma" in Central Europe, and is often found in large groups in spruce forests. It is rare in the United Kingdom, and most records have been from Scotland. The fungus may be extinct in the Netherlands.

The ectomycorrhizae of "T. vaccinum" has been the subject of considerable research. Ectomycorrhizae of "Tricholoma" species can vary considerably among species in the genus, and differences in the structure of rhizomorphs (a cordlike fusions of hyphae resembling a root) have been used to key out species. Mycorrhizae formed with Norway spruce ("Picea abies") are conspicuously hairy with numerous hyphae. The hyphae are partly densely interconnected to rhizomorphs that have a pigment in their outer membrane. The emanating hyphae mostly lack "contact septae" (fully developed simple septae) and contact clamps, and the rhizomorph hyphae vary markedly in diameter. The Hartig net (a network of hyphae that extend into the root) formed by "T. vaccinum" grows more deeply towards the epidermis, is composed of more rows of hyphae and has more tannin cells in close proximity to the epidermis, and consequently, fewer cortical cells in this position. It is here that the rhizomorphs make the closest contact with the rootlets. The mantle is prosenchymatous, meaning that the constituent hyphae are loosely organized with spaces between them. A combination of techniques including freeze fracturing and scanning electron microscopy has been used to probe the microstructure of the ectomycorrhizae, including inner mantle thickness and the nature of the interface between the Hartig net and host cells. Several fungal genes specifically expressed during ectomycorrhizal interaction between "T. vaccinum" and "Picea abies" have been identified, including some involved in a plant pathogen response, nutrient exchange and growth in the plant, signal transduction, and stress response. The first characterized fungal aldehyde dehydrogenase enzyme, ALD1, helps circumvent ethanol stress—a critical function in mycorrhizal habitats.



</doc>
<doc id="36840228" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36840228" title="Shahid (film)">
Shahid (film)

Shahid is a 2013 Indian Hindi-language biographical drama film directed by Hansal Mehta. Jointly produced by Anurag Kashyap, UTV Spotboy and Sunil Bohra, it is based on the life of lawyer and human rights activist Shahid Azmi, who was assassinated in 2010. The film stars Rajkummar Rao in the titular role; Mohammed Zeeshan Ayyub, Prabhleen Sandhu and Baljinder Kaur appear in supporting roles.

Mehta took a break after some of his films were box-office failures. When he heard about Azmi's murder, he felt the need to make a film about his life. He began his research for the film nearly three months after Azmi's murder. Mehta met writer Sameer Gautam Singh, who wrote the screenplay after researching Azmi's life and spending months interviewing Azmi's family. Apurva Asrani did additional work on the screenplay with Mehta and also served as the film's editor. Anuj Dhawan was the director of photography.

"Shahid" had its world premiere at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival's City to City programme in 2012. It was screened at several other film festivals including the 14th Mumbai Film Festival, the New York Indian Film Festival, the Indian Film Festival of Stuttgart, the Dubai International Film Festival and the Chicago South Asian Film Festival. The film was awarded the Silver Gateway Trophy at the Mumbai film festival while Mehta won the Best Director award. Mehta also won the best director award at New York Indian Film Festival and at the Indian Film Festival of Stuttgart. It was released theatrically in India on 18 October 2013 and met with critical acclaim. Rao received the Best Actor Award and Mehta the Best Director Award at the 61st National Film Awards ceremony.

Shahid Azmi and his family are terrorised during the Bombay riots, when hundreds of Muslims died. Later he goes to Kashmir and spends a brief period at a militant training camp but soon returns after witnessing an execution. He moves back to Mumbai where he is arrested under the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, for an alleged conspiracy to assassinate some politicians. His brother Arif Azmi tries to bail him out but fails. Shahid is tortured by police and forced to admit to the crime, after which he spends seven years at Tihar Jail in New Delhi. During his incarceration Omar Sheikh tries to brainwash him. Another inmate, Ghulam Navi Waar, inspires him to begin his college education, and once he is acquitted of the charges, he studies law in Mumbai.

After receiving his law degree, Shahid works with lawyer Maqbool Memon for a few months, before starting his career as an independent lawyer with the financial support of his elder brother Arif. During this process he meets Mariam, a Muslim divorcee, and marries her. Shahid soon starts picking up cases of Muslims charged under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA). He fights many cases pro bono in consultation with non-governmental organizations. Shahid's first major success as a defence lawyer is winning an acquittal, due to lack of evidence, for Arif Paanwala who was arrested under POTA for the 2002 Mumbai bus bombing.

Shahid represents the accused in the 2006 Mumbai train bombings, the 2006 Aurangabad arms haul, and the 2006 Malegaon bombings case. He is criticised for supporting terrorists and starts getting threatening calls that disturb his family life. On one occasion, Shahid's face is blackened by assailants outside the court room. While defending Faheem Ansari in the 2008 Mumbai attacks case, he is shot by two gunmen in his office and dies on the spot. Later, Ansari is shown to be acquitted of all charges by the Supreme Court of India due to lack of evidence.


In an interview with Priyanka Pereira of "The Wall Street Journal", director Hansal Mehta said that he needed a break after some of his films proved to be a box-office failures, like "Woodstock Villa" (2007) and "Raakh" (2010). On 11 February 2010, lawyer Shahid Azmi was shot dead in his office in Mumbai at the age of 32. He had represented those accused of the 2006 Mumbai train bombings, the 2006 Malegaon bombings and while he was defending Faheem Ansari in the 2008 Mumbai attacks case, he was killed. Azmi was arrested during the communal riots of 1992-1993 in Mumbai and later studied law and began defending people arrested on false charges. The lawyer secured 17 acquittals in his seven-year career. Mehta said that when he heard about Azmi's murder, he had a sense that the tale of his life could pull his "creativity out of the rut". He felt that Azmi lived an "ordinary life, with extraordinary conviction to do what he believed was right" and that his story "had to be told". Mehta began his research nearly three months after Azmi's murder. He later met writer Sameer Gautam Singh, who approached Mehta with a script. Mehta said he could not make a film with the script and asked him if he was would co-write another script with him. Singh agreed, and Mehta sent him along with his son Jai Mehta to Azmi's hometown to meet his family. They interviewed his family members and friends for two months. Mehta chose not to go with them as he feared that on seeing a filmmaker, Azmi's family and friends would "alter the version" of his life.

Both Mehta and Singh read several of Azmi's cases for the story. Mehta noticed that they were written in simple English that could be understood by anyone: "It told me he was a no-nonsense guy. He wanted to fight the battle and not beat around the bush." Mehta and Singh also met his colleagues, attended court sessions, petitions, litigations and learned how to get a client acquitted. Mehta later went to seek permission to make the film to the family members who expressed their skepticism about the project. Later, they agreed and talked to him about Azmi. The film focused on Azmi's beginnings and two cases he handled: the 2006 Mumbai train blasts and the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks. Mehta combined several of Azmi's petitions into a single case for "clarity and dramatic impact".

Mehta said he was looking for "big stars" for the film, but most were not interested because of his earlier failures. At the time, the film's co-producer Anurag Kashyap suggested he cast Rajkummar Rao thinking he was perfect for the role of Azmi. Later, casting director Mukesh Chhabra sent Rao to Mehta's office. Mehta cast him after a screen test. Mehta felt Rao "surrendered himself completely" to the film. In preparing for the role, Rao met Azmi's family and spent time with them to understand the man and his personality. He also studied the Quran and attended courtrooms to understand how lawyers behave. Rao said he was "emotionally drained" as the character was challenging and complex. In the scenes where he had to cry, Rao said he could not stop himself, thinking about what Azmi had to go through.

Tigmanshu Dhulia, Prabhleen Sandhu, Kay Kay Menon and Mohammed Zeeshan Ayyub played supporting roles in the film. Vivek Ghamande played the role of Faheem Ansari while Baljinder Kaur of Ammi.

"Shahid" was made on a production budget of and filmed in complete secrecy. It was shot in several Mumbai neighbourhoods Azmi had frequented including Kurla, Govandi and Pydhonie. Mehta chose to shoot in the apartment above Azmi's ground floor residence in the Taximen's Colony as he wanted to "capture the sense of claustrophobia and unkemptness of his home". Some portions of the film were shot in Azmi's office and his colony. "Shahid" was also shot in Nagpada, where Faheem Ansari's wife Yasmin lives. The scenes in the terrorist training camp were shot in Himachal Pradesh.

Mehta decided to depict realistic court scenes based on his team's observation of real courts. They visited the Andheri Court and the Esplanade Court among others, taking photographs to recreate the ambience for the courtroom scenes. Courtroom sets were built because filming in an actual court is not permitted. The scene where Azmi's face is blackened by assailants outside a courtroom was a re-enactment of an incident from Mehta's own life. In 2000, members of Shiv Sena who were protesting against Mehta's drama film "Dil Pe Mat Le Yaar!!" attacked him and vandalised his office.

The film's unit consisted of about 17 people because of budget and time constraints; it was made on a budget of . The film was shot linearly on a non-linear draft. Mehta said it was filmed guerilla style using all "available digital formats without really worrying about which lens was available". The filmmaker used only natural or minimal lighting. For an interrogation scene, Rao suggested Mehta show him naked as he wanted to "feel the embarrassment, the mental pain of the character." The film's editor, Apurva Asrani, edited the film in a linear order as he felt an earlier version was "not working". Mehta ultimately decided to give him a screenplay credit as he felt Asrani "shaped the narrative" of the film.

"Shahid" was jointly produced by Kashyap, UTV Spotboy and Sunil Bohra. Azmi had defended Kashyap's film "Black Friday" (2007) in the courts while it was debarred from release by the Central Board of Film Certification. Anuj Dhawan served as the film's director of photography.
Mehta said that they had a lot of material they did not use as "not all of it could translate into a scene"; he wanted the film to be more accessible. Azmi's brother Khalid Azmi said of the film's authenticity that "it is 95 percent accurate."

"Shahid" premiered at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival in its "City to City" programme in September 2012. The film was screened at several film festivals including the 14th Mumbai Film Festival, the New York Indian Film Festival, the Indian Film Festival of Stuttgart, the Dubai International Film Festival and the Chicago South Asian Film Festival. The film's album soundtrack consisted of one song titled "Beparwah", sung by Arijit Singh. The music was composed by Karan Kulkarni. The film's poster, which showed Rao's blackened face, was also released. The official trailer was unveiled on 20 September 2013. The film opened in India on 18 October 2013 around 400 screens. A private screening of the film was held for the cast and crew before its release.

"Shahid" opened to small audiences in theatres and earned a total of . It went on to take in at the end of its first weekend. The film performed well with multiplex audiences compared to single screens. It collected on the fifth day, on the sixth, and seventh day. The film's total box office collection at the end of its theatrical run was .

Rao received the Best Actor Award and Mehta the Best Director Award at the 61st National Film Awards ceremony. Rao also won the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actor at the 59th Filmfare Awards. At the 14th Mumbai International Film Festival, the film won the Silver Gateway trophy and cash prize of while Mehta won the Best Director award. Mehta won the Best Director award at the New York Indian Film Festival and at the Indian Film Festival of Stuttgart.

"Shahid" received mostly positive reviews from the critics with particular praise for Rao's performance. Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV called it a "gritty, gutsy, bold and brave" film that articulates "uncomfortable truths about contemporary India, its media, its judiciary and, of course, its people." Sify's Sonia Chopra gave a positive review, writing that the film "salutes the man who walked a unique path" and does "full justice to the man and his extraordinary life." Rajeev Masand wrote in his review: "The film itself is brave and unflinching, and oozes the kind of sincerity that you long for in most Hindi films." Madhureeta Mukherjee of "The Times of India" said the film is "brutally honest, brave and above all a fascinating humane story". Trisha of "Firstpost" believed Mehta's directorial style echoed "Azmi's own commitment to a truth in which thoughtless actions produce victims, rather than villainy producing heroes."

Shubhra Gupta of "The Indian Express" mentioned in her review that the film "needed to have been made" and Mehta "tells it straight, without any false flourishes". She also praised Rao's performance, saying he "wears the character like skin, and becomes Shahid." "India Today"s Suhani Singh gave a positive review, writing the film "stops short of hero worship and is a fitting tribute to an inspiring figure." Anupama Chopra praised Rao's performance in the film and called it his "triumph, [..] his "Shahid" has strength, anguish and a controlled anger, but also real charm." Vinayak Chakravorty of "India Today" noted it as a "career-defining role" for Rao and the "biggest reason you will love this unusual film." Baradwaj Rangan felt the film was a "deeply humanistic drama" which "makes us think, but more often, it makes us feel." "Mid Day"s Shubha Shetty Saha wrote: "Not often do we get the opportunity to watch a relevant movie that depicts the times we live in, with unblinking directness."

Prasanna D Zore of Rediff.com called it a "gutsy and thought-provoking film", she added that it is not an "in your face film": "It is a subtle, thought-provoking and gutsy story of a person who believed in the power of truth and justice yet knew that the path he had taken was strewn with risks, indifference and ignominy." Saurav Datta of "Daily News and Analysis" opined the film was "incomplete" without showing Azmi's younger brother's role as he took over his job; he felt the film also concluded with an "abrupt, grinding halt". "Mint"s Sanjukta Sharma called it an "admirable project" and praised Rao's performance but stated the film fell "short of a masterpiece" as a biopic. Namrata Joshi felt that the film "portrays the psyche of the Indian Muslim in the changing, increasingly polarised India with warmth and simplicity." Reuters Shilpa Jamkhandikar responded positively to the film and praised Rao's performance: "As Shahid, Raj Kumar injects the right amount of earnestness, anger and vulnerability into his role, to make this one of the best performances we have seen this year." Journalist and writer Rana Ayyub said that the film was a "brave and worthy tribute to [Azmi's] work and courage."

Among overseas reviewers, Omer M. Mozaffar of RogerEbert.com praised Mehta's direction and called his work a "pleasant surprise": "the lack of polish at first seems like a film school weakness, but grows into a well-crafted asset, especially in his deliberate fades to black." Rachel Saltz of "The New York Times" gave a positive review writing: "[Mehta] has made a film of conviction that’s neither plodding nor preachy." However, Saltz felt the second half of the film was "truncated and overstuffed". Mohammad Kamran Jawaid of "Dawn", gave the film a positive review writing that the two-hour time constraint "means there's little room for the traditional expansion we get from biopics, and if at times "Shahid" feels like an expanded best-of Mr. Azmi's life, it's because it is".

"Shahid" was mentioned in critic and author Shubhra Gupta's book, "50 Films That Changed Bollywood, 1995-2015".



</doc>
<doc id="36860986" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36860986" title="Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.">
Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.

Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., or simply Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., is an American television series created for ABC by Joss Whedon, Jed Whedon, and Maurissa Tancharoen, based on the Marvel Comics organization S.H.I.E.L.D. (Strategic Homeland Intervention, Enforcement, and Logistics Division), a fictional peacekeeping and spy agency in a world of superheroes. It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise. The series is produced by ABC Studios, Marvel Television, and Mutant Enemy Productions, with Jed Whedon, Tancharoen, and Jeffrey Bell serving as showrunners.

The series revolves around the character of Phil Coulson, with Clark Gregg reprising his role from the film series, and his team of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents, who must deal with various unusual cases and enemies, including Hydra, the Inhumans, Life Model Decoys, and alien species such as the Kree. Joss Whedon began developing a S.H.I.E.L.D. pilot following the success of his film "The Avengers", and Gregg was confirmed to reprise his role in October 2012. The series was officially picked up by ABC in May 2013, and also stars Ming-Na Wen, Brett Dalton, Chloe Bennet, Iain De Caestecker and Elizabeth Henstridge, with Nick Blood, Adrianne Palicki, Henry Simmons, Luke Mitchell, John Hannah, Natalia Cordova-Buckley, and Jeff Ward joining in later seasons. Prosthetic makeup is created with Glenn Hetrick's Optic Nerve Studios, while Legacy Effects contributes other practical effects. The visual effects for the series are created by FuseFX, and have been nominated for multiple awards. Several episodes directly crossover with films or other television series set in the MCU, while other characters from MCU films and Marvel One-Shots also appear throughout the series.

The first season originally aired from September 24, 2013, to May 13, 2014, while the second season aired from September 23, 2014, to May 12, 2015. A third season premiered on September 29, 2015, concluding on May 17, 2016, and the fourth season premiered on September 20, 2016, and concluded on May 16, 2017. A fifth season of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." premiered on December 1, 2017 and concluded on May 18, 2018. In May 2018, the series was renewed for a sixth season, intended to premiere in May 10, 2019. In November 2018, ahead of the sixth season's release, the series was renewed for a seventh season. After starting the first season with high ratings but mixed reviews, the ratings began to drop while reviews improved. This led to much lower but more consistent ratings, as well as more consistently positive reviews in the subsequent seasons.

Several characters created for the series have since been introduced to the comic universe and other media. A spin-off series, centered on Blood and Palicki's characters Lance Hunter and Bobbi Morse and titled "Marvel's Most Wanted", received a pilot order in August 2015, but it was ultimately passed on in May 2016. An online digital series, "", centered on Elena "Yo-Yo" Rodriguez, was launched in December 2016 on ABC.com.
The first season sees S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Phil Coulson putting together a small team of S.H.I.E.L.D. agents to handle strange new cases. They investigate Project Centipede and its leader, "The Clairvoyant", eventually uncovering that the organization is backed by Hydra, which has infiltrated S.H.I.E.L.D. In the second season, following , now-Director Coulson and his team look to restore trust from the government and public while dealing with Hydra, a faction of anti-superhuman S.H.I.E.L.D. agents, and the newly revealed Inhumans (who possess special abilities).

During the third season, Coulson begins a secret mission to assemble the Secret Warriors, a team of Inhumans, as Hydra restores its ancient Inhuman leader Hive to power. After the defeat of Hive and with Hydra destroyed, S.H.I.E.L.D. is made a legitimate organization once again with the signing of the Sokovia Accords. In the fourth season, Coulson returns to being a field agent, due to the world believing he is dead, and is tasked with tracking down more enhanced people including Robbie Reyes / Ghost Rider. In addition, Agent Leo Fitz and Holden Radcliffe complete their work on the Life Model Decoy project as well as the development of the Framework. The fifth season sees Coulson and members of his team mysteriously abducted to the space station Lighthouse run by the Kree in the year 2091, where they must try to save the remnants of humanity while figuring out how to get home. After returning home, where they are labeled fugitives, Coulson and his team work to ensure the future they saw does not come to pass.

Jeff Ward was promoted to series regular for the sixth season after previously recurring as Deke Shaw.

After The Walt Disney Company purchased Marvel Entertainment in 2009, they announced that a Marvel Television division was being formed under Jeph Loeb. In the following months, various pilots based on comics from Marvel's catalog went into development. In July 2012, Marvel Television entered into discussions with ABC to make a new series set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, though at that point it was undecided what it would be. The series was described as "'a kernel of an idea' with a number of scenarios being explored, including a high-concept cop show." The next month, it was announced that "Marvel's The Avengers" director Joss Whedon, creator of other television shows such as "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and "Firefly", would be involved in the series' development.

In August 2012, ABC ordered a pilot for a series called "S.H.I.E.L.D." to be written and directed by Joss Whedon, with Jed Whedon and Maurissa Tancharoen also writing. Disney CEO Bob Iger greenlit the series after watching the Marvel One-Shot short film "Item 47". In April 2013, ABC announced that the series would be titled "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.", and it was officially picked up for a full season of 22 episodes in May 2013. Jed Whedon, Tancharoen, and Jeffrey Bell act as the series' showrunners, with Bell joining the show to help the inexperienced former pair with hiring crew members and "navigating the politics of studios and networks", saying, "My job is to help them learn how to do that, to steer the ship while they learn." Joss Whedon assisted them before he started work on "".

The series was renewed for a second season in May 2014, a third in May 2015, a fourth in March 2016, a fifth in May 2017, and a sixth in May 2018. ABC Entertainment president Channing Dungey said the sixth season was not planned to serve as the series' final season, adding that by moving the season to air in mid-2019 would allow ABC to "super-serve the show's audience and possibly have it on the air longer." That November, ABC renewed the series for a seventh season.

In September 2016, discussing the eventual end of the series, Tancharoen said, "You always just forge ahead. Until someone tells us to stop, we will continue to move forward." Jed Whedon added, "There are always ideas in the back of your mind for how you'd wrap it up when they say, 'That's it guys,' but we're not there just yet." By May 2017, Bell noted they had "a sense of how we'd like the show to end when it ends. We just need to know when that time is coming so we can build to it properly." Jed Whedon continued, "Our goal is to know ahead of time, because we would love to land the story in a way that's satisfying".

Bell explained that he, Jed Whedon, and Tancharoen supervise all of the series' creative decisions, often consulting with Loeb. When the showrunners are writing the series, one person can write a script while the other two break stories, so that a story can be broken every few weeks. If the executive producers sign off on a story, a member of the series' writers room then produces an outline, gets notes on it from the showrunners, writes a full script, gets notes on it from ABC and the production crew, and then goes to set to produce the episode.

In January 2013, Joss Whedon deflected any direct influences from other series, such as the efforts of Fox Mulder and Dana Scully in "The X-Files", and explained that while the show would involve people with powers and the spectacle of science-fiction storytelling, it would focus on "the peripheral people...the people on the edges of the grand adventures." As the series began to introduce more powered individuals, Bell noted that audiences "seem to respond to powered people on the show and while it's not going to take over and become what the show's about, as a texture and flavor of the stories, we really enjoy that." Jed Whedon stated that the series would continue to emphasize the general public's response to powered people, saying, "The dynamic in the world has changed. There was one person with powers, and then by "The Avengers" there were maybe six total ... now they're much more prevalent, so there's reaction from the public based on that."

On the balance between creating new material and drawing from existing mythology, Bell noted that telling stories that can entertain both Marvel fans and non-Marvel fans is challenging, and that for the series they try to add nods to the MCU films or the comics in a way that works well on its own for all viewers, but could also mean more for a fan. On where the series can draw from the comics, Jed Whedon explained that there are areas of the comics that the series is not allowed to go to, and that ultimately they only use the comics for inspiration in generating their own story. Tancharoen elaborated that, "We're always going to be inspired and influenced by the comics, but of course on the show, we'll always be doing our spin to it." About comparisons between the scope of the series and that of the films, Bell said that ABC and Marvel had been very generous with the series' budget, and that the production could not complain for a network series, but that it was nothing compared to the films or even series like "Game of Thrones". He explained that the series does attempt to create "Marvel moments" as best it can, but pointed out that some of the more memorable moments from the films are smaller, character moments—something that works really well on television—so the series strives for those when it cannot afford more scope and scale. Jed Whedon elaborated that they look at a sequence and try to keep only what is required to tell the story, so "If a monster is landing on a car, instead of showing the whole monster leaping through the skyline, we want to be in the car with the character having that experience."
In September 2015, Bell looked back on the first two seasons and talked about the challenges of and changes in the series. He noted the negative reception from fans concerning the low number of recognizable characters like Coulson, but pointed out that fans seemed to have grown to like the series' original characters as they had been developed over time. He explained that with the increasing number of characters and complex relationships in the series, having different pairings and building new emotional relationships was important, and stated that "whether it's a quiet moment or in action, we [hope to] deepen the audience's love and concern, and hopes for these characters." A year later he reiterated the producer's intention to create a tradition moving forward of "finding new combinations and new conflicts" between different sets of characters, given "a lot of procedurals [see] the same people doing the same thing for five years and the character don't evolve or change at all."

The producers and writers initially formed a general plan for the show through the end of a third season, after reading the screenplays for upcoming MCU films. In May 2016, Chloe Bennet likened the end of the third season to "the end of the first book of S.H.I.E.L.D. ... the end of something bigger and the beginning of a whole new tone for the show." She elaborated that "the storylines that we started at the beginning of season 1 really wrapped up at the end of season 3. We've had some major losses of people who have been with us on the show since season 1. From the table read to the first day on set, there's definitely a new energy of the show" moving forward. The series was moved to the later timeslot of 10 pm for the fourth season. Jed Whedon said the writers hoped to "skew a little darker because of" this change, with Loeb adding that "It absolutely offers opportunities. I don't know that it changes things all that dramatically [though]. I mean, at the end of the day, Marvel is always going to make shows that run somewhere between PG-13 and PG-16. We're not going to be making "Deadpool" anytime soon on [ABC]." Marvel "had a long talk with ABC about what can we get away with, so to speak" in the new timeslot, which led to the inclusion of Ghost Rider in the season over one of Marvel's Netflix series, because Marvel felt "that this character was right to tell [darker and more violent] stories right now" and having him on "S.H.I.E.L.D." aided that because "it was so unexpected". Loeb hoped that the combination of the later timeslot and the introduction of Ghost Rider would lead to some viewers who had stopped watching the series over the previous seasons giving it another chance.

In May 2017, ahead of the fifth season renewal, Jed Whedon said the writers were not sure what would happen in the season, and that it would be "by the seat of our pants." While beginning to write the final episode of season 5 at the end of February 2018, the writers were planning for it to be able to serve as both a season and series finale, with some elements that could be adjusted based on whether the series was renewed for a sixth season or not. Whedon added, "we're ready for if this is the end. We're definitely going to make it rewarding either way."

In October 2012, a casting sheet for five lead roles was sent out. At the New York Comic Con, Joss Whedon, Kevin Feige, and Clark Gregg announced that Gregg would be reprising his role as agent Phil Coulson from "Iron Man", "Iron Man 2", "Thor", "The Avengers", and the Marvel One-Shots in the pilot, and would "headline" the series. Actress Ming-Na Wen was cast as Melinda May. The next month, Elizabeth Henstridge and Iain De Caestecker were cast as Jemma Simmons and Leo Fitz, respectively, while newcomer Brett Dalton was cast as Grant Ward. In December, Chloe Bennet was chosen out of more than 400 actresses to play Skye, the sixth and final regular for the first season; the character is revealed in the second season to be Daisy Johnson, and no longer goes by "Skye" starting with the third.

At San Diego Comic-Con 2014, Nick Blood was announced as cast in the role of Lance Hunter for the second season, while the character of Bobbi Morse was revealed to be appearing. That August, Henry Simmons joined the cast as Alphonso "Mack" MacKenzie, a recurring role, and Adrianne Palicki was cast as Morse in a guest role, to first appear in the episode "A Hen in the Wolf House". The next month, the entire first season principal cast were confirmed to be regulars for the second season, along with Blood. Palicki joined them with the episode "Aftershocks". In February 2015, Luke Mitchell was cast as Lincoln Campbell, a recurring role for the second half of the season.

All season two principal cast members returned for the third season, with Simmons and Mitchell joining them, promoted from their recurring roles. In October 2015, the Inhuman Hive was introduced; for the second part of season three, he possesses the corpse of Grant Ward, again portrayed by Brett Dalton. Also introduced were Natalia Cordova-Buckley and John Hannah, recurring as Elena "Yo-Yo" Rodriguez and Holden Radcliffe, respectively. Blood and Palicki left the main cast following the season three episode "Parting Shot", to star in the then-planned spin-off show "Marvel's Most Wanted". Dalton and Mitchell also left following the deaths of their characters in the third-season finale.

Gregg, Wen, Bennet, De Caestecker, Henstridge, and Simmons returned for the fourth and fifth seasons. They were joined by Hannah in the fourth, with Cordova-Buckley once again recurring as Rodriguez in the season, before being promoted to a series regular for the fifth season. Dalton returned as a guest during the third pod of the fourth season, while Blood made his return to the series during the fifth season. Introduced in the fifth season was Jeff Ward, who recurred as Deke Shaw.

Wen, Bennet, De Caestecker, Henstridge, Simmons, and Cordova-Buckley return for the sixth and seventh seasons, and were joined by Ward. Given the events of the final episode of season five, in which it is implied that Coulson dies, Gregg noted "there is some interest in having me involved in" the sixth season, potentially with flashback, and was also unsure if he would be a series regular, should he return, as he had been for the previous five seasons. With the announcement of the season seven renewal, Gregg was not listed among the returning cast for that season.

Betsy Heimann was the costume designer for the pilot, but left the series due to film commitments. Assistant costume designer Ann Foley took over for subsequent episodes, and worked closely with Tancharoen to create "very strong, different characters" whose "looks evolve along with the show." Foley also brought on concept artists Phillip Boutte Jr. and Josh Shaw to assist with the design process. Foley watched every MCU film, paying special attention to "The Avengers", and was also inspired by such films as "Skyfall" and "". In October 2016, Foley said that she was specifically following the aesthetic of "", "So any costume has to fit inside that world we've established and has to fit that tactical look." On the variety of costumes created for each character, Foley preferred to have set pieces in the characters' "closets", as "it's not a fashion show ... a guy like Ward isn't going to have twenty jackets in his closet. He is going to have one that he uses all of the time."

After reading each script, Foley would do her own research, before discussing the look of the episode with the writers. She then studies the comics, general fashion, and history to get a look that is recognizable to fans, but fits into the more realistic world of the series. Costumes are either custom made or bought, and the actors are brought in for fittings before filming. This process was often challenging due to the series' eight-day-per-episode schedule. Foley stated that all costumes take a similar amount of time to create, whether they are based on the comics or not. Marvel CCO Joe Quesada is involved in the approval process when costuming preexisting characters, including Daisy Johnson's Quake costume that is introduced in the third season. The Quake costume incorporates elements from the comic version of the character, and was intended to show that Quake "could easily be part of the Avengers". Foley took steps to differentiate the Quake costume from Scarlett Johansson's Black Widow costumes from the films, but was "flattered" by comparisons made between them. Foley was also adamant about not sexualising characters such as Quake to show that "these characters don't have to be sexualised, that they're powerful, strong women", and so avoided "a lot of cleavage, you don't see high heels. It's about practicality."

The costumes go through a natural evolution in the series. There is a shift at the end of the first season to a darker look, and all the characters have "definitely grown up" during the second season. In the third season there is another shift, "from the ragtag group of soldiers and scientists to [a] more precise militaristic outfit". This change is also reflected in the series' color palette, going from "a much lighter tone, much more patterns" in the first season to having "stripped away a bit of color" by the third. Despite this increasing darkness in the costumes, Foley intended to define each character as they are introduced and to have them always be recognizable and identifiable. With the start of the fourth season, Foley said that "each season definitely has its own feel and this season will be no different. I think that you're going to see some subtle differences in the costumes of the characters"; she felt like Fitz and Simmons, in particular, had become "more adult looking", while all the cast had "a pretty specific ... civilian look" that would become more prominent as S.H.I.E.L.D. is re-legitimized and becomes more public. Foley left the series after the thirteenth episode of the fourth season, to work on a television adaptation of "Altered Carbon", and was replaced with Amanda Riley. Riley used her previous experience recreating costumes to "blend in" with Foley's established look.

Foley returned for the first two episodes of the fifth season, before handing over to Whitney Galitz, who had assisted Foley on the previous few seasons, and Christann Chanell.

The series' props department is led by Scott Bauer. The pilot introduces the Incapacitating Cartridge Emitting Railgun or ICER tranquilizer weapons often used by the agents, with Joss Whedon having Bauer design "sci-fi" looking guns including a large rifle-like weapon. The series further portrayal of the ICERs was more subtle, with Bauer using airsoft guns that are safe to shoot others with over a small distance. ICER-specific muzzle flashes are then added by the visual effects department. Bauer reused the ICER rifle prop when making Mack's "Shotgun Ax", which appears in later seasons. The terrigen crystals that unlock Inhuman abilities in the series are 3D-printed from solid resin and then altered with extra details. Additional practical effects and props are created by Legacy Effects, who also work on the MCU films, notably creating Daisy Johnson's gauntlets for the third season. Prosthetic makeup for the series is designed in conjunction with Glenn Hetrick of Optic Nerve Studios. Hetrick began work on the series with the second season, to create Raina's Inhuman look, and returned for the third season to design and create the more "unique"-looking Inhumans such as Lash.

The third season introduces a new title sequence for the series, replacing the one that appeared in the first two seasons. The title sequence in "4,722 Hours" is drastically different from the design introduced for the third season, with the series' title in the episode's typeface silently fading onto the screen over the back drop of the planet Simmons is stranded on. The fourth season sees new series title cards for the "Ghost Rider" and "LMD" pods, and an "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." title card for the "Agents of Hydra" pod that changes to say "Agents of Hydra" for episodes primarily set in the Framework. The "Ghost Rider" graphic is used again for the fourth-season finale. For the fifth season, the opening of "Orientation" is reminiscent of the sequence for "4,722 Hours", forgoing the title card and having the typeface silently fading onto the screen. The subsequent episodes of season five feature a title card with the series name in a new typeface against a backdrop of various depictions of Earth: episodes through "Past Life" feature a destroyed future Earth; episodes from "Principa" through "The Devil Complex" feature a present Earth; while episodes from "Rise and Shine" through "All Roads Lead..." feature the Earth beginning to crack.

Production for the pilot took place almost entirely in Los Angeles to accommodate Joss Whedon's schedule, while the rest of the series is primarily filmed in Culver City, California. Additional filming has also taken place around the world, including in Paris, France, Stockholm, Sweden, and Old San Juan, Puerto Rico. The series is filmed on Arri Alexa cameras, with David Boyd serving as director of photography on the pilot, and Feliks Parnell, Jeff Mygatt, and Allan Westbrook doing so throughout the rest of the series. Garry Brown is the second unit director for the series, with stunts coordinated by Tanner Gill. The series is filmed in 2K resolution.

FuseFX serves as the lead visual effects vendor for "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.", with additional work by Pixomondo, Cosa, Greenhaus GFX, Lion VFX, and Synaptic. The series sees an average of 80 to 150 visual effects shots per episode, with 10 to 12 days to work on the effects for one episode once background plates have been received from filming. This equates to approximately 2000 visual effects shots per season. Mark Kolpack serves as visual effects supervisor for the series. David Altenau was the in-house supervisor at FuseFX for "Pilot" through episode eight, with Kevin Lingenfelser taking over for subsequent episodes. VFX producer Andrea D'Amico joined the team at FuseFX to work on the series in December 2015. Two separate production management and creative teams were established to work on the show, and producers, compositors and various artists were able to alternate episodes. This was important because most of the episodes had to be worked on concurrently, either two or three at a time. Typical effects for the series include the creation of character-driving effects animation, photo-realistic vehicles, CG set extensions, pyrotechnics, and atmospheric effects. Some assets, such as a Quinjet and Helicarrier, are shared from Industrial Light & Magic, though "those models are generally super heavy and dense with data" and need to be made "HD friendly or simply manageable to work in [a] TV schedule."

Bear McCreary confirmed that he would compose music for the series in July 2013. Unlike on some of his previous scores, ABC and Marvel allowed McCreary to work with a full symphonic orchestra, typically featuring 50 or 70 players, with over 90 for "important" episodes. Complex synthesizer programming was also used, to give the score "a modern edge". Since "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." was the first MCU television series, McCreary felt there was "a sense that it had to connect" to the consistent orchestra sound of the films, but viewed through a television lens. McCreary composes on average 30 minutes of music per episode. Creating the main theme for the series, which McCreary also saw as Coulson's theme, was a process which took a lot of collaboration with the executive producers, who wanted a specific sound—"something big, that...belonged in the Marvel Cinematic Universe" but also "intimate because these aren't superheroes, these are regular people." McCreary had to work harder to make the theme heard, given that the show does not have a traditional title sequence. By the third and fourth seasons, McCreary noted "the score became a little more intense and more electronically driven... [E]lectronics really moved to the forefront as we got into more stories about Inhumans and the digital world our characters inhabit. But the orchestra is always our foundation."

In September 2014, McCreary announced that there were plans for an "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." soundtrack, which was released digitally a year later by Marvel Music on September 4, 2015, and on CD on October 9. Featuring music from the first two seasons, the soundtrack was written and produced by McCreary and Steven Kaplan, with the album produced by Joe Augustine with McCreary.

All music composed by Bear McCreary. Notes next to each track indicate which episode(s) it was featured in.

In July 2013, Jed Whedon said the series would work in tandem with the Marvel films, both past and upcoming, to weave in between the films, and to "try to make them more rewarding on both ends." He explained that each Marvel project is intended to stand alone first before there is any interweaving, and noted that the series has to work with the film division and be aware of their plans so as not to interfere when introducing someone or something to the universe. Bell elaborated that this was preferable so that people who do not watch the films can still follow the series, and vice versa. He stated that "ABC and Marvel both want the series to be able to make sense on its own", but that it was beneficial for the films to have the series fill in any "gaps" for them, due to having to be "big" and moving "quickly through a lot of huge pieces", unlike television which has time to deal with more nuances.

In January 2016, Joss Whedon noted that this process "unfortunately just means the TV show gets, you know, leftovers." He stated that, for example, the series' creative team initially wanted to use Loki's scepter from "The Avengers" but were unable due to Whedon's plans for it in "Age of Ultron". On how their ability to connect with the films changed over the life of the series, Jed Whedon said, "The rule when we started was we couldn't say anything about spies, we couldn't say anything about Hydra, we couldn't have any A.I. or robots or anything like that, because all of that was coming in movies that year or the year after. Since then, they've blown those doors wide open." He added, "We have relatively free rein [in what the series can introduce and connect to]; we just can't go anywhere that [the films are] going. They know their stories so much further out than we do, which is good for us to tee up things that we know are coming to them or avoid things that they want to be special on the big screen. As long as we are not covering bases that they're going to cover, we haven't been told "no" that much". As an example, Whedon noted the fourth season's Framework storyline as "something that's pretty significant in our world, but is also a little eddy in the river that doesn't affect anything else because it's an alternate universe. So those kinds of stories help us go big without sending ripples through the whole MCU."

The series mimics the films' post credits scenes with 'end tags', starting with the episode "0-8-4" which features a Samuel L. Jackson cameo. Bell explained, "Sometimes it'll be funny, sometimes it'll be a mythology thing ... or an extra little reveal about" the episode. The end tag for "End of the Beginning" is a "directly lifted" scene from "Captain America: The Winter Soldier".

The series' first major tie-in episode with the wider MCU was "The Well", which begins immediately after "". The episodes "End of the Beginning" and "Turn, Turn, Turn" revolve around the events of "Captain America: The Winter Soldier", which led to a retooling of the series. Flashback sequences in "Shadows" and "The Things We Bury" featuring Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter served as marketing and set-up for the "Agent Carter" television series. The events of "The Frenemy of My Enemy" and "The Dirty Half Dozen" led up to the opening sequence of "Avengers: Age of Ultron", while "Scars" deals with the aftermath of that film. The third season follows similar themes to the film "", focusing on powered people and the different responses to them, leading up to the episode "Emancipation", which takes place after the film and shows how its events affect the series' powered characters.

The episode "T.A.H.I.T.I." introduces the Kree alien race to the MCU, members of which play a significant role in "Guardians of the Galaxy". This begins a storyline that recurs throughout the series, and introduces Inhumans to the MCU, with Jed Whedon saying that it was something "in the works" for a long time, as Marvel Studios had plans for an "Inhumans" film, and this would be "one of the first instances where we get to start planting the seeds on the show before the film." The third season introduces the concept of the Secret Warriors, with new Inhuman characters inspired by the comic of the same name, while also retconning the history of Hydra in the MCU, tying it into the Inhumans storyline. Gregg noted in January 2016 that the "writer and director [of the "Inhumans" film] will have free rein to do what they want to do with the Inhumans, but hopefully there'll be some way that our Inhumans connect to that." When the film was removed from Marvel Studios' release schedule, Whedon noted that the series had "a little more freedom" and were "able to do a little bit more" with the species going into the fourth season, including the potential of introducing some of the "classic" Inhumans. "Marvel's Inhumans", a television series centered on Black Bolt and other members of the Inhuman Royal Family, was announced in November 2016 to air on ABC in September 2017. It was not intended to be a spin-off of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D."

The fourth season explores the concept of Life Model Decoys (LMDs), which were first referenced in "The Avengers", and introduces the character Ghost Rider to the MCU. On why the series waited to begin exploring LMDs, Jed Whedon said that the series previously did not want to explore the concept before the release of "Avengers: Age of Ultron", which sees the introductions of Ultron and Vision in a similar manner to LMDs. On introducing Ghost Rider, Whedon said that "with "Doctor Strange" coming out this year, the Marvel [Cinematic] Universe is moving into new waters," referring to the exploration of magic. "We felt that this was obviously a great character that we'd love to have on our show that we feel fits with that shift." The season also continues storylines from the second season of "Agent Carter", with the reveal that the Momentum Energy Labs group is a successor to the Isodyne Energy company, with both companies connected by the parent company Roxxon, a mainstay of the MCU. The last four episodes of season five take place over a single day, and coincide with the events of "". In August 2017, Emily VanCamp said that discussions had taken place for her to reprise her role of Sharon Carter for the series, but there were conflicts with her starring role on the series "Revenge".

"Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." airs in the United States on ABC, in 720p high definition and 5.1 surround sound, despite delivering the episodes to ABC in 1080p. The first season aired on Tuesdays at 8pm EST for the first season, and starting with the second season, the series aired on Tuesdays at 9pm EST, before moving to the 10pm time slot on Tuesdays for the fourth season. For its fifth season, the series aired on Fridays at 9pm EST.

"Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." has been licensed in 155 countries and territories: CTV holds the broadcast rights for Canada; Channel 4 aired the series in the United Kingdom for the first two seasons, before it moved to E4 for the third; in Australia, the series aired on Seven Network for the first two seasons, before moving to Fox8 starting with the third; and in New Zealand, the show airs on TV2. MyNetworkTV was awarded the series' syndication rights, and began broadcasting it in September 2016.

The second and third seasons of the series were broadcast in two blocks each, with a season of "Agent Carter" airing in between. Bell explained that this decision was made following the challenge of producing 22 episodes for the first season to be aired over 36–40 weeks, which meant having repeats and "losing momentum". Instead, "Agent Carter" took up much of that gap in a row, leaving the back half of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D."s season to run uninterrupted. This format allowed the producers and writers to approach each season in two parts, each with distinct stories connected by carried-over elements. Ahead of the fourth season, Tancharoen explained, "For the past two seasons, we've been able to break our season down into two little mini-seasons because of the airdate schedule. This upcoming season, our airdate schedule is a little different, so we're breaking it into three pods. Story wise, the development of that has made our lives easier, to break it down in that way." The pod format was described as "7-10 episodes [that feature] little 'enclosed plotlines' that formed a larger whole."

Regarding if they would break the fifth season into pods again as with season four, Bell said, "A 22-episode arc is a lot for people to hold onto. By breaking it up into either smaller arcs or different pods, by introducing a set of antagonists and putting them down, or moving from space to space, our experience has been that it's something the viewers enjoy, and it makes it a little easier to digest when you're telling some of these stories." Whedon also noted it would depend on how the season would be "broken up in terms of airing. If everything is running back-to-back, it feels weird to start calling it different things... We will try to have it in bite-sized chunks." The season began airing its episodes on December 1, 2017, once "Inhumans" has aired its eight episodes, with the intent for all 22 episodes to air mostly uninterrupted; a short hiatus was taken for the airing of the 2018 Winter Olympics. The season ultimately was formed by two pod story arcs. The sixth season will feature 13 episodes.

Social media accounts for the series were set up in January 2013, months before ABC officially ordered it, "a rarity for a pilot." By May 17, 2013, "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." was the top new show of the television season in terms of social media activity, with the series' official Twitter account having over 46,000 followers and its official Facebook page having close to half a million likes. Many cast and crew members "live tweet" each episode, with J. August Richards noting that this brings instant feedback from viewers, and allows the crew to "watch the audience take that journey" in real time.

For the final six episodes of the first season, Marvel began the ""Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.": The Art of Level Seven" initiative, in which a different image was released each Thursday before a new episode, depicting a first look at a key event from the upcoming episode. Bell stated that the initiative was a way to tie the series back to its comics roots, and was thought of at the beginning of the first season. The production team tried to pair specific artists to the teaser posters based on their previous work and how it connected to the themes and emotion of the intended episode. For the second season, the series returned as "The Art of Evolution", with an image for each of the final twelve episodes of the season. For season five, Marvel revived their marketing art program, with ""Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.": The Road to 100", with five posters, one for each season of the series, representing "key pivotal moments of each season" to commemorate the series reaching 100 episodes.

At San Diego Comic-Con 2014, Marvel Custom Solutions and Lexus released a limited single-issue comic tie-in titled "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Chase", set between the Season 1 episodes "Seeds" and "T.R.A.C.K.S." The comic was written by George Kitson, with art by Mirko Colak, Neil Edwards, and Mirco Pierfederici.

A five-part web series titled "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Double Agent", also sponsored by Lexus, was released from March 4 to May 6, 2015 on ABC.com. The web series follows a newly hired "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." production assistant, who acts as a double agent for the "Mastermind", portrayed by Stan Lee. Cast and crew members from the series, such as Gregg, also appear, with viewers having the ability to vote in an online poll after each episode to guess where the double agent would go in the next episode; votes entered viewers in a drawing to win prizes from the set of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." "Double Agent" was nominated for Outstanding Digital Series at the 27th Producers Guild Awards. Another Lexus-sponsored five-part web series, "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Academy", released from March 9 to May 4, 2016. In "Academy", three "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." fans compete to play an agent in that series. Members of the "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." cast also appear. All three fans ultimately made cameo appearances in the third-season finale.

The series has been promoted with various subtitles at different times, including "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Uprising" in season one, leading up to the "Winter Soldier" crossover; "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Fallen Agent" for the end of the third season; "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Ghost Rider" for the first "pod" of season four; and "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: LMD" for the second "pod" of season four. The third "pod" of season four was known as "Agents of Hydra".

The complete first season was first released on Blu-ray and DVD on September 9, 2014, with the complete second season released on September 18, 2015, as an Amazon.com exclusive. On Netflix in the United States, the first season became available for streaming on November 20, 2014, the second season on June 11, 2015, the third season on June 16, 2016, the fourth season on June 15, 2017, and the fifth season on June 17, 2018.

In the United States, the premiere episode of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." earned a 4.7/14 rating in the 18- to 49-year-old demographic, with 12.12 million total viewers, making it the biggest network drama debut in four years. Though the series debuted to strong ratings against its competition, "NCIS", its ratings declined considerably over the following two months, though it remained Tuesday's top show among men 18–49, and overall was the No. 3 show among upscale young adults behind "Modern Family" and "The Big Bang Theory". It also enjoyed DVR recordings that, according to "TV Guide", were "through the roof".

In March 2016, Alisha Grauso of "Forbes" discussed the series and its ratings, describing the show as having "never quite been the ratings hit for ABC that the network had hoped it would be...It's hard enough to write a film script that fits within the continuity of the larger Marvel Cinematic Universe, even harder to do it with a full-length TV season that must act as connective tissue to the larger world while still being its own thing." Grauso opined that the series' ratings may improve if it either focused on trying to be the best series it could be (with fewer connections to the films, like the Marvel-Netflix shows) or on just being "support and tie-in to the world of the Avengers". Grauso concluded, "The end result for either scenario is that, hopefully, ratings move up and stay up. In the first case, fans might be lost by the disconnect from the MCU, but a stronger storyline and more consistent writing would bring them and new fans back. In the second scenario, fans would tune in every week for fear of missing out on a bit of story that's important to the larger world."

"Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." saw the season five episode "All Roads Lead..." earn a series low rating of 0.4/2 in the 18- to 49-year-old demographic, as well as the lowest initial viewers with 1.67 million. In November 2018, Parrot Analytics, which measures "how viewers interact with a TV show's brand online, assessing everything from global file-sharing and peer-to-peer traffic to social media activity", ranked "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." in the top 0.03 percent of in-demand television series worldwide, classify it as "Amazing". Series with similar demand included "Better Call Saul", "Criminal Minds", and "Vikings", while "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." had higher demand than series such as "The Originals", "Supergirl", "Arrow", and "Fear The Walking Dead".

For the first season, the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 88% approval rating, with an average rating of 7.83/10 based on 72 reviews. The website's consensus reads, ""Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." is sure to please comic book fans, but the strong ensemble and brisk pacing help to make this better-than-average superhero show accessible to non-fanboys as well." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a "generally favorable" score of 74 based on 33 reviews. 

The second season has a 91% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 7.66/10 based on 32 reviews. The website's consensus reads, ""Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." relaxes into itself during its sophomore season, mitigating the show's growing pains by focusing on characters while amping up narrative thrills."

The third season has a 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8.19/10 based on 22 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Still evolving in its third season, "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." further hits its stride with a blend of thrills, humor, and heart." 

The fourth season has a 95% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 7.65/10 based on 22 reviews. The website's consensus reads, ""Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." explores darker territory in its fourth season with the thrilling introduction of Ghost Rider, setting up an action-packed new chapter of Marvel's edgier mythologies." 

The fifth season has a 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 7.89/10 based on 21 reviews. The website's consensus reads, ""Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." swings for the fences with large-scale storytelling and wild twists that elevate season 5 from the saturated MCU and into its own space".

The way that the series is affected by the events of "Captain America: The Winter Soldier" has been called "miraculous", with Terri Schwartz at Zap2it writing "the fact that the movie so influenced the show is game-changing in terms of how the mediums of film and television can be interwoven", while Mary McNamara of the "Los Angeles Times" stated that "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." "faces a future of perpetual re-invention, and that puts it in the exhilarating first car of television's roller-coaster ride toward possible world domination." The fact that the series also depicts the rebuilding of S.H.I.E.L.D. in the MCU has also been highlighted, with Merrill Barr, reviewing "Beginning of the End" for "Forbes", saying "what Marvel's daring to say with this season finale is 'everything we do matters, and you need to pay attention to all of it.'"

The series' introduction of the Inhumans was seen by Oliver Sava of "The A.V. Club" as making "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." an essential part of the MCU and Marvel Studios' plans, with the connections between the series and the films previously having always been reactive on the series' behalf, with "stuff" happening in the films, and "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." dealing with the fallout of it. However, the series would now be "making things happen, and these events will clearly impact the future of the MCU". Barr wrote that the series "does a most excellent job of standing on its own two feet in a way we've never seen it do before. Come the final frame [of the second season finale], all anyone—Marvel fan or otherwise—will be asking is when season three begins."

The third season's paralleling of themes from "Captain America: Civil War" was called "topical and relevant" and "downright eerie" by "The A.V. Club"s Alex McCown and Screen Crush's Kevin Fitzpatrick. McCown compared the series' approach to setting up "a world distrustful of superpowers" to the real life events surrounding Cliven Bundy and Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign, and said that ""S.H.I.E.L.D." is taking full advantage of its medium in order to tell the story the upcoming Captain America film can't: A full and fraught exploration of the need to protect freedom and privacy, even for those with extraordinary abilities." Fitzpatrick added that this "topical bent...made for a great angle to build up that world mentality without feeling particularly subservient to the movies."

Ahead of the fourth season, Collider's Kayti Burt opined that "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." is "the X-Men TV show you should be watching". Burt noted that the "X-Men" film franchise was expanding to television with the series "Legion", but that "S.H.I.E.L.D." already served that purpose well, highlighting the similarities between the X-Men and the Inhumans, both creations of Stan Lee and Jack Kirby during the 1960s consisting of a large group of super-powered people who "are our neighbors and our friends ... both heroes and villains", and face "the same fears and prejudices" from the wider community. Burt felt that the similarities between "S.H.I.E.L.D."s Inhumans and the X-Men became "particularly pointed" in the third season with the Hive storyline, which had a lot in common with the film "" that was released around the same time; Burt was of the opinion that "S.H.I.E.L.D." executed the storyline "much better" than the film did. Other similarities Burt discussed were the series' diverse and ensemble cast, its take on the mutant cure storyline, the parallels between Daisy Johnson's second season arc and the introduction of Rogue in the first "X-Men" film, and its social and political commentary. With the latter, Burt also discussed the similarities between the Watchdogs and Donald Trump, calling it "not very subtle, but social commentary doesn't have to be. I appreciate that "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." is attempting to comment on the current socio-political state of the country in a way that many of the other superhero TV shows don't even attempt to do. It's perhaps the show's most "X-Men"-like quality." Concluding, Burt said that though the X-Men characters cannot appear in the MCU due to 20th Century Fox holding the rights, "we still get to enjoy many of the themes prominent in the X-Men universe through "S.H.I.E.L.D.""

Additionally, Marc N. Kleinheinz at Screen Rant discussed how the series "continues to resist a status quo", from the destruction and rebuilding of S.H.I.E.L.D., to the fallout from the Sokovia Accords. He noted that a major driving force behind the changes was the MCU films, with the series being forced "to constantly adapt to a changing narrative landscape that it has absolutely no control over." He also believed that the series was obligated to adapt various Marvel characters to screen which would not be appearing in films, such as Daisy Johnson, Mockingbird, and Ghost Rider. However, Kleinheinz felt that this mindset also came from within the series crew rather than just from Marvel, saying, "there's also the storytelling modus operandi that showrunners Jed Whedon and Maurissa Tancharoen have very obviously demonstrated during their four-year tenure. It seems that constantly staking out new ground from season to season is just as much a personal predilection as it is, possibly, a corporate mandate."

During the "Agents of Hydra" pod in the fourth season, Collider.com's Evan Valentine noted how "[o]ne of the prevalent themes of this latter half of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D."s fourth season has been its jabs at the current Trump administration... When all's said and done, whether you support or disavow the current administration and what it's done with its time in office, does this commentary work here? Sure it does... We need to be able to laugh at what's going on in the world, regardless of whether we agree or disagree, but "S.H.I.E.L.D." has managed to throw in some biting commentary this season."

"The Atlantic" named "4,722 Hours" one of the best television episodes of 2015.

By April 2015, Marvel was developing a spin-off series of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." The series, which was being developed by Bell and writer Paul Zbyszewski, would be based on storylines occurring at the end of the second season of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.", and would receive its own pilot rather than a backdoor pilot. Though Palicki and Blood were reportedly in final discussions to headline the potential new series, ABC passed on the project by May 7, 2015, when they announced their series renewals and cancellations, and new series pickups.

In August 2015, the spin-off series received new life as a reworked series, titled "Marvel's Most Wanted", with a pilot order. Bell and Zbyszewski once again developed the series, while also serving as co-writers of the pilot, executive producers, and showrunners, with Jeph Loeb also attached as executive producer. The series would still focus on Morse and Hunter, with Palicki and Blood both attached, and was described as "a new take focusing on the same duo and their continuing adventures."

Bell and Zbyszewski worked together on the characters' storyline for the third season of "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.", preparing them to move over to the spin-off, with Bell explaining that it would set up "Most Wanted" by defining exactly who the characters are, such as Hunter and his lack of loyalty to S.H.I.E.L.D. and to ideologies—"nothing specific about the show, it's just who Hunter is." In March 2016, Bell stated that while Hunter and Morse are "on "S.H.I.E.L.D.", we want to take advantage of who they are, and give the audience as much of their relationship with one another, and with other people, as possible. We are aware that there is a potential imminent end, and so they won't be neglected."

Hunter and Morse are written off the series in the episode "Parting Shot", both leaving S.H.I.E.L.D., as Palicki and Blood "physically had to go leave to shoot the pilot...they had to stop being on "S.H.I.E.L.D." and get ready for the pilot and then shoot the pilot and all of that, so it didn't make sense for us to have all these episodes with them and then not have them in two or three episodes, and then go, 'Oh, we were just over here,' and then come back and go away again." On whether they could return to the series at some point, Bell said, "I can't answer that, but I can say it would be kind of cheating to make Mack cry like that [in the episode] only to buy it back—not that we haven't brought characters back from the dead. We want to earn stuff." In May 2016, the spin-off series was passed on by ABC once again.

A six-part web series, "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Slingshot", was revealed on December 6, 2016, to debut on ABC.com on December 13, 2016. It follows Elena "Yo-Yo" Rodriguez on a secret mission, shortly before the start of season four, with Cordova-Buckley reprising her role. Gregg, Jason O'Mara, Simmons, Bennet, Wen, De Caestecker and Henstridge all reprise their roles in the series as Coulson, Jeffrey Mace, Mack, Johnson, May, Fitz and Simmons, respectively.

At the 2014 San Diego Comic Con International, Marvel Comics announced an ongoing series titled "S.H.I.E.L.D.", to be set in the mainstream Marvel Universe and written by Mark Waid, beginning December 2014. Featuring art by a rotating group of artists including Carlos Pacheco, Alan Davis, and Chris Sprouse, the series is led by Agent Phil Coulson, and sees the canonical introduction of the characters Melinda May, Jemma Simmons, and Leo Fitz—who originated from the television series—to the Marvel comics universe, who Waid noted would be given "the Marvel Universe spin." Waid described the series as "done-in-one. Coulson and his team have a mission, and if we need someone for a mission, everyone in the Marvel Universe is available as a potential Agent." Waid added that though the comic does not share events with the television series, it will maintain the characters' relationships and personalities. Marc Guggenheim relaunched the comic as "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." for Marvel Comics' All-New, All-Different Marvel line, and introduced the television series' character Grant Ward to the Marvel comic universe in May 2016.

In September 2015, it was announced that Phil Coulson, Daisy Johnson / Quake, Deathlok, Melinda May, Bobbi Morse, Lincoln Campbell, Sif, Raina and Gordon would appear in the "" mobile role-playing video game. Their inclusion in the game was done to promote the start of the third season, as well as to allow Marvel to "extend storylines and build on backstories to engage fans in a brand-new experience," according to Marvel Games creative director Bill Rosemann. In March 2016, de Caestecker and Henstridge reprised their roles as Fitz and Simmons, respectively, in the episode "Lizards", of the animated series "Ultimate Spider-Man vs the Sinister 6". Also in the month, "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." downloadable content was revealed for "Lego Marvel's Avengers". The content consisted of a mission based "on the events leading up to the season two finale", which involved facing Jiaying and Daisy in Afterlife while rescuing agents, as well as going up against Gordon and Cal Johnson who have occupied the S.H.I.E.L.D. Helicarrier. The content includes the playable characters Daisy Johnson, Leo Fitz, Agent Koenig, Melinda May, Bobbi Morse, Jemma Simmons, Cal Johnson / Mr. Hyde, Deathlok, Gordon, Grant Ward, Jiaying, Lincoln, and Raina, as well as the airplane 'The Bus'. Ming-Na Wen reprised her role as Melinda May to provide new dialogue for the content.



</doc>
<doc id="36910668" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36910668" title="New Guys">
New Guys

"New Guys" is the first episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series "The Office", and the show's 177th episode overall. It originally aired on NBC on September 20, 2012. The episode was written and directed by series creator Greg Daniels; this is his first writing credit for the series since the seventh season episode "Goodbye, Michael", and his first directing credit since "PDA".

The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton, Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. In this episode, two new employees (Clark Duke and Jake Lacy) are hired by the Scranton branch and cause trouble for Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) and Jim Halpert (John Krasinski). Andy Bernard (Ed Helms) returns from manager training, hoping for revenge on Nellie Bertram (Catherine Tate). Oscar Martinez (Oscar Nunez) considers adopting Angela Lipton's (Angela Kinsey) cat. Kevin Malone (Brian Baumgartner) tries to save a turtle.

"New Guys" was the inception of several story arcs and saw the departures of Mindy Kaling as Kelly Kapoor, (due to her involvement in her own sitcom "The Mindy Project") and B. J. Novak as Ryan Howard. "New Guys" received largely positive pre-release reviews from television critics. Post-release reviews were moderately positive; while many felt that the episode was a distinct step in the right direction for the show, others took issues with some of the comedic aspects of the episode. "New Guys" was viewed by 4.28 million viewers and received a 2.1 rating among adults between the age of 18 and 49, making it the show's lowest-rated season premiere. The episode ranked second in its timeslot and was also the highest-rated NBC series of the night.

Over the summer, Kevin Malone (Brian Baumgartner) tried to save a turtle that he ran over, but only ended up killing it. Kelly Kapoor (Mindy Kaling) moved to Ohio with her fiancé Ravi and Ryan Howard (B. J. Novak) also moved to Ohio for "unrelated reasons." Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) learned that he is not the biological father of Angela Lipton's (Angela Kinsey) baby.

While talking to the camera, Jim (John Krasinski) and Pam Halpert (Jenna Fischer) reveal that Jim was offered an entrepreneurial sports job by an old college friend based on an idea the two had in college. Jim tells the camera that he turned it down, because it would not be good for his family. Pam and Jim begin to take off their microphones and Pam makes a remark, noting that, after nine years, the cameramen should have enough footage for a documentary. One of the cameramen then addresses the two, saying that they are more interested in the developments of the office workers themselves, especially Jim and Pam, rather than the office now. Jim looks pensive when Pam tells the cameramen that they expect to live a calm, normal life, given their work and children.

Two new employees, Clark Green (Clark Duke) and Pete Miller (Jake Lacy), who are quickly dubbed "Dwight, Jr." and "The New Jim," are hired by the Scranton branch and cause trouble for Jim and Dwight. At first, Dwight is happy to have a protégé, acting as a fatherly figure to Clark due to the office noting their visual similarity, but soon begins to fear that Clark is after his job. Jim, on the other hand, does not feel that Pete is anything like him. However, after hearing Pete discuss his future plans, Jim realizes that he used to have Pete's ambition but has become stuck at the same job for over nine years. Meanwhile, Angela puts one of her cats, Comstock, up for adoption as her baby is allergic to it. Oscar Martinez (Oscar Nunez) initially refuses to adopt Comstock despite Angela's pleas, but agrees to adopt it after learning that it is her husband Robert's (Jack Coleman) favorite cat. It is implied that Robert and Oscar are having an affair, as Robert told Angela he was having a business dinner on the night he actually had plans with Oscar.

Andy Bernard (Ed Helms) returns from Outward Bound manager training—where he became more "decisive and confident"—hoping for revenge on Nellie Bertram (Catherine Tate) for commandeering his job during the previous spring. To do this, Andy sets up a slackline in the parking lot and makes the employees walk across it, humiliating Nellie as she insists on walking in her heels and fails to keep her balance. After Clark proves that he is talented at balancing, Dwight attempts to one-up him, but ends up failing repeatedly and hurting himself. Eventually, Dwight tries to prove his superiority by riding a bicycle across a tight-rope suspended between the roof and a telephone pole, but the printer he is using as a counterweight is not heavy enough and he ends up losing his balance and hanging from the bicycle above the parking lot. Much to his embarrassment, he has to be rescued by a team of firefighters, while Creed Bratton (Creed Bratton) mistakenly believes the incident to be a circus act. While everyone is outside crowding around Dwight, Jim calls up his old college friend and tells him that he wants to be involved in the new business deal, even though he did not have Pam's approval.

On May 11, 2012, NBC renewed "The Office" for a ninth season and it was later announced that Greg Daniels, who had been the series showrunner from season one through five, would be returning. "New Guys" was written and directed by Daniels. This is his first writing credit for the series since the seventh season entry, "Goodbye, Michael", and his first directing credited since season seven's "PDA". This also marks the third time he has both written and directed an episode, after the first season episode "Basketball" and the fourth season opener, "Fun Run". Daniels later revealed that "New Guys" would be the inception of big season arcs. He went on the record saying "I'll tell you that the last couple of years, I don't think we did any big arc-type things in the way that we used to in the beginning, I think the thing we're going to do is bring back a lot of arcs". Jenna Fischer later stated that part of the Jim and Pam arc would be dependent on "things that happened in seasons past that didn't seem very relevant at the time and [that] they're going to become important this season."

"New Guys" featured one of the final few performances of Mindy Kaling as Kelly Kapoor, who left the series to star in her own comedy television series "The Mindy Project", which was created for the Fox Broadcasting Company. Both Novak and Kaling appeared in two episodes of the season—"New Guys" and "Finale". The episode features both Clark Duke and Jake Lacy as two new Dunder Mifflin employees who have been hired to "go through the back log of over 4,000 unanswered customer complaints that" Kelly has ignored the past few years. Duke noted that filming the slack lining scene "was not that fun; it was really hard". He did, however, state that Helms was able to do it well "with no practice". The voice of the documentarian that responds to Jim is that of series director David Rogers. Rogers also voiced the same character in the penultimate episode opener "A.A.R.M.". Originally, Daniels had re-recorded the line in "New Guys", but ended up liking Rogers' voice better. He asked him to reprise the role in "A.A.R.M." to preserve continuity.

The official website of "The Office" included several cut scenes from "New Guys" within a week of the episode's release. In the first 40-second clip, Dwight tries to bond with Clark by discussing an article he read in "Time" magazine about dub-step. Clark teases Dwight for reading the magazine, something he considers for older audiences, but Dwight is oblivious. In the second 75-second clip, Toby calls a workplace bullying meeting and the office discussing how Andy has been harassing various people. Kevin tries to maintain that Angela bullies him, and states that she will not give him her cat because he killed his turtle "a few times". In the third and final 30-second clip, Jim tries to convince Dwight that the relationship Dwight shares with Clark is similar to that of Darth Vader and Luke Skywalker, characters from the popular science fiction movie franchise "Star Wars".

Much like the sixth season starter "Gossip"—which featured parkour in the cold opening—the seventh season opener "Nepotism"—which started with a lip dub—and the eighth season premiere "The List"—which opened with a bit about planking—"New Guys" also contains a plot involving a popular Internet meme, in this case slacklining, which is a practice in balance that typically uses nylon webbing tensioned between two anchor points. When Ryan is leaving, he claims he is going to Ohio because "they call it the Silicone Prairie," a reference to Silicon Valley, a part of the San Francisco Bay Area in Northern California in the United States that is home to many of the world's largest technology corporations. Andy returns from Outward Bound, an organization that aims to foster the personal growth and social skills of participants by using challenging expeditions in the outdoors. Dwight tries to talk to Clark about the heavy metal band Slayer, noting that he has tickets for a show in ten months. Jim asks Pete if he likes the Philadelphia Phillies, but Pete mistakes his reference to mean horses.

Erik Adams of "The A.V. Club" compared Dwight and Clark's relationship to that of the mythical characters of King Laius and Oedipus, respectively. The story, which was later turned into a popular play "Oedipus Rex" by Greek writer Sophocles, tells of how Laius hears of a prophecy that his son will kill him. Fearing the prophecy, Laius abandons his son, Oedipus', who is raised in the city of Thebes. Oedipus later crosses paths with Laius and gets into a fight and, not knowing that Laius is his father, kills him. Adams, thus, states that the "break-room conversation" Dwight and Clark share starts to make Dwight paranoid and fear that Clark is after his job.

Many reviewers noted that the episode made references to previous episodes of the series. The ending, featuring Dwight riding a bicycle on the roof, was positively compared to the third season episode "Safety Training". Adams wrote that many of the scenes "take characters to corners of the office tied to memories of episode's past", such as Oscar's phone call, which takes place in the stairwell where Dwight pumped himself up for his work review in the second season episode "Performance Review", and Pam climbing up the rooftop access ladder, which is reminiscent of Pam and Jim's first "date" in the second season episode "The Client".

"New Guys" originally aired on NBC on September 20, 2012. The episode was viewed by 4.28 million viewers and received a 2.1/6 percent share in the 18–49 demographic. This means that it was seen by 2.1 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds, and 6 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds watching television at the time of the broadcast. This marked a 46 percent drop in viewership from the season eight premiere "The List" and made it the lowest-rated premiere of "The Office" to air. "The Office" finished second in its time slot, being beaten by an episode of the Fox series "Glee", which received a 2.9/8 percent rating. "New Guys", however, finished ahead of repeats of the CBS show "Two and a Half Men" and the ABC series "Grey's Anatomy" and a new episode of The CW show "The Next". "The Office" was also the highest-rated NBC television program of the night. "New Guys" was the twenty-first most-watched show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18–49. This marked a slight improvement from the season eight premiere, "The List", which ranked as the twenty-second. When DVR numbers were included, the episode increased its ratings up 52 percent to a 3.2, meaning it was seen by, in total, 3.2 percent of all 18- to 49-year-olds.

Several pre-release reviews of the episode were generally positive. Bruce Miller of the "Sioux City Journal" gave the episode a largely positive review and noted that "If you can erase last season from your mind, you'll see this ... is exactly how "The Office" should have carried on after Steve Carell left." Furthermore, he praised the addition of Duke and Lacy, calling their performances "so good you could see them become the centerpiece of a new series." Verne Gay of "Newsweek" awarded the episode an "A–" and called the installment "very (very) funny." He was especially happy about the addition of Lacy and Duke, calling them "flashbacks to a younger Jim and Dwight." Furthermore, he noted that "the ninth and final season actually may offer completion" of a show that has just "merely offered variations on [the characters'] tics" for the past eight seasons. Bob Owen of the "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" called the episode "generally funnier than [the show] was last season" and wrote that the episode would be a good opportunity "for viewers who quit the [series] last year ... to come back to the show." Particularly, he was excited to "see the seeds of the show's end planted."

"Entertainment Weekly" writer Ken Tucker concluded that "New Guys" has "a lot more snap and vigor than most of last season's episodes." He was extremely complimentary towards the Pam and Jim story arc that was hinted at, noting that, after settling into a comfortable marriage, the show was finally trying to make them interesting again. David Silverberg of DigitalJournal.com called the entry "one of the show's best [premieres] in recent years" and concluded that the addition of Duke and Lacy "work as a better foil than Nellie and the creepy boss played by James Spader." Adams awarded the episode a "B+" and called it "a fresh start" for the series after the eighth season. Adams also complimented the show for "stop[ing] every so often to acknowledge the fans that have stuck with the series [and] also mak[ing] subtler callbacks to the show's glory days." He was also complimentary towards the fact that Duke and Lacy have not been thrown into stories of their own, rather, they "serve as parallels and stimulants to Dwight and Jim."

Nick Campbell of TV.com called the episode "a decent" and "moderately sharp" season premiere. He concluded that, "While the episode still wasn't on par with those of the show's earliest seasons, ... The episode wasn't lazy—and for "The Office", that's a win." Other reviews were slightly more mixed. TV Fanatic reviewer Dan Forcella awarded the episode a three out of five, but was appreciative of the additions to the cast, as well as many of the actors story lines. Jeffrey Hyatt of Screencrave noted that the episode was similar in tone to the season eight finale, "Free Family Portrait Studio", but that "the addition of Lacy and Duke pay quick dividends as the opener provides flashes of comedy moxie, while helping wash away painful memories of last season." David Hinckley of the "New York Daily News" awarded the episode three stars out of five and wrote that "The deadpan goofiness remains fresh enough to keep fans interested" and that "the fact that this whole drama doesn't feel new and shiny anymore isn't anyone's fault. ... All "The Office" needs to do now is march out proudly random, zany and off-center." HitFix's Alan Sepinwall, however, was critical of the episode's humor, noting that it "didn't give me a lot of hope for a last-minute resurgence". Matt Roush of "TV Guide" wrote that the "one interesting storyline" may make him watch the remainder of Pam and Jim's story, but not "the rest of this sadly played-out workplace comedy."

Many reviews were complimentary towards the interaction Pam and Jim had with the cameramen. Silverberg called it "a nice surprise". Tucker called the sequence one of the "biggest reveals" in the episode. Sepinwall, despite being critical of the episode's humor, found the sub-plot "interesting". He called it "a character arc I've been waiting for the show to remember to do for years now, and the scenes here were promising (if not incredibly funny)".



</doc>
<doc id="36952642" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36952642" title="Mycena chlorophos">
Mycena chlorophos

Mycena chlorophos is a species of agaric fungus in the family Mycenaceae. First described in 1860, the fungus is found in subtropical Asia, including Japan, Taiwan, Polynesia, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka, in Australia, and Brazil. Fruit bodies (mushrooms) have pale brownish-grey sticky caps up to in diameter atop stems long and up to a millimeter thick. The mushrooms are bioluminescent and emit a pale green light. Fruiting occurs in forests on fallen woody debris such as dead twigs, branches, and logs. The fungus can be made to grow and fruit in laboratory conditions, and the growth conditions affecting bioluminescence have been investigated.

The species was first described scientifically by Miles Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis in 1860 as "Agaricus chlorophos". The original specimens were collected from the Bonin Islands by American botanist Charles Wright in October 1854 as part of the North Pacific Exploring and Surveying Expedition of 1853–56. Pier Andrea Saccardo transferred the species to the genus "Mycena" in an 1887 publication. Daniel Desjardin and colleagues redescribed the species and set a lectotype specimen in 2010.

In 1860 Berkeley and Curtis described the species "Agaricus cyanophos" from material also collected from the Bonin Islands. This material was found near the location that the original specimens of "M. chlorophos" were found, but a couple of weeks later. Japanese mycologists Seiya Ito and Sanshi Imai studied these collections in the late 1930s, and concluded that "Agaricus cyanophos" was the same species as "M. chlorophos", despite differences in cap shape, gill attachment, and the color of emitted light. Desjardin and colleagues agreed with this determination after examining the type material of both taxa. "M. chlorophos" is classified in the section "Exornatae" of the genus "Mycena". Other luminescent species in this section are "M. discobasis" and "M. marginata". Some authors have considered "M. illuminans" to be synonymous with "M. chlorophos" due to their morphological similarity, but molecular analysis has shown that they are distinct species.

In Japan, the mushroom is known as "yakoh-take", or "night-light mushroom". In the Bonin Islands it is called "Green Pepe".

The cap is initially convex before flattening out (sometimes forming a central depression), and measures up to in diameter. The cap has radial grooves extending to nearly the center, and sometimes develops cracks in the margin, which has small rounded teeth. Its color is pale brownish gray that fades after expansion, and it is somewhat sticky. The white stem is long by 0.3–1 mm thick, hollow, and translucent. It has tiny hairs on the surface. The base of the stem is disc-shaped or somewhat bulbous, measuring 1–2.5 mm wide. The thin gills are free from attachment to the stem, or are adnexed (narrowly attached) to a slight collar encircling the stem. Initially white then grayish in color, they are somewhat crowded, with 17–32 full-length gills and 1 to 3 tiers of lamellulae (shorter gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stem). The gills are 0.3–1 mm wide with micaceous edges. The flesh is very thin, and has a strong odor of ammonia. Both the caps and the gills are bioluminescent, while the mycelia and stems have little to no luminescence.

The spores are white, smooth, roughly elliptical, and have dimensions of 7–8.5 by 5–6 μm. The basidia (spore-bearing cells) are 17–23 by 7.5–10 μm, and four-spored with sterigmata around 3 μm long. The paraphyses are 5–8 μm wide, shorter than the basidia, more abundant and form a somewhat gelatinous layer. The cheilocystidia (cystidia on the cap edge) are 60 by 7–21 μm, hyaline, conical or ventricose (inflated). The tips of the cheilocystidia are drawn out to a point, or have a short appendage measuring 15 by 2–3 μm, which is sometimes branched, and is thin or slightly thick-walled. There are no cystidia on the gill face (pleurocystidia). Pileocystidia (cystidia on the surface of the cap) are club-shaped, measuring 25–60 by 13–25 μm. They are somewhat thick-walled, and spiny on the exposed surface with short simple outgrowths extending up to 3 μm long. The pileocystidia are joined together and form a continuous layer over the young cap, but break up as the cap expands. The caulocystidia (cystidia on the stem) are conical or lance-shaped, hyaline, and smooth, with walls that are thin or slightly thickened. They measure up to 300 by 10–25 μm, but are shorter in the upper regions of the stem. Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of all tissues.

The two other luminescent species of "Mycena" section "Exornatae" are similar in appearance to "M. chlorophos". "M. discobasis" fruit bodies have paler caps; microscopically, they have larger spores measuring 9.9 by 6.7 μm, and lack the short apical appendage found on "M. chlorophos" cheilocystidia. "M. margarita" has smaller spores averaging 6.9 by 4.4 μm, smaller cheilocystidia, and loop-like clamp connections.

Fruit bodies of "Mycena chlorophos" are found in forests, where they grow in groups on woody debris such as fallen twigs, branches, and bark. In the Japanese Hachijo and Bonin Islands, mushrooms occur predominantly on decaying petioles of the palm "Phenix roeberenii". The fungus requires a proper range of humidity to form mushrooms; for example, on Hachijo Island, fruiting only occurs in the rainy seasons in June/July and September/October when the relative humidity is around 88%, usually the day after rain falls. Experimental studies have shown that mushroom primordia that are too wet become deformed, while conditions that are too dry cause the caps to warp and break because the delicate gelatinous membrane covering them is broken.

In Asia, the species has been found in Japan, Taiwan, Polynesia, Java, and Sri Lanka. In Japan, the fungus is becoming more scarce as its natural habits are decreasing. Several Australian field guides have reported the species from that country. The fungus has also been recorded several times from Brazil. "Mycena chlorophos" was one of several fungi featured in a set of postage stamps issued in Samoa in 1985.

Since the mushroom is small, and fruits in only a limited season in a small area, researchers have investigated the conditions needed to artificially cultivate the species in laboratory conditions, in order to have more material to study the mechanism of bioluminescence, and to help preserve the species. The optimum temperature for the growth of mycelia is , while the optimum for the growth of primordia is . These temperatures are consistent with the subtropical climate in which the species is typically found. Maximum luminescence occurs at 27 °C, and about 25–39 hours after the primordia begin to form, when the cap has fully expanded. At 21 °C, luminescence persists for about 3 days, and becomes undetectable to the naked eyes about 72 hours after primordium initiation.



</doc>
<doc id="36994726" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36994726" title="Phallic architecture">
Phallic architecture

Phallic architecture consciously or unconsciously creates a symbolic representation of the phallus. Buildings intentionally or unintentionally resembling the human penis are a source of amusement to locals and tourists in various places around the world. Deliberate phallic imagery is found in ancient cultures and in the links to ancient cultures found in traditional artifacts.

The ancient Greeks and Romans celebrated phallic festivals and built a shrine with an erect phallus to honor Hermes, messenger of the gods. Those figures may be related to the ancient Egyptian deity Min who was depicted holding his erect phallus. Figures of women with a phallus for a head have been found across Greece and Yugoslavia. Phallic symbolism was prevalent in the architectural tradition of ancient Babylon. The Romans, who were deeply superstitious, also often used phallic imagery in their architecture and domestic items. The ancient cultures of many parts of the Far East, including Indonesia, India, Korea and Japan, used the phallus as a symbol of fertility in motifs on their temples and in other areas of everyday life.

Scholars of anthropology, sociology, and feminism have pointed out the symbolic nature of phallic architecture, especially large skyscrapers which dominate the landscape as symbols of male domination, power and political authority. Towers and other vertical structures may unintentionally or perhaps subconsciously have those connotations. There are many examples of modern architecture that can be interpreted as phallic, but very few for which the architect has specifically cited or admitted that meaning as an intentional aspect of the design.

The worship of the phallus has existed since the Stone Age, and was particularly prevalent during the Neolithic period and the Bronze Age.

Phallic architecture became prominent in ancient Egypt and Greece, where genitalia and human sexuality received a high degree of attention. The ancient Greeks honored the phallus and celebrated phallic festivals. The Greco-Roman deity Priapus was worshiped as a god of fertility, depicted with a giant phallus in numerous public architectural pieces.

The Greeks regularly built a shrine which they called "Herm" at the entrance of major public buildings, homes and along roads to honor Hermes, messenger of the gods. The shrines typically "took the form of a vertical pillar topped by the bearded head of a man and from the surface of the pillar below the head, an erect phallus protruded". It is believed that they sought their inspiration from the ancient Egyptians and their phallic image of Min, the valley god, who was similarly "depicted as a standing bearded king with simplified body, one arm raised, the other hand holding his erect phallus."

Herodotus, the ancient Greek historian, documented women carrying large phallic shaped monuments and ornaments the size of a human body in villages in ancient Dionysia. On the island of Delos a pillar supports a colossal phallus, the symbol of Dionysus. Phallus reliefs on buildings on such sites are also believed to have been apotropaic devices to ward off evil. The elaborate use of phallic architecture and sculpture in ancient Greek society can also be seen in sites such as Nea Nikomedeia in northern Greece. Archaeologists excavating the ancient town discovered clay sculptures of plump women with phallic heads and folded arms.

Similar figurines of women with phallus heads from the Neolithic period have been found across Greece, Macedonia and parts of old Yugoslavia. The vast majority of the figurines of the Hamangia culture have cylindrical phallus-shaped heads without facial features, although some, particularly of the Aegean culture, had phallic sculptural pieces with phallic heads with a pinched nose and slitty eyes. In these parts of the ancient world, obelisk like structures resembling the human penis were built, often with phallic symbols, representing human fertility and asserting male sexuality and orgasm. Phallic symbolism was prevalent in the architecture of ancient Babylonia, and in Khametian iconography, the obelisk was considered to be symbolic of the phallus of the masculine earth. The obelisks of ancient Egypt themselves had several functions, existing both as a reference to the cultus of the sun and of the phallus, representing fertility and power.
Although phallic architecture as individual pieces was not prevalent in ancient Rome as it was in ancient Greece or Egypt, the Romans were deeply superstitious and often introduced phallus-related components as architectural pieces and domestic items. Archaeologists unearthing a site in Pompei discovered many vases, ornaments and sculptures unearthed revealing the preoccupation with the phallus, also unearthing an 18-inch terracotta phallus protruding from what was believed to have been a bakery with the inscription, "Hie habitat felicitas" (here dwells happiness), and many Romans wore phallus amulets to ward off the evil-eye.

Priapic worship amongst the women of Sicily continued into the 18th century; worshiping phallic votive objects and kissing such offerings before placing them upon the altar in the churches. Fetishism with the phallus architecturally and in smaller implements was also exhibited by certain Christian sects in medieval times, such as the Manichaeans, and was connected with masochism and sadism, a form of religious flagellantism. Smaller phallic shaped monuments in the form of idols, even vases, rings, drinking vessels and jewellery have been well-documented and could be found within medieval churches of Ireland.
In Hinduism, the Hindu trimurthi represents Brahma, the creator, Vishnu, the preserver and Shiva, the destroyer. Shiva, the main deity in India, is both destroyer and is stated to also include his role of creation; this creation role is represented by the phallic symbol, known as "lingam" in which form he is worshiped or in the form of male trinity of penis and two testicles. The "linga", or phallus, is a common feature of Hindu temples across India, engrained as reliefs or other forms. The Brihadeeswarar Temple of Tanjore in Tamil Nadu, built during the Chola Dynasty, is dedicated to Shiva, and features "lingam" between the cells; it is especially renowned for its "Hall of One Thousand Lingas".

In Indonesia, the phallic "lingga" and feminine "yoni", remain common symbols of harmony. The Sultan's Palace of Kasepuhan, in West Java, has a number of "lingga-yoni" carvings along its walls. According to the Indonesian chronicles of the Babad Tanah Jawi, Prince Puger gained the kingly power from God, by ingesting sperm from the phallus of the already-dead Sultan Amangkurat II of Mataram.

Candi Sukuh temple of Ngancar, East Java, was built in the 10th century and is dedicated to Shiva. The temple has numerous reliefs graphically depicting sexuality and fertility including several stone depictions of a copulating penis and vagina. It consists of a pyramid with reliefs and statues at the front. Among them is a male statue clutching his penis, with three tortoises with flattened shells. The temple once had a striking 1.82 metre (5'11.5 ft) representation of "lingga" with four testicles; this is now housed in the National Museum of Indonesia. Phallic references were also made in Khmer architecture in Cambodia, and several Khmer temples depict the phallus in reliefs.

In Africa, Ancient Malians, particularly the royals of Djenne, decorated their palaces with phallus like piers and columns at the entrance of their palaces and decorated the walls with phallus motifs. Similar features can be seen on the pillars of many temples across Africa, often interpreted by western scholars to be phallic symbols, but may often be more subtle and subject to varying interpretations. Like the ancient Egyptian pharaohs, Aksumite kings built temples with phallic pillars in ancient Ethiopian cities such as Konsu, and monolithic pillars with phallic representation have also been discovered in Madagascar. In ancient Maya, phallic architecture was rare but Uxmal in particular has a considerable number of phallus-like architectural pieces. It contains a temple known as the Temple of the Phallis and phallic sculptures and motifs.

Claude Nicholas Ledoux was a major exponent of architectural development in the 17th century which "articulated across the tensions of form and ornament, symbol, and allegory, dogma, and fantasy", at a time when western society was oppressive and particularly sensitive to public displays of sexuality; blatant and graphic phallic architecture would have been considered an embarrassment and a shameful act. In his initial draft for the House of Pleasure in Chaux (a proposed ideal city, near the Forest of Chaux), Ledoux drew upon allegorical ideas in his design with the union of man and woman, a physiological interpretation of intercourse and penetration. Private bedrooms were designed to "thrust out from the circular ring of the building, metaphorically representing penetration, the circular ring representing the vaginal passage and womb of the female.

The second revised design is said to "subliminate both elevated site and female gender" with a "lonely phallus", without the original planned animated circular ring representing the female reproductive organs. Ledoux drew upon phallic and sexually charged inspiration in other buildings which he designed. His design of Besançon Theatre for instance was fueled by the exigencies of prostitution and ancient sexual ritual. However, in comparison to the likes of Jean-Jacques Lequeu, who gained notoriety for his pornographic architectural concoctions, Ledoux's architectural inspiration was relatively mild, and he is said to have omitted towers from his designs on occasion as he was aware that they would be frowned upon shamefully by general society as a too obvious representation of the phallus; Ledoux's "missing erection" is explained to this effect in Jacques Lecan's "Significance of the Missing Phalus".

According to Oscar Reutersvärd, the interest in neoclassical architecture in the 18th century was synonymous with and motivated by a similar interest in masculine virility. Works such as Francesco Colonna's "Hypnerotomachia Poliphili" (1467) and Giovanni Battista Piranesi's "Campo Marzio" (1762) show profoundly the ancient influence of phallic architecture in design and worship, and contain numerous illustrations of Priapic temples and architecture. Piranesi in particular is said to have offered a "prototype for the mysterious architecture of phallic worship that more closely resembles the houses of pleasure" in his etchings.

He located two designs for the Bustum Caesaris Augusti, concluding that they were based upon sexual ritual, with "two phallic plans penetrating the semicircular cubicula". Piranesi believed that the purpose of the phallic designs were to celebrate virility and male regenerative power. Other commentators such as Carl August Ehrensvärd also provided illustrations and analysis of Priapic temples and the meaning of phallic architecture. A work of note to this effect is "Neoclassical Temple of Virility and the Buildings with a Phallic Shaped Plan" (1977) of the Institute for Art History of the University of Lund, Sweden.

In America, especially in Chicago and New York, and numerous other global cities, high rise skyscrapers of phallic shape grew up in the 20th century. Le Corbusier, the famous architect, propagated it in Europe in place of traditional decorative architecture. Similar futuristic developments took place in Italy with the initiative of Sant’Elia, symbolizing the triumph of man. Yet unlike those of ancient times which were blatant architectural representations of the phallus, in the West in modern times "shrines to the phallus" are more subtle, and may often be subject to interpretation as such; very few architects have specifically admitted the human phallus as a source for their architectural creation. The Italian Fascists were cited as having an obsession with phallic architecture which was rigid and impermeable. In the last few decades the high-rise phallic skyscraper has been a symbol of government quest for economic power in China, Hong Kong and South Korea and the other ASEAN/Pacific Rim nations. China fuels billions of dollars annually into high-rise office and residential buildings with the aim of increasing GDP, at a rate far greater than they can be occupied.

In art and architecture, acutely vertical buildings are often seen as a symbol of masculinity and horizontal buildings are seen as more feminine. The terms "phallic verticality", "phallic erectility" and "phallic brutality" have been referred to by architectural theorists, including the likes of French sociologist Henri Lefebvre, who argued that buildings of phallic architectural type metaphorically symbolize "force, male fertility, masculine violence". Phallic erectility "bestows a special status on the perpendicular, proclaiming phallocracy as the orientation of space" while phallic brutality "does not remain abstract, for it is the brutality of political power."

Lefebvre conducted considerable research into the meaning of high-rise buildings. He said "The arrogant verticality of skyscrapers, and especially of public and state buildings, introduces a phallic or more precisely a phallocratic element into the visual realm; the purpose of this display, of this need to impress, is to convey an impression of authority to each spectator. Verticality and great height have ever been the spatial expression of potentially violent power." Sigmund Freud metaphorically drew a comparison between "high achievement and the acquisition of wealth as building monuments to our penises."

In the 19th century, Thomas Mical argues that surrealists "capitalized on the phallic symbolism of monuments such as the ancient Egyptian obelisk from Luxor in the Place de la Concorde or the Vendome Column" by "supplementing these phallic structures with female counterparts". Jules Breton for example suggested moving the obelisk to La Villette abattoir and designing a large gloved hand of a woman holding the obelisk in a suggestive manner, and adapting the Vendome into a factory chimney with a nude woman climbing it.
Auguste Bartholdi's 1870 monument "Defense of Paris" for instance, a commemoration of Leon Gambetta's escape from Paris in balloon during the Franco-Prussian War, was also subject to debate amongst Parisian artists of the late 19th century as they believed it resembled a testicle. Arthur Harfaux proposed turning the monument into "an enormous sex, the balloon forming a testicle and the phallus being horizontal", while Breton proposed turning it into copulating genitals, adding a twin balloon to form two testicles.
Contemporary scholars in architectural criticism have investigated the relationship between architecture and the body, sexuality, sex, power, and place. Feminists in particular, such as Margrit Kennedy, perceive high-rise phallic-like buildings on the urban landscape as "phallic symbols of male domination, power and rational instrumentality." Esther M. K. Cheung believes the form of monumental high-rise building which grew up in 20th century America can "be read as a phallic symbol of power". The present trend symbolises "Science and technology over nature, incorporating all the maleness which that with sci-fi utopias." Elizabeth Grosz, however, offers a counter argument to phallocentrism in urban design theories, saying "not so much the dominance of the phallus as the pervasive unacknowledged use of the male or masculine to represent the human. The problem, then, is not so much to eliminate as to reveal the masculinity inherent in the notion of the universal, the generic human, or the unspecified subject." Marc C. Taylor discusses phallic architecture and what makes a building masculine or feminine in his book "Disfiguring: Art, Architecture, Religion".

During the modern era, many sculptors have created some public phallic works of art, with varying degrees of subtlety. One of these examples may be the statue in honor to the Carnation Revolution on the top of a hill in Lisbon, Portugal by the sculptor João Cutileiro. Perhaps the greatest example of a phallic cemetery is the Khalid Nabi Cemetery in hills of northeastern Iran near the border with Turkmenistan, roughly northeast of Gonbad-e Kavous. According to a popular belief, the cemetery house the tomb of a pre-Islamic prophet, Khalid Nabi, who was born 40 years prior to the birth of Muhammad, in c. 530. The ancient graveyard contains some 600 tombstones of unknown origin, many of which are clear representations of the phallus; from a distance they resemble stone pegs.
Phallic shrines are common in Far East Asia, especially in Buddhist parts of Korea and Japan where they are seen as symbols of fertility or prowess. In Dragon Pool Temple in Jeju City, there is a phallic shrine which is visited by female pilgrims who come to worship it for its perceived fertility blessings. The phallic stone is made from granite, quite small in size and white and was reportedly found in a field nearby by a farmer.

In Thailand, the phallus is also considered to be a symbol of good luck and representative of fertility. There are numerous shrines in the country featuring phallic architecture. Chao Mae Tuptim shrine in Bangkok, behind the Swissôtel Bangkok hotel has over a hundred colored circumcised wooden penis statues of all shapes and sizes which are said to possess special cosmic powers and endow good fortune and fertility on anybody coming into contact with them.

Near Erdene Zuu Monastery in Övörkhangai Province of Mongolia is Kharkhorin Rock which contains a massive statue of a penis raised on a platform on the steppe. The statue has dual functions; primarily it is a reminder to the monks to remain celibate, but it is also a symbol of fertility and human life. A smaller statue of a phallus is nearer the monastery. Haesindang Park (also known as "Penis Park") in Gangwon Province of South Korea, located about south of Samcheok, is a nature park which contains a number of erect statues. A tragic legend shrouds them in that a virgin was once swept out to sea and drowned, unable to be saved by her lover. The townspeople were devastated and helpless, and a curse appeared to have been cast over them, ruining the local fishing industry. One day, a local fisherman relieved himself in the sea and miraculously the fishing industry revived. He discovered that her restless spirit could be appeased in such a manner, so the townsfolk compensated for the woman's inability to consummate beyond the grave by placing sexually potent phallic statues in view of the shore. The statues range in size and styles; some have faces on them and are more animated in appearance and more colorful, but others are exact depictions of the human penis.

In some Asian countries such as Bhutan, many have a belief that a phallus brings good luck and drives away evil spirits. Phallus symbols are routinely painted outside walls of the new houses and carved wooden phalluses are hung (sometimes crossed by a design of sword or dagger) outside, on the eves of the new homes, at the four corners. On a road drive from Paro airport to Thimphu explicit paintings of phalluses are a common sight on the white-washed walls of homes, shops and eateries. In the Chimi Lhakhang monastery, the shrine dedicated to Drupka Kinley, several wooden penises are used to bless people who visit the monastery on pilgrimage seeking blessings to bear a child or for welfare of their children. The glaringly displayed phallus in the monastery is a brown wooden piece with a silver handle, a religious relic considered to possess divine powers and hence used for blessing the spiritually oriented people. It is also said to prevent quarrels among family members in the houses which are painted with these symbols.

The 102-story Empire State Building, located in Midtown Manhattan, New York City, at the intersection of Fifth Avenue and West 34th Street, is one of the world's most famous landmarks, and is generally thought of as an American cultural icon. Cited by Valerie Briginshaw as a symbol of American pride and "the ultimate sign of American phallic power", it was inaugurated on 31 May 1931.

Designed in the Art Deco style, it has a roof height of 1,250 feet (381 meters), and with its antenna spire included, it stands a total of 1,454 ft (443.2 m) high. It stood as the world's tallest building for 40 years, from its completion in 1931 until construction of the World Trade Center's North Tower was completed in 1972. After the World Trade Center was destroyed on September 11, 2001, it remained the tallest building in New York City for 13 years until the One World Trade Center was completed. Numerous people have mentioned its similarities in appearance to the phallus, with its "tall and glinting" towers.

The Leaning Tower of Pisa in Pisa, Italy, dating from around 1173, has long suffered from structural problems. The tower is eight stories high at and before restoration work from 1990 leaned 5.5 degrees. It currently leans about 4 degrees but due to foundation problems it continues to sink about 1mm annually. The resemblance of the tower to a penis has seen the "Leaning Tower of Pisa" became a sexual slang term for a half erect penis. Local retailers have attempted to capitalize on the tower as a phallic architectural piece by making souvenirs featuring underwear with the tower resembling a penis. The Catholic Church denounced the promotion of the tower in such a manner as showing "a complete lack of respect" and a "disgrace" and retailers can now be fined up to €500 for selling items promoting the tower as a penis.

Nelson's Column, a monument to Admiral Horatio Nelson, was erected by a grateful nation between 1840 and 1843 to commemorate Nelson's victory at the Battle of Trafalgar. However the Nelson Memorial Committee ran out of money, having only raised £20,485 in public subscriptions. The column is Corinthian with a granite shaft. In his poem "A Ballad of the Good Lord Nelson", Lawrence Durrell included the multiply allusive lines "Now stiff on a pillar with a phallic air/Nelson stylites in Trafalgar Square/Reminds the British what once they were."

Colonna Mediterranea is a monumental column in Luqa, Malta. It has been described by its artist Paul Vella Critien as an "Egyptian symbol". However at a glance it could be observed to look similar to a large penile, and therefor was largely described to be a "phallic monument". The monument has managed to attract several international media coverage in specific before and during the visit of Pope Benedict XVI to Malta as the pope mobile, carrying the papacy, had been planned and passed by it. Similarly the same artist has created another monumental column, the Kolonna Eterna, which was also described as being phallic by critics.

The Obelisk of Luxor, which stands in the Place de la Concorde of Paris, France, was given to the French by the Egyptians in the 1800s. The 23-meter (75-foot) obelisk originally stood at the front of Luxor Temple, honoring Ramses II, pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt. According to Michael D. Garval, the French perceived the obelisk as "prodigiously phallic" from the moment it arrived.

The Oriental Pearl TV Tower, located in Pudong Park in Lujiazui, Shanghai, China, is the world’s third tallest TV and radio tower at , the tallest such building in Asia. The tower houses restaurants, theaters, a conference hall, and a hotel and is a significant tourist attraction in the city. The tower has been met a mixed reception, however. "The New York Times" described it as a "great phallic monster of truly monumental ugliness, a bit like an enormous asparagus with a silver ball on top." The long steel column tower is considered by some to be proof of the city's phallic worship, and that such skyscrapers indicative of wealth are an increasing aphrodisiac of the materialist in Chinese cities.

The Burj Qatar was designed by French architect Jean Nouvel. In 2004, the project was first called the "High Rise Office Building". Following completion in 2012, it was originally called the "Burj Doha" by its owner, H. E. Sheikh Saud bin Muhammed Al Thani. 
The public has noted the building's "phallic form", suggestive of what Nouvel calls a “fully assumed virility.”

The State Capitol building of Lincoln, Nebraska has been cited as the "apex" of phallic architecture. At 15 stories and 400 feet (121 m) tall, it is the second-tallest U.S. statehouse, surpassed only by the 34-story Louisiana State Capitol. It is the tallest building in Lincoln, the third-tallest in the state, and also the heaviest Capitol building in North America. The building was designed by Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue, who drew upon Classical and Gothic architectural traditions. It was constructed between 1922 and 1932, of Indiana limestone, with a golden dome. The building is nicknamed "The Phallus of the Plains" for its phallus-like appearance.

30 St Mary Axe opened in London in April 2004. Designed by Norman Foster, the structure, London’s first environmentally sustainable tall building using recycled and recyclable materials, has been compared to the phallus and a gherkin, which also is a slang term for "small penis"; its nicknames include Gherkin, the Erotic Gherkin, Towering Innuendo and the Crystal Phallus. Also likened to a "phallic fat cigar", the building has been cited as a "crude anatomical metaphor", yet has become one of the London's most iconic buildings. "Cabinet" voted it the "Best Uncircumcised Building in the World".

The Torre Agbar is a 38-story skyscraper located in the Plaça de les Glòries Catalanes of the Poblenou neighborhood of Barcelona, Spain. Designed by Jean Nouvel, it is named after its owners, the Agbar Group, a holding company whose interests include the Barcelona water company Aigües de Barcelona. An example of high-tech architecture in the city, its design combines a number of different architectural concepts, resulting in a striking structure built with reinforced concrete, covered with a facade of glass, and over 4,500 window openings cut out of the structural concrete. The building stands out on the skyline of Barcelona; it is the third tallest building in the city, standing at 144.44 m (473.88 ft), with an area of over 50,000 square metres, of which 30,000 are offices. 2,500 LED bulbs cause the tower to change color at night. It was officially opened by the King of Spain on 16 September 2005. Nouvel claims it to be inspired by a geyser and the nearby mountain of Montserrat, although he does note its phallic appearance. Although many draw comparisons with the phallus, locals refer to the structure as "el supositorio" (the suppository), a drug delivery system that is inserted into the rectum or vagina.

The Washington Monument in Washington D.C. is often seen as a prime example of phallic architecture and American masculinity. The towering monument, made of marble, granite, and bluestone gneiss, it is both the world's tallest stone structure and the world's tallest obelisk, standing according to the National Park Service. Construction of the monument began in 1848, was halted from 1854 to 1877, and was completed in 1884. In a "Journal" review, dated 17 October 1911, Arnold Bennett said of the monument, "Saw Washington monument. Phallic. Appalling. A national catastrophe – only equalled by the Albert Memorial. Tiny doll-like people waiting to go into it." Dan Burstein says of it, "Speaking of sex symbols, there is no more phallic symbol in existence than the Washington Monument, and the Capitol dome can be viewed as breastlike." James Webb used a metaphor to praise the "uplift[ing]" power of the Washington Monument as a white phallus, "piercing the air like a bayonet". In the futuristic film "Hardwired", set in the United States where everything noteworthy is commercialized, the Washington Monument is used as a giant Trojan condoms billboard.

Ypsilanti Water Tower is a historic water tower in Ypsilanti, Michigan, United States, listed as a National Register of Historic Places building in 1981. The tower was designed by William R. Coats and constructed as part of an elaborate city waterworks project that began in 1889. Located on the highest point in Ypsilanti, the tower was completed in 1890 at a cost of $21,435.63. Today the tower is frequently joked about for its phallic shape and has earned the nickname "Brick Dick".

It has become a well-known landmark in Ypsilanti, and due to the building's shape and location, the tower is frequently used by residents as a point for providing directions for visitors and residents. Iggy Pop said of it in a 1996 interview, "The most famous thing in Ypsilanti is this water tower made out of brick, about 175 years old. It looks like this big penis."

The World's Most Phallic Building contest was a contest held in 2003 by "Cabinet" magazine to find the building which most resembled a human phallus. The contest originated when writer Jonathan Ames drew the ire of "Slate" readers by claiming, in a diary that was later published in his book "I Love You More Than You Know", that the Williamsburg Bank Building in Brooklyn, New York City, New York, was the world's most phallic. This led Cabinet magazine to initiate a search of its own to find which building was truly the "world's most phallic". Cities and readers subsequently poured in their views and staked their claims to the magazine's editors. After months of entries and discussion, the Ypsilanti Water Tower was announced as the winner, although the winner of a readers' poll was the Florida State Capitol building in Tallahassee. Another notable nominee was the Torre Agbar of Barcelona.

The Christian Science Dixon church in Dixon, Illinois strongly resembles a penis when viewed from the air.The church, however, claims it was tastefully designed around an old oak tree and declared that "We didn’t design it to be seen as what they’re seeing. And we didn’t design it to be seen from above."

In 2012, a beehive metal sculpture by Thompson Dagnall in Hyde, Greater Manchester, was criticized by the council for installment adjacent to the children’s play area in Hyde park for looking too rude and phallic. Although Dagnall was paid £3,500 a week for his efforts, council workers modified the structure by stumping it and moved it to another part of the park.

A new headquarters for the "People's Daily" newspaper has been under construction and is slated for completion in 2014. In May 2013, China attempted to censor jokes about its phallic shape.

The high Hyde Park Obelisk, located in Hyde Park, Sydney Australia at the intersection of Elizabeth Street and Bathurst Street, is both a former sewer ventshaft and a notable landmark in the Sydney CBD. Its phallic appearance was emphasised on 7 November 2014, when the AIDS Council of NSW (ACON) temporarily installed a giant condom over the Obelisk as part of a HIV awareness campaign. The installation generated a lot of media interest—including many phallic innuendos—and drew the ire of the Australian Christian Lobby.




</doc>
<doc id="37009720" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37009720" title="Turning Tables">
Turning Tables

"Turning Tables" is a song recorded by English singer-songwriter Adele for her second studio album, "21". Conceived after an altercation with her former lover, the song was co-written by Adele and singer-songwriter Ryan Tedder, whilst the production was completed by Jim Abbiss. "Turning Tables" is a pop ballad with a soulful sound; its instrumentation consists of piano, "Broadway-worthy" strings and guitar. Lyrically, the song describes a domestic dispute in which its narrator assumes a defensive stance against a manipulative ex-lover. XL Recordings sent the song to UK mainstream radio on 5 November 2011 as the fifth single from "21" along with "Rumour Has It".

"Turning Tables" received acclaim from music critics, who praised Adele's vocals and its production. The song reached the top-twenty of the singles charts in four countries, including Belgium, Italy and the Netherlands. It also peaked at number 62 on the UK Singles Chart and 63 on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for selling over 500,000 digital downloads. Adele performed "Turning Tables" on television shows such as "Late Night with David Letterman" in the US and "The Jonathan Ross Show" in the UK and included it on the Adele Live concert tour. American actress and singer Gwyneth Paltrow performed a cover of the single in the "Glee" episode "A Night of Neglect".

In April 2009, 20-year-old Adele, who had recently embarked on her first serious relationship with a man 10 years her senior, began composing the follow-up to her 2008 debut album "19". In response to the media's typecasting her as an "old soul" due to the vintage production and sentimental nature of her songs, Adele decided on a more upbeat and contemporary second album. However, studio sessions were generally unproductive and, after two weeks, yielded only one song recorded to the singer's satisfaction—the Jim Abbiss-produced "Take It All", a lovelorn piano ballad not unlike the songs on "19". Disillusioned with her lack of inspiration and the slow progress of the studio sessions, she cancelled the remaining recording dates. Adele had written "Take It All" during a difficult moment in her relationship. When she played the song for her boyfriend, the two got into a bitter argument that culminated in the end of their 18-month relationship. Heartbroken but musically stimulated, the singer channelled her rush of emotions into her music, crafting songs that examined her failed relationship from the perspectives of vengeful ex-lover, heartbroken victim, and nostalgic old flame.

After several recording sessions with writers and producers like Paul Epworth, Fraser T Smith and Rick Rubin, Adele got enough material for creating a full LP. She released her second studio album on 19 January 2011 under the title "21". Adele first intended to title the album "Rolling in the Deep", her adaptation of the slang phrase "roll deep", which summarises how she felt about her relationship; in her loose translation, the phrase refers to having someone "that has your back" and always supports you. However, the singer later deemed the title too confusing for some of her audiences. Although she had wanted to avoid the number motif of her debut, Adele considered "21" the most fitting title as it represented her age at the time of the album's composition, serving as an autobiographical period piece, and symbolised the personal maturity and artistic evolution since her debut.

"Turning Tables" was written by American singer-songwriter and frontman of pop-rock band OneRepublic, Ryan Tedder and Adele herself. The production of the song was helmed by Jim Abbiss. When the demos to two songs were completed, Adele approached Tedder, who was in London at the time for a radio show. Tedder had expressed interest in collaborating with the singer after they met at the 2009 Grammy Awards ceremony in February. He arrived four hours early to their first studio session held at Sphere Studios in London, buying time to better familiarise himself with some of her previous work. Although unaware of Adele's personal predicament, he composed the opening piano sequence and first few lines of "Turning Tables".

Coincidentally, it perfectly captured the experience of the singer, who arrived at the studio moments after another altercation with her former lover. Angry and unfocused, she denounced her ex-lover's tendency to "turn the tables" on her during their arguments, an expression that Tedder decided to reference in the song's lyrics. Adele recorded the demo with Abbis the following day. "Turning Tables" was mixed by Abbiss and Ian Dowling. Neil Cowley played the piano in the song, while the string arrangement was made by Chris Elliot. The strings were played by Patrick Kernan, Stephen Morris, Tom Pigott-Smith, Julian Leaper, Boguslaw Kostecki, Bruce White, Peter Lale, Rachel Stephanie Bolt, David Danels, Caroline Dale, Warren Zelnski, Jackie Shave, Chris Laurence, Rita Manning, Cathy Thompson, Emlyn Singleton and Chris Worsey. XL Recordings serviced the song to UK mainstream radio on 5 November 2011 as fifth single from "21" alongside "Rumour Has It". On 14 December 2011, the song was sent for airplay to Italian radio stations.

"Turning Tables" is a pop ballad with a soulful sound that lasts for four minutes and 10 seconds. John Murphy of musicOMH recognized the single as a fragile piano ballad which shows off Adele's voice to its best effect. Sputnikmusic's Joseph Viney described the song as a delicate ballad that possesses an astonishing beauty. Its instrumentation consists of piano, "Broadway-worthy" strings and guitar. According to the digital sheet music published by Sony/ATV Music Publishing, "Turning Tables" is written in the key of C minor and set in common time, with 78 beats per minute. Adele's vocal range spans from the low note of G to the high note of C.

Lyrically, "Turning Tables" is a song of domestic dispute, where its narrator assumes a defensive stance against a manipulative ex-lover. Reconciling herself with the termination of a contentious relationship, she vows emotional distance to shield herself from future heartbreak. Bryan Boyd of "The Irish Times" likened the singer to 1980s Welsh rocker Bonnie Tyler in delivering the vocals with a mixture of anger, pain and pathos. According to "Paste" magazine, cinematic strings "serve as fitting counterpoint to [the song's] heartbroken, hollowed-out lyrics." "Turning Tables" opens with a piano sequence after which Adele sings the first lines: "Close enough to start a war/All that I have is on the floor". The chorus consists of the lyrics: "So I won't let you / Close enough to hurt me / No, I won't rescue / You to just desert me / I can't give you / The heart you think you gave me / It's time to say goodbye / To turning tables."

"Turning Tables" received acclaim from music critics. Ian Walker of the website AbsolutePunk commented that the song "contains some of the album's greatest vocal moments, further cementing Adele's reputation as a competent vocalist showing no signs of stopping." A writer from the "Daily Herald" said that Adele sounds "epic" on the song. "Entertainment Weekly"s Leah Greenblatt found a "scorned-woman balladry" in the song. Greg Kot of the "Chicago Tribune" found a "piano-based melancholy" in the song. A reviewer of HauteThought wrote that "Adele's natural ease and original tone shines in Turning Tables. The song allows her to explore her upper register without ignoring the lower, soulful sound she always seems able create." Lily Moayeri stated that on the "barely contained 'Turning Tables', Adele lets forth her formidable lungpower." Ryan Reed of "Paste" called the single "tearjerking", while Margaret Wappler of "Los Angeles Times" labeled the song as "softly sentimental".

"Turning Tables" debuted at its peak of number 63 on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 for the issue dated 7 May 2011. The next week, the song dropped 21 places to number 85 and became the biggest fall of the week. The single stayed on the chart for total of three weeks and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for selling over 500,000 digital copies. As of May 2015 "Turning Tables" has sold 883,000 digital downloads in the US alone. On the Canadian Hot 100, the song debuted at number 60 for the issue dated 7 May 2011. It fell to number 91 the next week becoming the biggest fall of the week. "Turning Tables" was certified gold by Music Canada for selling over 40,000 digital copies of the song. In the UK, it entered the singles chart at its peak of number 62 on 14 May 2011. On 21 May 2011 "Turning Tables" dropped to number 80, before falling of the chart the next week. On 17 September 2011 the song re-entered the UK Singles Chart at number 68. It was more successful on Belgium Ultratip singles chart where it reached number two in Wallonia and number four in Flanders. "Turning Tables" debuted at number nine on the Italian Singles Chart on 19 January 2012. After three weeks on the chart, the song reached its peak of number eight on 16 February 2012.

Adele performed "Turning Tables" at Live at Largo in Los Angeles on 9 February 2011. Robie Daw of Idolator recognized the performance as "intimate" and commented that it featured Adele's soulful vocals simply accompanied by "haunting" piano chords. She performed the single on VH1 Unplugged on 3 March 2011. Adele performed the song at "Late Night with David Letterman"; the performance was later uploaded to her Vevo account on YouTube. On 4 September 2011, the singer performed "Turning Tables" at the premiere of "The Jonathan Ross Show" and was also interviewed. "Turning Tables" was part of the set list on Adele's second concert tour entitled Adele Live (2011). On 22 November 2011, Adele unveiled a video of her performance of the song from the concert held at the Royal Albert Hall in London. The performance was later included in her first video album "Live at the Royal Albert Hall" which was released on 25 November 2011. Adele described the concert as the most special show that she would ever play. Adele performed the song on 27 January 2012 at Live from the Artists Den. During the performance the singer stated: "Nothing in life moves me as much as being on stage does. I love the closeness of playing in small rooms, and this room was lovely and simple, just beautiful."

"Turning Tables" was covered by American actress and singer Gwyneth Paltrow, in the "A Night of Neglect" episode of the Fox Broadcasting Company television show "Glee". Her performance of the song was considered inferior to the original. Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" named it her least-favorite of Paltrow's covers to date and said that her vocals "lacked the texture that made Adele's version so heartbreaking." Sandra Gonzalez of "Entertainment Weekly" gave it her lowest grade of the episode, a "B–", and Aly Semigran of MTV opined that while Paltrow is "a nice enough singer," she "in no way has the chops" the song requires. Whilst "The Wall Street Journal"'s Raymund Flandez called it a "scene-stealing turn" and commended it visually and vocally, he noted that Paltrow lacks Adele's veracity. Released as a single, this version peaked at number 66 on US "Billboard" Hot 100 and Canadian Hot 100. As of 2 July 2012, the "Glee" version had sold 113,000 paid downloads in the US alone. Co-writer of the song Ryan Tedder performed the song at Denver's Acoustic Christmas (a charity concert hosted by all Colorado artists) with his band OneRepublic in 2011.

Credits adapted from the liner notes of "21", XL Recordings.

Recording

Personnel

 



</doc>
<doc id="37104805" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37104805" title="Lepiota babruzalka">
Lepiota babruzalka

Lepiota babruzalka is an agaric mushroom of the genus "Lepiota" in the order Agaricales. Described as new to science in 2009, it is found in Kerala State, India, where it grows on the ground in litterfall around bamboo stems. Fruit bodies have caps that measure up to in diameter, and are covered with reddish-brown scales. The cap is supported by a long and slender stem up to long and thick. One of the distinguishing microscopic features of the species is the variably shaped cystidia found on the edges of the gills.

The species was first described by Arun Kumar Thirovoth Kottuvetta and P. Manimohan in the journal "Mycotaxon" in 2009, in a survey of the genus "Lepiota" in Kerala State in southern India. The holotype collection was made in 2004 in Chelavur, located in the Kozhikode District; it is now kept in the herbarium of Kew Gardens. The specific epithet "babruzalka" derives from the Sanskrit word for "brown-scaled".

The fruit bodies of "Lepiota babruzalka" have caps that start out roughly spherical, and as they expand become broadly convex, and eventually flat, with a blunt umbo. The cap attains a diameter of . Its whitish surface is covered with small, reddish-brown, pressed-down scales that are more numerous in the center. The margin is initially curved inward, but straightens out in age, and retains hanging remnants of the partial veil. The gills are white, and free from attachment to the stem. They are crowded together, with two or three tiers of interspersed lamellulae (short gills that do not extend fully from the cap edge to the stem). Viewed with a hand lens, the edges of the gills appear to be fringed. The stem is cylindrical with a bulbous base, initially solid before becoming hollow, and measures long by 1–1.5 mm thick. The stem surface is whitish, but will stain a light brown color if handled. In young fruit bodies, the stems have a whitish, membranous ring on the upper half, but the ring does not last long before disintegrating. The flesh is thin (up to 1 mm), whitish, and lacks any appreciable odor.

"Lepiota babruzalka" produces a white spore print. Spores are roughly elliptical to somewhat cylindrical, hyaline (translucent), and measure 5.5–10.5 by 3.5–4.5 µm. They are thick-walled and contain a refractive oil droplet. The basidia (spore-bearing cells) are club-shaped, hyaline, and are one- to four-spored with sterigmata up to 8 µm long; the dimensions of the basidia are 15–20 by 7–8 µm. Cheilocystidia (cystidia on the edge of the gill) are plentiful, and can assume a number of shapes, including cylindrical to club-shaped, utriform (like a wineskin bottle), to ventricose-rostrate (where the basal and middle portions are swollen and the apex extends into a beak-like protrusion). The cheilocystidia are thin-walled, and measure 13–32 by 7–12 µm; there are no cystidia on the gill faces (pleurocystidia).

The gill tissue is made of thin-walled hyphae containing a septum, which are hyaline to pale yellow, and measure 3–15 µm wide. The cap tissue comprises interwoven, inflated hyphae with widths between 2 and 25 µm. Neither the gill tissue nor the cap tissue show any color reaction when stained with Melzer's reagent. Clamp connections are rare in the hyphae of "Lepiota babruzalka".

According to the authors, the only "Lepiota" bearing a close resemblance to "L. babruzalka" is "L. roseoalba", an edible mushroom described by Paul Christoph Hennings in 1891. Found in Africa and Iran, "L. roseoalba" lacks the reddish-brown scales on the cap, has radial grooves on the cap margin, and its stem is not as slender as those of "L. babruzalka".

Fruit bodies of "Lepiota babruzalka" grow singly or scattered on the ground among decaying leaf litter around the base of bamboo stands. The species has been documented only from Chelavur and Nilambur in the Kozhikode and Malappuram Districts of Kerala State. As of 2009, there are 22 "Lepiota" taxa (21 species and 1 variety) known from Kerala, which is recognized as a biodiversity hotspot.



</doc>
<doc id="37140875" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37140875" title="Tropical Storm Norman (2012)">
Tropical Storm Norman (2012)

Tropical Storm Norman was the fourteenth tropical cyclone of the 2012 Pacific hurricane season that brought minor flooding to western Mexico and record rainfall to areas of Texas in September 2012. Originating from a disturbance near the southern tip of Baja California, it soon moves north and developed into a tropical cyclone on September 28. Upon developing into one, Norman attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph (85 km/h). Heading northward into the Gulf of California, the storm began to weaken later that day due to southwesterly wind shear and land interaction. Norman curved northwestward and weakened to a tropical depression early on September 29. Around that time, it briefly moved inland near Topolobampo, Sinaloa, before re-emerging into the Gulf of California. Later on September 29, Norman degenerated into a remnant low pressure area.

In anticipation of the storm, a tropical storm warning was issued for a portion of the Pacific coast of Mexico. Additionally, orange, yellow, green, and blue alerts were posted for several states. About 553 shelters were opened, though only 65 people sought refuge in them. Heavy rainfall from Norman was reported in Colima, Jalisco, Nayarit, Sinaloa, Baja California Sur, Durango, and Zacatecas. In Baja California Sur, mudslides and flooding left roads impassable, mainly in the La Paz area. Flooding in Sinola left streets inundated and about 150 families fled their homes. About 24 cars in the area were swept away. The remnants of Norman brought record rainfall totals to some areas of Texas. Local flooding occurred, with a few roads inundated in Wimberley. A woman died after her vehicle was swept off the road.

A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on September 12. The wave moved westward across the Atlantic basin with minimal deep convection. By September 23, it reached the eastern Pacific Ocean and began increasing in shower and thunderstorm activity over the next few days. While located near Acapulco another burst in convection occurred on September 25, likely due to interaction with the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). Around that time, the National Hurricane Center began Tropical Weather Outlooks (TWOs) on the system, which is information issued every six hours on significant areas of disturbed weather and their potential for development out to 48 hours. The tropical wave split on September 26, with the northern portion moving northwestward near the southwestern coast of Mexico. By September 27, the system had organized deep convection and was producing tropical storm force winds, but data from scatterometers indicated that it lacked a closed circulation. Although TWOs issued on September 27 predicted a high probability for development, the chances for tropical cyclogenesis was decreased later that day, due to the system's close proximity to land.

On September 28, satellite data and ships' observations indicated a closed circulation. Thus, Tropical Storm Norman developed at 0600 UTC, while located about southeast of Cabo San Lucas. Initially, the storm was expected to intensify slightly before making landfall on September 29 and then dissipate on the following day. However, upon developing into a tropical cyclone at 1200 UTC on September 28, Norman attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 50 mph (85 km/h). Thereafter, Norman began heading northward between a mid-to upper-level low to its west and a mid-level ridge over the Gulf of Mexico. Later on September 28, the storm entered the Gulf of California and began weakening due to a significant increase in wind shear and interaction with land. Around that time, the cloud pattern became less organized and convection was being displaced from the circulation. Early on September 29, the storm curved northwestward and was downgraded to a tropical depression due to difficulty in locating the center of circulation and significant disorganization. Norman made landfall near Topolobampo with winds of 35 mph (55 km/h) at 0500 UTC on September 29. Shortly thereafter, the storm re-curved west-northwestward and re-emerged into the Gulf of California. Norman degenerated into a remnant low pressure area at 1200 UTC on September 29. The remnant low moved slowly west-southwestward, before dissipating over Baja California Sur near Loreto on September 30.

The Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning along the Pacific coast of Mexico from La Cruz, Sinaloa to Huatabampo at 1500 UTC on September 28. Early on the following day, the tropical storm warning was discontinued. An orange alert" (high risk) was issued for parts of the state of Sinaloa, and a yellow alert was in effect for Baja California Sur, and green alert was declared for southern Sonora. A "blue alert", minimum risk, was issued for north-central Sonora, Durango, Chihuahua and Zacatecas. Officials deployed 400 soldiers in the cities of La Paz and Los Cabos. According to the state director of Civil Protection, Carlos Enriquez Rincon, 500 schools were available to operate as temporary shelters. The shelters have a capacity of around 30,000 people, though only 65 people spent the first night of the storm in shelters. Furthermore, a total of 5,000 food packages were sent to residents. In the mainland, authorities in the municipality of Culiacán opened 53 shelters, with a total capacity of over 7,000. In addition, classes were suspended in 5 states.

Tropical Storm Norman brought extremely heavy rains to Colima, Jalisco, Nayarit, Sinaloa, Baja California Sur, Durango, and Zacatecas. The ports of Cabo San Lucas and San Jose del Cabo were closed for boats and water activities. In the former, waves were recorded. Due to mudslides and wash flooding over 24 cars were swept away in La Paz. In Sinaloa, the rains caused by Norman did not represent an important contribution to the 11 dams in the state, with mean water levels rising from 42.5% to 42.6%. Eight fisherman were rescued near the port of Mazatlan when their boat tipped over. Five fisherman were initially reported missing; however, following the passage of the storm, the missing people were later found alive. Street flooding was also reported. A total of 150 families were evacuated in two fishing villages along the mainland. Following the storm, a state of emergency was declared for the municipalities of Los Cabos, Angostura, and Navolato.

The remnants of Norman brought record rains to Texas. A peak rainfall total of fell on La Pryor. At Camp Mabry in Austin, of rain fell in a 24‑hour period, breaking a daily precipitation record set in 1985. However, across the central portion of the state, rainfall from the system was less than expected. A few roads in Wimberley were temporarily closed due to flooding. One woman was killed in Nacogdoches County after her car was swept off a roadway. A tornado warning was also issued in the Corpus Christi area.



</doc>
<doc id="37245036" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37245036" title="Country Bill's">
Country Bill's

Country Bill's Restaurant was a family-owned American-style steakhouse and seafood restaurant in the Woodstock neighborhood of southeast Portland, Oregon, in the United States. Adjacent to the restaurant was a bar called CB's Lounge. The restaurant opened in 1964 when ownership transferred from Bill Blake to Ron Thomas' family. Though Thomas was not particularly fond of the name of the business Blake had established in 1960, he was unable to afford new signage and kept the lounge's title. Over time the restaurant grew from a hamburger stand into a family dining restaurant, expanding from one space to four. In 1978, the family purchased the building and property following the landlord's death.

Eventually, Thomas transferred the business to one of his two sons, Craig. Craig and his wife decided to retire in 2011 and none of their children wanted to continue operating the restaurant. The business and the building were listed for sale in February 2011. Country Bill's closed in September 2012 after 48 years of operation. The restaurant had low staff turnover and dedicated patrons, hundreds of whom visited during its final days. Country Bill's was also known for its Brat Pack era decor, including red clamshell booths, mood lighting supplied by electric candles, metallic wallpaper and wood paneling. Following closure, the building underwent interior and exterior renovation to make spaces available for new tenants.

Country Bill's Restaurant opened in 1964 after Ron Thomas' family purchased the business from Bill Blake for $600. Blake had named his lounge Country Bill's in 1960 but the business was unsuccessful. Thomas had been in the food service industry in Utah previously and ended up living in Portland after a series of relocations with his family. Though he was not fond of the lounge's name, Thomas was unable to afford new signage and kept the title. Over time the restaurant grew from a hamburger stand into a family dining restaurant, expanding east from one space to four. In 1978, the family purchased the building and property following the death of their landlord.

Ownership stayed within the family, eventually transferring to Craig Thomas, one of Ron's two sons, both of whom worked in the restaurant for numerous years. Craig Thomas and his wife decided to retire in 2011 and none of their children wanted to continue operating the restaurant. In February 2011, Country Bill's and the building were listed for sale for $975,000. The restaurant closed on September 15, 2012, after 48 years of operation. Hundreds of customers, some from as far away as Europe, visited the restaurant during its final days.

Following the restaurant's closing in 2012, the building underwent interior and exterior renovation, resulting in two spaces for future tenants, one of which has been confirmed as a dental office.

Country Bill's served American food, originally operating as a hamburger stand, before becoming a steakhouse and seafood restaurant. The menu included prime rib, razor clams and steelhead; meals were accompanied by soup or salad and a potato as sides. Slot machines were available on site but the business made 70 percent of its income from food. Adjacent to the restaurant was a bar reminiscent of the Brat Pack era called CB's Lounge. 

In his review for "Willamette Week", Ben Waterhouse asserted that the restaurant had changed little since its establishment. Waterhouse stated "time travel" was Country Bill's form of entertainment, noting its red vinyl booths, wood paneling and "white-haired" clientele. He recommended ordering beer or spirits (specifically Anchor Steam) as opposed to cocktails, which he found contained too much sugar. "Mix" magazine reviewed Country Bill's as one of "five vintage restaurants that have stood the test of time". In his review, Michael Russell described CB's Lounge's red clamshell booths, electric candles and the servers "who alternate between alarmingly fresh-faced and downright sassy". Russell recommended the hand-cut garlic French fries and deep fried cheesecake, which he described as "country-fair gluttony incarnate". "The Portland Mercury" also described the restaurant's retro features such as the plush red booths, mood lighting and metallic wallpaper. The publication also noted the older waiting staff.

Country Bill's was known for its low staff turnover and dedicated patrons. According to Craig Thomas, the family's formula for success included a hard work ethic, loyal staff and a "common-sense approach" to business. The cook worked for the restaurant for 43 years, starting at age 16. Longtime customers and employees reportedly felt its closing was "almost like losing a family member". "The Oregonian" wrote about Country Bill's last days in articles about local restaurant and economic news, noting the business's longevity.




</doc>
<doc id="37353736" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37353736" title="28th Battalion (Australia)">
28th Battalion (Australia)

The 28th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army. It was raised in early 1915 as part of the First Australian Imperial Force for service during the First World War and formed part of the 7th Brigade, attached to the 2nd Division. It fought during the final stages of the Gallipoli campaign in late 1915 and then on the Western Front between 1916 and 1918. At the end of the war, the 28th was disbanded in 1919 but was re-raised in 1921, as a part-time unit based in Western Australia. During the Second World War, the 28th undertook defensive duties in Australia for the majority of the conflict, before seeing action against the Japanese in the New Britain campaign in 1944–1945. The battalion was disbanded in March 1946 but was re-formed in 1948 as an amalgamated unit with the 16th Battalion, before being unlinked in 1952 and re-raised as a full battalion following the reintroduction of national service. It remained on the Australian Army's order of battle until 1960 when it was subsumed into the Royal Western Australia Regiment, but was later re-raised in 1966 as a remote area infantry battalion. In 1977, the 28th was reduced to an independent rifle company, and in 1987 was amalgamated into the 11th/28th Battalion, Royal Western Australia Regiment.

The 28th Battalion came into existence on 16 April 1915 when it was raised at Blackboy Camp, in Western Australia. Formed as part of the Australian Imperial Force (AIF), an all volunteer formation raised for overseas service during the First World War, the 28th Battalion's first batch of volunteers came from personnel who had originally been allocated to the 24th Battalion. The 24th was being raised at Broadmeadows in Victoria, and it had been intended that the 24th would be raised from all states of Australia with recruits travelling to Victoria to form the unit, but the higher than expected number of volunteers at Broadmeadows at the time meant that the 24th was raised as a Victorian battalion, and the Western Australians, who had been intended to form a sub unit within the 24th, were reallocated to the 28th which was subsequently raised mainly from Western Australian recruits.

The 28th Battalion was subsequently allocated to the 7th Brigade, which besides the 28th and several support units, also consisted of the 25th, 26th and 27th Battalions, which were drawn from the states of Queensland, Tasmania and South Australia, and which completed their training separately before joining each other in Egypt. With an authorised strength of 1,023 men, the battalion's first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel Herbert Collett. After completing rudimentary training, the 28th embarked on the transport "Ascanius" on 9 June and sailed from Fremantle to Egypt via the Red Sea.

The 28th arrived in Egypt in July and concentrated along with the rest of the 7th Brigade at Abbassia, near Cairo, where they were assigned to the newly formed Australian 2nd Division. Two months of training followed, as the division was readied for action; this process was put on hold in September when elements of the division were dispatched to Gallipoli to provide reinforcements for the Australian and New Zealand forces that had been fighting around Anzac Cove since April. The campaign was almost over, but the decision to evacuate had not been confirmed and the 7th Brigade was dispatched in early September. Upon arrival the brigade was temporarily attached to the New Zealand and Australian Division as reinforcements, occupying positions north-east of Anzac Cove around "Cheshire Ridge". They remained on the peninsula for the next few months, manning the trenches, improving defences and defending the beachhead until the evacuation in mid-December, when they were withdrawn back to Lemnos Island. Casualties during the 28th's brief involvement in the campaign were described by the Australian War Memorial as "light", and the battalion's strength on departing the peninsula was 24 officers and 667 other ranks.

After spending Christmas on Lemnos, the 28th returned to Egypt in early January 1916. Further training followed before the 7th Brigade was deployed in defence of the Suez Canal. At this time, the AIF was reorganised and expanded in preparation for future operations. Two new infantry divisions were formed from the experienced troops of the 1st Division who had deployed to Gallipoli at the start of the campaign, while a third division was raised in Australia from scratch. The 2nd Division was largely left untouched, so that it could complete its formation which had been interrupted by its deployment to Gallipoli. The 7th Brigade subsequently returned to the command of the 2nd Division and the 28th Battalion – along with the rest of the 7th Brigade – would remain with that formation for the rest of the war. In mid-March 1916, the 28th was transferred to France, as part of the first body of Australian troops to deploy to the European battlefield. In early April, the 28th Battalion entered the front line around Armentières, holding the right hand sector of the 7th Brigade's line. For the next two-and-a-half years, they would fight in the trenches of the Western Front in both Belgium and France and take part in numerous battles.

The 28th's first major action came during the Battle of Pozières in late July and early August when they took part in two attacks. During the first attack, the 28th suffered heavily when they were committed to a night-time attack on the heights that got held up in heavy wire entanglements that the preparatory bombardment had failed to destroy; the battalion's losses were the heaviest in the 7th Brigade, amounting to 10 officers and 360 other ranks. A follow up attack was undertaken on 4 August, which proved more successful, eventually securing the objective. The following day, the Australians were subjected to heavy shelling before they were withdrawn on 6 August. After this, the 28th was moved to a quieter sector around Ypres before returning to the Somme in the later part of 1916, and taking part in further fighting around Flers. In early 1917, the Germans began a surprise withdrawal along the front, which enabled them to hold the line with fewer troops, thus gaining a pool of reserves. When the Allies discovered this, a brief advance followed, before they came up against the strongly prepared defences of the Hindenburg Line. After this, a series of attacks followed with the 28th Battalion being utilised mainly in supporting roles for the remainder of the year. Actions were fought at Bullecourt, Menin Road, Broodseinde and Poelcappelle during this time.

The battalion wintered in Belgium, but early in 1918 was transferred to the Somme again in response to the German Spring Offensive. In late March and into April, they defended the line around Villers-Bretonneux as the Allies fought to defend the vital railhead of Amiens, before providing support to the 6th Brigade's attack on Ville-sur-Ancre in May. A brief lull followed in June and July as the Allies attempted to regain the initiative, during which the 28th was involved in a minor action around Morlancourt. On 8 August, the Allies launched their Hundred Days Offensive during which the 28th Battalion was initially engaged around Villers-Bretonneux. It was there, on the first day of the offensive, that Lieutenant Alfred Gaby, performed the deeds that led to him becoming the 28th Battalion's first, and only, Victoria Cross recipient. A series of advances followed as the Allies exploited their initial success and sought to break the Hindenburg Line. In late August, the Australian 2nd Division advanced to the Somme River, and on 29 August, as the 7th Brigade attacked around Biaches, the 28th was assigned the task of capturing the Amiens–Peronne railway bridge. The following day, they forced their way across the river around Peronne, and during the subsequent Battle of Mont St Quentin–Peronne, they joined the 7th Brigade's advance towards Aizecourt-le-Haut. They continued fighting until early October 1918 when they were withdrawn from the line, just after an attack on the Beaureviour Line, around the village of Estrees.

The fighting throughout 1918 had heavily depleted the Australian units, which had been unable to make good their losses, and on 5 October, the entire Australian Corps was withdrawn for rest and reorganisation. The battalion remained out of the line until the war ended in November, after which they began to demobilise. The process was slow as personnel were repatriated back to Australia in drafts and consequently the battalion was not disbanded until March 1919. Throughout the war, casualties amongst the 28th totalled 787 killed and 2,241 wounded. The battalion received 17 battle honours for its war service, which were bestowed in 1927.

The demobilisation of the AIF was completed in early 1921, at which time Australia's part-time military force, the Citizens Force, was reorganised to reflect the divisional structure and numerical designations of the AIF. As a result, the 28th Battalion was re-raised in Western Australia, as part of the 13th Brigade, within the 5th Military District. Upon formation, the new battalion drew personnel from parts of the 11th, 16th and 28th Infantry Regiments. In 1927, when territorial designations were approved for all Citizen Forces infantry battalions, the 28th adopted the title of the "Swan Valley Regiment", although in 1934 this was changed to the "Swan Regiment". The battalion's motto – the Latin word "Urgens" – was approved in 1927. It was headquartered in Perth, but also had detachments in Northam and Western Australia. At the outset, in 1921 the Citizen Forces units were maintained through a mixture of voluntary and compulsory service, but in late 1929, the scheme was suspended by the Scullin Labor government, and replaced by an all-volunteer "Militia" scheme. Numbers fell sharply and training opportunities for those that did volunteer were limited throughout the 1930s. Activities during this period were limited with training consisting of just one six-day annual camp, which was augmented by monthly half-day parades, amounting to a further six days of training. Training was also hampered by the austerity measures that were necessitated by the economic hardships of the Great Depression, which meant that the equipment provided during this time was largely obsolete, being mainly First World War vintage, and provided in insufficient numbers.

Throughout the early part of the Second World War, the 28th Battalion undertook brief periods of continuous service, providing training to recruits who were enlisted following the re-establishment of conscription in January 1940 to improve the nation's overall readiness. The provisions of the "Defence Act" precluded the Militia from being sent outside Australian territory to fight, so many of the battalion's personnel volunteered to serve in the Second Australian Imperial Force (2nd AIF). After Japan's entry into the war, the 13th Brigade's units were mobilised for full-time service and pressed into home defence with III Corps, undertaking garrison duties to defend Western Australia against a possible invasion. When that threat passed, they moved to the Northern Territory, and the 28th Battalion established itself around 49-Mile Creek. Late in the war, the 13th Brigade was reassigned from the 4th Division to the 5th, and in November 1944 they were committed to the New Britain campaign, landing at Jacquinot Bay the following month and later established themselves around Waitavalo. From then until the end of the war in August 1945, the 28th took part in a containment campaign against the much larger Japanese force on the island, as the Australians attempted to confine them to the Gazelle Peninsula and Rabaul. The 28th kept up a program of patrolling through the jungle, but made little contact with the Japanese. After the war, the battalion remained on the island processing Japanese prisoners of war until being repatriated back to Australia in January 1946. They were disbanded two months later as part of the demobilisation process. Throughout the war, the 28th lost six men killed on active service and one wounded. It received one battle honour for its service in 1961, but was also entrusted with the 16 battle honours awarded to the 2nd AIF's 2/28th Battalion.

Once Australia's wartime military forces had been demobilised, the part-time force was re-established in the guise of the Citizens Military Force (CMF), which was formed in 1948. Within this, an amalgamated 16th/28th Battalion was raised. This battalion existed until August 1952 when, following the reintroduction of national service, the 28th Battalion was re-raised in its own right, based in East Perth with sub-units at Albany, Katanning and Geraldton. "Heart of Oak" was approved as the battalion's regimental march in 1953, but it was replaced the following year by "Colonel Bogey". In 1960, following the introduction of the Pentropic organisation and the suspension of national service, this battalion was subsumed into the newly formed Royal Western Australia Regiment, providing three company-sized elements to the regiment's 1st Battalion (1 RWAR). The Australian Army ceased using the Pentropic organisation in July 1965 and at this time 1 RWAR was split into two smaller battalions: 1 RWAR and 2 RWAR. In early 1966, these were renumbered 16 RWAR and 11 RWAR, with the companies that had originally come from the 28th Battalion being allocated to 16 RWAR. In October 1966, when national service was reintroduced, the 28th Battalion was re-formed as a full battalion known as 28 RWAR, and fulfilling the role of a remote area battalion, catering for the training needs of men eligible for call up who wished to exercise the option to serve in the CMF instead of the Regular Army, but who could not parade regularly due to where they lived or what civilian occupation they held. The national service scheme ended in December 1972, after which many who had joined the CMF to defer full-time national service took their discharge. Numbers fell significantly and in 1977 the 28th Battalion was reduced to an independent rifle company, along with the 11th Battalion. This continued until October 1987, when the two companies were amalgamated to form the current 11th/28th Battalion, Royal Western Australia Regiment.

The 28th Battalion held the following alliances:

The 28th Battalion received the following battle honours (including those inherited from the 2/28th Battalion):






</doc>
<doc id="37422341" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37422341" title="IPad (4th generation)">
IPad (4th generation)

The fourth-generation iPad (marketed as iPad with Retina display, colloquially referred to as the iPad 4) is a tablet computer produced and marketed by Apple Inc. Compared to its predecessor, the third-generation iPad, the fourth-generation iPad maintained the Retina Display but featured new and upgraded components such as the Apple A6X chip and the Lightning connector, which was introduced on September 12, 2012. It shipped with iOS 6.0, which provides a platform for audio-visual media, including electronic books, periodicals, films, music, computer games, presentations and web content. Like the iPad 2 and the third-generation iPad, it has been supported by five major iOS releases, in this case iOS 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. iOS 11, which was released on 19 September 2017, does not have support for the fourth-generation iPad because iOS 11 drops support for all 32-bit devices.

It was announced at a media conference on October 23, 2012 as the fourth generation of the iPad line, and was first released on November 2, 2012, in 35 countries, and then through December in ten other countries including China, India and Brazil. The third generation was discontinued following the fourth's announcement, after only seven months of general availability.

The device is available with either a black or white front glass panel and various connectivity and storage options. Storage size options include 16 GB, 32 GB, 64 GB, and 128 GB; the available connectivity options are Wi-Fi only and Wi-Fi + Cellular with LTE capabilities.

The fourth-generation iPad received primarily positive reviews and was praised for its hardware improvements as well as the Retina display, which was also featured in the device's predecessor. Furthermore, benchmarks reveal that the fourth-generation iPad is able to perform CPU-reliant tasks twice as fast as its predecessor. During the first weekend of sales, an aggregated amount of 3 million fourth-generation iPads and iPad Minis were sold.

Rumors regarding the next-generation iPad emerged shortly after the release of the third-generation iPad. At that point some speculated that the next iPad released would be of a smaller size. Further speculations emerged in July 2012 when DigiTimes, with the help of unspecified sources, claimed that Apple made small revisions to the then upcoming iPad and scheduled its release for late 2012. On October 16, 2012, Apple announced a media event scheduled for October 23 at the California Theatre in San Jose, California. The company did not pre-disclose the subject of the event, but it was widely expected to be regarding the iPad Mini. Photographic images of the device's dock connector and front camera emerged shortly before the media event.

At the media event, Apple CEO Tim Cook introduced a new version of iBooks and new generations of the MacBook Pro, Mac Mini, and the iMac before unveiling the fourth-generation iPad and the lower-end iPad Mini. During the unveiling, Apple stated that the fourth-generation iPad would be available to pre-order online in a selected number of countries starting October 26. On November 2, Apple released the Wi-Fi model of device in 35 countries across Europe, East Asia and North America. The cellular model was released in-store a few weeks after the initial release of the device.

The release of the fourth-generation iPad led to the discontinuation of its predecessor, which angered many third-generation iPad users. In response, Apple extended its 14-day return policy to 30 days. "ITProPortal" noted that, since the price of both models is identical, consumers that purchased the third-generation iPad within this time frame were effectively allowed to exchange their discontinued device for the fourth-generation model.

On January 29, 2013, Apple announced and scheduled the launch of the 128 GB variant of 4th generation iPad. It was released on February 5, 2013.

Following the announcement of the iPad Air on October 22, 2013, sales of the fourth-generation iPad were discontinued. The fourth-generation iPad was reintroduced on March 18, 2014, following the discontinuation of the iPad 2. In order to make its reintroduction a low-end device to the iPad Air, its price was cut by 20% over its original launch price. On October 16, 2014, the fourth-generation iPad was discontinued in favor of the iPad Air 2; the iPad Air took its place as the entry-level iPad at that time.

The fourth-generation iPad is shipped with iOS 6.0 and later, iOS 7. It can act as a hotspot with some carriers, sharing its Internet connection over Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or USB, and also access the Apple App Store, a digital application distribution platform for iOS. The service allows users to browse and download applications from the iTunes Store that were developed with Xcode and the iOS SDK and were published through Apple. From the App Store, GarageBand, iMovie, iPhoto, and the iWork apps (Pages, Keynote, and Numbers) are available.

The iPad comes with several pre-installed applications, including Siri, Safari, Mail, Photos, Video, Music, iTunes, App Store, Maps, Notes, Calendar, Game Center, Photo Booth, and Contacts. Like all iOS devices, the iPad can sync content and other data with a Mac or PC using iTunes, although iOS 5 and later can be managed and backed up without a computer. Although the tablet is not designed to make phone calls over a cellular network, users can use a headset or the built-in speaker and microphone to place phone calls over Wi-Fi or cellular using a VoIP application, such as Skype. The device has a dictation application, using the same voice recognition technology as the iPhone 4S. The user speaks and the iPad types what they say on the screen, though the iPad must have an internet connection available (via Wi-Fi or cellular network) due to the feature's reliance on Apple servers to translate the speech.

The fourth-generation iPad has an optional iBooks application, which displays books and other ePub-format content downloaded from the iBookstore. Several major book publishers including Penguin Books, HarperCollins, Simon & Schuster, and Macmillan have committed to publishing books for the device. Despite being a direct competitor to both the Amazon Kindle and Barnes & Noble Nook, both Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble offer e-reader apps for the iPad.

The 4th generation iPad, unlike its immediate predecessor, the 3rd generation iPad, is supported by iOS 10; however, it was announced at the Apple WWDC 2017 that the 4th generation iPad (along with the iPhone 5/5C) will not support iOS 11. iOS 10.3.3 is the latest and final version of iOS to include support for these devices.

The device has an Apple A6X SoC which comprises a 32-bit Apple dual-core CPU running at 1.4 GHz and a quad-core PowerVR SGX554MP4 GPU, 1 GB of RAM. It also features a 5-megapixel, rear-facing camera capable of 1080p video recording; and a 720p HD front-facing videophone camera designed for FaceTime. The device features a 9.7" (diagonal) display with a resolution of 2,048 by 1,536 (QXGA) resulting in 3.1 million pixels, this gives the display a pixel density of 264 ppi. The total number of pixels used in the display of the fourth-generation iPad is four times that of the iPad 2 – providing even scaling from the prior model.

As with all previous generations of iPhone and iPad hardware, there are four buttons and one switch on the fourth-generation iPad. With the device in its portrait orientation, these are: a "home" button on the face of the device under the display that returns the user to the home screen, a "wake/sleep" button on the top edge of the device, and two buttons on the upper right side of the device performing "volume up/down" functions, under which is a switch whose function varies according to device settings, generally functioning either to switch the device into or out of silent mode or to lock/unlock the orientation of the screen. Externally, the fourth-generation iPad is identical to its predecessor apart from the differences between dock connectors used and change of manufacturers that produce the display. In addition, the Wi-Fi only version weighs 652 grams while the cellular model weighs 662 grams – 2 grams heavier than their respective predecessors. The display responds to other sensors: an ambient light sensor to adjust screen brightness and a 3-axis accelerometer to sense orientation and switch between portrait and landscape modes. Unlike the iPhone and iPod Touch's built-in applications, which work in three orientations (portrait, landscape-left and landscape-right), the iPad's built-in applications support screen rotation in all four orientations, including upside-down. Consequently, the device has no intrinsic "native" orientation; only the relative position of the home button changes.

The tablet is manufactured either with or without the capability to communicate over a cellular network. All models can connect to a wireless LAN via Wi-Fi. The fourth-generation iPad is available with 16, 32, 64 or 128 GB of internal flash memory, with no expansion option. Apple sells a "camera connection kit" with an SD card reader, but it can only be used to transfer photos and videos.

The audio playback of the fourth-generation iPad has a frequency response of 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz. Without third-party software it can play the following audio formats: HE-AAC, AAC, Protected AAC, MP3, MP3 VBR, Audible formats (2, 3, 4, AEA, AAX, and AAX+), ALAC, AIFF, and WAV.

This iPad uses an internal rechargeable lithium-ion polymer (LiPo) battery that can hold a charge of 11,560 mAh. The batteries are made in Taiwan by Simplo Technology (60%) and Dynapack International Technology (40%). The iPad is designed to be charged with a relatively high current of 2 amps using the included 12 W USB power adapter and Lightning connector. While it can be charged by an older USB port from a computer, these are limited to 500 milliamps (0.5 amps). As a result, if the iPad is in use while powered by a computer, it may charge very slowly, or not at all. High-power USB ports found in newer computers and accessories provide full charging capabilities. Apple claims that the battery can provide up to 10 hours of video, audio playback, or web surfing on Wi-Fi, 9 hours of web surfing over a cellular connection, or one month on standby. Like any rechargeable battery, the iPad's battery loses capacity over time. However, the iPad's battery is not user-replaceable. In a program similar to iPod and iPhone battery-replacement programs, Apple promised to replace an iPad that does not hold an electrical charge with a refurbished unit for a fee. During the battery replacement process, user data is not preserved/transferred, and repaired or refurbished units come with a new case. The warranty on the refurbished unit may vary between jurisdictions.

The Smart Cover, introduced with the iPad 2, is a screen protector that magnetically attaches to the face of the iPad. The cover has three folds which allow it to convert into a stand, which is also held together by magnets. The Smart Cover can also assume other positions by folding it. Smart Covers have a microfiber bottom that cleans the front of the iPad, and wakes up the unit when the cover is removed. It comes in five colors of both polyurethane and the more expensive leather.

Apple offers several other accessories, most of which are adapters for the proprietary Lightning connector, the only port besides the headphone jack. A dock holds the iPad at an angle, and has a dock connector and audio line-out port. The iPad can use Bluetooth keyboards that also work with Macs and PCs. The iPad can be charged by a standalone power adapter ("wall charger") compatible with iPods and iPhones, and a 12 watt charger is included.

The fourth-generation iPad received primarily favorable reviews from critics and commentators. The review by Gareth Beavis of "TechRadar" praised the device for its high resolution Retina Display, which "TechRadar" wrote is "...one of the most impressive we've seen on a tablet to date." However, the reviewer also wrote that the screen "lacks the 'punch' seen in Super AMOLED screens seen on devices like the Samsung Galaxy Note 2." The review also praised the interface of the iPad for its simple design and easy to use layout. Additionally, other aspects, such as the design of the iPad and updated SoC were noted and praised in the review. Critically, Beavis noted that the iPad can still moderately heat up under medium usage, however not to the extent seen in the third-generation iPad. Tim Stevens of "Engadget" praised the Retina Display and labelled it as the best screen available on tablets. Benchmarks and tests conducted by Engadget resulted in Stevens concluding that the fourth-generation iPad is the fastest Apple mobile device available, surpassing a "record" that the iPhone 5 held for a brief period.

Benchmark tests conducted by SlashGear concluded that the SoC of the fourth-generation iPad is able to perform CPU-reliant tasks more than twice as fast as that of the third-generation iPad. A series of benchmark tests conducted on the graphics performance of the fourth-generation iPad by Anandtech resulted in the device achieving the highest score compared to other consumer mobile devices, including the Samsung Galaxy S III, Nexus 10 and third-generation iPad. The performance increase of the fourth-generation iPad varies between tests, however an increase is nonetheless evident. Furthermore, battery longevity tests conducted by the same organization suggests that the battery of the fourth-generation iPad is able to last longer than its predecessor. However, the battery of the updated iPad 2 is able to outlast the fourth-generation iPad.

In the first weekend of sales of the iPad Mini and fourth-generation iPad, Apple reported that it sold an aggregated number of 3 million units. "TechRadar" noted that the first weekend sales figures for the fourth-generation iPad are lower than corresponding figures for the third-generation iPad, which sold 3 million units in its first weekend. Subsequent reports and analysis such as that from David Hsieh, a technology analyst, suggest that the iPad mini is selling better than the fourth-generation iPad. Despite the noted slump in sales, Apple's stock price, in direct response to the figures released, rose by 1.4% to $584.62 on November 5.

In a repairability review conducted by iFixit, the fourth-generation iPad scored 2 out of 10 (10 being the easiest to repair) due to the use of adhesive to attach components. However, reviewers noted that several components such as the screen and battery could be removed easily for replacement.



</doc>
<doc id="37518907" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37518907" title="Toyah Battersby">
Toyah Battersby

Toyah Battersby is a fictional character from the British soap opera "Coronation Street", played by Georgia Taylor. Toyah and her family were introduced to the serial by executive producer Brian Park in a bid to increase falling ratings. Actress and singer Toyah Willcox gave the producers permission to name the youngest member of the Battersby family after herself, since the character was said to be born during the height of her career. Taylor originally auditioned for the part of Zoe Tattersall, but was cast as Toyah instead. The role marked her acting debut. She made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 4 July 1997.

Toyah was portrayed as cocky, naive, too trusting and occasionally needing to be "a bit more clued up" about things. Taylor called Toyah a decent person and someone who was loyal to her friends and family. Taylor initially disliked Toyah's image, particularly her make-up and clothes, which were too revealing. Toyah's first major storyline saw her abducted by a stranger. At the time, Taylor said it was one of the hardest storylines she had to film and the Independent Television Commission believed it should have carried a warning before it was broadcast. A few months later, Toyah became the show's first female character to be involved in a storyline surrounding the subject of under-age sex. The storyline was criticised by watchdogs, but Taylor defended it, calling it "educational".

Toyah began a relationship with Spider Nugent (Martin Hancock) in 1999, which lasted until Hancock's departure in July 2000. The following year, the character was the focus of one of "Coronation Street"'s most controversial storylines, which saw her beaten and raped by Phil Simmonds (Jack Deam). The storyline marked the first time in 40 years that the show had included a rape. The storyline was criticised by some former "Coronation Street" cast members, who thought the producers were using the subject of rape to boost ratings. Taylor decided to leave the show in July 2002 and her character departed on-screen the following year on 5 February 2003. Toyah was well received by critics and Taylor received the Best Young Actor accolade at the "Inside Soap" Awards and Best Dramatic Performance at "The British Soap Awards".

Following a thirteen-year absence from "Coronation Street", Taylor announced that she had reprised the role in September 2016. She returned to filming during the following month, and Toyah's return scenes aired on 25 December 2016. Toyah's storylines have included having an affair with Peter Barlow (Chris Gascoyne), while being married to Toby Chapman (Andrew Dowbiggin), her failed marriage with Toby, beginning in an open relationship with Peter and her desire of having children.

Toyah and her family move into 5 Coronation Street and soon upset the neighbours with their bad behaviour, most notably Curly Watts (Kevin Kennedy). Toyah and her stepsister, Leanne (Jane Danson), steal from the local newsagent and indulge in under-age drinking. Toyah develops a crush on Spider Nugent (Martin Hancock) and turns vegetarian to impress him. She also asks him to help save a turkey from being slaughtered for Christmas. After arguing with her mother, Janice (Vicky Entwistle), and stepfather, Les (Bruce Jones), Toyah runs away to London to find her biological father, Ronnie Clegg (Dean Williamson). However, Toyah comes across Neil Flynn (Tim Dantay), who pretends to be her father and then abducts her. Neil takes Toyah to some woods, but while he is distracted, she escapes and is found by Janice and Les.

Toyah gets a job at Roy's Rolls, the local café, and begins dating Philip "Dobber" Dobson (John Donnelly). Dobber is a bad influence on Toyah, persuading her to steal from the café and threatening to dump her if she did not have sex with him. Toyah loses her virginity to Dobber but eventually sees through him and they break up. With the help of former teacher, Ken Barlow (William Roache), Toyah's grades at school soon improve and she even wins a writing competition. While spending the night watching a lunar eclipse together, Toyah and Spider have sex. They soon begin a relationship and stay at Emily Bishop's (Eileen Derbyshire) house for a while until they find a place of their own. Toyah gets a second job as a barmaid at The Rovers Return and start to drift apart so when Spider asks her to go to India with him, she turns him down. Spider leaves Weatherfield alone. Toyah later has a one-night stand with Andy McDonald (Nicholas Cochrane).

After a night out with Sam Kingston (Scott Wright), Toyah decides to walk home alone but is attacked and raped. Toyah is found by Jason Grimshaw (Ryan Thomas), who takes her home. Janice initially thinks Toyah has been robbed and is shocked when Toyah tells her she was raped. Toyah gives a statement to the police and is examined at the hospital. Several male residents are suspected, particularly Peter Barlow (Chris Gascoyne), but they are ruled out by DNA tests. Toyah struggles to deal with what has happened to her and she develops agoraphobia. While being comforted at home by her friend, Phil Simmonds (Jack Deam), Toyah recognises his voice as he calls out her name and realises that he raped her. Phil realizes that she knows and stops her escaping but Peter hears Toyah's screams and rescues her after knocking Phil unconscious. Phil is found guilty of rape and sent to prison. Toyah has a brief romance with Sam and moves into a flat with Fiz Brown (Jennie McAlpine) and Maria Sutherland (Samia Ghadie).

While on holiday in Blackpool, Toyah meets Goran Milanovic (Matt Zarb), an illegal immigrant. After a few dates, he proposes marriage but she refuses before starting to date her college tutor, John Arnley (Paul Warriner). She is initially reluctant to introduce him to her flatmates and when she does, they are surprised to see that he is a lot older. John asks Toyah to move in with him and she agrees. When Toyah and Fiz argue about John, Fiz tells her that he and Maria had sex and Maria got pregnant. Toyah confronts Maria, who gives her the impression that John forced himself on her. Remembering her rape, Toyah attacks John in front of his class before dumping him. Toyah decides to leave Weatherfield after reuniting with Spider and they move to London.

Toyah returns on Christmas Day, telling Leanne she has left her husband Toby Chapman (Andrew Dowbiggin), as she has been having an affair. Toyah later meets Peter Barlow, her new partner, and they agree to tell Leanne that they are together. Toby visits Toyah to save their marriage but she refuses to listen or reconcile. Toyah then goes with Leanne to the hospital after she has a migraine. Toyah and Peter decide to keep their relationship a secret, but Peter's son, Simon Barlow (Alex Bain), sees them kiss using his drone. Peter tells Toyah that Simon knows and they ask him to keep it secret for Leanne's sake.

Toyah argues with Leanne's half-sister, Eva Price (Catherine Tyldesley), for not passing on a message about starting a shift at the pub, but they agree to call a truce. Peter leaves cigarettes at Leanne's flat and Toyah tries to take the blame but Simon is forced to cover for her. Simon later tells Eva who blackmails Toyah: stop Peter from shutting down Aidan Connor's (Shayne Ward) factory or Eva will tell Leanne about Peter and Toyah. Peter agrees to Eva's demands and they continue their affair. Toby returns in January 2017 and demands Toyah sign a paper to destroy their frozen embryos. Toyah is reluctant and after a heart to heart, they kiss. However, Toyah makes it clear that she doesn't love Toby and is staying with Peter, causing Toby to lash out and leave. Peter learns what has happened and decides to drop off Chloe Tipton (Jo-Anne Knowles), making Toyah jealous. They later make up and Leanne catches Peter and Toyah kissing. During a heated argument, Leanne disowns Toyah and refuses to talk to her again, despite her efforts. Leanne forgives Toyah after she helps deliver baby Oliver in a lift after it breaks down.

Peter buys The Rovers Return from Steve McDonald (Simon Gregson) and Liz McDonald (Beverley Callard). After another round of IVF fails, Toyah is told that future treatment is not recommended as problems with her uterus mean she is very unlikely to ever get pregnant. She and Peter look into surrogacy after talking to Izzy Armstrong (Cherylee Houston). She and Peter are accepted as clients by a surrogacy agency and Jackie, a surrogate mother, agrees to carry their baby after meeting them. She strikes up a feud with Peter's ex-wife, Carla Connor (Alison King), upon her return to Weatherfield. Toyah is later devastated when Jackie miscarries the baby, and is shocked to discover that Eva is pregnant with her ex-fiancé, Aidan's, baby. Toyah supports Eva's decision to have an abortion, however Toyah concocts a plan shortly before the termination where Eva would give birth to her baby and pretend the baby is hers and Peter's through Jackie. Eva gives birth to her baby girl who she Toyah and Peter name Susie as they go through with the plan of pretending Eva's daughter is theirs, with Peter none the wiser. Peter later finds out and breaks up with Toyah selling the pub. Eva leaves the street with Susie meaning that Toyah has no longer got a child. She starts to move on with her life and gets a job at the medical centre and has a fling with Imran Habeeb (Charlie de Melo) unaware Leanne is also having a fling with him. When they find out they hatch a plan and pretend they want a threesome with him but the plan backfires when he realizes what they are up to.

The four-strong Battersby family was created and introduced to "Coronation Street" in a bid to increase falling ratings. News of the family's arrival came days after the series producer, Brian Park, axed three regular characters. He stated "The Battersbys are an exciting injection of fresh blood. They follow in the great tradition of the Ogdens and Duckworths, balancing the mix of comedy and drama for which "Coronation Street" is justly renowned." Actress and singer Toyah Willcox gave the producers permission to name the youngest member of the family after herself, since the character was born in 1982 at the height of her career. Willcox later regretted her decision.

Actress Georgia Taylor was cast as Toyah and the role marked her acting debut. Taylor was studying for her A-levels when she originally auditioned for the part of Zoe Tattersall. She was unsuccessful, so she then auditioned for Toyah and won the role. Of her casting, she explained "When I got the call to say that I'd got the part I just sat there open-mouthed, hugging my best friend. I could barely believe it. It is all very different than being on stage – it's not quite so intense because your audience isn't right there in front of you. But it's a very different type of satisfaction, working much faster with storylines and characters developing all the time." At the time of her casting, Taylor was two years older than the character she portrayed.

A month before she made her debut on-screen, Toyah was described as being Janice's (Vicky Entwistle) 14-year-old illegitimate daughter, who would become "the scourge of every Weatherfield Comprehensive teacher". During an interview with the "Daily Record's" Polly Graham, Taylor stated "Toyah's gobby and cocky and makes her parents' life a misery. But it's brilliant playing her, it's more fun than playing somebody nice." Graham explained that both Toyah and her stepsister, Leanne (Jane Danson) were well known to the police for under-age drinking and burglary. Taylor said that she hated her character's clothes, as they were too revealing for her. She explained "In the beginning, the clothes that Toyah wore were terrible. I was very conscious of my bum hanging out from these tiny mini-skirts. There are a lot of girls who wear those tarty skirts, but I never felt comfortable in that sort of thing." Taylor also disliked Toyah's make-up, which was initially bright pink lipstick, a lot of black eyeliner and no foundation.

Toyah's image eventually began to change and she became more aware of the way she looked when she got a boyfriend and started college. Toyah also took extra English lessons from Ken Barlow (William Roache) in a bid to better herself. Taylor later commented that her character got on her nerves due to her naivety. She also thought that Toyah had a romantic view of love, was too trusting and occasionally needed to be "a bit more clued up". The actress added that Toyah was "a very decent person", who was loyal to her friends. Digital Spy's Kris Green described Toyah as "the more mellow of the Battersbys" and thought that was due to Les (Bruce Jones) not being her biological father. The "Daily Mirror's" Charlie Catchpole commented that Toyah went "from lumpy, sulky schoolgirl to confident, radiant young woman".
Following an argument with Janice and Les, Toyah ran away to London to find her real father, Ronnie. However, she was "led on" by Neil Flynn (Tim Dantay), a stranger pretending to be Ronnie, and was later abducted by him. Taylor said the storyline was one of the hardest she had to film: "In the story, I come down to London to track down my real father and things go badly wrong. Toyah hitchhikes all the way and just leaves herself so wide open. She is so naive and trusting and open to being used and abused." The storyline was filmed on location in the city of London in early August. An hour long episode focusing on Janice and Les' search for Toyah was broadcast a month later.

Jones, who played Les, revealed that the runaway storyline was tough on him and he began crying when he read the script. He continued "The four of us in the Battersby family read our scripts together to work out how we are going to play our parts. On this occasion, all four of us were sobbing. It is not like a normal "Coronation Street" story, it's more like a "Taggart" or a "Cracker"." Jones thought the "scrapes" that Toyah found herself in were frightening and hoped that if the storyline could stop one teenager from running away from home, then it would be worthwhile. The storyline attracted the attention of the Independent Television Commission, who believed that the episode featuring Toyah's abduction should have carried a warning before it was broadcast.

In October 1998, Toyah became the first female "Coronation Street" character to be involved in a storyline surrounding the subject of under-age sex. Toyah, who was sixteen at the time, had a holiday romance with Philip "Dobber" Dobson (John Donnelly). She quickly introduced him to her parents and was prepared to do anything for him, like stealing from the local café. When Dobber asked Toyah to have sex with him, she agreed, despite knowing that she should wait. Toyah was scared that if she said no, Dobber would break up with her. Toyah was persuaded to lose her virginity to Dobber in the back of his car. The storyline was branded "controversial" and "shocking", while watchdogs stated that it sent out the wrong ideas to young schoolgirls. Taylor defended the storyline and her character, saying "We have taken a strong moral line and are not promoting teenage sex. It's quite the opposite. Toyah's actions should be a lesson for other girls not to fall into the same trap. It was an educational storyline, and I feel it was done in a responsible way."

The actress went on to explain that the storyline showed how Toyah regretted her actions and that young female viewers could learn from her mistake. She added "Anyone watching can see Dobber is just using Toyah and I hope the message gets across to other girls not to fall into the same trap." Toyah did not use protection with Dobber, so her sister, Leanne, persuaded her to go to the doctor for the morning-after pill. Taylor praised Leanne for being Toyah's "conscience and the voice of common sense". She thought that Leanne had given her good and responsible advice on how to deal with what happened. The "Daily Record's" John Millar agreed with Taylor and wrote that the storyline was "building to a stark warning for the millions of teenagers tuning into the Street." Millar believed at no time did the viewers get the impression that Toyah was doing something "admirable" and proclaimed that Toyah was "the sort of girl who needs care and affection, which explains why the poor soul was coaxed into losing her virginity after a holiday romance convinced her that she was in love."

Five months after moving onto Coronation Street, Toyah developed a crush on her neighbour, Spider Nugent (Martin Hancock), and even turned vegetarian to try and impress him. Hancock told "All About Soap's" Hilary Kingsley that Spider initially saw Toyah as "a chubby schoolgirl, a pesky brat who had a crush on him." However, when she listened to his issues and helped him with his battles against the local supermarket and the council, Spider began to admire her instead. Hancock explained "She was so efficient and hard-working that she became a friend. And then, over the summer, it hit him, "Blimey! She's turned out nice!" While Spider and Toyah watched the 1999 solar eclipse together, they ended up having sex for the first time. Hancock observed that both Spider and Toyah were overcome by the excitement to the point that there was "an explosion of lust." However, in the morning, Spider was torn about what had happened. He admired Toyah, but knew that if they became a couple, it would cause a lot of problems, particularly as there was a ten-year age gap between them. Taylor explained that she was happy that her character was getting together with Spider, although their scenes together often took place in the "grottiest" of locations.

Spider decided to "dodge his responsibilities" and began staying away from Toyah, who was not happy about it as she wanted them to make a commitment. Spider eventually changed his mind and Hancock commented "The fact is that he really fancies Toyah, and he figures that he may as well be hung for a sheep as a goat." The actor reckoned that Spider and Toyah brought out the best in each other. Spider and Toyah soon began a proper relationship and briefly lived together. However, when Spider announced that he wanted to settle down and buy a house with Toyah, the couple realised that they had started to drift apart. Spider thought that if they got a mortgage together it would help save the relationship, but Toyah did not want that at all. When Spider was offered a promotion, he realised that he did not want to work for the DSS anymore and quit. He then told Toyah that he had bought them tickets to India so that they could go and "find themselves." However, Toyah insisted that she did not want to leave Weatherfield. Nicole Carmichael from "Inside Soap" wrote that while Spider did not want to lose Toyah, he felt that he could not stay and soon departed.

In April 2001, Toyah was the focus of one of "Coronation Street"'s most controversial storylines. After enjoying a night out with her friend Sam Kingston (Scott Wright), Toyah was raped, beaten and left for dead in an alleyway by an unknown assailant as she walked home alone. The storyline began during a special 45-minute episode that was broadcast during the Easter weekend. It marked the first time in 40 years that "Coronation Street" had included a rape. Viewers saw Toyah being grabbed by her attacker, but not the actual act of rape. Instead Toyah's "bruised body" was found by Jason Grimshaw (Ryan Thomas) just as he set out for an early morning run. Jason took a "traumatised" Toyah back to her house, where she told her mother what had happened. Toyah then had to repeat the story to the police and revealed that she did not know who raped her because she was semi-conscious during the attack. Toyah underwent an examination and counselling at the local hospital. The scenes were shot at the St Mary's Hospital Sexual Assault Centre in Manchester, where the writers spent four months researching victims' experiences and working with the clinical director and the staff to get the scenario right.

The storyline was criticised by some former "Coronation Street" cast members, who believed the producers were using the subject of rape to gain higher ratings than rival soap opera "EastEnders". Taylor defended the storyline and hoped that it would help other women who had been attacked to seek help. She stated "The main focus of the storyline is the psychological effect that the attack has on Toyah. There are many women out there who have been raped or sexually assaulted and we owe it to them to make sure that the story-line is handled sensitively and accurately. There is no denying that rape is a sensitive and controversial storyline. But I have put my heart and soul into it trying to portray it accurately and I only hope that women who have experienced it will think I have given it justice." A show spokesperson commented that the storyline would be "handled sensitively" and that it would not become "a whodunnit". Some of the male residents came under suspicion and were forced to give DNA samples. Peter Barlow (Chris Gascoyne) briefly became the prime suspect, but DNA soon eliminated him from enquires.

Toyah was aware that her attacker knew her as she remembered him calling her name, but could not put a name to the voice. She also struggled to deal with her "physical and emotional scars" and soon developed agoraphobia. Toyah found support from her mother and neighbour Charlie Ramsden (Clare McGlinn), who revealed that she had once been raped. Taylor told "Inside Soap's" Allison Maund that Charlie's advice really helped Toyah to start getting back on her feet. However, the process was hampered when Toyah received an anonymous phone call, which left her feeling "extremely frightened". The phone call sparked "a terrifying event" in which Toyah's rapist was finally revealed to be her friend Phil Simmonds (Jack Deam). When Phil came round to comfort Toyah, she recognised his voice as he called out her name and realised that he was her rapist. While Toyah tried to escape, Phil grabbed her and held her hostage. Toyah's screams were heard by Peter, who broke the door down and knocked Phil unconscious. A show spokesperson commented that Toyah would be left to worry about whether Phil would deny the rape and be convicted.

A couple of months later, Toyah received a letter from Phil asking her to visit him in prison and in return he would plead guilty to raping her. Until the letter arrived, Toyah had been piecing her life back together by getting her job back at the Rovers and starting a romance with Sam. Of how Toyah felt about the letter, Taylor told Adrian Lobb from "Inside Soap", "By the time Toyah gets the letter, she has grown a little stronger. But it comes as a complete surprise. Toyah doesn't trust Phil, obviously, and she thinks he's playing games. While part of her wants to confront him about the attack, there's another side of her that wants to let it go, and just leave it to the courts to deal with him." Toyah agreed to Phil's request to visit him and Taylor said that Toyah believed that seeing Phil in person would help her to come to terms with what happened. When Toyah came face to face with Phil, her first thought was how pathetic he looked. When Phil tried to make excuses for what he had done, Toyah did not feel any pity and told him to plead guilty, which he agreed to do. Toyah left the prison feeling "tearful, but triumphant" and Taylor commented that while she would never fully recover from her ordeal, Toyah was determined to look towards the future.

On 30 July 2002, Neil Wilkes from Digital Spy reported that Taylor had quit "Coronation Street" after five years. Wilkes revealed that her contract would expire in October that year, but the actress had chosen to stay with the serial beyond that to give the writers time to come up with a storyline for her character's departure. Series producer Kieran Roberts added that he was sorry to see Taylor go, but understood her decision to move on. Taylor later explained that she chose to leave because she and the writers struggled to come up with storylines for Toyah. She told the "Liverpool Echo's" Janet Tansley "I was asked where she would go from there and couldn't think what she could do. If I couldn't see a future for her, I couldn't play her." Taylor filmed her final scenes on 3 January 2003.

Despite a rumour that Toyah would become a victim of serial killer Richard Hillman (Brian Capron), the producers decided that she needed "a fiery fling" before she left. Therefore, Toyah's last storylines saw her embark on "a passionate affair" with her university tutor John Arnley (Paul Warriner). However, the relationship quickly turned into a love triangle when John had an affair with Toyah's flatmate Maria Sutherland (Samia Ghadie). When Toyah discovered the affair, she decided to leave the Street and made her on-screen exit in February 2003.

On 20 September 2016, it was announced Taylor had agreed to reprise her role after an absence of 13 years. Taylor began filming her scenes in October 2016 and made her on-screen return in the episode broadcast on 25 December 2016. Toyah has often been mentioned and referred to by her family members since her departure. Taylor expressed her happiness at her return, saying "I am thrilled to be re-joining my old friends on the cobbles and hugely excited to be given the opportunity to explore the character of Toyah 13 years on. "Coronation Street" has always had a place in my heart and I'm delighted to be working again with my good friend Jane Danson and bringing the Battersby sisters back together." The actress also said that the upcoming storylines played a part in her return to the show. She described them as "fantastic, clever, and detailed". The show's series producer, Kate Oates, added that Toyah would have some secrets upon her return that she has kept from her sister, Leanne. The character's return storyline saw her showing up in Weatherfield after deciding to end her marriage to husband Toby (Andrew Dowbiggin), because she has been having an affair. Toby later follows Toyah to the Street, where he asks her to reconsider her decision and try for a baby. However, Toyah makes it clear that their marriage is finished and asks him to leave.

In 1998, Taylor earned the "Best Young Actor" accolade at the "Inside Soap" Awards. In 2001, Taylor won "Best Dramatic Performance" at "The British Soap Awards". She was also nominated for "Most Popular Actress" at the 7th National Television Awards. At the "Inside Soap" Awards, Taylor earned a ""Best Actress" nomination, while Toyah's rape was nominated in the "Most Dramatic Storyline" category. In July 2018, Taylor was longlisted for the "Best Actress" award at the "Inside Soap Awards". She did not progress to the viewer-voted shortlist. For her portrayal of Toyah, Taylor was nominated for Best Soap Actor (Female) at the 2018 "Digital Spy" Reader Awards; she came in eleventh place with 1.5% of the total votes.

"The People's" Gavin Blyth and Jon Clarke stated that Toyah and Leanne were "rough, tough and make other streetwise teenagers look like they are fresh out of nursery." The characters were credited with increasing the show's ratings from 13 million to 19 million viewers. When Toyah met Dobber, the "Daily Mirror's" Tony Purnell commented "If anyone was going to find Mr Wrong on holiday it was Toyah Battersby." John Millar from the "Daily Record" wrote "The Street should be congratulated if the plight of Toyah Battersby – a brilliant performance by young Georgia Taylor, by the way – means just one schoolgirl says no to her lusting boyfriend."

An "Inside Soap" columnist observed that during the controversy over whether the show was right to run a storyline about rape, Taylor's "magnificent" portrayal of a rape victim seemed to have been forgotten. The "Daily Mirror's" Tony Stewart also praised Taylor's performance throughout the storyline, saying it was "so heart-achingly convincing". Stewart also wrote that Toyah's attack was "a chilling reminder of how brutal life can be". Stewart's colleague, Sue Crawford, branded Toyah a "disaster magnet". In June 2011, Rachel Tarley from the "Metro" included Toyah's rape in her list of the top 10 most controversial soap storylines.

Lorna Cooper, editor for MSN TV, included Toyah in a feature about soap's forgotten characters. Cooper said Toyah "didn't have the best of luck during her 1997–2003 stint on "Coronation Street"." A writer for Virgin Media quipped "Wayward teen Toyah rampaged through The Street in the 1990s. She fell for eco-warrior Spider but her life fell apart after she was raped by evil Phil Simmonds. She then followed Spider to London." In November 2012, Paul Millar from Digital Spy stated "Toyah Battersby was one of "Coronation Street's" best-loved characters – certainly the best-loved Battersby – during the time in which she graced the cobbles."

Laura-Jayne Tyler of "Inside Soap" praised Toyah's return, stating "We're loving every single second of Toyah being back, and actress Georgia Taylor is rocking her return like she's never been away. Having said that, we're not sure that she's fully embracing Toyah's steamy snogging sessions with Peter Barlow. If it were us, we'd be getting properly stuck in!"



</doc>
<doc id="37554798" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37554798" title="2012 MAC Championship Game">
2012 MAC Championship Game

The 2012 Marathon MAC Championship Game was an American football game held on November 30, 2012 at Ford Field in Detroit, Michigan between the West Division champion Northern Illinois Huskies and the East Division champion Kent State Golden Flashes to determine the Mid-American Conference (MAC) champion. This is the first time since 2003 that both teams entered the game ranked in the BCS standings, AP Poll, and Coaches' Poll.

The pre-game buildup focused primarily on the two high-powered offenses, both of which were led by strong rushing attacks. The rushing attacks differed; Northern Illinois' was led by junior quarterback Jordan Lynch, who finished fourth in the nation in rushing, while Kent State's was led by a running back tandem consisting of Dri Archer and Trayion Durham. The opening line favored Northern Illinois by seven points. After being tied at the end of regulation, the game went into two overtime periods and eventually concluded with Northern Illinois winning 44–37. The Huskies were subsequently invited to the 2013 Orange Bowl.

Multiple media outlets speculated that if Kent State won, it could earn a BCS bowl bid. Under then-current BCS rules, the highest-ranked team from outside the six "AQ" conferences received an automatic at-large BCS bid if it was (1) in the top 16 of the final BCS rankings and (2) ranked higher than at least one champion of an AQ conference.

Kent State had entered the weekend of November 24 ranked 23rd in the BCS standings, but after every team ranked between 15 and 21 lost that day, the Golden Flashes rose to 17th in the November 25 rankings, with Northern Illinois rising to 21st. At the same time, no team from the Big East, which had an automatic place in a BCS bowl, was in the top 25. The teams ranked immediately ahead and behind Kent State, UCLA and Texas, had to play higher-ranked teams on the road during the championship weekend. UCLA visited 8th ranked Stanford in the Pac-12 Championship Game, and Texas visited sixth-ranked Kansas State to end both teams' regular seasons. Because of Northern Illinois' ranking entering the game, it had not been initially thought that the Huskies would be able to jump into the top 16 with a win, even with losses by UCLA and Texas.

Both UCLA and Texas would lose their respective games; also, Nebraska, which had entered the Big Ten Championship Game at No. 12 in the BCS, was blown out 70–31 by a Wisconsin team that entered the game at 7–5. All of this opened the door for the winner of the MAC game to enter the top 16. Northern Illinois won and vaulted to #15 in the BCS Standings, earning a spot in the 2013 Orange Bowl. The berth was the first ever for a MAC team in a BCS game, and was also the first BCS berth ever for a one-loss non-AQ team.

Kent State settled for the GoDaddy.com Bowl.

Northern Illinois finished tenth in the nation in total offense, finishing the season with 6,574 total yards. Their success can largely be attributed to their star quarterback, junior Jordan Lynch, who achieved first-team all-MAC honors and was named the MAC Offensive Player of the Year. He finished in the top-30 nationally in passing yards, touchdowns, completion percentage, and passer rating. Perhaps Lynch's best contribution, however, was in the rushing game, where he amassed 1815 yards which was fourth in the country, and best among quarterbacks. Two other running backs, both juniors, made contributions in the rushing game as well: Leighton Settle and Akeem Daniels. His leading receiver was senior Martel Moore who, during the season, became the first Northern Illinois receiver to surpass 1,000 yards receiving since 2005, and led the team with 75 receptions for 1,083 yards. The Huskies' offensive line was anchored by left tackle Tyler Loos, who achieved second-team all-conference accolades.

Coordinated by Jay Niemann, the Huskies' defense was led by linemen Alan Baxter and Sean Progar, who totaled 9.5 and 8.5 sacks respectively, as well as defensive back Jimmie Ward, all of whom achieved all-conference honors. Northern Illinois finished tied for tenth in the country with 38 sacks on the season. In total, Northern Illinois gave up 19.9 points, ranking 21st in the country.

Kent State was led primarily by junior running back Dri Archer, who achieved first team all-MAC accolades. Archer, who is 5'8" (1.73 m) and , totaled 1429 yards and 16 touchdowns, both of which ranked in the top-20 in the FBS. Archer was described by SBNation.com's Mike Breese as a "dynamic do-it-all performer". Kent State's other first-team all-conference performer was senior offensive guard Brian Winters. The Golden Flashes' quarterback was senior Spencer Keith, who threw 12 touchdowns and 10 interceptions in total. Their potent rushing attack had an additional member, Trayion Durham, who achieved third-team all-MAC by rushing for 1316 rushing yards and 14 touchdowns on the season. The Golden Flashes' leading receiver was also Archer. Their leading wide receiver was a freshman, Josh Boyle.

Despite a lackluster performance throughout the season in terms of total defense (where they finished 74th) and scoring defense (where they finished 44th), they did create the second-most turnovers in the country with 38 which trailed only Oregon. From an individual perspective, junior safety Luke Wollet led the team with four interceptions and achieved second-team all-MAC honors. For the third consecutive season, defensive lineman Roosevelt Nix achieved first-team all-conference honors. During the season, he totaled 6 sacks as well as 15 tackles for loss.

Northern Illinois got the ball to start the game and, after three plays totaling three yards, were forced to punt, going three-and-out. Kent State's first drive also resulted in a three-and-out. The Huskies took over at their own 14 on the ensuing drive and managed to achieve one first down prior to having to punt. The first scoring drive occurred for the Golden Flashes on their second drive, but they were aided by Huskies' punt returner Angelo Sebastiano fumbling a Kent State punt. They took advantage of the mistake and ultimately scored on a 15-yard touchdown run by Dri Archer. After the Huskies failed to score on their next drive, Kent State capitalized again on a 37-yard field goal by Freddy Cortez. The final drive of the first quarter lasted 14 plays for 65 yards and ended in a Mathew Sims 27-yard field goal.

Kent State went three-and-out on their first drive of the second quarter. Northern Illinois' ensuing drive capitalized on their strong field position (their own 41-yard line) by executing a 6-play, 59-yard drive that culminated in a 14-yard pass from Jordan Lynch to Martel Moore that tied the game at 10. Kent State committed another miscue on their next drive, throwing an interception to Dechane Durante. Northern Illinois again capitalized, this time with a 12-play, 58-yard drive culminating with a 1-yard rush by Akeem Daniels. That drive would be the final scoring drive of the half, at which the score was Northern Illinois Huskies 17, Kent State Golden Flashes 10.

Since NIU got the ball to start the game, Kent State got it to start the second half and got the ball at their own 47 after a 28-yard return by Josh Boyle. Kent State got the ball into the red zone, but ultimately settled for a field goal which cut NIU's lead to 4 points. Northern Illinois' prolific offense continued their scoring by executing a 10-play, 75-yard drive highlighted by a 44-yard run by Lynch on a 4th and 1. Lynch would run it into the end zone for a 1-yard touchdown three plays later. After the Golden Flashes went three-and-out, the Huskies scored, this time via a 29-yard field goal by Sims.

After Kent State turned the ball over on downs, Northern Illinois, for the first time in the second half, did not score and punted the ball away. Kent State began a comeback on their ensuing drive via a 5-yard touchdown drive Spencer Keith, making the score 27-20. Northern Illinois' next drive lasted only one play, a fumble by Jordan Lynch that was returned by Kent State defender Zack Hitchens for a touchdown. After Cortez made the extra point, the game was tied at 27. The Huskies got back on track by scoring a touchdown, a 9-yard run by Lynch, but the Golden Flashes responded with one of their own, a 19-yard pass from Keith to Tim Erjavec. At the end of regulation, the score was tied at 34.

Per NCAA overtime rules, each team got the ball at their own 25-yard line for one drive. In the first overtime period, Kent State got the ball down to the NIU 5 before kicking a 33-yard field goal. Northern Illinois responded with a field goal of their own, a 40-yarder by Sims. After the first overtime, the score was tied at 37. NIU got the ball to start the second overtime, and took only two plays to score a touchdown: a 23-yard run by Akeem Daniels followed by a 2-yard run by Lynch, his third touchdown of the game. Kent State then had to score a touchdown in order to force the game to a third overtime. They were unsuccessful in doing so, however, as on 4th and 8, Keith threw an interception, thus ending the game with the Northern Illinois Huskies victorious by a score of 44-37.







</doc>
